================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Microcosmus: An Essay Concerning Man and His Relation to the World
Creator: Hermann Lotze (Elizabeth Hamilton and E. E. Constance Jones, trans.)
Edition: 1885 (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark), 2 vols.; English translation by Elizabeth Hamilton and E. E. Constance Jones (this scan: 1888 reprint of the 1885 translation)
Language: English
Source: Internet Archive (microcosmus01lotzuoft + microcosmus02lotzuoft), T. & T. Clark edition
Public domain: Translation published 1885; public domain.
Artifact ID: lotze-microcosmus-hamilton-jones-1885
================================================================================

MICROCOSM  US.

I'KIMED l:Y MOliUISON AND C,Ibfc,

T. & T CLARK. KU IN  BURGH

LONDON,  HAMILTON. AHAMS, AND CO.

M'BLiu,  (;EOKC;K  HERI.KKT.

NEW  YOI;K.  - scKiBNrii  ANT-  WELI-OHI..

MICBOCOSMUS:

AN  ESSAY  CONCERNING  MAN  AND  HIS
RELATION  TO  THE  WORLD.

i  i

HERMANN LOTZE.

Cranslatefc from tbc German

ELIZABETH  HAMILTON  AND  E.  E.  CONSTANCE  JONES.

vTfjirti  tuition.

X  TH'O VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

K  P  I  X  B  U  R  O  IT  :

T. & T. CLARK, :i« (JKOIUiK S  T  R  K  K  T.
1888.

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.

THIS translation  of  the  Mikrokosmus  was  begun by  Miss
Hamilton,  daughter  of  tlie  late Sir  William Hamilton
of  Edinburgh,  the  distinguished metaphysician. Unhappily
Miss  Hamilton  did  not  live  to  finish  the  work  she  had  under
taken,  and  her  translation  ends  at  p.  650  of  this  volume.

The  rest  of  the  book,  including  the  Introduction,  has  been
translated  by  me  ;  and  I  have  also  revised  Miss  Hamilton's
work.

The  Mikrokosmus  was  originally  published  in  three  volumes:
vol.  I.  containing:  Hooks  I.-III.,  vol.  II.  Books  IV.-VI.,  and
vol.  III.  Books  VII. -IX.  In  the  original  the  sections  are
not  numbered,  and  the  Table  of  Contents  consists  merely  of
the  headings  of  chapters  collected  together,  without  any  refer
ence  of  headings  to  pages.  In  the  translation  I  have  numbered
tin*  .sections,  and  in  the  Table  of  Contents  referred  the  head
ings  to  sections,  and  the  sections  to  pages,  and  supplied  a
lew  headings  where  they  seemed  to  be  required.  The  small
number  of  footnotes  which  occur  in  the  translation  have  been
added  by  me.

I  wi>h  to  express  my  thanks  to  Dr.  Henry  Sidgwick,
Knightbridge  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  at  Cambridge,  for
advice  which  he  has  given  me  in  reference  to  my  part  in  this
work.  I  am  also  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  James
"Ward,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  for  suggestions,  and  help  in
some  cases  of  difficulty.  The  proofs  have  been  corrected  by
Mr.  Jacobs  of  St.  John's  College,  to  whom  many  improvements
and  emendations  are  due.  For  the  substantial  correctness  of
the  translation  throughout  I  alone  am  responsible.

K.  E.  C.  JONES.

(liUTuN  C'oi.r.KfsK,  CAM  in;  i  DUE,
July  19:5.

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION.

1OETWEEN  spiritual  needs  and  the  results  of  human
-*-*  science  there  is  an  unsettled  dispute  of  long  standing.
In  every  age  the  first  necessary  step  towards  truth  has  been
the  renunciation  of  those  soaring  dreams  of  the  human  heart
\vhich  strive  to  picture  the  cosmic  frame  as  other  and  fairer
than  it  appears  to  the  eye  of  the  impartial  observer.  And
no  doubt  that  which  men  are  so  ready  to  set  in  opposition
to  common  knowledge  as  being  a  higher  view  of  things,  is  but
a  kind  of  prophetic  yearning,  which,  though  well  aware  of  the
limits  that  it  seeks  to  transcend,  knows  but  little  of  the  goal
that  it  would  reach.  Such  views,  indeed,  though  they  have
their  source  in  the  best  part  of  our  nature,  receive  their  dis
tinctive  character  and  colouring  from  very  various  influences.
Fed  by  many  doubts  and  reflections  concerning  the  destinies
of  life  and  drawn  from  a  range  of  experience  that  at  the  best
is  limited,  they  neither  escape  the  influences  of  transmitted
culture  and  temporary  tendencies,  nor  are  they  even  inde
pendent  of  those  natural  changes  of  mental  mood  which  take
place  in  men,  and  are  different  in  youth  from  what  they  an;
after  the  accumulation  of  manifold  experiences.  It  cannot
be  seriously  hoped  that  such  an  obscure  and  unquiet  move
ment  of  men's  spirits  should  furnish  a  juster  delineation  <-f
the  connection  of  things  than  the  careful  investigations  of
science,  in  which  that  power  of  thought  which  all  share  in  is
brought  into  action.  Though  we  cannot  command  the  heart
to  suppress  its  questionings  and  longings,  we  yet  hold  that  it
can  expect  a  response  to  them  only  as  an  incidental  result  of
knowledge  which  starts  from  ft  less  emotional  and  therefore
u.  clearer  point  of  view

Til

viii  AUTHOR'S  INTRODUCTION.

Lut  the  growing  sense  of  its  own  importance  possessed  by
science,  which  after  centuries  of  doubt  sees  different  depart
ments  of  phenomena  brought  into  subjection  to  unquestionable
laws,  threatens  to  distort  this  juster  relation  between  cognition
and  spiritual  needs  in  a  new  way.  For  not  content  with  avoid
ing,  at  the  beginning  of  scientific  inquiries,  the  importunate
questions  with  which  our  wishes,  dreams,  and  hopes  are  but
too  ready  to  confuse  the  work  in  its  initial  stage,  men  go
further,  and  deny  that  there  is  any  obligation  to  return  to
these  questions  at  all  in  the  course  of  investigation.  Science
being,  it  is  said,  a  pure  service  of  truth  for  truth's  sake,  is
not  called  upon  to  consider  whether  the  selfish  wishes  of
men's  souls  are  satisfied  or  not.  Thus  here,  too,  men  pass
from  timidity  to  presumptuous  boldness.  Having  once  tasted
the  delight  of  impartial  and  wholly  unfettered  investigation,
they  rush  into  a  sham  and  puerile  kind  of  heroism  that
glories  in  having  renounced  that  which  no  one  has  ever
any  right  to  renounce  ;  and  reposing  boundless  confidence  in
assumptions  which  are  by  no  means  incontestable,  estimate
the  truth  of  their  new  philosophic  views  in  direct  proportion
LO  the  degree  of  offensive  hostility  which  these  exhibit  towards
everything — except  science — that  is  held  sacred  by  the  living
soul  of  man.

This  deification  of  truth  is,  it  seems  to  me,  neither  just,
regarded  as  an  independent  estimation  of  its  value,  nor
calculated  to  create  conviction,  at  which  science  must  always
aim.

If  the  object  of  all  human  investigation  were  but  to  pro
duce  in  cognition  a  reflection  of  the  world  as  it  exists,  of
what  value  would  be  all  its  labour  and  pains,  which  could
result  only  in  vain  repetition,  in  an  imitation  within  the  soul
of  that  which  exists  without  it  ?  What  significance  could
there  be  in  this  barren  rehearsal — what  should  oblige  think
ing  minds  to  be  mere  mirrors  of  that  which  does  not  think,
unless  the  discovery  of  truth  were  in  all  cases  likewise
the  production  of  some  good,  valuable  enough  to  justify  the
pains  expended  in  attaining  it  ?  The  individual,  ensnared

AUTHOR'S  INTRODUCTION.  ix

by  that  division  of  intellectual  labour  that  inevitably  results
from  the  widening  compass  of  knowledge,  may  at  times  forget
the  connection  of  his  narrow  sphere  of  work  with  the  great
ends  of  human  life  ;  it  may  at  times  seem  to  him  as  though
the  furtherance  of  knowledge  for  the  sake  of  knowledge  were
an  intelligible  and  worthy  aim  of  human  effort.  ]>ut  all  his
endeavours  have  in  the  last  resort  but  this  one  meaning,
that  they,  in  connection  with  those  of  countless  others,  should
combine  to  trace  an  image  of  the  world  from  which  we  may
learn  what  we  have  to  reverence  as  the  true  significance  of
existence,  what  we  have  to  do  and  what  to  hope.  That  strictly
disinterested  investigation  which,  without  any  reference  to
these  questions,  co-operates  in  the  building  up  of  knowledge,
exhibits  wise  self-restraint  in  awaiting  a  late  but  full  answer
from  the  combined  results  of  many  lines  of  inquiry,  preferring
this  to  those  premature  and  one-sided  elucidations  from  sub
ordinate  and  accidental  standpoints  which  do  indeed  set  our
questionings  at  rest  but  only  very  imperfectly.  Hence  to  the
disconnected  impatient  questions  to  which  the  stress  of  human
existence  gives  rise,  science  may  withhold  an  immediate  answer,
and  may  refer  men  to  the  progress  of  investigation,  which  will
dissipate  many  difficulties,  without  introducing  those  new
perplexities  in  which  isolated  answers  to  pressing  doubts  are
always  apt  to  entangle  us.  lUit  taking  truth  as  a  whole,  we
are  not  justified  in  regarding  it  as  a  mere  self-centred  splen
dour,  having  no  necessary  connection  with  those  stirrings  of
the  soul  from  which,  indeed,  the  impulse  to  seek  it  first  pro
ceeded.  On  the  contrary,  whenever  any  scientific  revolution
has  driven  out  old  modes  of  thought,  the  new  views  that  take
their  place  must  justify  themselves  by  the  permanent  or
increasing  satisfaction  which  they  are  capable  of  affording  to
those  spiritual  demands,  which  cannot  be  put  off  or  ignored.

The  very  aims  of  science  itself  must  equally  determine  it
to  seek  this  ground  of  acceptance.  For  where  does  science
itself  exist  but  in  the  convictions  of  those  who  are  wholly
persuaded  of  its  truth  ?  And  it  will  never  produce  such
convictions  if  it  forget  that  every  region  which  it  iuvesti-

i  AUTHOR'S  INTRODUCTION.

gates,  all  the  departments  of  the  mental  and  the  physical
world,  had  been  explored  and  taken  possession  of  by  our
hopes  and  wishes  and  anticipations  long  before  any  systematic
investigation  was  thought  of.  Science  comes  everywhere  too
late  to  meet  with  a  thoroughly  impartial  reception  ;  it  finds
already  established  in  all  quarters  that  Philosophy  of  the
Feelings  which  will  hinder  the  course  of  scientific  proof  with
all  the  force  due  to  the  intense  mental  longing  from  which  it
arose.  And  where  reluctant  conviction  can  be  forced  upon
men  in  detail,  it  can  be  as  easily  made  useless  on  the  whole
by  the  remembrance  that  in  the  last  resort  the  authority  eve:i
of  those  first  principles  by  deductions  from  which  science  would
compel  our  assent,  rests  upon  nothing  better  than  immediate
belief  in  their  truth.  Men  think,  too,  that  they  are  even
more  justified  in  clinging  with  a  like  immediate  belief  to  that
view  of  the  world  which  seems  to  have  its  truth  corroborated
by  its  consonance  with  our  wishes.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass
that  science  as  a  whole  is  put  on  one  side,  and  regarded  as  a
maze  in  which  cognition,  detached  from  its  connection  with
the  whole  living  mind,  has  become  entangled  in  a  way
impossible  to  follow  in  detail.

Though  a  man  may  revel  in  this  faith  in  the  world  of
feeling,  he  cannot  avoid  making  use  of  the  advantages  of
science  at  every  step  in  practical  life,  and  thus  tacitly
acknowledging  its  truth  ;  just  as  little  can  a  man  live  for
science  without  experiencing  the  joy  and  the  burden  of
existence,  and  feeling  himself  everywhere  surrounded  by  a
cosmic  order  of  another  kind,  on  which  science  sheds  at  best
but  scanty  enlightenment.  Can  the  difficulty  be  evaded
more  easily  than  by  trying  to  take  part  in  both  worlds,  to
belong  to  both,  yet  without  uniting  the  two  ?  To  follow —
in  science — the  principles  of  cognition  to  their  most  extreme
results,  and  to  allow  oneself— in  practical  life— to  be  impelled
in  quite  other  directions  by  traditional  habits  of  belief  and
action  ?

That  this  twofold  and  inconsistent  conviction  is  often  the
only  solution  that  men  arrive  at  need  not  surprise  us ;  but  it

AUTHOR  S  INTRODUCTION.  XI

would  be  a  pity  to  commend  it  as  the  right  view  of  our
relation  to  the  world.  It  is  true  that  the  imperfection  of
human  knowledge  may  compel  us,  when  we  have  used  our
utmost  endeavours,  to  confess  that  we  cannot  build  up  the
results  of  cognition  and  of  faith  so  as  to  form  a  complete
and  perfect  structure ;  but  we  can  never  look  on  indifferently
when  we  see  cognition  undermining  the  foundations  of  faith,
or  faith  calmly  putting  aside  as  a  whole  that  which  scientific
zeal  has  built  up  in  detail.  On  the  contrary,  we  must  be
ever  consciously  endeavouring  to  maintain  the  rights  of  each,
and  to  show  how  far  from  insoluble  is  the  contradiction  in
which  they  appear  to  be  inextricably  involved.

The  pride  of  philosophic  inquiry,  and  the  ceaseless  advance
of  physical  science,  have  attacked  from  different  sides  that
cosmic  view  in  which  the  human  soul  found  its  longings
satisfied.  But  the  disturbances  caused  by  the  assaults  of
philosophy  have  in  our  time  been  avoided  in  a  most  elli-
cacious  manner,  namely  by  the  complete  indifference  with
which  the  age  turns  away  from  and  disregards  the  labours  of
speculation.  Jt  has  not  been  so  easy  to  escape  the  far  more
importunate  persuasiveness  of  the  natural  sciences,  the
assertions  of  which  are  confirmed  at  every  step  by  the
experiences  of  daily  life.  The  excessive  influence  which  tin-
really  magnificent  development  of  these  sciences  exerts  upon
all  the  tendencies  of  our  age  infallibly  calls  forth  a  pro
portionally  increasing  resistance  to  the  injuries  which  it  is
supposed  will  be  inflicted  by  it  upon  that  which  is  of  supreme
importance  in  human  culture.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  the
old  contradictions  rise  again  to  battle ;  on  the  one  hand
knowledge  of  the  world  of  sense  with  its  ever-growing  wealth
of  exact  science  and  the  persuasive  force  of  intuitable  facts  ;
on  the  other  hand  those  vague  convictions  regarding  the
supersensuous  world,  which — not  having  an  absolutely  fixed
and  certain  content — are  hardly  susceptible  of  proof,  but —
being  sustained  by  an  ever-renewed  consciousness  of  their
necessary  truth — are  still  less  susceptible  of  refutation.  That
this  contest  between  the  two  is  an  unnecessary  torment  which

xii  AUTHORS  INTRODUCTION.

we  inflict  upon  ourselves  by  terminating  investigation  pre
maturely,  is  the  conclusion  that  I  desire  to  establish.

Physical  science  is  certainly  wrong  in  turning  away  altogether
from  the  aesthetic  and  religious  regions  of  thought  which  are
customarily  regarded  as  affording  a  higher  view  of  things.  It
fears — needlessly — that  its  sharply -defined  notions  and  its
solid  fabric  of  method  would  be  disturbed  by  the  admission
of  elements  which  —  being  themselves  incalculable  —  would
necessarily  communicate  their  own  indefiniteness  and  mistiness
to  all  that  comes  into  contact  with  them ;  and  it  forgets  that
its  own  fundamental  elements,  the  ideas  of  forces  and  natural
laws,  are  not  the  ultimate  components  of  the  threads  that
weave  the  texture  of  reality.  On  the  contrary,  when  we
exercise  keener  insight,  they  too  lead  us  back  to  that  same
supersensuuus  region  of  which  we  cannot  compass  the
boundaries.

But  not  less  baseless  is  that  which,  on  the  other  hand,
opposes  and  hinders  the  recognition  of  the  mechanical  view  of
Xature — the  anxious  fear  lest  its  results  should  cause  all  life
and  freedom  and  poetry  to  disappear  from  the  world.  How
often  has  this  fear  been  expressed,  and  how  often  has  the
irresistible  progress  of  discoveries  opened  new  sources  of
poetry  in  the  place  of  those  which  had  to  be  filled  up !  The
strong  sense  nf1  home,  with  its  nearness  and  sacredness,  which
could  enable  an  isolated  people,  ignorant  of  the  boundless
human  lite  beyond,  to  regard  itself  as  making  up  the  whole
of  humanity,  and  every  hill  and  fountain  of  the  land  as  being
under  the  guardian  care  of  some  special  divinity — this  unifying
of  the  divine  and  human  has  everywhere  disappeared  with
the  advance  of  geographical  knowledge  consequent  on  growing
intercour.se  between  different  nations.  But  the  enlarged
prospect  thus  gained  has  not  spoiled,  but  only  changed  and
enhanced  the  poetical  charm  of  the  world.  Astronomy  by  its
discoveries  upset  men's  notions  both  of  the  heavens  and  of
the  earth  ;  it  resolved  the  former,  which  had  been  regarded
as  the  visible  dwelling-place  of  the  gods,  into  the  immensity
of  an  airy  firmament  in  which  imagination  could  no  longer

AUTHOR'S  INTRODUCTION.  xui

fix  the  home  of  supersensuous  beings;  it  transformed  the  earth,
the  sole  stage  of  life  and  history,  into  one  of  the  smallest  parts
of  the  boundless  universe.  And  step  by  step  this  disturbance
of  traditional  views  pursued  its  further  course.  The  earth
became,  instead  of  a  motionless  centre,  a  wandering  planet,
circling  round  a  sun  which  formerly  seemed  to  exist  only  to
beautify  and  serve  it ;  even  the  music  of  the  spheres  was
hushed,  and  men  generally  have  come  to  agree  that  the  all-
embracing  world  in  which  we,  with  our  hopes  and  wishes  and
endeavours,  dwell,  is  a  voiceless  system  of  countless  heavenly
bodies,  obeying  universal  laws.

That  this  transformation  of  cosmographic  views  has  in  the
course  of  history  changed  popular  imagination  in  the  most
important  manner,  no  one  can  deny.  AVhen  the  earth  was
regarded  as  a  disc,  and  the  familiar  boundaries  of  a  man's
native  land  were  held  to  comprise  all  the  highest  and  deepest
secrets  of  the  cosmic  order — the  visible  summit  of  Olympus
and  the  gates  of  the  underworld,  at  a  distance  that  was
within  men's  reach — human  life  was  certainly  different  from
what  it  is  now — now  that  the  earth  is  held  to  be  a  revolving
sphere  that  seems  to  have  neither  within  it  nor  around  it  in
the  empty  immensity  of  the  atmosphere,  place  for  that  mystery
through  a  sense  of  which  alone  human  life  is  so  fertilized  as
to  produce  its  fairest  fruit.  Past  ages,  guided  by  a  thread  of
sacred  tradition,  could  trace  back  the  crowd  of  nations  that  fill
the  motley  mart  of  liie  t>  the  quiet  groves  of  Paradise,  in  the
shades  of  which  the  manifold  variety  of  human  races  found
the  unifying  consciousness  of  a  common  origin.  The  discovery
of  new  regions  of  the  earth  disturbed  this  belief;  other
nations  came  into  sight,  ignorant  of  the  old  traditions,  and
the  common  cradle  of  mankind  came  to  be  placed  far  beyond
the  extremest  limits  of  historical  remembrance.  And  finally,
even  the  inflexible  rind  of  the  planet  of  which  men  believed
that  they  had  held  possession  from  the  time  of  its  creation
opened  its  closed  mouth  and  told  of  countless  ages  of  exist
ence  in  which  this  human  life,  with  all  its  presumption  and
its  doubt,  did  not  yet  exist,  and  creative  Nature,  self-sufficing

Xiv  A rTIIOIl'S  INTRODUCTION.

gave  birth  to  numerous  species  of  living  creatures,  which  arose
and  passed  away  one  after  the  other.

Thus  all  the  familiar  boundaries  which  used  to  fence  in  our
life  with  grateful  certainty  are  done  away  ;  the  outlook  around
us  has  become  immeasurable,  unlimited,  and  cold.  But  all
these  enlargements  of  knowledge  have  neither  driven  poetry
out  of  the  world,  nor  affected  our  religious  convictions  otherwise
than  beneficially  ;  they  have  driven  us  to  seek  for  and  to  find
with  greater  intellectual  effort,  in  a  supersensuous  world,  that
which  we  can  no  longer  regard  as  near  and  directly  intuitable.
The  satisfaction  which  our  souls  used  to  find  in  cherished
views,  has  always  become  possible  under  different  forms  wher*
these  views  had  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  progress  of  science.
As  in  the  life  of  the  individual,  so  in  the  history  of  the  human
race,  unavoidable  changes  take  place  in  the  definite  outlines
of  the  picture  in  which  man's  inalienable  and  highest  aspira
tions  are  represented.  Vain  is  every  endeavour  to  resist  the
clear  light  of  science,  and  to  hold  fast  any  view  of  which  we
have  a  haunting  secret  conviction  that  it  is  but  an  evanescent
dream  ;  but  equally  ill-advised  is  the  despair  that  gives  up
that  which  must  ever  remain  the  immoveable  centre  of  human
civilization,  whatever  change  of  form  it  may  undergo.  Rather
let  us  admit  that  in  the  obscure  impulse  to  that  higher  aspect
of  things  which  we  sometimes  glory  in,  and  sometimes  feel
incapable  of  rising  to,  there  is  yet  a  dim  consciousness  of  the
right  path,  and  that  every  objection  of  science  to  which  we
attend  does  but  disperse  some  deceptive  light  cast  upon  the
one  immutable  goal  of  our  longings  by  the  changing  stand
points  of  growing  experience.

That  undeifying  of  the  whole  cosmic  frame  which  the
discoveries  of  past  times  have  irrevocably  accomplished  in
overthrowing  mythology,  is  an  event  which  cannot,  we  may
hope,  be  any  longer  a  source  of  pain ;  and  the  last  lament
over  it,  poured  forth  in  Schiller's  Goiter  Gricclienlands,  will
never  be  followed  by  any  attempt  to  re-establish  this  lost  faith,
in  opposition  to  the  teachings  of  science.  Great  revolutions
ot  religious  views  have  made  men  forget  the  loss,  and  furnished

AUTHORS  INTRODUCTION.  XV

far  mo.  e  than  adequate  compensation  for  it.  But  as  the
Crowing  farsightedness  of  astronomy  dissipated  the  idea  that
the  great  theatre  of  human  life  was  in  direct  connection  with
divinity,  so  the  further  advance  of  mechanical  science  begins
to  threaten  with  similar  disintegration  the  smaller  world,
the  Microcosm  of  man.  In  saying  this,  I  do  not  intend  to
allude  more  than  incidentally  to  the  increasing  diffusion  of
materialistic  views  which  strive  to  trace  back  all  mental
life  to  the  blind  working  of  material  mechanism.  Broad  and
confident  as  the  current  of  these  views  flows  on,  yet  it  by  no
means  has  its  source  in  inevitable  assumptions,  bound  up
inseparably  with  the  spirit  of  a  mechanical  investigation  of
Nature.  But  even  within  the  limits  in  which  this  has  a  better
right  to  move,  the  disintegrating  and  destructive  activity  of
such  investigation  is  plain  enough  and  begins  to  dispute  that
pervading  unity  of  body  and  soul  upon  which  seemed  to
depend  all  the  beauty  and  living  activity  of  animate  creatures,
and  all  the  significance  and  worth  of  their  intercourse  with
the  external  world.  The  assaults  of  physiological  science  have
been  directed  against  the  truth  of  sensuous  cognition,  against
the  unfettered  exercise  of  will  in  movement,  against  the
creative  spontaneous  development  of  material  life  generally,
and  have  thus  called  in  question  all  those  characteristics
which  for  unsophisticated  feeling  contain  the  very  core  of
life's  poetry.  "We  cannot  therefore  be  surprised  at  the  stead
fastness  with  which  the  Philosophy  of  the  Feelings  here  seeks
to  oppose  itself  as  a  higher  view  of  things,  to  the  convincing
representations  of  the  Mechanical  view  of  Nature.  On  the
other  hand,  there  seems  all  the  more  necessity  for  an  attempt
to  show  the  innocuousness  of  this  view,  which  where  it  forces  us
to  sacrifice  opinions  that  seem  to  be  a  part  of  our  very  selves,
yet  by  what  it  gives  back,  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  regain
the  satisfaction  we  had  lost.

And  the  more  I  myself  have  laboured  to  prepare  the  way
for  acceptance  of  the  mechanical  view  of  Nature  in  the  region
of  organic  life — in  which  region  this  view  seemed  to  advance

more  timidly  than  the  nature  of  the  thing  required — the  more
VOL.  i.  I'

XVi  AUTHORS  INTRODUCTION.

do  I  now  feel  impelled  to  bring  into  prominence  the  other
aspect  which  was  equally  near  to  my  heart  during  all  those
endeavours.  I  can  hardly  hope  that  the  result  of  this  attempt
will  meet  with  a  very  favourable  reception,  for  the  amount
of  acquiescence  that  happened  to  fall  to  the  lot  of  my  earlier
representations  was  probably  due  for  the  most  part  to  the  ease
with  which  any  mediating  view  may  be  interpreted  so  as  to
seem  favourable  to  either  of  the  one  -  sided  extreme  views
which  it  was  designed  to  avoid.  But  all  the  same  it  is  in
such  mediation  alone  that  the  true  source  of  the  life  of  science
is  to  be  found  ;  not  indeed  in  admitting  now  a  fragment  of
the  one  view  and  now  a  fragment  of  the  other,  but  in  showing
how  absolutely  universal  is  the  extent  and  at  the  same  time
how  completely  subordinate  the  significance,  of  the  mission  which
mechanism  has  to  fulfil  in  the  structure  of  the  world.

It  is  not  the  comprehensive  cosmos  of  the  whole  great
universe  that  we  shall  here  attempt  to  describe — in  imitation
of  the  example  set  before  us  as  Germans — even  in  that  circum
scribed  sense  of  the  task  which  we  have  above  indicated.  The
more  deeply  the  features  of  that  great  world-picture  impress
the  general  consciousness,  the  more  vividly  will  they  point
us  back  to  ourselves,  and  stir  up  anew  the  question — What
significance  have  man,  and  human  life  with  its  constant
phenomena,  and  the  changing  course  of  history,  in  the  great
whole  of  Nature,  to  the  steady  influence  of  which  the  results
of  modern  science  have  made  us  feel  more  than  ever  in  sub
jection  ?  In  seeking  to  bring  together  the  reflections  on  these
points  which  press  themselves  upon  the  thoughtful  soul,  not
only  within  the  limits  of  any  philosophic  school  but  every
where  in  life,  we — with  the  changed  points  of  view  to  which
the  present  age  has  attained — attempt  here  a  repetition  of  the
undertaking  of  which  we  have  so  brilliant  an  example  in
Herder's  Idecn  zur  Geschichte  dcr  Menschhcit.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

BOOK I

THE  BODY.

CHAPTER I.

CONFLICTING VIEWS OF NATURE.

1.  Mythology  and  Common  Reality— Personal  Spirits in  Nature

and  the  Realm  of  Things, .  1-7

2.  The  World-Soul  and  Animating  Impulses,  7-17

3.  Forces  and  their  Universal  Laws,  17-23

4.  Relation  of  Man  to  Natur.-, .  23-26

CHAPTER 1 1.

NATURE AS MECHANICAL.

1.  Universality  of  Law, ....  27-29

2.  Determination  of  Etleets  ;  Places  of  Efiicient  Activity  in  Nature

— Atoms  and  the  Sense  in  which  they  are  accepted,  .  .  29-36

3.  Physical  Forces,  .....  36-41
V I^ws  of  Effects  and  of  their  Composition — General  Inferences

with  respect  to  the  Explanation  of  Natural  Pha-nomena, .  41-44

C  II  A  P  T  E  R II  I.

THE BASIS OF LIFE.

1.  Mi-chanical  Conception  of  Life,  and  Vital  Force,  50-51

2.  The  Transitoriness  of  the  liody  chemically  considered— Change

of  its  Constituents, ....  51-56

3.  Propagation  and  Conservation  of  its  Energy, .  50-00
•1.  Harmony  of  its  Processes, . .  ' ' '

xviii  CONTENTS.

JEC.

5.  The  Efficient  Idea  (Idee)  '—Purposive  Self-Conservation,

6.  Capacity  of  Excitation— Machines  produced  by  Human  Skill,  .

CHAPTER IV.

THE MECHANISM OF LIFE.

1.  constant  and Periodic  Operations — Progressive  Development

— Anomalous  Disturbances, .  .  .  75-80

2.  The  Application  of  Chemical  Forces  and  their  Results  as  regards

Life — The  Development  of  Forms  from  Formless  Germs,  . 80-86

.?. Change  of  Material  and  its  Significance,  86-92

4.  Its  Mode, . .  92-97

5.  Its  Organs, .  97-98

CHAPTER V.

STRUCTURE OF THE ANIMAL BODY.

1.  The  Bony  Framework, ......  99-102

2.  The  Muscles  and  the  Motor  Nerves, .  102-106

3.  The  Vascular  System  and  Circulation  of  the  Blood, .  . 106-110

4.  Respiration, .  .  .  .  .  .  .110-112

5.  6. Nutrition  and  Excretion, .  ... 113-120

CHAPTER VI.

CONSERVATION OF LIFE.

1 .  Physical,  Organic,  and  Psychical  Compensation  of  Disturbances, 121-124

2.  Examples  of  the  Establishment  of  Equilibrium,  .  . 121-128

3.  The  Sympathetic  System — Ceaseless  Activity  of all  that is

Organic,  ....... 128-135

1.  General  Sketch  of  Lite,  .  ... 136-139

BOOK II.
THE  SOUL.

CHAPTER I.

THE EXISTENCE OF THE SOUL.

1.  Reasons  for  believing  that  there  are  Soiils, .  .  , 143-144

2.  Freedom  of  the  Will — Incompatibility  of  Physical  and  Psychical

Processes,  and  Necessity  of  two  diverse  Grounds  of  Explana
tion, .  .  144-150

'  I  have  followed  the  Clarendon  Press  Translation  of  Lotze  in  writing  this
throughout  with  a  capital  to  distinguish  it  from  idea  =  Vor*telluny.

CONTEXTS.  XIX

-«-'  P.MjI.

;;. Hypothesis  of  their  Union  in  the  same  Being,  .  .  .  150-152

4.  The  Unity  of  Consciousness  —What  it  is  not,  and  what  it  really

is,  ...  .  .  152-156

f>.  Impossibility  of  explaining  it  as  a  Combination  of  a  Plurality

of  Effects,  ....  .  158-163

0.  Relating  Knowledge  contrasted  with  the  Composition  of  Physi
cal  Results,  ...  .  .  163-1 RH

7.  Supcrsensuous  Nature  ol  the  Soul, .  .  160-16 7

CHAPTER II.

NATURE AND FACULTIES OF Till! SOUL.

1.  Plurality  of  Faculties  in  the  Soul— Defects  of  this  View,  . 168-172

2.  Po-sii.ility of  combining  it with the Unity  of  the Soul—

Original  and  Acquired  Faculties, .... 172-177

3.  impossibility of a Single Primitive Faculty  —  Ideation (or

Cognition,  Vorxtcllen),  Feeling,  and  Will — Constant  Activity

f.f  the  whole  Nature  of  the  Soul, .  .  177-1*]

4 Low. T  and  Higher  Reactions, .  .  181-18-1

[>. Mutability  of  the  Soul  and  its  Limits, .  .  1S4-1S5

«'>. The  Known  Nature  and  the  Unknown  Nature  of  the  Soul, .  1SS-190

7. 1" f  knowing  the  Unknown Nature  of  the  Soul, and  the

Urason  why  we  seek  to  know  it, .  .  190-lt'S

CHAPTER III.
or  THF.  TI:AIN  OF  ID  HAS  (Vorstdlumjcn  .

1.  ('<iin]'arison of Mriital Life with Bodily Life and with

Physical  Nature, ...... 193-19'!

2.  How Ideas persist, and how they are forgotten — Of their

Interaction,  and  of  the  Narrowness  of  Consciousness,  . 196-202

3.  Differences  in  the  Strength  of  Sensations — Degrees  of  Clearness

in  Memory-Images— Contrast  of  Ideas, .  .  202-211

4.  The Inner  Sense— 5. Guidance  of  the  Train  of  Idea.s  by  the

LAWS  of  Association  and  Reproduction,  . 211-219

CHAPTER IV.

THK FOr.MS OF KF.I.ATIN<; KNOWLEDGE

1.  Relations  between  Individual Ideas  (  Vorstcllungen)  as  Objects

of New  Ideas — Change  of Knowledge, and Knowledge  of

Change, .  . 220-L'2fi

2.  Innate  Ideas  (Liven), .  . 226-228
8. Apprehension  of  the  World  in  Space  and  Time by  menus  of

Sense,  .  229-2J2

CONTEXTS

4.  Apprehension  of  the  World  in  Thought  by  the  Understanding

— Concept,  Judgment,  and  Syllogism,  .  .  . 232-236

5.  The  Effort  of  Reason  after  Unifying  Comprehension, .  . 236-239

CHAPTER V.

OF THE FEELINGS, OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS, AND OF THE WILL.

1.  Origin  of  the  Feelings, ....  .  240-242

2.  Their  Forms  and  their  Connection  with  Knowledge — Reason's

Determinations  of  Worth, .....  242-248

3.  Self-Consciousness, .  .  24S-2f.l

4.  The  Empiric  Ego  and  the  Pure  Ego, .  .  251-254

5.  Impulses  and  Efforts— Will  and  Freedom  of  Will,  ,  254-261

6.  Concluding  Remark, .  .  .  261-2C3

BOOK III.
L  I  F  E.

CHAPTER I.

THE CONNECTION LETWEEN BODY AND SOUL.

1.  Different  Stages of  Apprehension of the  World — True and

Derivative  Standpoints, ..... 2*57-273

2.  The  Universal  Bond  between  Mind  and  Matter,  .  . 273-275

3.  Possibility  and  Inexplicableness  of  Reciprocal  Action  between

the  Homogeneous  arid  the  Heterogeneous, .  .  . 275-281

4.  How  Sensations  arise — Guidance  of  Movements,  .  . 231-287

5.  Influence  of  the  Soul  on  Bodily  Form, .  .  i:S7-2S'J

CHAPTER II.

OF THE SEAT OF THE SOUL.

1.  Meaning  of  the  Question, .  . 290-205

2.  Limited Sphere of  the Soul's  Operation — Structure  of  the

Brain, .  . 295-301

3.  The  Way  in  which  Movements  arise, .  . 301-306

4.  Conditions  of  Space-Perception, .  . 306-310

5.  Significance  of  the  Unbranched  Xerve-Fibres, .  310-313

6.  Omnipresence  of  the  Soul  in  the  Body,  313-315

CONTENTS.

XXI

CHAPTER III.

FORMS OF THE RECIPROCAL ACTION BETWEEN* BODY AND SOt'l  .

'CO.  P»(iE

1.  Organ  of  the  Soul,  .  316-318

2.  Organ  of  Space-Perception, .  .  318-321

3.  Corporeal  Basis  of  the  Feelings,  .  .  321-323

4.  Higher  Intelligence,  Moral  and  Esthetic  Judgment, .  .  323-324

5.  Organ  of  Memory — Sleep  and  Unconsciousness — Influence  of

Bodily  States  upon  the  Train  of  Ideas,  .  .  . 324-332

6.  Central Organ of Movement — Reflex Movements — Acquired

Forms  of  Reaction— Divisibility  of  the  Soul,  .  . 332-338

7.  Phrenology — Obstruction  to  the  Mind  caused  by  its  Union  with

the  Body, ....  .  338-343

C  II  A  P  T  E  li I  V.

LIFE IX MATTER.

1.  The  Constant  Illusion  of  Sense— Impossibility  of  Tinners  being

copied  in  our  Perception, ..... 344-34:)

2.  Tin-  SpO'-iuland  Higher  Worth  ot'  Suu.se—  The  Inner  Activity  of

Things  —  Matter the Manifestation of something Super-
sensuous — Concerning  the  Possibility  of  Extended  Beings, . 349-360
'4. Animation  of  the  whole  World,  .... 300-303

t.  Contrast  between  Body  and  Soul  not  retracted— Justification

of  Plurality  as  against  Unity,  .  .  . 304-369

CHAPTER V.

BEGINNING AND END OF SOUL-LIFE.

1.  Limitations of Knowledge— Questions concerning Primeval

History,  .  ....  370-375

2.  Dependent  Nature  of  all  Mechanism, .  .  375-378

3.  Natural  Necessity  and  the  Infinite  Substance, .  .  378-382

4.  fteneral Possibility  of  Action — Source  of  Definite l>a\vs of

Action,  .....  . 3S2-3S7

5 Immortality— Origin  of  Souls, .  .  . 387-392

CONCI.U.SION, .  .  393 i  «i

BOOK IV.
M  A  N.

CHAPTER I.

NATCRF. AND IDEAS f(

1.  Mcchanicnl  Explanation  and  Ideal  Interpretation  of  Nature, . 405  4'>fl

2.  Mutual Independence  of  these  Conceptions,  and  Necessity  of

combining  them, .  .  .  . 409-412

CONTENTS.

.

3.  Purposive  Creation—  The  Ideal  in  the  R<-al,  . 412-417

4.  Nature  as  Fact,  ...  • 417-418

CHAPTER II.

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.

1 Doubt  as  to  the  Supremacy  of  Ends— Created  Beings  as  Ends

in  themselves,  • 419-423

2.  Ends  and  Results,  . .  423-425

3.  Development  of  Things  from  Chaos— Spontaneous  Growth  of

Order  from  Unorder,  .  .  • 425-431

4.  The  Elements  of  Chaos — Inherent  Purposiveness  in  Things  and

in  their  Operations, .  .  . 431-439

5.  The Unity  of  Nature considered as  a Product  of  Manifold

Actions  and  Reactions,  • 439-442

CHAPTER III.

THE UNITY OF XATURF,.

1.  Unity  of  the  Basis  of  Thing.-,, .  . 443-445

2.  And  its  Results— The  System  of  Material  Elements  and  their

Distribution — Preservation  of  Unity  in  the  Course  of  Events
— Notion  of  Miracles — Plan  of  Development  in  the  World
and  in  Man — Cosmic  Periods,  .  445-455

3.  Limitation  of  our  Knowledge  and  Being,  455-456

4.  Universal  and  Terrestrial  Nature,  .... 456-458
[).  Grades  of  Natural  Products — The  Animal Kingdom  and  its

Typical  Forms,  .... 459-464

CHAPTER IV.

MAX AND BRUTE.

1.  The  Grades  of  Animals  and  their  Significance, .  465-467

2.  Structure  and  Life — Bodily  Size— Bodily  Strength — Length  oi'

Life— Requirements  as  to  Food — Capacities  of  Acclimatization
— Erect  Form — Its  Causes  and  Results — Symbolism  and
Beauty  of  Form,  .  .  .  467-494

CHAPTER V.

VARIETIES OF THE HUMAN I1ACH.

1.  Conditions  of  Individual  Development — Inheritance  of  Race-

Characteristics  and  of  Individual  Traits— Resemblances  to

Unites,  .  ... 495-505

2.  Varieties (Verschiedenheit) of Race — Hypotheses as to the

Origin  of  these  Varieties, . ...  505-516

3.  Negroes,  American-Indians,  Malays,  Mongols,  Caucasians, .  516-520

4.  Notions  of  Kind  (Art)  and  Vurlrty  (Spidart),  . . .  520-525

5.  Transition  to  Book  V. — Darwinian  Theory, .  525-527

CONTENTS  XX111

1)  0  0  K V.
M  I X  D.

CHAPTER I.

MIND  AND  SOUL.

ire.  **<.»

1.  The  Animal  Soul  and  the  Ritional  Mind — Reciprocal  Relation

between  the  two, ...  .  531-535

2  Abolition  of  this  Duality — The  General  Concept  of  Soul  and  the
Individual  Soul — Soul  a  Phaenomenologic  Designation  of
Heterogeneous  Subjects — Transference  of  this  Designation  to
Homogeneous  Subjects — Original  Nature  and  Development
of  the  Soul,  .......  535-543

3.  What  is  meant  by  Mature  qfth>  Soul .' — Can  we  regard  as  the

Original  Content  of  any  Nature  the  Idea  of  its  Development  ?
— The  Reality  of  the  Idea  and  the  Unreality  of  Simple
Quality,  .  .  .  .  543-551

4.  Unity  of  the  Idea,  .  .... 551-556

5.  General Attributes of  Souls — The Realm of Souls and its

Members, .......

C  H  A  P  T  E  R I  I.

HUM  AX SENTIENCE.

1.  Different  Explanations  of  the  Senses — The  Indifferent  Content

of  Sense, and  the  Feeling  of  Pain  or  Pleasure  that  accom
panies  it — Intrinsic  Worth  of  Sense-Impressions, .  . 563-573

2.  Consonance  of  their  Nature  with  the  Stimuli  to  which  they

correspond — Examples  :  Light  and  Sound, .  .  . 573-578

3.  .Esthetic  Judgment— Symmetry  in  Space  and  Time— Mathema

tical Aspect  of Sense-Imagination  —  Understanding and

Sympathetic  Enjoyment  of  Alien  Forms  of  Existence,  .  578-586

4.  Of  the  Use  of  Implements— Of  Dress  and  Ornament, .  .  586-595

5.  Of  Ceremonies, .......  596-600

C  II  A  P  T  E  R III.

HPEECH AND THOUGHT.

1.  Carrying  off  of  Excitation  by  Movement  generally, .  . 601-604

•2.  l>y  Change-  of  the  Respiratory  Movements— The  Voice — Articu
late  Sound,  and  the  Organization  of  Sounds — Corporeal  I'asis
of  the  Capacity  of  Speech,  .  .  604-614

3.  The  Meaning  of  Words,  ..... 614-617

4 Thought— The  Parts  o!  Speech — Syntactical  Forms  of  Language.

—The  National  Logic  of  Language, .  618-628

XKlV

CONTENTS.

5.  Dependence  of  Thought  on  Speech— Importance  of  Names—

Substantive  Forms  to  which  no  Tkinys  correspond,  .  . 626-631

6.  Order  of  Thought  and  Order  of  Construction  in  a  Sentence-—

Silent  Speech— Intuition and Discursive Thought— Con
versation, ....... 631-639

CHAPTER IV.
KNOWLEDGE  (die  Erkcnntniss)  AND  TRTJTIT.

1.  Progressiveness  of  Human  Nature, .  .  . 640-645

2.  The  Ideal  Nature  of  Mind  and  its  Mechanical  Equivalent, . 645-651

3.  The  Nature  of  Human  Intelligence— The  Stages  of  Reflection—

The  Universal  Impulse  to  Volition  and  Action, .  . 652-661

4.  The  Genesis  of  Special  and  of  General  Notions — Place  of  Generic

Notions  in  Men's  Conception  of  the  Cosmos,  .  . 661-668

5.  Innate  Notions  of  the  Understanding  and  their  Impossibility —

The  Origin  of  Universal  and  of  Necessarily  Valid  Notions —

The  Notion  of  Truth,  .  ... 668-675

6.  Laws  of  Identity  and  Causation — The  Natural  Metaphysics  of

Life  and  its  Development, ..... 675-681

CHAPTER V.

CONSCIENCE AND MORALITY.

1.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Feelings,  .  .  . 682-684

2.  The  Meaning  of  Conscience, ..... 684-687

3.  Pleasure  and  Pain  as  Actual  Motives  to  Action — Pleasure  and

the  Good — The  Notion  of  Worth  and  its  Connection  with  the

Notion  of  Pleasure, .  .  . 6S7-G94

4.  Pleasure  as  an  Ethical  Principle,  .... 694-696

5.  Emotions  of  Sense — Emotions  of  Self—  Egoism  and  Univer-

salism,  .  .....  69G-706

6.  Development  of  Morality,  .  .  .  .  706-710

7.  Basis  and  Content  of  Morality, .....  710-713

8.  Capacity  of  Becoming  Conscious  of  the Infinite  the Distin

guishing  Characteristic  of  the  Human  Mind,  713-714

BOOK 1.

THE  UODY.

CHAPTER I.

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.

Mythology  and  Common  Reality — Personal  Spirits  in  Nature,  and  the  Reilm
<>f  Things— The  World-Soul  and  Animating  Impulses — Forces  and  their
t'nivcr.sal  Laws — Delation  of  Man  to  Nature.

§  1.  rplIKRE  are  times  when  our  thoughts  turn  regrel-
-*•  fully  back  to  the  primitive  age  of  our  race.
Then,  in  mankind's  fair  youth,  —  so  our  musings  run,—
mutual  understanding  brought  Nature  nigh  to  Mind,  so  that
of  her  own  accord  she  unveiled  her  inner  kindred  life,  which
now  she  guards  from  the  intrusion  of  our  scrutiny.  Our
weary  glance,  as  it  strays  over  the  outside  of  phenomena,
meets  nothing  else  than  the  whirl  of  impersonal  substances,
the  blind  conflict  of  unconscious  forces,  the  drear  necessity
of  inevitable  predetermination.  Whereas  we  figure  the
youthful  human  race,  with  clearer  eye  piercing  directly  to
the  depths  and  knowing  nothing  of  this  painful  experience.
Then  witli  a  sense  of  kinship  the  mind  apprehended  the
eternal  self-conscious  Ideas  that  are  the  living  essence  of
things,  it  understood  because  it  felt  as  its  own  the  stirrings
of  desire  that  form  the  motives  of  their  working.  The
orderly  connection  of  things  must  have  stood  before  the
world's  youth — at  least  so  runs  our  thought — as  something
more  than  a  fact  of  inexplicable  origin,  for  it  found  reflected
within  the  creative  purpose  from  whose  blissful  unity  Nature,
unshackled  by  restraints  from  without,  evolves  the  multitude
of  its  phenomena.

VOL I.  A

2  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  I.

I  will  not  stop  to  inquire  into  the  justice  of  this  charge
against  the  present,  but  go  on  to  show  that  the  human
conception  of  the  universe  has  at  no  time  been  exclusively
governed  by  the  idea  of  such  a  universal  vitality  of
Nature  as  is  extolled  in  these  passionate  expressions.  It
is  true  that  all  that  activity  which  fills  our  own  soul,  the
diversified  train  of  thought,  the  secret  play  of  feeling,  the
living  force  of  effort,  whose  spontaneous  freedom  seems  our
noblest  endowment, — that  each  individual  in  childhood,  and
Thought  when  it  was  young,  believed  it  could  recognise
all  this  under  apparently  the  most  unlike  forms  of  the  outer
world.  Yet  it  is  only  the  child  whom  the  narrow  sphere  and
imperfect  cohesion  of  his  experience  permits  for  a  while  to
enjoy  this  illusion.  The  youth  of  the  human  race,  on  the
other  hand,  embraced  the  old  age  of  many  individuals ;  it
must  therefore  at  an  early  period  have  been  in  possession  of
the  rich  variety  of  experience  that  fills  a  whole  human  life,
and  along  with  it  of  a  degree  of  intelligent  insight  sufficient
to  make  the  thought  of  a  boundlessly  animated  Nature  but  as
it  were  a  holiday-dream,  which  on  the  working  morrow  will
be  dispelled.

For  only  in  idle  contemplation  could  men  undisturbed
cling  to  the  idea  of  a  vitality  pervading  the  whole  realm  of
Nature  with  a  free  voluntary  activity.  Active  life,  on  the
other  hand,  must,  for  the  satisfaction  of  its  needs  and  for
all  the  ends  of  its  working,  be  able  to  build  on  a  certain
constancy  and  trustworthiness  in  events,  and  on  a  necessity
in  their  connection  that  admits  of  being  calculated  on  before
hand.  The  ordinary  occurrences  of  everyday  life  are  enough
to  convince  us  of  the  reality  of  this  trustworthiness  in
things,  independent  of  arbitrary  will,  and  it  cannot  have
been  long  ere  through  them  the  human  mind  became
accustomed  to  look  on  this  earthly  scene  of  human  activity
as  a  realm  of  things  to  be  used,  in  which  the  play  of
forces  depends  entirely  on  the  lifeless  regularity  of  universal
laws.  Through  the  commonest  occurrences  of  life  men
could  not  fail  to  become  acquainted  with  the  effects  of

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  8

gravity  ;  the  rudest  attempt  to  build  a  shelter  called  forth
ideas  of  the  equilibrium  of  bodies,  of  the  distribution  of
pressure,  of  the  advantages  of  the  lever,  experiences  these
which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  find  the  least  civilised
peoples  turning  to  manifold  account.  Primitive  hunters,
when  using  bow  and  arrows,  had  to  calculate  on  the
propelling  force  of  the  tightened  string ;  nay,  they  must
tacitly  have  relied  on  the  regularity  with  which,  under
varying  conditions,  that  property  increases  and  diminishes.
Even  the  yet  simpler  dexterity  of  bringing  down  game  by
means  of  a  hurled  stone  would  never  have  been  attained,
had  there  not  dwelt,  as  it  were  in  the  ilesh  and  blood  of
the  arm,  the  intuitive  conviction  that  the  direction  and
velocity  of  the  flight  of  the  thrown  body  would  be  wholly
determined  by  sensible  differences  in  the  kind  and  degree
of  our  exertion.

By  no  mythology  have  these  phenomena,  and  the  connec
tion  in  virtue  of  universal  laws  which  they  reveal,  been
deliberately  made  part  of  its  representation  of  the  cosmos
And  yet  all  these  tilings  —  weight,  equilibrium  of  bodies,
impact  and  communication  of  movement — lay  daily  before  the
eyes  of  all ;  and  it  is  through  nothing  else  than  the  deliberate
employment  of  these  that  man  establishes  around  him  that
artificial  course  of  things,  that  second  world  of  art  and  comfort,
to  which,  as  civilisation  advances,  his  life  comes  to  be  far
more  closely  related  than  to  the  original  untutored  force  and
beauty  of  creation.  ]Jut,  though  these  facts  lie  too  close  at
hand  to  allow  of  their  having  been  overlooked,  it  yet  is  not
surprising  that  the  mythological  imagination  should  have
wholly  set  aside  the  thoughts  which  they  could  not  fail  to
awaken.  For  it  is  not  the  negro  alone  whom  we  see  alter
nately  belabour  and  worship  his  fetish :  our  own  civilisation
sometimes  repeats  this  absurdity,  though  perhaps  with  better
grace.  Only  too  readily  do  the  most  diverse  conceptions  dwell
peaceably  side  by  side  in  the  same  human  soul,  without  their
antagonism  being  so  distinctly  realized  that  the  need  of  recon
ciliation  is  felt,  llenco  it  was  quite  possible  for  the  poetic

4  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  I.

imagination  with  far-reaching  glance  to  overlook  what  lay  afe
its  feet,  and  to  sketch  the  dazzling  image  of  a  vitally  animated
"Mature,  while  practical  life  for  its  own  ends  continued  simply
to  take  for  granted  and  make  use  of  the  lifelessness  of  common
things.  With  the  blindness  of  him  who  will  not  see,  tha
mythological  conception  of  Nature  early  turned  away  from  all
those  phenomena  which  are  either  artificially  produced  by
ourselves,  or  obviously  regulated  in  their  manifestation  by
external  determining  causes.  It  confined  its  poetic  interpre
tation  to  such  processes  as  either  by  their  unchanging  regu
larity — as  the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  succession
of  the  seasons,  and  the  cycle  of  vegetable  life — or  by  an  absence
of  order  that  defies  calculation,  like  the  capricious  variations
of  the  atmosphere,  are  wholly  beyond  the  modifying  influ
ences  of  our  volition.  The  imagination  of  those  generations,
plunging  into  these  extracts  from  selected  parts  of  Nature,
was  disturbed  in  its  idealizing  activity  by  no  remembrance
i.f  the  everyday  reality,  that  nevertheless  lay  before  its  eyes
as  palpable  evidence  for  blind  necessity  in  the  connection  of
things.  We  cannot  help  here  noticing  in  particular,  what  we
might  have  expected  in  general,  that  even  this  distinction
between  a  superior  and  a  common  Nature  could  not  be
thoroughly  carried  out;  that  even  on  the  narrower  field
chosen  by  it,  mythology  by  no  means  succeeded  in  wholly
idealizing  the  external  world  of  sense ;  that  even  here  it
could  at  most  push  back  and  hide  the  obscure  and  stubborn
core  of  reality  and  of  blind  connection  which  it  tried  to  avoid,
without  being  able  to  explain  or  even  to  do  without  it.

For,  first  of  all,  in  any  other  form  than  that  of  human
life,  and  the  animal  existence  to  which  it  is  akin,  mental
activity  does  not  so  obviously  appeal  to  our  powers  of  per
ception  as  to  beget  full  unquestioning  belief.  The  Teutonic
tribes  might  indeed  pay  homage,  as  to  a  living  being,  to  the
sprouting  corn-blade  coining  up  out  of  the  ground  ;  yet  the
mythic  expression  of  this  pretty  fancy  was  hardly  other
than  an  image  tacitly  distinguished  from  that  which  it
represented.  The  Greek  cannot  have  really  looked  on

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  5

Dcmeter  as  herself  the  budding  green,  the  soul  of  the  corn  ;
she  remained  the  goddess  in  human  form,  exerting  her  shield
ing  and  quickening  influence  on  behalf  of  a  germ,  which
after  all  held  its  power  of  development  hidden  within  the
recesses  of  its  own  being.  Every  step  by  which  agriculture
advanced  must  have  thrown  fresh  light  on  the  conditions
favourable  to  that  development,  till  the  reverence  of  the
faithful  came  to  have  nothing  left  for  which  to  thank  the
goddess  other  than  the  first  inexplicable  creation  of  the  germ,
which,  once  in  existence,  was  brought  to  perfection  by  the
revolving  course  of  Nature.  Though  in  poetic  phraseology
it  was  the  river-god  himself  who  flowed,  yet  evidently  the
imagination  falls  back  on  the  conception  of  him  in  human
shape,  as  a  ruling  personality,  to  whom  the  watery  element
does  indeed  inseparably  belong,  yet  who  always  remains  some
thing  foreign  and  different.  The  thunderbolt  is  but  a  weapon
in  the  hand  of  Jupiter;  the  winds  are  held  in  check,  and
sent  forth  by  their  celestial  rulers:  everywhere  the  elemental
world  falls  back  into  its  old  relation  of  contrast  to  the  realm
of  spirits,  and,  never  awaking  to  mental  life  of  its  own,
remains  a  substance  capable  of  being  moulded  at  their  bidding.
There  may  have  been  a  poetic  conception  of  Nature,  that,
as  the  poet  sings,  heard  from  among  the  reeds  the  plaintive
notes  of  Syrinx,  or  detected  in  the  stone  the  silence  of
Tantalus'  daughter  ;  but  these  and  countless  similar  myths
convince  us  after  all  only  that  mythology  failed  to  get  to  the
heart  of  Nature  and  to  endow  her  with  a  soul  of  her  own.
For  the  only  way  in  which  it  could  animate  stones  and  reeds
was  to  conceive  of  both  as  transformed  human  life,  and  to
leave  it  to  fancy  to  connect  the  remembrance  of  that  former
intelligible  existence  with  the  stubborn  unintelligibility  of
the  form  into  which  it  had  passed.

In  a  charming  poem  by  lluckert,  the  illusory  glory  of
autumn  colours,  in  which  each  leaf  seems  to  be  turned  into
a  blossom,  is  contrasted  with  the  genuine  vivifying  energy  of
spring,  that  amid  all  its  blossoming  never  conceals  the  full
dark  green  growth  beneath.  It  was  on  this  autumnal  show

6  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  I.

that  mythology,  for  the  second  time,  made  shipwreck ;  as  it
had  been  unable  to  spiritualize  matter,  so  also  it  failed  to
lend  to  events  the  higher  bloom  of  freedom:  the  dark,
irrepressible  growth  of  an  original  inevitable  necessity  again
came  to  the  front.  It  was  of  no  avail  that  mythology
shunned  the  sight  of  it,  and  attended  exclusively  to  the
splendour  of  the  world  of  gods,  and  to  its  dominion  over
the  realm  of  matter.  For  even  here,  in  order  that  this
dominion  should  be  possible,  it  had  to  acknowledge  a  circle
of  eternal  and  universal  laws,  in  harmony  with  which  alone
any  will  can  obtain  power  over  the  states  of  things.  The
adoration  of  an  inscrutable  fate,  holding  even  the  gods  in
its  bonds,  was  the  expression  of  this  thought  in  its  relation
to  the  course  of  the  moral  world ;  less  explicitly,  but  yet
intelligibly  enough,  it  is  repeated  in  every  representation  of
the  mutual  intercourse  between  divine  beings  and  the
elements  of  Nature.  Helios  might  in  tranquil  majesty  guide
the  golden  car,  where  now  the  inanimate  globe  of  fire
revolves ;  but  the  wheel  of  that  divine  car  turned,  and  its
axle  exerted  and  received  pressure,  according  to  no  other  laws
than  those  by  which  on  earth  at  all  times  the  wheels  of  every
vehicle  will  turn  round  their  loaded  axle.  Poetry  could,  at
most,  relieve  the  gods  of  the  laborious  setting  of  their
hands  to  work, — it  could  never  wholly  dispense  with  the
idea  of  a  universal  order,  according  to  whose  laws  alone  the
living  will  imparts  motion  to  the  world  of  matter.  While
Zeus  hurls  the  thunderbolt  only  by  the  force  of  his  hands,
the  knitting  of  his  eyebrows,  does,  without  effort,  stir
Olympus  to  its  depths ;  yet  this  second  impressive  image  of
godlike  might  only  repeats  more  obscurely  the  same  process
of  mediate  efficiency  expressed  with  lucid  explicitness  by
the  first.  Even  in  the  Mosaic  history  of  the  creation,  sub-
limer  than  any  other,  because  it  represents  as  forthwith
existing  what  the  Deity  willed  to  be,  without  weakening  the
impression  of  omnipotence  by  any  mention  of  intervening
physical  agencies, — even  here  the  silent  thought  is  still  not
deemed  to  be  sufficient  for  the  beginning  of  creation.  God

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  7

is  made  at  least  to  utter  the  word, — a  very  slight  yet  all  the
same  a  distinct  condition,  which,  it  seemed,  had  to  be  fulfilled
in  order  that,  through  its  operation,  the  eternal  necessity  of
tilings  might  bring  to  pass  the  rise  of  existence  at  the  word
of  command.

Thus  then  mythology  really  comes  far  short  of  what  it
seemed  to  promise ;  and  the  discord  in  the  beginnings  of
things  which  it  sought  to  reconcile,  it  scarcely  succeeded  in
concealing.  It  could  not  animate  the  world  of  things,  it
could  only  conjure  up  beside  it  a  second  world,  those  godlike
forms  that,  hovering  around  or  above  the  dark  core  of  things,
within  themselves  exalt  every  accident  of  the  blind  course  of
Nature  into  consciousness  and  enjoyment ;  but  they  are  not
the  Heal  of  which  they  partake.  As  little  could  it  banish  the
fundamental  rights  of  reality,  the  regulated  necessity  in  the
connection  of  things;  it  did  nothing  more  than  dream  of
the  blissful  freedom  of  a  celestial  life,  that  stands  out  it
bright  relief  against  that  dark  background;  yet  only  in  that
background  does  this  life  at  every  step  find  firm  soil  beneath
its  tread.

§  2.  The  renewal  of  the  imsuccessful  attempt  was  left  for
another  line  of  thought.  AVere  it  our  purpose  to  state
historically  the  course  of  these  shiftings  of  view,  we  should
not  of  course  speak  thus.  For  the  fact  is,  that  the  thought
of  a  universal  life  of  Nature  seems  to  have  arisen  much
earlier  and  to  have  been  followed  out  into  the  most  hetero
geneous  forms  of  existence ;  not  till  later  did  the  fancy
retreat  from  these  upon  a  narrower  range  of  individual
forms,  whose  ideal  beauty  remained  intelligible,  long  after
all  remembrance  of  their  original  significance  had  passed
away.  But  while,  like  a  dream  that  is  past,  the  mytho
logical  view  of  things  is  retreating  before  us  to  a  greater
distance,  on  the  contrary  that  other  conception,  of  which
we  are  now  about  in  the  second  place  to  speak,  as  it  was
perhaps  the  earliest  blossom  of  the  spirit  of  inquiry,  so  has
remained  alive  through  all  time,  and  prevails  hardly  less  in
the  present  than  it  did  in  the  past

8  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  I.

That  increasing  experience  had  destroyed  belief  in  the
visible  forms  of  gods  seemed  to  be  no  loss,  since  it  had  never
made  them  visible.  For  to  the  new  mode  of  thought  it  was
no  longer  necessary  to  behold  the  animating  intelligences  of
Nature  as  distinct  beings  beside  the  forms  of  dead  matter;  it
rather  sought  to  unite  what  mythology  was  always  seeing  fall
within  its  hands  into  two  separate  worlds  ;  as  directly
endowed  with  life,  the  body  of  natural  forms  was  now  to
carry  within  itself  the  animating  principle  of  its  development.
But  when  with  this  view  the  attempt  was  made  to  track
living  activity  beyond  the  confines  of  organized  existence  into
the  most  formless  constituents  of  the  external  world,  the
archetype  of  human  psychic  life  could  not,  any  more  than  the
outline  of  the  human  figure,  prove  sufficient  for  the  delinea
tion  of  the  animation  sought.  For  but  few  of  the  products
of  Nature  present  themselves  to  such  a  degree  as  isolated
wholes,  that  it  is  easy  to  assign  them  as  abodes  to  personal
spirits.  And  even  though  we  may  ascribe  to  other  things
the  capacity  of  receiving  impressions  and  being  affected  by
them,  yet  the  absence  of  that  system  of  organs  on  which,
in  our  experience  the  possibility  of  sense-perceptions,  the
combination  of  these  into  an  orderly  view  of  things,  and  the
reaction  of  will  depends,  prevents  us  from  discerning  in
them  any  form  of  mental  life  such  as  shall  allow  them  to
develop  self- consciousness  in  the  same  way  as  we  do.
Finally,  the  further  we  advance  in  the  process  of  resolving
composite  forms  into  simple  elements,  the  more  do  we  lose
sight  of  seemingly  incalculable  freedom  of  action;  the  more
distinctly  is  each  type  of  Nature  seen  to  be  limited  to  a
uniform  mode  of  operation  that  under  like  conditions  is
always  alike,  to  present  no  signs  of  internal  development,
and  to  be  destitute  of  that  power  of  collecting  and  elabo
rating  impressions  which  gives  to  every  soul  in  the  course
of  its  life  an  idiosyncrasy  that  defies  comparison.  Guided
by  such  observations,  the  new  conception  which  we  are  con
trasting  with  the  mythological  view  of  things,  speaks  no
longer  of  animating  principles  which  impel  things,  but  of

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  9

impulses  that  animate  them.1  Ami  yet  with  the  new  direc
tion  of  thought,  which  I  have  tried  briefly  to  indicate  by
this  contrast,  we  seem  to  lose  more  than  we  are  at  first  in  a
position  to  gain.

For  above  all,  the  full,  conscious,  mental  life,  of  which
we  have  experience  in  ourselves,  is  alone  to  us  thoroughly
intelligible.  If  we  have  to  give  up  its  universal  presence  in
Nature,  the  opposite  thought  of  a  wholly  blind  necessity  of
working  may  also  be  intelligible  to  us, — in  so  far  at  least
as  we  no  longer  profess  to  throw  ourselves  into  this  complete
antithesis  of  our  own  nature.  But  just  on  this  account
this  idea  can  only  suffice  for  us  so  long  as  we  are  content
with  calculating  natural  events  and  with  controlling  them
for  the  satisfaction  of  our  wants ;  to  the  perpetual  craving
for  insight  into  the  heart  of  things  it  yields  no  satisfaction.
Hence,  in  order  to  escape  from  this  threatened  absence
of  personality  in  all  things,  we  create  the  notion  of
Impulse  ;  for  by  that  term  we  seek  to  express  not  only  that
no  external  force  with  arbitrary  necessity  compels  things  to
produce  their  effects,  but  that  this  compelling  power  cannot
merely  be  in  their  own  nature,  it  must  be  known  by  them  as
their  own,  be  by  them  known,  possessed,  willed,  and  per
petually  produced  anew  within, — or  however  else  we  may
describe  the  desire  to  take  impulse  as  the  peculiar  living
nature  of  things,  as  their  selfhood.  The  clear  sun  of  Personal
Consciousness,  that  shone  in  the  forms  of  the  mythic  world,
has  been  therefore  replaced  at  least  by  the  moonlight  of  an
Unconscious  Reason  in  things,  in  order  that  what  they  do
should  not  merely  seem  to  spring  from  them,  but  in  some
manner  should  further  exist  for  themselves  and  bo  recognised
by  them  as  their  own  life  and  action.

The  many  circumlocutions  and  figurative  expressions  which
have  been  required,  and  which  will  always  be  required,  in
order  to  bring  home  what  we  are  here  in  search  of,  show
clearly  how  between  the  two  extremes  of  the  belief  in  Personal

1["Sprirht  nicht  mchr  von  Seelcu  wtlche  die  Dingc  trciben  soiidem  voo
Triebcu  \\clche  sio  bcicelcu."]

10  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  I.

Spirits  in  Nature  and  the  notion  of  a  blind  necessity  of  work
ing,  this  idea  of  an  Unconscious  Reason  stands  as  an  exceed
ingly  indistinct  via  media.  Yet,  as  the  human  mind  is
wont  under  the  guidance  of  a  decided  preference  to  return
once  and  again — and  that  in  the  most  diverse  ways — to
this  idea,  it  must  meet  a  deep-seated  mental  need.  And  in
fact,  when  we  seek  to  account  for  this,  we  find  even  in  our
ordinary  moods  many  traces  of  a  tendency  to  prefer  a  some
what  dim  murky  twilight  to  the  broad  light  of  intelligent
life,  and  to  eil'ace  the  boundary  between  conscious  action  and
unconscious  operation.

Not  that  we  do  not  prize,  as  the  two  essential  attributes
by  which  mind  is  distinguished  from  things,  the  deliberate
thought  by  which  our  mental  states  are  bound  together,  and
the  volition  which  ascribes  to  itself  their  determination.  But
the  noblest  part  of  mental  life  does  not  always  seem  to
us  to  lie  in  these,  not  every  spoken  word  is  to  be  regarded
as  the  result  of  a  train  of  thought  which  we  can  retrace  ;
we  rather  rejoice  in  the  spontaneousness  with  which  from
unconscious  depths  the  expression  of  the  soul's  life  wells  up
inexplicable  and  yet  intelligible.  We  admire  the  lucid
cogency  with  which  an  unbroken  chain  of  inferences  leads
from  the  starting-point  of  an  investigation  to  its  conclusion  ;
yet  often  we  prize  more  highly  that  other  kind  of  consistent
sequence  in  virtue  of  which  in  works  of  art  thought  grows
out  of  thought,  without  our  being  able  to  make  a  demonstra
tion  of  the  connecting  links,  whose  connecting  efficacy  we  yet
feel.  Similarly  we  can  only  look  on  ourselves  as  creatures
with  a  will  of  our  own  when,  sitting  in  judgment  on  ourselves,
we  lay  to  our  own  account  the  moral  excellence  or  worthless-
ness  of  a  particular  action.  Yet  at  the  same  time  we  regard
it  as  the  problem  which  education  has  to  solve,  that  not
merely  the  trifling  movements  to  which  the  incidents  of  every
day  life  give  rise,  but  further  our  whole  moral  conduct  should
appear  as  the  involuntary  expression  of  a  noble  nature,  free
from  the  melancholy  seriousness  of  deliberate  purpose,  and
therefore  free  from  any  thought  of  being  a.ble  to  be  different.

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATUKE.  1 1

Even  mythology,  when  it  explained  the  phenomena  of
Xature  from  intelligent  motives,  did  not  think  differently  as  to
this.  Not  ever}'  sunrise  is  preceded  by  a  renewed  resolve  of  the
god  ;  the  original  volition  having  as  it  were  become  faint  at  the
distance  to  which  it  has  retreated,  continues  to  work  with  the
unconscious  power  of  a  graceful  habit.  Nature  manifests
herself  as  Nature  just  because  she  seems  to  act  under  the
influence  of  motives,  of  which  she  has  ceased  to  be  conscious,
and  of  whose  power  she  is  now  but  dreamily  aware,  as  some
thing  persisting  involuntarily.  And  in  this  twilight  condition
we  love  to  merge  even  our  own  existence, — however  highly
we  may  prize  distinctness  of  thought  and  freedom  of  will,  far
from  denying  the  presence  even  in  ourselves  of  a  Nature  that
works  unconsciously  and  involuntarily,  we  rather  dwell  with
partiality  on  its  constant  quiet  activity.

As  yet  we  have  hardly  made  clear  the  reasons  that  confirm
us  in  this  tendency,  and  I  cannot  hope  to  treat  them  exhaus
tively  here.  But  first  of  all  it  appears  to  me  as  if  we  were
sometimes  overpowered  by  the  feeling  how  much  all  investiga
tion  and  demonstration,  all  pondering  and  resolution,  belong
to  the  laborious  processes  of  that  life  which  is  still  engaged  in
the  toilsome  search  after  a  distant  summum  lonum.  Then  we
faintly  feel  the  fascination  that  in  so  many  enthusiastic  souls
has  begotten  longing  after  the  absorption  of  their  personal
life  in  the  all-embracing  ocean  of  a  universal  spirit.  That
self-absorbed  contemplation  before  which  the  loosened  ties  of
a  methodical  train  of  thought  are  dissolved,  and  ego  and
non-ego — their  limits  effaced — blend  in  dreamy  identity,
that  vegetative  existence  which  has  given  up  all  volition
and  all  effort  after  the  distant, — these  seem  to  us,  in  the
undiscriminated  vague  emotion  with  which  they  fill  us,  to
possess  as  something  actually  present  that  veritable  highest
good  towards  whose  far-off  reflection  tends  the  unresting
labour  of  our  thoughts  and  our  will.  We  prefer  the  tran
quillity  of  this  finite  fulfilment  to  the  infinite  restlessness  of
longing.  But  perhaps  we  are  no  less  fascinated  by  the
vista  into  something  infinite  which  opens  up  before  us  as

12  BOOK  I. CIIAl'TER  I.

soon  as  we  come  to  perceive  a  Nature  working  within  us
unconsciously.  In  fact,  a  pleasure  from  mingled  self-com
placency  and  humility  seems  to  lie  for  us  in  the  conviction
that  within  ourselves  lurks  a  world,  whose  form  we  but
imperfectly  apprehend,  and  whose  working — when  in  par
ticular  phases  it  comes  under  our  observation  —  surprises
us  with  foreshadowings  of  unknown  depths  in  our  own
being.  Any  one  who  could  see  quite  through  himself
would  seem  to  us  to  have  come  to  an  end  of  himself;  he
alone  who  is  gradually  discovering  himself  is  entitled  to
take  an  interest  in  his  own  existence.  Hence  we  would
not  be  without  this  dark  core  of  our  being,  so  assuredly
do  we  count  it  as  part  of  our  own  personality,  thus
expanded  for  us  to  the  dimensions  of  a  world  in  which  wo
ourselves  have  still  discoveries  to  make,  and  so  clearly  do  we
recognise  it  as  something  in  us,  yet  not  we  ourselves.  Then
we  retreat  in  confusion  before  this  mysterious  recess  of  our
beinr*,  thinking  we  behold  in  it  that  Infinite  which  is  the

O*  ' O

eternal  foundation  of  all  finite  phenomena.

I  add  but  cursorily  one  last  consideration.  As  in  ourselves
we  love  to  obscure  the  boundary  between  consciousness  and
unconsciousness,  so  also  we  are  not  wont  to  set  our  inner
nature  itself  in  sharp  contrast  to  its  bodily  external  form.
Hardly  ever,  save  when  the  idea  of  death  awakens  thoughts
of  a  remote  future,  do  we  think  of  regarding  the  body  as  but
a  covering  to  be  rent  asunder,  which  the  spirit  occupies  with
out  blending  with  it.  This  view  is  little  familiar  to  simple
minds,  and,  even  when  we  grasp  it  by  reflection,  we  yet  fail
to  raise  it  from  the  condition  of  a  derived  conviction  into  the
clearness  of  an  immediate  vital  feeling.  We  never  can  think
of  our  hands  and  feet,  of  the  surface  of  our  bodies  that  feels
pressure,  except  as  a  part  of  our  very  self — in  no  wise  as  an
adjacent  tract  of  the  outer  world  which  has  been  brought
under  the  dominion  of  the  soul  only  more  completely  than
further  outlying  parts  of  the  same.  The  mind  invariably
resists  the  giving  up  of  that  close  union  of  soul  and  body,  the
feeling  of  which  comes  to  us  aJl,  as  a  pleasing  illusion,  from

CONFLICTING  VIKWS  OF  NATUSE.  13

the  knitting  together  of  our  organization.  The  spirit  seems
to  fullil  its  destiny  only  when,  instead  of  moving  a  foreign
body  from  without,  it  takes  its  place  within  it  as  the  spring
< 'faction;  only  then  does  the  existence  even  of  matter  seem
i'ully  justified,  when  it  not  only  confronts  spirit  as  something
to  be  used,  but  is  inwardly  penetrated  by  its  glow.  Here  it
is  the  artistic  impulse,  the  esthetic  craving,  that  grows  strong
within  us.  As  in  all  beauty  we  seek  a  mysterious  blending
of  the  ideal  essence  with  the  real  form,  so  of  science  also  we
above  all  require  recognition  of  the  animated  form  in  that
charm  of  wholeness  with  which  it  floats  before  us  in  life  as
the  visible  fulfilment  of  our  longing  after  unity,  and  we  will
rather  admire  it  as  an  uncomprehended  reality  than  suffer  the
understanding  to  dissolve  it.

From  these  and  other  similar  causes  springs  indeed  the
power  of  attraction  ever  exerted  over  us  by  the  idea  of  an
unconscious  reason  pervading  all  Xature  ;  I  have  purposely
spoken  of  those  alone  which  give  the  conception  in  question
its  fascination  for  every  human  mind,  passing  over  the  argu
ments  by  which  philosophical  speculators  seek  to  commend
them  within  the  sphere  of  the  schools,  though  they  cannot  bring
them  home  to  living  feeling.  At  the  same  time,  I  suspect
that  even  such  recommendations  would  not  remove  the
reproach  of  indistinctness  to  be  brought  against  the  funda
mental  thought  of  this  conception.  For,  in  appealing  to
actual  experience  of  unconscious  mental  operations  in  our
selves,  not  only  do  we  appeal  to  that  within  us  which
most  stands  in  need  of  explanation,  but  investigation  would
after  a  few  steps  show  that  all  those  states  on  which  we  were
laying  stress — in  so  far  at  least  as  they  were  connected  with
enjoyment — were  cases  belonging  to  a  margin,  and  to  b<;
approached  only  by  a  personal  and  individual  life  of  intelli
gence  with  the  organs  of  its  nature  ;  with  this  condition  left
out,  they  become  inexplicable  instead  of  more  easy  to  explain.

T>ut  this  view  is  at  a  disadvantage  as  compared  with  the
belief  in  personal  spirits  in  Nature  not  only  from  the  indis
tinctness  of  its  principle,  for  it  is  further  open  to  the  charge

14  BOOK  I. CHAPTEit  I.

that  even  under  the  application  of  this  principle  we  do  not
readily  regain  an  advantage  which  the  mythological  view  of
things  certainly  afforded.  Tor  the  lively  ever  -  recurring
satisfaction  with  which  we  follow  the  latter  in  its  inter
pretations  of  Nature,  arises  in  great  part  from  the  fact
that  it  traces  back  phenomena  to  motives  whose  cogency
is  directly  intelligible  to  feeling.  If  day  by  day  Helios
drives  the  sun-car  across  the  heavens,  it  is  not  because  he
is  urged  by  the  blind  natural  necessity  of  an  inexplicable
instinct,  but  "  that  he  may  give  light  to  the  immortals "
and  contribute  his  share  to  the  blissful  order  of  the  celestial
world,  that  he  daily  repeats  the  monotonous  task.  And  how
frequently  elsewhere  in  the  legends  of  widely  differing
peoples  are  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  their
mutual  attractions  and  repulsions,  represented  as  the  con
sequences  of  deeds  and  destinies  whence  spring  everywhere
poetic  motives  of  love,  duty,  longing,  and  remembrance
to  keep  the  monotonous  round  going  on !  Thus  Nature  in
fact  becomes  the  reflection  of  a  world  of  thought;  the
external  displays  of  force  have  no  greater  significance  than
belongs  to  the  gestures  of  living  beings ;  they  exist  not  for
their  own  sake,  but  in  order  to  point  back  to  an  essence
which  is  expressed  without  being  exhausted  in  them.  If  we
give  up  the  belief  in  personal  spirits  of  Nature,  this  support,
offered  by  a  spirit-world  to  Nature,  is  in  the  first  place  only
weakened.  Even  should  the  outward  deportment  of  things
now  spring  from  a  dream-like  internal  impulse,  yet  no  analogy
leads  us  to  form  any  notion  of  a  wider  background  of  their
psychic  life,  whence  that  dreamy  impulse  and  the  individual
activity  excited  by  it  could  proceed,  as  one  among  a  plurality
of  manifestations.  A  single  impulse,  immediately  directed
towards  a  single  kind  of  operation,  has  become  the  whole
essence  of  things,  their  one  and  all,  and  they  appear  forced
to  make  the  outward  signs  of  activity,  without  any  inner
experience  of  a  higher  kind  by  expressing  which  these  would
be  alone  justifiable.  In  like  manner  as  it  explains  the
turning  of  llowers  towards  the  sun,  mythology  would  have

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  15

traced  back  the  mutual  attraction  of  bodies  to  a  conscious
longing,  and  explained  that  longing  itself  from  the  past
course  of  destiny.  Movement  in  space  would  thus  have
been  to  it  the  momentary  expression  of  a  manifold  mental
life,  into  which  in  its  manifoldness  we  could  still  enter,
which  in  the  fulness  of  its  import  reaches  far  beyond  this
single  expression,  and  on  that  very  account  can  truly  explain
it  from  itself.  To  us,  on  the  other  hand,  an  impulse  of
attraction  that  we  suppose  to  lie  in  the  nature  of  matter
repents  properly  but  the  uncomprehended  fact  of  movement,
adding  thereto,  instead  of  the  explanatory  motive,  merely  the
thought  of  an  equally  incomprehensible  necessity  by  which
tilings  are  compelled  to  execute  it.  In  fact,  in  this  light  the
processes  of  Nature  appear  to  us  only  as  the  silent  gesticula
tions  of  forms  whose  images  we  discern  on  the  horizon,  while
their  voices  are  lost  in  the  distance.

But  this  was  not  the  whole  meaning  of  this  view  of  things ;
at  all  times  therefore  we  find  it  striving,  by  a  wider  develop
ment  of  its  thoughts,  to  counteract  this  lowering  of  the
conception  of  Nature.  Above  all,  it  carried  back  the  divided
multiplicity  of  phenomena  to  an  all-embracing  Cause,  to  an
Infinite  Reason.  In  the  centre  of  this  dreaming  and  creating
World-soul  it  placed  an  original  Impelling  Cause  of  deep
import  which,  assuming  an  inexhaustible  variety  of  shapes,
gives  rise  to  this  actual  frame  of  things.  Attaining  in
individuals  to  full  self  -  consciousness,  the  action  of  this
perpetual  force  is  guided  throughout  by  the  same  motives,
even  in  forms  where  it  but  dreamily  and  unconsciously
stirs,  and  each  single  product  of  Nature  expresses  in  visible
corporeality  one  of  those  thoughts  by  which  the  living
essence  of  the  Highest  is  interpreted.  These  thoughts,
springing  from  the  same  original  source,  and  therein  com
bining  to  form  the  whole  of  an  inexhaustible  Idea,
establish  between  the  things  whose  moving-springs  they
are,  an  intimate  connection  of  meaning  and  of  community
of  nature.  And  in  this  community  of  their  ground  and
aim,  of  which  they  perhaps  retain  some  obscure  remeni-

16  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  L

brance,  things  get  back  again  that  deeper  support  of
their  being  which  we  missed.  The  utterances  in  which
the  individual,  yielding  to  the  necessity  of  its  impulse,
indulges,  are  no  longer  made  for  their  own  sake ;  they  are  the
contribution  which  each  in  its  place  is  bound  to  make  to  the
realization  of  the  universal  cosmic  meaning.  And  if  the
creatures  pass  in  changeful  development  through  a  series  of
states,  or  in  various  fashions  react  on  external  forces,  they  are
not  even  here  under  the  compulsion  of  an  unconnected  multi
tude  of  separate  impulses  from  without.  On  the  contrary,
from  the  unity  of  the  Idea  which  is  their  animating  principle,
arise  as  with  poetic  necessity  all  the  manifold  varieties  of
existence  and  of  deportment  to  be  observed  in  them.  Thus
each  individual  is  a  living  self-contained  unity,  and  yet  at
the  same  time  each  has,  in  the  mighty  entirety  of  things,
the  explaining  background  of  the  particular  dream  by  which
it  is  moved.

On  account  of  the  truth  which  it  unquestionably  contains,
this  conception  will  never  cease  to  produce  its  impression  on
the  human  mind  ;  yet  manifold  difficulties  start  up  as  soon
as  it  seriously  sets  about  the  interpretation  of  phenomena.
No  one  has  yet  found  an  expression  for  that  infinitely  high
essence  of  the  world-soul  whose  individual  emanations  the
productions  of  Nature  are  ;  no  one  has  yet  found  an  expression
to  satisfy  our  raised  expectations,  or  make  up  to  us  for  the
congenial  life  with  which  mythology  had  filled  Nature.  For
all  those  efforts  after  growth  and  development,  after  plurality
in  unity  and  unity  in  plurality,  after  contrariety  and  the
conciliation  of  opposites,  by  which  men  have  tried  to  render
intelligible  the  essence  of  the  world-soul,  must  to  the  un
biassed  judgment  appear  but  miserable  tasks,  scarce  worthy
even  of  the  sportive  activity  of  childhood,  far  less  fitted  to
express  the  serious  creative  tendencies  of  the  cause  of  the
world.  Did  such  efforts  exhaust  the  fulness  of  its  content,
we  could  not  deny  that  any  single  moment  taken  at  random
out  of  the  life  of  a  human  spirit  has  infinitely  more  soul  than
the  depths  of  the  world- soul.

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  17

Nevertheless  the  shortcomings  of  our  attempts  to  fathom
these  depths  would  not  disprove  the  truth  of  the  view  itself;
even  should  the  Highest  continue  to  float  before  us  but  as  an
unutterable  idea,  we  might  yet,  by  holding  fast  this  idea,  at
least  gain  the  advantage  of  securing  a  living  conception  of
Nature.  But  the  same  reproach  which  we  had  to  bring  against
mythology,  lies  at  the  door  of  this  view  and  its  results.  For
it  too,  expressly  as  it  promises  to  embrace  the  whole  of
Nature,  has  yet  hitherto  in  all  its  performances  really  had  in
view  only  those  selected  main  outlines  of  the  course  of
Nature  to  which  the  mythological  imagination  confined  itself;
like  that,  it  overlooks  the  treasures  of  the  trivial  common
place  actual  world  that  —  less  poetic,  but  all  the  more
inevitable  —  spreads  around  us.  In  the  mobility  of  the
animal  body,  in  the  growth  of  plants,  nay,  in  the  crystalline
forms  of  solid  matter  and  the  revolution  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  in  short,  wherever  the  isolated  effects  of  the  elements
have  already  coalesced  into  a  permanent,  self-maintaining
form  of  existence  and  of  motion,  there  we  can  easily  find  the
reflection  of  Ideas  which  we  assume  in  the  essence  of  the
world-soul  as  the  type  of  its  working.  But  the  achievements
of  the  lever  and  the  screw,  the  laws  of  equilibrium  and  of
impact,  the  effects  of  pressure  and  of  tension,  all  these  have
ever  seemed  to  lie  far  apart  from  the  progressive  manifesta
tion  of  the  world-soul,  and  have  for  the  most  part  remained
wholly  outside  the  speculations  of  those  who  have  philo
sophized  about  it.  The  open-air  landscape  beauty  of  creation
may  foster  the  tendency  to  this  lofty  view  of  Nature  ;  the
homely  activity  of  the  workshop,  teaching  us  not  to  admire
what  lies  before  us  finished,  but  to  consider  the  possibility
of  its  coming  to  pass,  necessarily  leads  to  other  thoughts ;
by  it  the  doctrine  of  creative  animating  natural  impulses  is
inevitably  forced  to  give  place  to  a  third  view, — the  last
which  forms  a  chapter  in  the  history  of  human  thought.

§  3.  We  are  now  daily  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of  artificial
contrivances,  far  more  varied  than  those  of  earlier  times,  in
which,  by  means  of  a  complicated  series  of  movements,  lifeless

VOL. I.  B

18  BOOK I. CIIAPTKK L

materials  successfully  imitate  the  activity  of  living  organisms.
Our eyes cannot rest repeatedly  and  ^  continuously on this
remarkable  borderland  of  self-acting  instruments,  which  derive
their  material  from  Nature  but  the form  of  their  operation
from  human volition,  without  our  whole  mode  of conceiv
ing Nature being affected by these observations. In the
materials of  which  it  is constructed  there was  no  internal
predisposition  to  the  formation  of  the  machine  which  moves
before  us ;  no  inherent  vital end brought about its present
mode  of  connection,  no  animating  impulse  inspired  the  rhythm
of  its  movements. We  know  in fact that not  from  within,
by  a  spontaneous  effort  at  development,  but  under  extraneous
compulsion  have  the  combined  bodies  acquired  this  admirable
play  of  mutually  adjusted  states. Far  simpler  properties and
effects  belonged  in themselves  to the  particular  substances
which  we  combined,  varying  according  to  universal  laws  with
the  alteration of  definite conditions. These  invisible  forces
our  mechanical  skill  has  compelled  (by  the cunning  combina
tions  into  which  it  has  beguiled  that  which  holds  them)  to
work,  under  such  conditions  that  their  conformity  to  universal
laws  must,  without  any  purpose  of  their  own,  realize  the  ends
that  are  our  purposes. If  this  be so,  then  the  elements  of
Nature  suffer  themselves  to  be applied  and  adjusted  by  our
hands  to  the  most  remarkable  performances,  to  which  they
were  impelled  by  no  innate  tendency  craving  for  expression,  and
why  should  it  be  otherwise  with  Nature  herself  ? Perhaps,  too,
the  forms  of  her  creatures — full  of  significance  as  they  are —
spring up but from  without,  as part of  the  world's course,
which  combines the elements sometimes  in one  way,  some
times in another, and in each of these groups inexorably
initiates  the  system  of  movements  and  operations  that,  accord
ing  to  general  laws,  corresponds  to the  actual  mode  of  their
connection. Thus  all organisms would  be made  what  they
are by the concurrence of many external conditions, and
would  just  as  little  possess  an  inner  vital  spring  of  action  as
the  products  of  our  hands,  of  whose  want  of  personality  wo
aie  convinced.

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  19

The  moio  widely  and  effectively  the  practical  dominion  of
human  skill  extends  over  Nature,  the  more  confidently  do  we
find  this  inference  drawn.  And  results  seem  to  confirm  this
confidence  even  where  we  are  not  constructing  anything  new
out  of  serviceable  materials,  but  merely  seeking  to  modify
what  Nature  offers  of  her  own  accord.  By  combining  sub
stances  presented  to  us  by  the  earth,  the  hand  of  the  chemist
lias  produced  countless  others,  which  never  existed  until  they
had  been  created  by  art,  and  many  of  which  by  their  per
manence  and  strength,  by  the  brilliancy  of  their  sensible
properties,  by  the  variety  of  their  modes  of  action,  vie  with
the  most  remarkable  of  those  offered  to  us  by  Nature  as  her
own  products.  From  having  been  subjected  to  artificial
fertilization  and  lengthened  careful  nurture,  plants  have
developed  a  heightened  beauty  of  blossom  and  of  fruit,  and
our  gardens  are  filled  with  a  flora  such  as,  in  the  form  in
which  it  delights  us,  has  no  natural  halitat.  Animals  show
even  in  their  shape  the  modifying  and  improving  effect  of
domestication  ;  hardly  anywhere  do  we  meet  with  the  original
features  of  Xattire  ;  in  all  its  departments  the  deliberate  in
terference  of  man  has  succeeded  in  making  alterations  full  of
importance.  The  impression  produced  by  these  observations
necessarily  strengthens  the  conjecture  that  Nature  brings  forth
her  products  not  through  animating  impulses  from  within,  to
which  we  have  nothing  parallel  to  show,  but  through  the
composition  of  the  same  separate  forces,  by  whose  application
we  succeed  in  transforming  her  creatures.

A  further  consideration  would  seem  to  make  this  conjecture
a  certainty.  If  each  single  natural  product  depended  entirely
on  itself,  and  were  developed  out  of  itself  without  needing  an
external  world  or  being  accessible  to  its  encroachments,  then
we  might  conceive  of  each  as  resting  on  a  single  animating
Idea  peculiar  to  itself,  by  which  should  be  determined,  with
provident  sagacious  consistency,  every  detail  of  its  future
development.  It  was  thus  that  the  view  which  believed  in  the
animating  impulses  of  things,  loved  to  conceive  of  Nature  ;  it
thought  of  the  actual  world  as  a  great  picture  of  still  life,

20  BOOK  I. CIIAPTKK  1.

and  sought  to  give  to  each  figure  in  this  picture  its  own
peculiar  meaning.  What  had  been  overlooked  by  this  mode
of  thought,  came  home  the  more  forcibly  to  the  new,  which
had  become  accustomed,  in  practical  intercourse  with  things,  to
inquire  as  to  the  ways  in  which  each  product  can  come  into
existence.  It  was  to  it  clear  that  the  actual  world  is  a
picture  of  life  in  movement,  whose  separate  parts,  in  constant
action  and  reaction,  bring  forth,  preserve,  alter,  and  destroy
one  another.  But  whatever  grows  and  lives,  not  isolated  in  a
world  of  its  own,  but  as  part  of  a  connected  actual  whole  by
which  it  is  influenced,  whatever  thus  has  needs  and  conditions
of  development,  must,  in  acting  and  being  acted  upon,  obey
the  universal  laws  of  a  cosmic  economy  which,  extending
impartially  over  all  that  actually  is,  can  alone  afford  to
the  individual  the  satisfaction  of  his  needs.  Every  form
of  mutual  action  necessarily  involves  this  capacity  of  being
reciprocally  affected  in  the  things  that  mutually  act,  and
presupposes  some  universally  binding  system  of  law,  whereby
the  amount  and  the  form  of  their  reciprocal  operations  are
determined.  Now  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  the  most
important  single  phenomenon  to  behave  as  an  independent
and  indivisible  unity  intelligible  only  in  itself ;  how  it  is
developed,  what  it  actively  performs,  and  what  it  passively
receives,  depends  no  longer  on  its  own  arbitrary  fancy,  but
has  from  eternity  been  decided  for  it  from  outside  ;  and  all
its  operations,  all  its  states,  are  assigned  to  it  by  the  general
laws  of  the  world's  order  and  the  particular  circumstances
under  which  it  enters  into  that  order.

Hardly  ever  has  any  serious  attempt  been  made  to  with
draw  inorganic  Nature  from  this  mechanical  mode  of  concep
tion  ;  a  longer  resistance  was  made  to  bringing  organized
beings  also  under  it.  But  the  same  reasons  compel  us  to
admit  it  here  too.  Animals  and  plants  produce  neither  from
themselves  nor  from  nothing  the  substances  through  whose
aggregation  their  outward  form  grows ;  they  borrow  them
from  the  common  storehouse  of  Nature.  In  a  continuous
cycle  the  soil  and  the  atmosphere  supply  to  the  vegetable,  and

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  2  1

this  again  to  the  animal,  kingdom,  those  indestructible  elements
which  serve  now  one,  and  now  another  form  of  life,  then  for  a
time  return  to  the  formless  condition  of  unorganized  bodies,
applicable  to  everything,  but  of  themselves  inclined  neither  to
one  nor  to  another  mode  of  their  application.  This  necessity
to  draw  from  the  general  store  and  to  detach  the  required
elements  from  already  existing  combinations,  in  order  to
bring  them  into  its  own  service,  sets  narrow  bounds  to  the
free  play  of  vital  force  in  each  several  organism.  That  force,
for  its  part  disposed  to  transgress  those  laws  which  hold  good
for  the  rest  of  the  world,  would  perhaps  willingly,  with  pre
vision  of  the  whole  course  of  its  future  evolution,  direct  the
development  of  life  from  a  single  impetus  and  with  the  unity
of  a  single  purpose.  But  this  disposition  will  not  be  shared
by  the  materials  that  are  to  it  indispensable;  they  will
imperatively  demand  to  be  directed  here  by  the  same  laws  to
which  in  all  other  cases  they  are  subject.  The  plant  can
never  decompose  the  carbonic  acid  of  the  atmosphere  unless  it
counteracts  the  chemical  affinity  which  holds  its  constituents
together,  by  another  aflinity  in  a  definite  degree  stronger,  and
carbonic  acid  only  recognises  the  separating  power  of  such  an
attraction  as  is  attached  to  a  definite  quantum  of  material
mass.  And  where  the  acquired  material  has,  within  the
living  body,  to  be  brought  into  the  forms  required  by  the
plan  of  the  organization,  it  will  just  as  little  spontaneously
accommodate  itself  to  this  conformation.  On  the  contrary,
like  every  weight  to  be  moved,  it  will  expect  to  see  its  par
ticles  pushed  into  the  required  position  by  means  of  definite
amounts  of  propelling  force  exerted  by  definite  masses,  accord
ing  to  the  same  universal  mechanical  laws  that  likewise
regulate  the  movements  of  inorganic  substances.

Whatever  living  impulse  therefore  may  animate  organisms
fmm  within,  this  does  not  cause  their  persistence  in  spite  of
assaults  from  without,  and  the  execution  of  their  predestined
functions.  Both  are  at  all  times  due  to  the  forces  inherent  in
their  elementary  particles,  which,  coming  into  contact  with
the  outside  world,  are  capable  of  receiving  stimuli  and

22  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  I.

responding  to  them  efficiently.  And  whatever  ingenious
sequence  may  bind  the  life-phsenomena  of  an  organism  into  a
systematically  developed  whole,  that  too  is  bestowed  on  it  both
Dy  the  original  arrangement  of  its  parts,  from  which  the  total
result  of  the  single  operations  receives  a  definite  form,  as  well
as  by  the  progressive  alteration  which  these  parts  make  for
themselves  in  the  course  of  their  activity.

So  long  as  the  investigation  of  Nature  started  from  the
unity  of  the  living  impulse,  and  sought  in  it  a  sufficient
source  of  explanation  for  the  changeful  development  of  an
organism,  it  had  little  success  in  the  interpretation  of
phenomena.  It  took  the  most  decided  step  in  advance  when
it  began  to  take  note  of  the  activity  of  the  smallest  parts,
and,  at  various  points  combining  the  single  operations,  to
trace  back  the  whole  to  the  united  efforts  of  countless  con
stituents.  It  still  for  a  time  allowed  something  internal,  the
one  vital  force  of  every  organism,  to  remain  an  object  of
traditional  belief  and  veneration,  and  theoretically  granted
that  the  Idea  of  the  whole  precedes  the  efficiency  of  the  parts
long  after  it  had  practically  decided  to  seek  really  fruitful
explanation  only  in  the  common  working  of  the  parts.  This
last  aversion  the  present  has  overcome ;  and,  tired  of  rever
encing  an  essence  that  never  expressed  itself  in  action,  it  has
extended  the  clear  and  definite  mode  of  conception  of
mechanical  physical  science  over  the  whole  domain  of  Nature.,
as  much  to  the  advantage  of  inquiry  as  undeniably  to  the
disquieting  of  the  mind.

In  place  of  the  vital  impulse,  animating  as  with  a  breath
the  composite  and  variously  formed  whole,  it  put  the  simple
and  indestructible  forces  which  perpetually  inhere  in  the
elements.  The  impulse  had  been  regarded  as  developing  with
changeful  energy  now  one,  now  another  mode  of  operation,  here
holding  its  power  in  reserve,  there  hurrying  and  striving  to
express  itself ;  equalizing  and  supplying  what  was  deficient,
it  was  bound  not  by  an  immutable  rule  of  action,  but  solely
by  regard  to  the  end  towards  which  all  the  details  of  the
development  were  to  converge.  Force,  on  the  other  hand,

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  23

inheres  in  the  elements  of  the  body  with  an  unvarying,  ever-
identical  mode  of  operation,  at  each  moment  of  necessity
performing  all  that,  according  to  general  laws,  present  circum
stances  dictate,  and  capable  neither  of  deducting  anything
from  their  possible  effect,  nor  of  supplying  what  the  un
favourable  character  of  circumstances  denies.  Not  guided
by  any  aim  in  view,  but  driven  forward  by  the  pressure  of
the  course  of  Nature  behind,  it  does  not  of  itself  work  towards
the  realization  of  a  plan,  but  each  connected  chain  of  diverse
effects  depends  on  the  peculiar  conditions  under  which  a
number  of  elements  are  compelled  by  the  actual  form  of  their
connection  to  work  together.

"While  physical  science  thus  divides  the  unity  of  the
animating  power  into  an  indefinite  multitude  of  elemental
forces,  and  believes  the  final  form  of  the  organism  to  be
determined  by  the  manner  in  which  these  are  combined,  it
leaves  open  the  question  as  to  the  origin  of  these  combina
tions,  which  are  so  happily  chosen  that  whnt  is  fairest  and
most  significant  in  Nature  is  necessarily  evolved  as  their
result.  Addressing  itself  exclusively  to  the  explanation  of
the  conservation  of  the  already  existing  universe,  it  may  in
fact  shut  out  this  question  from  the  narrower  range  of  its
inquiries.  If  sometimes  inclined  to  ascribe  the  origin  of  this
order  to  a  chance  for  which  no  special  reasons  can  be  found,
it  is  yet  just  as  likely  to  refer  it  to  the  wisdom  of  a  divine
spirit.  l>ut  in  any  case  it  is  wont  to  maintain — and  in  so
doing  perhaps  to  go  beyond  its  province — that  of  the  creative
freedom  of  this  spirit  no  breath  has  passed  into  the  creation,
and  that  Nature  once  in  existence  continues  to  exist,  like
every  product  of  art,  according  to  those  inexorable  laws  whose
immutability  testifies  alike  to  the  wisdom  of  the  maker  and
to  the  complete  impersonality  of  that  which  has  been  made.

§  4.  And  in  this  wonderful  machine  of  Nature,  by  whose
ceaseless  movement  we  are  everywhere  surrounded,  what  place
do  we  ourselves  occupy  ?  \Ve,  who  once  believed  we  could
discern  kindred  godlike  forms  behind  the  veil  of  phenomena  ?
we,  in  whom  the  Universal  Reason  of  the  World-soul  became

24  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  I.

at  least  dreamily  conscious  of  great  ends,  and  of  an  eternal
Impulse  binding  us  along  with  Nature  into  one  great  universal
fabric  ?  With  the  yearnings  of  our  spirit,  with  the  demands
of  our  moral  nature,  with  the  general  fervour  of  our  inner
life,  we  feel  out  of  place  in  this  realm  of  Things  to  which
consciousness  is  unknown.  Yet  perhaps  this  feeling  of
discord  also  is  but  the  survival  of  an  error  which  we  must
lay  aside.

For  not  alone  have  our  views  of  Nature  in  process  of  time
undergone  the  alterations  described, — along  with  them  our
self-knowledge  has  at  the  same  time  assumed  new  forms.
Youthful  humanity  could  innocently  rejoice  in  its  vivid
consciousness,  which,  like  the  plant  evolved  wholly  from  its
own  germ  and  oppressed  by  no  feeling  of  extraneous  com
pulsion,  did  not  even  feel  needful  the  recognition  of  its  own
freedom.  Growing  experience  and  gradually  widening  surveys
of  human  existence  showed  that  the  development  even  of
mental  life  was  governed  by  general  laws  valid  for  all,  and
less  and  less  to  be  attributed  to  any  special  desert  of  the
individual.  The  mind  resigned  itself  with  equanimity  to  this
kind  of  necessity,  so  long  as  it  saw  in  it  the  gently  constraining
power  of  the  one  eternal  Idea  in  which  we  live  and  are ;  a
sense  of  oppression  arose  when  that  too  had  to  give  place  to
the  divided  plurality  of  determining  and  moulding  forces.
How  much  of  that  which  we  had  looked  on  as  an  essential
part  of  our  personality  did  we  find  to  be  the  result  of
influences  that  cross,  confirm,  or  resist  one  another  within  us  !
Within  narrower  and  narrower  proportions  shrank  that  in  us
whicli  we  could  call  really  our  own ;  the  bodily  organs
claimed  one  part  as  their  contribution,  another  came  under  the
general  forces  of  psychic  life,  which  by  no  merit  of  their  own
work  according  to  identical  laws  in  all  individuals;  one  small
sphere  alone,  that  which  is  ruled  and  shaped  by  the  freedom
of  our  moral  action,  seemed  to  afford  an  asylum  to  our  real
self.  To  this  last  vestige  of  genuinely  inner  life  science  has
left  but  an  ambiguous  existence,  as  a  possible  object  of  bnliW  •
and  even  this  she  seems  on  the  point  of  giving  up  altogether.

CONFLICTING  VIEWS  OF  NATURE.  25

As  soon  as  we  know  that  the  general  economy  of  the  universe
apparently  requires  yearly  a  certain  average  of  crime  just  as
much  as  a  certain  average  of  temperature,  we  can  hardly
help  seeing  even  in  mental  life  the  unbroken  sequence  of  a
blind  mechanism.  Like  the  outer  world  in  its  perpetual
revolution,  our  mental  life  too  must  be  but  a  vortex  of  move
ments  kept  going  by  the  incessant  action  and  reaction  of  the
countless  atoms  of  our  nervous  system.  We  have  advanced
far  beyond  the  childlike  ingenuousness  of  mythological  con
ceptions  ;  we  have  not  only  given  up  personal  nature-spirits,
but  made  the  possibility  of  any  sort  of  personal  existence  one
of  the  darkest  of  problems.  Enclosed  within  the  great
machine  of  Nature  stands  the  smaller  machine  of  the  human
mind,  more  cunningly  framed  than  any  other,  inasmuch  as  it
is  aware  of  its  own  movements,  and  watches  with  admiration
those  of  the  other  toy  ; — yet  some  day  its  parts,  too,  will  fall
asunder,  and  it  will  be  all  over  with  the  jest  and  the  earnest,
the  love  and  the  hatred,  by  which  this  strange  world  was  moved  !
Even  these  final  conclusions  men  have  not  shrunk  from
drawing,  now  in  an  exulting,  now  in  a  despairing  spirit.  At
the  same  time,  they  have  not  been  universally  drawn ;  at
various  points  on  the  way  thither  multitudes  have  stopped,
trying  in  different  directions  to  escape  from  the  uninviting
goal.  And  all  along,  through  all  shiftings  of  view,  one
eimple  faith  has  yet  preserved  itself  unshaken,  the  faith  in
an  eternal  First  Cause,  who  bestowed  on  the  world  of  spirits
living  freedom  for  the  combat  on  behalf  of  a  sacred  aim,
and  denied  it  to  the  world  of  things,  that  under  a  blind
necessity  was  to  be  a  stage  and  a  weapon  for  the  efforts  of
the  combatants.  With  this  clear  line  of  demarcation  tlm
mind  gained  power  to  establish  itself  in  the  circle  of  things,
building  on  their  unvarying  conformity  to  law  and  on  its
own  freedom.  But  that  left  still  another  platform  to  be
reached  from  which  to  answer  the  many  questions  as  to  the
respective  boundaries  of  the  two  contiguous  spheres  of
freedom  and  necessity,  ever  and  anon  raised  by  attentive
observation  of  the  details  of  the  course  of  Nature.

26  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  L

By  such  problems  we  feel  ourselves  beset, — not  as  if  they
had  not  existed  and  been  felt  at  all  times ;  but  more  than
ever  they  have  now  been  brought  into  the  foreground  of
thought  by  the  growing  diffusion  of  physical  science.  Too-
long,  no  doubt,  did  the  human  mind,  when  forming  its  view
of  the  universe,  overlook  that  obscure  uncompromising  element
of  necessity,  the  world  of  things ;  as  experience  advanced,
this  has  advanced  with  increasing  power,  and  vainly  should
we  now  strive  to  conceal  the  fact  that  its  dominion  is  firmly
established  over  the  world  of  sense.  If,  however,  we  wouh1
anew  attempt  to  withdraw  from  it  what  we  believe  we  cannot
yield  without  the  sacrifice  of  our  own  being,  we  must  not
begin  by  disputing  what  all  experience  unites  in  ever  afresh
confirming.  On  the  contrary  we  must  admit,  even  for  our
own  bodily  life,  the  complete  validity  of  the  principles  on
which  the  world  of  sense  is  interpreted  by  the  mechanical
system  of  inquiry  into  Xature.  Meanwhile  we  may,  perhaps,
clearly  distinguish  that  which  in  the  passion  of  conflict  is,  in
many  quarters,  laid  down  as  an  unquestionable  principle  of
physical  science,  from  that  which  science  itself — here  more
tolerant  than  certain  of  its  votaries — claims  to  know  cer
tainly,  and  is  entitled  everywhere  and  inexorably  to  require.
Perhaps  also  it  will  at  last  appear  that  mechanism  as  a  whole,
far  from  being  antagonistic  to  the  true  tasks  of  mental  life,
has  itself  been  taken  as  a  necessary  working  element  in
the  great  totality  of  things  of  which  only  partial  glimpses
of  separate  sides  are  afforded  to  the  human  mind  by  the
fluctuations  of  the  spirit  of  the  age.

CHAPTEK II.

NATUKE  AS  MECHANICAL.

Universality  of  Law — Determination  of  Effects — Places  of  Efficient  Activity  in
Nature — -Atoms,  and  the  Sense  in  which  they  are  accepted — Physical
Forces — Laws  of  Effects  and  of  their  Composition — General  Inferences
with  respect  to  the  Explanation  of  Natural  Phenomena.

§  1-  CJOME  necessary  connection  in  things  has,  in  some
^  sense,  been  sought  in  every  age,  and  under  every
mode  of  thought ;  it  is  not  this  which  is  distinctive  of  the
mechanical  attitude  of  contemporary  science,  but  the  further
speculations  as  to  the  meaning  and  origin  of  this  necessity.
Even  the  darkest  superstition,  thinking  by  futile  magic  to
determine  the  destiny  of  the  distant  in  space,  appealed  to
an  incomprehensible  connection,  according  to  which  the
desired  effect  was  to  follow  its  incantations.  In  a  twofold
sense  the  thought  of  science  is  different.  The  several  states
of  things,  instead  of  being  supposed  to  be  assigned  to  them
merely  in  succession,  by  this  incomprehensible  necessity,  arc-
held  to  proceed  intelligibly  one  out  of  another,  so  that  each
prior  state  contains  in  itself  the  reason  why,  by  a  universal
and  comprehensible  law,  the  posterior  is  necessarily  required  a?
its  consequence.  And  similarly  each  actual  form  of  existence
is  not  supposed  to  evolve  state  out  of  state  according  to
a  law  peculiar  to  itself ;  on  the  contrary,  the  necessity  that
is  dominant  in  one  organism,  owes  its  compelling  power  to  the
same  universal  laws  which  in  every  other  also  assign  like  to
like  and  diverse  to  diverse.  Thus  the  various  spheres  of
contrasted  phenomena  that  make  up  the  universe,  do  not
separately  rest  on  special  predispositions,  having  nothing  in
common ;  they  are  only  examples  of  what  the  power  of  uni
versal  law  establishes,  under  the  different  circumstances,  which

a

28  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  II.

bring  phenomena  under  its  rule  in  ways  varying  according
to  conditions  of  time  and  place.  It  is  on  this  conception
of  a  system  of  law  controlling  all  nature,  whence  alone  things
derive  their  obligations  and  their  capabilities  of  working,
that  the  mechanical  view  of  nature  has  based  the  extensive
superstructure  of  its  doctrines.

But  from  the  phenomena  by  which  alone  we  are  sur
rounded,  we  can  reach  this  universal  system  of  law  only
through  inferences  that  transcend  the  region  of  perception.
And  here  the  steps  that  have  been  taken  are  not  all  alike
unquestionable.  The  principles  of  our  knowledge,  certain
in  themselves,  are  not  everywhere  sufficient  for  the  attain
ment  of  useful  results ;  frequently  a  happy  intuition  has  had
to  divine  fruitful  points  of  view.  The  progress  of  science
has  not,  of  course,  invariably  confirmed  the  correctness  of
such  conjectures,  which  when  made,  excited  surprise  by  the
opening  up  of  great  prospects ;  further,  it  has  not  always
been  found  practicable  to  trace  back  to  their  special  inner
necessity  even  such  conjectures  as  have  been  abundantly
verified  by  experience.  The  sceptical  inquirer  may  therefore
be  beset  by  many  doubts,  and  the  hope  of  escaping  from  par
ticular  corollaries  of  the  mechanical  view  of  Nature  will  be
secretly  derived  from  the  fact  of  its  foundation  not  being  in
all  points  completed.  But  it  would  be  of  small  avail  to  think
one  could  shake  the  great  fabric  of  this  view  by  hastily  collect
ing  together  objections  suggested  by  a  cursory  consideration  of
many  of  its  particular  propositions.  Resting,  as  it  does,  on  a
boundless  store  of  consentient  facts,  it  deserves,  like  a  natural
phenomenon,  to  be  regarded  in  the  belief  that  future  insight
into  the  connection  of  its  parts  will  dispel  present  doubts
as  to  particular  points.  In  fact,  like  a  product  of  Nature,
this  view  of  Nature  is  itself  capable  of  a  full,  transforming
development.  None  but  one  very  imperfectly  acquainted
with  its  spirit,  could  look  on  the  principles  which  it  has
hitherto  applied  as  a  fixed  number  of  possible  points  of  view
which  cannot  be  increased.  On  the  contrary,  physical  science
knows  very  well  that  the  fields,  which  have  as  yet  been  com-

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  29

pletely  covered  by  its  investigations,  are  but  few  compared  with
the  infinite  variety  of  phenomena  which  Nature  daily  sets
before  us.  It  is  aware  that  the  general  principles  of  which
it  makes  use,  are  partly  derived  from  the  particular  forms  in
which  operating  Nature  manifests  itself  in  the  few  best-known
departments,  and  that  as,  one  after  another,  new  spheres  of
experience  enter  the  circle  of  objects  of  investigation  and
become  more  fully  known,  a  more  general  and  comprehensive
statement  of  the  prior  basis  of  its  reasonings  becomes  indis
pensable.  In  this  process  of  self-development  it  will  rarely
have  to  pull  down  what  it  had  previously  built  up ;  more
frequently  it  will  find  that  laws,  whose  validity  this  progress
leaves  unimpaired,  are  but  special  cases  of  more  comprehensive
formulae.  Thus  true  physical  science  will  not  show  thai
Marrow-minded  haste  with  which  men  so  often  try  to  explain
all  phenomena  on  the  same  pattern  as  those  which  chance,  01
the  point  temporarily  reached  by  observation,  has  brought
most  conspicuously  before  them.  In  view  of  this  pliability
of  science  we  have  to  bring  into  relief  the  few  points  which
it  does  hold  as  necessary  and  universal,  while  of  the  others  we
must  ascertain  the  degree  of  probability  which  alone  it  claims
for  them.

§  2.  Now  there  is  one  feature,  in  addition  to  the  conviction
of  a  universal  bond  of  law,  that  is  essentially  characteristic
of  the  spirit  of  the  mechanical  view  of  Nature,  namely,  the
unremitting  care  with  which,  in  regard  to  every  effect  with
which  it  deals,  it  seeks  accurately  to  determine  the  elements
by  which  this  effect  is  produced.  This  caution  has  not
always  been  practised.  In  earlier  times  men  spoke  of  effects
in  general  without  saying  by  what  they  were  produced ;  of
operations,  without  stating  whence  they  proceeded  and  where
they  ended.  Compound  products,  in  which  a  multitude  of
parts  might  be  distinguished,  were  connected  by  them  in  a
general  way  with  forces,  evolutions,  and  operations,  that  seemed
to  take  place  within  these  structures  in  as  indefinite  a  way
as  electric  discharges  in  clouds,  which  one  sees  Hash,  without
discerning  the  outline  of  that  from  which  they  proceed.  To

SO  COOK  I. CHAPTER  JJ.

its  strict  avoidance  of  this  fault  modern  science  owes  all  that
it  has  accomplished.  Seeking  carefully  to  define  each  element
from  which  an  effect  proceeds,  in  reference  to  other  elements,
and  to  all  the  conditions  surrounding  it  when  active,  it  has
not  only  made  itself  familiar  with  effects  in  their  general
appearances  and  deportment,  but  has  connected  their  magni
tude,  direction,  and  duration,  as  well  as  the  influence  exerted
by  them  in  any  given  direction,  with  definite  quantitative
laws.

In  this  way  science  has  made  its  way  to  a  point  beyond
which,  for  the  most  part,  the  investigation  of  mental  de
velopments  has  not  as  yet  advanced.  Following  on  weak
attempts  to  interpret  the  course  of  history,  and  all  that  is
important  in  its  events,  from  the  mere  volition  of  individuals,
we  are  glad  once  more  to  find  nowadays  an  inclination  to
derive  human  social  conditions,  religious  aspirations,  and
the  variable  tendencies  of  art  from  the  unconsciously  organic
operation  of  a  universal  spirit.  Nothing  is  taken  away
from  the  brilliant  results  due  to  these  efforts  by  the  con
fession  that,  after  all,  history  is  not  made  without  personal
intelligences,  and  that  more  exact  observation  will  discover
in  that  universal  spirit  only  the  uniform  tendency  impressed
on  individuals  under  the  influence  of  universal  conditions  and
by  their  mutual  action  and  reaction.  We  need  not  there
fore  grant  that  all  fair  and  significant  phenomena  in  Nature
and  history  were  but  after-results  of  the  circumstances  that
as  a  matter  of  fact  went  before  ;  on  the  contrary,  what  we
meet  with  as  the  ideal  element  in  the  world  of  reality,
may  well  have  given  the  first  impulse  to  that  definite  order
of  things  from  which  we  are  continually  seeing  it  arise  as  a
necessary  result.  I  Jut,  wherever  the  subject  of  our  inquiry  is,
not  the  worth  of  that  which  has  come  into  being,  but  the
possibility  of  its  coming  into  being  and  the  process  of  its
realization,  our  search  will  be  necessarily  directed  towards  the
single  real  elements,  whose  normal  action  and  reaction  on  one
another  is  the  sole  instrumentality  whereby  everything  comes
into  existence.  And  thus  history  and  physical  science  wilJ

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  31

derive  the  origin  of  all  new  conditions,  the  persistence  of  all
prior  ones,  from  the  mutually  exercised  influence  of  many
separate  individual  points,  in  which  exclusively  the  Idea  has
become  materialized  into  energetic  existence.

Having  perforce  entered  on  this  line  of  investigation,
science  could  not  but  try  to  discover  those  first  starting-points
of  all  effects,  which,  absolutely  simple  and  immutable,  con
tribute  to  form  the  heterogeneous  course  of  Nature  in  pro
portions  which  are  unchanging,  and  therefore  calculable.
That  which  presents  itself  at  first  to  direct  observation  as  an
isolated  unity,  c.y.  the  moving  animal  body  or  the  clearly
outlined  form  of  the  plant,  ultimately  shows  during  the  course
of  its  life  that  its  existence  in  time  and  place  and  capability
of  action  are  dependent  on  a  certain  combination  of  parts,
and  cease  along  with  that.  Unorganized  bodies,  by  their
divisibility  into  homogeneous  constituents,  or  by  the  manifest
occurrence  in  them  of  heterogeneous  ingredients,  still  more
forcibly  suggested  that  they  were  composite  substances  with
properties  dependent  on  the  nature,  the  number,  and  the  forces
of  their  component  elements.  But  the  attempt  to  discover
these  elements  soon  brought  the  conviction  that  the  simple
and  unvarying  constituents  of  things  are  wholly  beyond  tin;
reach  of  sense-perception.  For  what  appears  to  the  senses,  in
a  very  small  space,  as  a  homogeneous  and  persistent  element,
is  found  to  be  after  all  variable  during  the  progress  of  inquiry,
or  becomes  split  up,  before  the  assisted  eye,  into  a  world  of
variety,  and  once  more  we  see  indefinite  congeries  of  particles
engaged  in  building  up,  by  their  action  and  reaction,  those
minute  forms  that  cheat  us  with  the  appearance  of  a  uniform
and  inwardly  motionless  existence.  Hence  it  was  necessary
to  take  for  granted  that  which  perception  did  not  reveal,
because  going  on  in  a  region  to  it  inaccessible,  and  to  seek  the
final  constituents  of  the  physical  world  in  countless  atoms,
invisible  from  their  minuteness,  persistent  in  their  duration,
and  unchangeable  in  their  properties.  These  atoms,  now
coalescing  in  most  manifold  fashion,  now  withdrawing  unaltered
from  these  fluctuating  combinations,  produce  by  the  variety

32  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  JL

of  their  positions  and  motions  the  different  kinds  of  natural
products  and  their  changeful  development.

Microscopic  investigation,  which  so  often  converts  the  appa
rently  homogeneous  into  a  cunningly-framed  fabric  of  manifold
parts,  seems  most  naturally  to  foster  the  tendency  to  think  of
the  efficient  elements  of  physical  nature  as  distributed  among
particular  points  of  space,  and  of  the  properties  of  the  larger
perceptible  bodies  as  dependent  on  the  mode  in  which  these
parts  are  combined.  But  this  thought  was  elaborated  by
the  ancients  long  ago  under  the  guidance  of  considerations
that  partly  still  retain  undiminished  force.  Yet  by  the  want
of  connected  observations  expressly  directed  towards  this  end,
they  were  prevented  from  giving  mathematical  precision  to
this  conception,  and  in  their  hands  it  remained  rather  a
general  thought  about  a  possible  explanation  of  Nature  than
a  means  of  elucidating  to  any  considerable  degree  a  definite
group  of  phenomena.  While,  however,  the  ancients  did  not
turn  to  much  account  the  fruitfulness  of  their  principle,
in  another  direction  they  went  much  further  than  the
atomists  among  modern  men  of  science.  They  believed  they
had  found  in  atoms  the  ultimate  and  inscrutable  elements  of
all  reality,  and  what  we  now  hold  to  be  only  the  constant
element  in  the  course  of  the  created  world,  they  held  to  be
the  unconditioned  and  truly  existing,  before  which  nothing
was,  while,  itself  preceding  all,  it  is  the  essentially  necessary
and  independent  foundation  of  every  possible  creation.  Now
that  a  countless  multitude  of  separate  and  unconnected  points
should  form  the  commencement  of  the  universe,  and  that  from
their  aimless  movements  the  complicated  whole  of  pha3nomena
should  arise :  this  theory  will  always  have  against  it  the
mind's  earnest  longing  to  see  Nature  developed  as  a  unity
from  one  source  and  on  one  plan.  But  this  objection,  which
has  force  against  the  view  of  the  ancients,  would  be  wrongly
urged  against  the  atomistic  foundations  of  our  physical  science,
with  whose  spirit  and  requirements  the  resuscitation  of  that
view  is  not  necessarily  connected.  When  we  speak  of  inde
structible  atoms,  varying  in  form  and  size,  we  believe  we  have,

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  33

by  a  happy  conjecture,  added  to  the  series  of  facts  which  wu
actually  observe  a  new  and  pre-eminently  suggestive  fact,
which,  however,  does  not  directly  fall  under  our  observation.
Tins  fact  is,  that  all  changes  in  the  course  of  Xature  stop  at
these  smallest  particles,  and  under  all  alterations  of  their
external  relations  leave  these  as  unmodified  starting-points
of  unceasing  activity.  In  this  fact  we  believe  we  have,  under
the  guidance  of  innumerable  indications  of  experience,  happily
divined  a  characteristic  trait  of  Xature.  Like  other  facts,
this  too  may  well  suggest  prior  questions  as  to  its  meaning
and  origin.  But  physical  science  itself,  intent  solely  on  the
explanation  of  what  is  going  on  within  the  world  as  it  exists,
has  a  right  to  stop  at  some  ultimate  fact,  such  as  indicates
a  universal  and  irreversible  trait  of  that  world  in  such  a
manner  as  to  shed  light  on  the  meaning  of  phenomena.  Thus
atoms,  unaltered  and  undivided,  not  on  account  of  any  absolute
indestructibility  on  their  part,  but  because  the  actual  course
of  Xature  yields  no  opportunities  for  their  dissolution,  form
immoveably  fixed  points  for  the  construction  of  phenomena.
On  whatever  higher  conditions  their  own  existence  may
depend,  these  conditions  we  may  leave  undetermined  when
seeking  to  interpret  Xature  as  actually  existing,  because  they
are  invariably  fulfilled,  are  never  lost,  and  therefore  never
need  to  be  re-established.

What  further  conceptions  we  have  to  form  in  regard  to  the
nature  of  atoms,  can  be  decided  only  by  means  of  those  indica
tions  of  experience  which  compel  us  to  admit  them,  and  here  much
remains  in  store  for  the  future.  It  is  natural  to  naive  reflec
tion  to  account  for  the  various  properties  of  the  visible  world
by  the  various  natures  of  the  smallest  elements ;  science,  on
the  other  hand,  is  naturally  desirous  of  reducing  the  divergent
variety  of  phenomena  to  the  smallest  possible  number  of
originally  differing  principles.  In  fact,  experience  very  soon
teaches  that  many  distinctions  in  things  that  at  first  seem
essential,  are  the  result  only  of  varieties  in  the  size  and
combination  of  constituents  in  themselves  homogeneous.  Yet
the  persistence  with  which  many  natural  products  retain  their

VOL.  I.  C

34  BOOK  I. CIIAPTLll  11.

characteristically  distinctive  attributes  under  much  variation
in  their  conditions,  would  seeni  to  increase  the  difficulty  of
explaining  all  the  different  forms  of  bodies  and  their  varieties
in  deportment  exclusively  from  the  different  modes  in  which
absolutely  similar  and  homogeneous  atoms  are  connected.
Besides,  no  higher  point  of  view  requires  this  similarity  of
atoms ;  for  what  constitutes  the  unity  of  the  cosmic  whole  is
not  that  all  its  original  elements  are  similar,  but  that,  while
differing,  they  conform  to  the  requirements  of  a  comprehensive
plan.

The  atomic  theory  of  the  ancients  was  governed  by  this  idea
of  the  identity  of  nature  of  the  minutest  constituent  parts ;
and,  at  the  same  time,  differences  in  them  which  had  to  be
recognised  in  order  to  explain  Xature  were  sought  for  ex
clusively  in  the  diversities  of  form  and  size  proper  to  the
atoms.  But  perfect  identity  of  substance  seemed  rather  to
imply  everywhere  identity  of  form  and  size  ;  thus  the  belief
came  to  prevail  that  the  atoms  themselves  are  composed  of
still  more  minute  particles  homogeneous  and  of  equal  size,
and  that  their  forms  are  determined  by  the  space-relations  of
these.  The  atoms  were  thus  not  properly  simple  elements,
but  indivisible  systems  of  many  particles.  Nevertheless  the
atoms,  and  not  their  particles,  were  the  elements  of  the  course
of  Nature.  Por  the  combinations  of  these  smallest  primitive
particles  into  the  larger  and  more  diversely-shaped  atoms
were  looked  on  as  eternal  and  irreversible  facts,  having  their
foundation  before  the  creation  of  the  existing  world,  and
consequently  outside  the  sphere  of  scientific  inquiry.  Now
that  the  created  world  is  in  existence,  all  that  the  action  and
reaction  of  the  process  of  Xature  that  still  goes  on  in  it  can
accomplish,  is  to  break  up  composite  palpable  bodies  into
their  atoms ;  it  cannot  further  analyse  these  into  their
primitive  constituents.

The  acceptance  of  an  inexplicable  primary  construction  is,
however,  forced  on  this  remarkable  mode  of  thought  solely  by
its  hypothesis  of  perfect  homogeneity  in  the  minutest  particles.
Certainly  no  other  reason  could  be  found  why  it  should  not

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL  35

be  possible  for  some  one  of  the  forces  arising  in  the  course  of
Xuture  to  alter  the  combination  of  those  particles  in  one  atom
into  the  different  combination  which  they  hold  in  a  second,  for
this  new  combination,  seeing  it  is  there  realized,  cannot  in  itself
be  antagonistic  to  the  nature  of  those  particles.  It  would  be
different  if  we  were  to  revive  the  theory  of  the  ancients  so  as
to  hold  that  the  atomic  particles  are  formed  not  of  homo
geneous,  but  on  the  contrary  of  essentially  heterogeneous
primary  constituents.  Each  of  these  might  then  be  in
divisible,  because  the  constituents  of  each  would  be  held
together  by  an  elective  affinity  such  as  could  be  surpassed
by  no  oilier,  and  at  the  same  time  each  would  have  a  definite
size  and  form,  because  only  on  condition  of  a  limited  number
and  fixed  situation  of  the  parts  would  their  mutual  cohesion
be  strong  enough  to  resist  the  severance  of  any  one.  Such
molecules,  while  by  their  indestructibility  deserving  the  name
of  atoms,  would  consequently  not  be  indeed  the  ultimate  and
simplest  elements  of  the  material  world,  but  they  would  bo
the  last  to  which  the  changes  in  Nature  carry  us,  those  which
in  all  syntheses  and  analyses  remain  the  invariable  constituent
units.

lint  it  is  easy  to  see  that  at  the  same  time  this  theory
allows  us  wholly  to  divert  our  attention  from  any  extension
in  space  of  these  primitive  parts,  and  to  regard  them  as
immaterial  existences  that  from  fixed  points  of  space  control
by  their  forces  a  definite  extent  without  in  the  strict  souse
occupying  it.  The  mutual  action  and  reaction  of  these  un-
extended  points  would  mark  out  their  distances  from  one
another  and  their  relative  position,  and  thus  they  would
describe  the  outline  of  an  extended  figure  just  as  definitely
and  certainly  as  if  by  permanent  extension  they  occupied  the
space  contained  within  it.  If  we  further  conceive  of  forces
of  external  attraction  and  repulsion  as  attached  to  these
individual  real  points,  considerable  aggregates  of  them  would
by  resistance  to  penetrative  force  present  the  appearance  ot
palpable  materiality  or  by  reflection  of  the  light  waves  the
aspect  of  a  coloured  surface,  just  as  much  as  if  the  operating

36  BOOK  I. CILYPTKi; II.

beings  themselves  filled  the  space  with  permanent  extension
of  their  own.  There  is  nothing  contrary  to  physical  science
(in  whose  eyes  particles  are  of  importance  only  as  centres  of
radiating  force)  in  attributing  this  semblance  of  extended
matter  to  simple  immaterial  forms  of  being ;  the  philosophic
study  of  Nature  finds  itself  forced  to  make  an  attempt  in  this
direction,  seeing  that  here  alone  the  idea  of  the  simplicity
of  the  really  ultimate  elements  is  combined  with  the
equally  indispensable  diversity  in  form  of  the  atoms  which
we  must  assume  as  the  immediate  component  parts  of
matter.

§  3.  Whatever  idea,  however,  we  may  form  to  ourselves  of  the
nature  of  atoms,  it  will  always  be  the  most  essential  require
ment  for  the  explanation  of  Nature  to  find  general  points  of
view  from  which  the  results  of  their  activity  may  be  connected
with  definite  laws.  By  its  distinct  comprehension  of  these
foundations  of  its  judgments  modern  science  is  widely  separated
from  the  atomism  of  the  ancients,  which  in  its  efforts  to  explain
phenomena  from  varying  combinations  of  elements,  always
silently  took  for  granted  the  laws  of  action  to  which  the  daily
spectacle  of  physical  events  has  accustomed  us,  yet  without
deliberately  and  expressly  stating  these  principles,  and
investigating  the  limits  of  their  validity.  And  it  will  be  well
for  us  to  admit  that  in  this  respect  even  our  science  also  is
incomplete,  and  that,  as  it  derives  many  of  its  principles  only
from  dicta  of  experience,  and  may  consequently  with  fresh
experience  receive  different  lessons,  it  cannot  beforehand  hold
itself  exempt  from  all  modification.

First  of  all,  we  are  in  the  dark  as  to  the  inner  nature  of
atoms.  Still,  whatever  internal  states  and  efforts  we  might
ascribe  to  them,  these  will  never  suffice  to  set  any  single
thing  in  motion  apart  from  its  being  compelled  thereto  by  its
relations  to  other  things.  For  pure  space  surrounds  each
atom  uniformly  on  all  sides,  and  no  one  point  of  this  homo
geneous  extension  possesses  advantages  over  any  other,  on
account  of  which  the  atom  at  rest  should  be  drawn  to  leave
its  place,  or  the  atom  in  motion  to  change  its  direction ;  110

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  37

point  suits  the  nature  of  the  atom  better  than  any  other,  so
that  it  should  hasten  to  approach  or  delay  to  leave  it.  Hence
each  atom  at  rest  will  remain  at  rest,  so  long  as  external
influences  do  not  intervene,  and  each  one  in  motion  will
continue  its  motion  with  the  same  direction  and  velocity,
until  newly  operating  causes  effect  a  stoppage  or  a  diversion.

This  Law  of  Persistence — the  foundation  of  our  whole  theory
of  motion — nevertheless  states  a  case  which  as  stated  never
occurs.  For  motion  in  reality  is  never  found  apart  from  pre
cisely  those  external  causes  that  alter  its  direction  and  velocity.
The  individual  atom  is  surrounded  not  l»y  empty  space,  but
by  space  occupied  at  innumerable  points  by  other  atoms  the.
.same  or  different  in  nature.  We  may  assume  that  among
them  all,  as  constituents  of  the  same  world,  there  is  a  connec
tion  of  mutual  correspondence  whence  arises  a  direct  action
on  one  another  of  their  internal  states.  But  this  internal
experience  of  the  atoms  is  wholly  beyond  our  observation  ;  it
does  not  therefore  form  the  subject  of  physical  science,  which
deals  only  with  the  movements  in  space  which  are  its  external
expression  and  effect.  In  the  case  of  two  unchangeable  atoms
in  empty  space  this  expression  of  their  internal  action  on  one
another  can  only  consist  in  the  lessening  or  increasing  of  the
distance  between  them.  Which  of  these  two  results  shall  in
:i  given  case  follow,  ?>.  whether  the  phenomenon  of  attraction
or  of  repulsion  shall  arise,  depends  on  the  unknown  internal
relations  of  the  related  atoms,  and  can  therefore  be  ascertained
only  by  experience.  Further,  it  is  solely  on  the  concurrent
results  of  experience  that  we  can — as  yet  at  least — base  the
rule  that  the  operating  elements  affect  one  another  less
powerfully  as  the  interval  between  them  becomes  greater,  more
powerfully  as  it  decreases.  At  what  particular  rate,  too,
the  variation  follows  the  changing  amount  of  interval,  can  be
decided  in  each  case  simply  by  the  dictate  of  experience  ;
lastly,  it  is  this  alone  which  informs  us  with  what  amount  of
force  two  atoms  of  a  given  nature  will  repel  or  attract  one
another.

Jt appears  from the  foregoing that the capacity  or the

38  BOOK  T. Oil  AFTER  U.

necessity  to  produce  a,  given  effect  never  potentially  exists  in
the  nature  of  a  single  atom  or  a  single  body.  As,  on  tin;
contrary,  the  necessity  of  any  operation  arises  simply  from  the
mutual  relation  of  two  elements,  the  decision  whether  one
shall  exert  attraction  or  repulsion  on  another  has  its  source,
equally  in  the  nature  of  that  other.  Further,  the  amount  of
the  influence  exerted  by  each  will  be  assigned  to  it  partly  by
this  relation  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  its  antagonist,  and
partly  by  the  distance  between  them,  i.e.  by  the  circumstances
prevailing  at  the  moment.  But  though  in  this  way  the  definite
operative  force  does  not  properly  accrue  to  each  atom  till  the
very  moment  of  its  action,  yet  physical  science  is  wont  to
describe  the  power  as  perpetually  inherent  in  the  atom.  It
thereby  no  doubt  occasions  misunderstanding  on  the  part  of
those  who  do  not  follow  the  meaning  of  this  language  in  its
applications.  For  there  is  a  strong  temptation  to  conceive  of
the  power  perpetually  inhering  in  the  substance  as  a  new  and
unsubstantial  substance,  as  a  property,  yet  a  hidden  property,
as  a  potential  activity,  or  as  an  effort  devoid  alike  of  a  conscious
aim,  of  spontaneous  action  and  of  actual  exertion.  Xo  one
would  feel  the  same  difficulty,  were  we  to  speak  of  our  soul's
power  to  love  or  to  hate.  "VVe  know  that  love  and  hatred  do
not  as  such  lie  a  priori  developed  within  us,  waiting  for
objects  to  which  they  may  be  directed ;  but  are  awakened  to
a  definite  degree  at  the  moment  when  our  personality  comes
into  contact  with  another,  Nevertheless,  we  let  pass  the
expression,  that  the  power  of  love  and  hatred  is  inherent  in
our  soul ;  we  know  we  mean  by  it  nothing  more  than  that
our  permanent  mental  nature,  as  it  now  is,  will  necessarily
develop  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  manifestations  under  the
influence  of  certain  conditions.  With  the  same  licence  of
speech  physical  science  regards  any  capacity  of  operation
acquired  by  a  material  element  in  virtue  of  certain  conditions
as  a  power  of  attraction  or  repulsion  existing  a  priori  and
complete  in  the  nature  of  the  element.  It  need  not  fear  to
be  led  into  practical  errors  by  this  abbreviation  ;  for  the  notion
cf  force  can  never  be  applied  without  reference  in  every  c^so

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  39

to  a  different  form  of  the  actual  condition  of  things  upon
which  the  use  of  the  notion  is  based.  We  speak  of  the  atoms
so  far  as  they  are  in  operation,  not  so  far  as  they  are  inactive ;
but  we  can  speak  of  no  operation  of  one  atom  without
mentioning  a  second  by  which  it  is  undergone;  and  we  can
suppose  no  attraction  or  repulsion  between  these  two  without
at  the  same  time  conceiving  them  as  at  the  initial  moment  of
the  operation  at  a  fixed  distance  the  one  from  the  other,  and
without  from  this  inferring  the  amount  of  the  force  developed
according  to  a  law  established  by  experience.  It  is  therefore
practically  indifferent  whether  we  affirm  that  the  necessity  of
;i  given  kind  and  amount  of  operation  arises  for  each  element
from  the  internal  relations  of  the  elements  to  one  another
ut  the  moment  when  the  influence  of  the  actual  circumstances
comes  into  play,  or  whether  we  pay  that  of  a  number  of
powers  slumbering  prepared  but  latent  in  the  atom,  that  power
comes  into  exercise  at  each  moment  which  finds  in  the  present
circumstances  the  conditions  of  its  excitation  and  expression.
Science,  however,  has  certainly  had  reason  to  prefer  the  latter
form  of  expression  as  practically  the  more  convenient.

If  the  internal  states,  of  which  perhaps  each  atom  has
experience  at  the  moment  of  its  action,  left  its  nature  so
altered  that  it  reacted  differently  to  a  later  stimulus  from
what  it  had  done  to  an  absolutely  identical  earlier  one,  we
could  not  speak  of  its  powers  as  perpetually  inherent.
Experience  has  on  the  whole  showed  us  no  such  mutability.
A  chemical  element,  after  having  entered  into,  and  again
passed  out  of,  various  combinations,  now  with  one,  now  with
another,  appears  at  the  end  of  these  vicissitudes  with  pro
perties  nowise  differing  from  those  with  which  it  entered
into  the  first  of  these  combinations.  Where  there  is  some
appearance  of  the  opposite,  the,  explanation  of  the  temporarily
altered  properties  is  to  be  found  in  the  still-continued  opera
tion  of  the  events  accompanying  it.;  la^t  disengagement.
Thus,  however  many  and  various  may  have  been  the  states
<>f  the  atom,  it  always  comes  out  of  these  shifting  colloca
tions  wholly  unaltered, — it  acquires  no  new  habits,  such  aa

40  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  II.

are  developed  in  organized  beings, — nor  does  it  betray  a  traco
of  memory,  through  which  the  past  states  might  come  to
determine  those  of  the  future.  Its  mode  of  operation  can
therefore  be  determined  beforehand,  when  we  know  its
original  nature,  and  the  sum  of  all  the  still  operant  condi
tions,  without  its  being  necessary  to  take  account  of  the
course  of  the  history  through  which,  between  two  points
of  time,  it  has  passed.  This  continual  return  to  the  same
character,  under  the  same  conditions,  is  strictly  that  wherein
what  we  call  the  immutability  of  material  atoms  consists.
For  it  would  be  too  much  to  affirm  that  their  nature
never  undergoes  alterations  in  its  internal  states ;  but  these
alterations  vanish — at  least  as  regards  outward  relations —
with  the  cessation  of  their  external  conditions ;  and,  wherever
the  latter  return  into  a  prior  combination,  the  atom  also
returns  with  perfect  elasticity  to  its  correspondent  state,  and
once  more  takes  part  in  the  farther  play  of  action  as  the
same  force  or  as  the  same  mass  as  formerly.

Our  knowledge  of  phenomena  is  not  sufficiently  com
prehensive  to  allow  of  our  setting  down  this  unchangeablenegs
as  an  absolutely  universal  property  of  all  the  elements  of
Nature.  It  is  just  possible  that  in  departments  in  which
investigation  is  as  yet  in  its  infancy,  indications  may  appear
of  a  progressive  inner  development  of  atoms.  But,  as  experi
ence  has  not  hitherto  made  such  a  supposition  necessary,  so
it  is  easy  in  general  to  be  assured,  that,  at  least  to  a  limited
extent,  the  immutability  of  elements  must  always  hold  good.
For  it  is  not  possible  to  conceive  a  structure  of  Nature,  in
which  the  living  species  shall  always  retain  the  same  shapes
and  the  same  arrangement  of  their  mutual  relations,  and  the
course  of  events  present  always  the  same  main  outlines,  if
the  elements  themselves,  whence  tin's  varied  fabric  is  always
produced  anew,  on  their  side  also  undergo  constant  change.
Perhaps  all  Nature  is  now  actually  going  through  a  progressive
course  of  development ;  yet,  on  the  evidence  of  all  experi
ence,  so  great  is  at  the  same  time  its  constancy  that  we  can
only  understand  all  the  periods  of  its  existence  whose  history

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  41

we  can  trace,  on  the  assumption  of  unchanging  elements,
that  after  each  revolution  of  external  conditions  return  to
their  primitive  state  of  being,  and  thus  afford  the  original
starting-point  for  the  renewal  of  the  same  cycle.

§  4.  Now,  if  this  hypothesis  supplies  the  broadest  basis  for
the  predetermination  of  occurring  effects,  experience  has  equally
confirmed  the  extensive  validity  of  another,  which  enables  us
to  estimate  the  results  arising  from  the  joint  influence  of
several  conditions  on  the  same  simple  element.  That  an
atom  is  already  engaged  in  one  movement  does  not  prevent
us  from  supposing  it  to  take  on  a  second ;  the  atom  in  motion
obeys  the  second  impetus,  not  reluctantly  or  merely  partially,
but  as  fully  as  if  it  had  no  prior  movement,  and  its  total
velocity  is  the  sum  of  the  separate  velocities  in  one  direction
communicated  to  it  by  these  different  forces.  Xow,  if  we
suppose  these  forces  to  be  exactly  like  one  another,  combining
them  in  such  amounts  as  we  please,  we  can  arrive  at  the
uotion  of  resultant  foices,  whose  magnitude  we  then  estimate
according  to  the  number  of  simple  and  like  units  of  force
contained  in  each.  From  this  we  can  easily  draw  the
inference,  that  the  velocities  communicated  by  different  forces
to  the  same  element  are  directly  proportional  to  the  magni
tudes  of  these  forces.  Further,  if  a  force  continuously
acting  repeats  at  each  moment  the  same  shock  which  it
gave  in  the  preceding,  the  velocity  produced  will  increase  in
course  of  time  by  the  constant  addition  of  the  later  impulses
to  the  prior  ones  which,  by  the  Law  of  Persistence,  are  still
operating,  and  the  motion  will  receive  an  acceleration  such  as
we  see  exemplified  in  the  fall  of  bodies  through  the  constant
attraction  of  the  earth.  Lastly,  if  different  forces  having
different  velocities  and  directions,  try  to  move  the  same  ele
ment  simultaneously,  this  too  will,  instead  of  obeying  one
and  disobeying  others,  yield  to  the  impulses  of  all  at  once.
I  fence,  at  the  end  of  a  given  space  of  time,  the  element  is
by  the  joint  operation  of  two  forces  at  the  same  point  which
it  would  have  reached  if,  obeying  both  successively,  it  had
moved  first  in  the  direction  of  the  one,  and  then,  during  a

42  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  II.

second  equal  time,  and  from  the  point  attained,  had  moved  in
the  direction  of  the  other  force.  If,  on  the  same  hypothesis,
we  seek  to  find  the  places  of  the  moving  atom  at  the  end
of  the  first,  the  second,  and  every  succeeding  infinitesimal
section  of  that  space  of  time,  the  line  that  connects  these
points  will  describe  the  straight  or  curved  course  followed  by
the  element  under  the  resultant  influence  of  both  forces.
It  ends  in  a  point,  and  the  atom  is  at  rest,  when  the  sums
of  the  forces  propelling  it  in  opposite  directions  are  equal.

Finally,  if  the  necessity  of  mutual  action  and  reaction  be
granted  in  the  case  of  two  elements,  it  must  equally  be
^ranted  when  one  is  confronted  no  longer  bv  one,  but  by  a

O  O  «/  «/

plurality  of  elements  of  the  same  kind,  whether  separate
or  combined  into  a  mass.  Here,  too,  the  capability  of
being  acted  on  is  not  so  easily  exhausted  that  the  one
element  must  extend  its  influence  over  only  a  limited
number  of  others,  or  distribute  the  amount  among  these.
On  the  contrary,  whatever  be  the  number  of  its  antagonists,
the  action  and  reaction  between  it  and  each  of  them  takes
place  precisely  as  it  would  do  if  all  the  others  were  absent.
From  each,  therefore,  the  one  element  receives,  and  to  each  it
imparts  the  velocity  corresponding  to  the  mutual  action
between  atoms  of  such  a  kind.  It  thus  concentrates  in
itself  this  velocity  multiplied  by  the  number  of  like  elements
contained  in  the  antagonistic  mass,  to  each  of  which  it  com
municates  a  single  unit  of  this  velocity.  If,  therefore,  we
call  quantity  of  motion  the  product  of  the  velocity  into  the
number  of  homogeneous  moving  parts,  or  into  their  mass,  each
one  of  a  mutually  acting  couple  will  receive  a  quantity  of
motion,  therefore  a  velocity,  that  increases  in  proportion  as  its
antagonist  is  greater  and  its  own  mass  smaller.  This  law  of
the  equality  of  action  and  reaction,  along  with  the  foregoing,
gives  a  determination  of  the  course  impressed  by  unequal
masses  on  one  another,  in  consequence  of  their  common  forces,
whether  they  may  have  been  originally  at  rest  or  in  motion.

All  these  rules  of  calculation  imply  the  general  assump
tion  that  the  action  and  reaction  between  one  element  and  a

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  4o

second  exerts  no  influence  on  the  law  by  which  one  can
simultaneously  enter  into  a  similar  relation  with  a  third.  It
is  not  the  mode  of  operation  of  the  force,  but  only  its  result
which  is  altered  by  its  meeting  with  others  acting  at  the  same
time ;  for  the  result  must  be  of  course  that  the  impulses  in
opposite  directions,  of  different  forces,  which  the  same  element
cannot  simultaneously  obey,  neutralize  each  other,  and  that  the
others  give  rise  to  a  mean  resultant.  This  assumption  is  the
simplest  and  best  for  the  determination  of  effects  produced  by
the  joint  operation  of  several  conditions;  for  it  permits  of  the
action  of  each  single  force  being  in  the  first  place  estimated
separately,  and  without  regard  to  the  others,  and  of  the  single
results  obtained  being  afterwards  combined  into  a  final
resultant.  And  it  would  be  natural  to  be  guided  by  such  a
fundamental  thought,  even  on  the  hypothesis  that  forces
differing  not  merely  in  amount,  but  also  in  nature,  met  simul
taneously  in  the  same  atom.  Here,  too,  we  should  suppose
that  their  crossing  did  not  alter  the  particular  laws  by  which
the  element  reacts  on  each  one  separately,  or  is  acted  on  by
it ;  only  here,  too,  the  result  would  be  the  neutralization  of
the  opposite  actions  which  are  required  at  the  same  time  by
the  different  forces  from  their  common  object.  And  yet  we.
cannot  actually  determine  how  far  this  conception  holds
good.  For  there  is  nothing  necessary  in  the  supposition  of
the  indifference  with  which  different  forces  act  side  by  side
in  the  same  element  without  occasioning  any  mutual  dis
turbance  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  most
unlikely  of  several  possible  suppositions.

If  two  persons  are  bound  together  by  mutual  affection,
and  if  each  separately  enters  into  equally  friendly  relations
with  a  third  person,  the  advent  of  this  last  will  not  in  all
cases  leave  unchanged  the  feelings  of  the  two  first  towards
one  another;  it  is  just  as  likely  to  convert  their  former
friendship  into  strife ;  or  it  may  be  that  persons  previously
estranged  become  united  in  common  aversion  of  the  third.
This  example,  taken  from  a  totally  different  sphere,  lias  per
haps  no  profound  analogy  with  the  simple  case  with  which

44  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  II.

we  are  now  concerned,  but  it  is  a  concrete  illustration  of
what  we  can  now  express  without  any  simile  in  abstract
terms.  If  we  conceive,  as  we  must,  of  the  mutual  action
and  reaction  of  things  not  as  attached  to  them  externally,
but  as  either  dependent  on,  or  accompanied  by,  alterations
of  their  internal  states,  then  each  element  is  at  the  moment
of  its  action  radically  different  from  what  it  was  before  or
will  afterwards  be.  Now  it  may  well  be  that  the  law
according  to  which  ex  lujpothcsi  it  has  passed  out  of  its
inactive  state  into  one  of  mutual  action  and  reaction  with  a
second  element,  holds  good  also  for  it  when  active  ;  for  the
alteration  of  the  internal  state  connected  with  its  action
may  not  necessarily  affect  those  of  its  attributes  on  which
its  subordination  under  this  law  depended.  And  then,  on
the  before-mentioned  assumption,  each  new  stage  of  action
will  take  place  just  as  if  no  other  had  preceded  it.  But
certainly  it  is,  on  the  whole,  quite  as  conceivable  that  a  prioi
activity  alters  the  internal  state  of  the  operant  element  too
essentially  to  allow  of  its  still  reacting  upon  another  element,
according  to  the  former  law  of  its  efficiency.  For,  as  we
have  seen,  forces  are  not  indestructible  peculiarities  that
without  respect  to  relations  inhere  perpetually  in  the  nature
of  an  element;  they  and  their  laws  are  but  expressions  of
those  necessities  of  action  and  reaction  which  always  proceed
primarily  from  the  mutual  relations  of  things.  If  the  internal
states  of  things  are  altered,  these  relations  may  change  along
with  them,  and  thus  impulses  to  new  effects  of  a  different
character,  i.e.  new  forces  or  new  laws  thereof,  be  developed.
We  may  therefore  without  hesitation  hold  it  to  be  possible
that  the  very  law  of  work  of  a  simple  force  may — and  that
in  regular  wise — alter  with  altered  states  in  its  subject.

Experience  has  of  course,  in  the  spheres  where  it  has
hitherto  been  possible  to  form  a  precise  theory,  hardly  as  yet
given  any  indication  of  the  practical  importance  of  this  general
view  ;  nevertheless  we  must  consider  the  unchangeableiiess
of  laws  of  action — so  far  as  we  find  it — simply  as  one  of  those
iacts  of  experience  which  are  instructive  in  regard  to  funda-

NATTKE  AS  MKCIIAN1CAL.  45

mental  features  of  the  actual  constitution  of  the  universe ;  we
must  not  look  on  it  as  in  itself  a  necessary  arrangement,  that
must  occur  in  every  possible  system  of  Nature,  or  even  unre
strictedly  in  Nature  as  \u*  iind  it.  Still  less  are  we  entitled
Lo  transfer  it  tacitly  to  the  sphere  of  mental  life,  as  if  it
could  claim,  without  the  special  confirmation  of  experience,
to  hold  good  as  a  universal  rule  in  all  cases.  Lastly,  it  is
scarcely  needful  to  add  that  it  can  come  into  question  only
witli  reference  to  those  simple  forces  which  we  invariably
attribute  to  the  nature  of  a  single  element  in  its  relation  to
a  second.  The  joint  operations  of  larger  groups  of  elements,
on  the  other  hand,  are  of  course  dependent  en  the  mode
in  which  these  constituents  are  combined,  and  no  universal
rule  could  be  laid  down  in  regard  to  the  changes  which
such  forces  may  undergo  in  consequence  of  the  many  possible
rearrangements  of  the  combined  elements.  In  so  complicated
a  system  much  may  be  irrecoverably  displaced  by  impres
sions  from  without,  and  the  return  of  the  same  external
conditions  would  not  restore  the  same  capacity  for  reaction
which  was  formerly  developed  under  similar  conditions.
Such  degradation  of  the  simple  dements,  on  the  other
hand,  we  cannot  suppose  possible,  and  even  should  there  l:e
the  above-mentioned  mutability  in  their  mode  of  action,  we
would  yet  always  take  for  granted  that  along  with  each
repetition  of  the  same  combination  of  external  conditions  the
same  laws  of  action  must  also  come  into  play.

Starting  from  sucli  premises,  science  has  elaborated  the
explanation  of  natural  processes,  by  assigning  to  these  pro
cesses  general  principles,  by  supposing,  for  situations  actually
occurring  in  experience,  combinations  of  circumstances  which
seem  to  correspond  to  them,  and  calculating  the  results  which
existing  forces  must  produce  under  such  circumstances.  In
this  way  it  has  succeeded  partly  in  throwing  full  light  on
particular  spheres  of  phenomena,  partly  (where  the  great
number  of  concurrent  conditions  makes  the  calculation  of
them  difficult)  in  at  least  reaching  general  points  of  view  by
which  the  results  to  be  expected  are  circumscribed  within

46  BOOK  I. CHAPTEH  II.

fixed  limits.  Thus  from  the  equality  of  action  and  reaction
the  corollary  may  easily  be  drawn  that  the  internal  actions  of
a  connected  mass  may  alter  its  form  but  not  its  situation  in
space,  or  that  under  all  internal  alterations  of  a  system
its  centre  of  gravity  remains  at  rest,  if  it  was  at  rest,  or
continues  a  motion  in  which  it  was  formerly  engaged  without
change  of  direction  and  velocity.  Every  change  of  place
initiated  by  11  ie  forces  inherent  in  a  body  therefore  presupposes
action  and  reaction  between  it  and  something  external,  that
supplies  a  point  of  support,  or  of  resistance  to  determine
direction.  For  the  study  of  life,  to  which  we  are  hastening
on,  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  the  details  of  physical
dynamics  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  desirable  to  add  some
further  remarks  on  modes  of  conceiving  them.

In  our  mental  life  we  iind  the  amount  of  many  activities
dependent  on  time ;  the  strength  of  our  feeling  about
objects,  the  clearness  of  our  ideas,  the  force  of  our  will,  all
seem,  in  the  absence  of  fresh  stimuli,  to  diminish  in  course
of  time.  In  the  ordinary  opinion,  therefore,  it  must  be  most
probable  that  all  effects  whatever,  consequently  also  the  ex
pression  of  every  force  of  Nature,  are  subject  to  such  a  gradual
relaxation  and  exhaustion.  Hence  it  was  long  commonly
assumed  that  communicated  motion  at  last  ceases  of  itself,
and  the  Law  of  Persistence  on  the  other  hand  was  regarded
as  a  strange  discovery  of  science.  Even  in  mental  life  it  is
of  course  not  time  itself  that  wastes  the  force  of  the  activity,
but  the  many  processes  constantly  crossing  each  other  hinder
by  their  mutual  influences  the  unslackened  continuance  of  any
one.  In  the  simple  elements  of  Mature  either  this  multiplicity
of  internal  conditions  does  not  obtain,  or  it  does  not  exert  an
influence  of  the  same  kind  ;  for,  so  far  as  we  can  survey  the
history  of  phenomena,  the  forces  of  equal  masses  have  at  all
times  been  the  same.  They  do  not  increase  or  diminish
because  they  have  been  in  operation  for  a  time,  and  as  they
undergo  no  exhaustion,  so  neither  do  they  by  repeated  exercise
acquire  any  habit  of  more  perfect  action.  We  have  hence  to
seek  the  ground  of  every  new  capacity  for  operation  that  we

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  47

see  arising  anywhere,  in  a  new  conformation,  of  the  variable
circumstances  by  which  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  unchang
ing  forces  have  been  removed  or  lacking  conditions  of  their
operation  have  been  supplied.  Similarly  we  have  to  explain
"very  apparent  dissipation  of  a  force  by  changes  in  the
mutual  relations  of  the  masses  concerned,  such  as  either
put  a  stop  to  further  action  by  resistance,  or  carry  it  beyond
reach  of  our  observation  by  distributing  it  over  an  increas
ing  circle  of  objects.  Every  posterior  state  must  therefore
be  explained,  firstly,  by  the  continuance  of  a  prior  state  at
the  value  which  it  retains  for  the  moment;  and  secondly,  by
the  sum  of  all  the  newly-occurring  circumstances,  as  joint
conditions  of  the  new  result.

It  will  be  seen  how  by  these  considerations  we  are  neces
sarily  led  to  refer  all  changes  in  the  mode  of  work,  all  variety
of  development,  and  all  variations  in  expression  which  we
meet  with  in  any  natural  organism,  partly  to  internal  move
ments  by  which  the  relations  of  its  own  parts  are  incessantly
being  modified,  partly  to  changes  in  the  circumstances  by
which  it  is  connected  with  the  outside  world.  But  almost
everything  in  Nature  that  engages  our  most  eager  interest
belongs  to  this  region  of  variable  phenomena,  our  attention
being  above  all  attracted  by  organic  life  and  by  the  com
plicated  scheme  of  events  looked  at  in  wholesale.  Science
must  perforce  apply  the  principles  of  its  investigation  to  these
phenomena  also,  and  as  inevitably  will  it  have  temporarily
ut  least  to  submit  to  appear  in  the  invidious  character  of
conceding  to  the  search  of  imagination  neither  an  inner
nature  nor  true  vitality.  Fur  if  the  unprejudiced  mind
reverences  the  image  of  life  just  because  it  beholds  in  all  its
man i Coldness  the  harmonious  fulness  of  one  being,  in  all  tlu
changeful  variety  of  its  development  the  gradual  unfolding  of
one  and  the  same  imperishable  type,  we  cannot  deny  that
science  certainly  does  destroy  the  value  of  this  fair  image,
inasmuch  as  it  shows  its  individual  features  to  consist  of
many  separate  conditions  knowing  nothing  of  one  another.
Things  no  longer  live  from  themselves,  but  through  changing

48  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  II.

circumstances  a  changing  succession  of  action  is  produced  in
them  which  we  indeed  call  their  life,  yet  without  being  able
to  explain  by  what  unity  this  vortex  of  events  going  on  side
by  side  is  internally  fused  into  a  whole.  This  reproach — of
putting  together  externally  as  in  a  mosaic  pattern  that  which
seems  to  have  value  for  us  only  as  proceeding  from  a  single
cast — has  been  constantly  brought  against  the  attempts  at
explanation  of  physical  science,  and  we  are  far  from  asking
that  it  should  not  be  made.  For  it  has  ever  been  these
voices  that  reminded  investigation,  when  it  was  laboriously
toiling  through  the  perplexities  of  individual  phaenomena,
of  the  great  ends  on  account  of  which  alone  its  efforts  have
a  human  interest  ;  they  have  everywhere  opened  up  anew
a  vista  into  a  boundless  field  of  vision,  where  the  satis
faction  which  we  experience  from  the  partial  removal  of
the  nearest  difficulties  would  have  led  us  to  a  premature
contraction  of  our  views.  But  while  acknowledging  most
expressly  the  perfect  justice  of  these  charges,  we  must  yet
add  that  none  of  the  modes  of  conception  by  which  they
are  usually  most  vehemently  urged  has  hitherto  succeeded
in  obtaining,  without  the  principles  of  physical  science,
results  equally  indisputable  and  fruitful  with  those  that
have  been  already  won  by  these  axioms  in  every  depart
ment  of  physical  explanation.  We  have  therefore  reason
to  hope,  that  not  by  deviating  from  the  path  which  we
have  hitherto  taken,  but  by  following  it  to  the  end,  we
shall  meet  that  mental  craving,  to  baflle  which  is  in  nowise
intended  by  the  mechanical  conception  of  Nature.

For  it  is  unjust  to  add  to  the  one  reproach  of  obscuring
the  unity  of  life,  the  other  reproach  of  necessarily  regarding
the  simple  elements,  from  whose  combination  it  deduces
all  things,  as  lifeless  points  devoid  of  any  internal  nature,
to  which  forces  of  various  kinds  are  but  externally  attached.
On  the  contrary,  physical  science  merely  rids  itself  of  such
assertions  as  are  unnecessary  for  its  immediate  ends  ;  and  for
its  ends  the  hypothesis  is  certainly  sufficient  according  to
which  the  atoms  are  merely  centres  and  points  of  junction  for

NATURE  AS  MECHANICAL.  40

(•(fluent  and  influent  operations.  For,  after  experience  has
taught  us  that  the  internal  states  of  atoms — if  such  they  have,
— exert  no  modifying  influence  on  the  regularity  of  their
working,  we  can  leave  them  out  of  account  as  regards  pheno
mena,  without  having  at  the  same  time  to  banish  them
altogether  from  our  view  of  the  universe.  On  the  contrary,
further  consideration  would  soon  bring  us  back  to  the  idea
on  which  we  have  directly  based  the  foregoing  view,  i.e.  that
forces  do  not  attach  themselves  to  a  lifeless  inner  nature
of  things,  but  must  arise  out  of  them,  and  that  nothing
can  take  place  "between  the  individual  elements  until  some
thing  has  taken  place  within  them.  All  external  incidents  of
union  and  separation  must  hence  rest  on  or  find  then
reflection  in  an  inner  life  of  things ;  and,  even  if  physical
science  breaks  up  the  unity  of  compound  substances,  each
single  part  of  the  mosaic  which  she  puts  instead  is  a  living
point  inwardly  in  a  state  of  movement.  No  doubt  this  com
pensation—the  only  one  which  we  seem  at  present  in  n
position  to  offer — will  be  deemed  by  many  not  only  as  trifling
but  also  as  impossible.  Let  us  leave  for  the  future  the  task
alike  of  proving  its  possibility  and  of  showing  that  its  import
ance  is  far  greater  than  it  seems.  Perhaps  we  shall  then  find
that  in  a  different  sense  we  too  can  admit  the  comprehensive
unity  of  divergent  forces,  without  being  compelled  to  deny  tho
validity  of  physical  science,  to  the  recognition  of  wrhich  tho
total  result  of  our  observations  will  always  force  us,  whethet
we  will  or  no,  to  return.

VOL.  1.

CHAPTER III.

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.

Mechanical  Conception  of  Life,  and  Vital  Force— The  Transitoriness  of  the
Body  chemically  considered — Change  of  its  Constituents — Propagation  and
Conservation  of  its  Energy — Harmony  of  its  Processes — The  Efficient  Idea
— Purposive  Self-Conservation — Capacity  of  Excitation — Machines  pro
duced  by  Human  Skill.

§  1.  TT  has  been  but  slowly  that  the  principles  now  set
J-  forth  have  found  recognition  in  the  study  of  life.
The  systematically  growing  figure  of  the  plant  and  the  incal
culable  activity  of  the  animal  were  separated  by  too  wide  a
chasm  from  the  rigidity  and  absence  of  system  of  their
unorganized  dwelling-place,  to  allow  of  direct  observation  sug
gesting  even  a  conjecture  of  an  essential  community  between
the  two  departments  of  real  existence.  The  manifestation  of
life  took  the  imagination  captive  with  the  complexity  of  its
internal  arrangements,  from  which  a  series  of  the  most
various  states  unrolled  themselves  in  fixed  order  ;  no  ground
remained — it  seemed — to  doubt  that  a  cycle  of  processes,  in
meaning  and  importance  so  incomparably  surpassing  all  else
produced  by  Nature  or  by  art,  must  in  its  origin  also  be  un
paralleled.  Thus  was  formed  that  idea  of  a  peculiar  vital
force  of  which  we  have  already  stated  the  essential  import,
and  the  special  details  of  which,  set  up,  as  it  appears  to  us,
in  unjustifiable  opposition  to  the  advancing  claims  of  the
mechanical  conception  of  Nature,  we  are  now  about  to  discuss.
However  great  be  the  difference  between  the  spheres  of  life  and
of  inanimate  existence  in  regard  to  the  ideas  which  the  two
may  be  called  on  to  embody  in  the  world  of  phenomena,  it  is
yet  but  little  in  the  power  of  science  to  refer  the  causal  con
nection  of  the  embodiment  and  conservation  of  life  to  laws  and
forces  differing  from  those  prevailing  in  the  rest  of  Nature,  out

fO

THE  PASTS  OF  LIFE.  51

of  which  life  also  is  evolved  and  into  which  it  again  passes.
As  long  as  that  connection  holds  on  which  we  formerly  dwelt
us  the  determining  point  for  our  view,  as  long  as  life  must
draw  nil  its  sustenance  from  the  common  store  of  Nature,  and
can  he  developed  only  from  the  substances  therein  contained,
so  long  will  the  peculiarities  of  its  evolution  be  due  wholly  to
the  complete  obedience  with  which  it  submits  to  the  laws  of
the  universal  course  of  Nature.  The  realm  of  life  is  divided
from  that  of  inorganic  Nature  not  by  a  higher  force  peculiar  to
itself,  setting  itself  as  something  alien  above  other  modes  of
action,  not  by  wholly  dissimilar  laws  of  working,  but  simply
by  the  peculiar  kind  of  connection,  into  which  its  manifold
constituents  are  woven  in  such  wise  that  their  native  forces,
under  the  influence  of  external  conditions,  must  give  rise  to  a
connected  series  of  phenomena,  under  the  same  general  laws
that  elsewhere  also  are  wont  to  determine  the  sequence  of
state  on  state.  Little  as  we  are  at  present  in  a  position
fully  to  explain  the  whole  complexity  of  vital  processes
in  the  spirit  of  this  conception,  we  can  yet  easily  see  that  its
main  outline  and  the  peculiar  habits  of  working,  by  which
living  beings  at  first  seemed  to  be  absolutely  distinguished
from  other  forms  of  existence,  are  not  inexplicable  from  this
point  of  view,  and  that  the  theories  still  opposed  to  it  lack
many  of  the  advantages  which  we  already  actually  possess
in  the  more  precise  estimation  of  the  individual  rendered
possible  by  the  principles  of  a  mechanical  conception  of  life.

§  2.  Hardly  any  other  phenomenon  makes  to  the  eye  so
significant  a  distinction  between  life  and  its  absence,  as  the
corruption  that  consumes  the  dead  body.  Here  we  seem
most  palpably  to  be  taught  that  nothing  but  the  predominance
of  a  higher  force  during  life,  keeps  the  constituent  elements
duly  mixed,  and  prevents  the  action  of  the  mutual  affinities
by  which  after  death  they  pass  into  far  other  and  simpler
kinds  of  composition.  And  yet  it  needs  but  slight  considera
tion  to  see  the  groundlessness  of  such  an  inference.  For
why  should  we  not  from  this  phenomenon  rather  draw  the
other  conclusion,  that  the  activity  of  life  can  last  only  so  long

52  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

as  the  chemical  composition  of  the  body  yields  the  necessary
conditions,  and  that  the  corruption  of  death  is  nothing  else
than  a  disturbance  of  that  composition  which  has  now  become
visible,  but  by  which  perhaps  long  since,  though  less  obviously,
the  conditions  of  life  have  been  affected  ?  This  reasoning
will  seem  forcible  in  cases  where  a  distinct  disease,  originating
within  the  body,  has  consumed  its  vitality ;  but  corruption
invades,  though  more  slowly,  even  the  body  that  has  been
struck  down  in  the  fulness  of  health  by  a  violent  death ;  and
so  we  return  to  the  idea  that  the  blending  of  the  elements,  main
tained  during  life  by  a  special  force,  comes  under  the  general
laws  of  chemical  processes  only  when  this  force  ceases  to  exist.
But  closer  observation  discloses  in  the  living  body  a
scarcely  less  remarkable  shifting  of  elements.  We  find
that  constantly,  by  manifold  kinds  of  separation,  particles
are  removed  from  it,  which  in  their  chemical  composition
do  not  indeed  resemble  the  products  of  corruption,  yet
come  much  nearer  to  them  than  does  the  mode  in  which  the
elements  of  the  healthy  body  are  combined.  Again,  oft-
repeated  observations  teach  us  that  a  great  part  of  the
textures  of  which  the  living  body  consists,  are  going  through
an  uninterrupted  process  of  decomposition  and  redintegration,
and  that  the  substances  leaving  the  body  in  the  most  various
forms,  are  in  part  the  fragments  into  which  this  decom
position  has  converted  what  was  formerly  capable  of  life.
There  is  no  necessary  ground  to  suppose  that  the  process  of
this  decomposition  obeys  different  laws  during  life  from  those
which  even  after  death  control  the  decay  of  the  body.  For
the  accessory  circumstances  conditioning  both  processes  are
too  diverse  not  to  make  it  easy  to  refer  to  them  the  great
diversity  observable  in  the  character  of  their  results.  The
continual  circulation  of  fluids  occasions  the  decomposed
elements  to  flow  in  the  living  body  in  small  and  imper
ceptible  quantities  towards  the  excretory  organs,  by  means
of  which  they  are  restored  to  the  surrounding  world,  and  the
mischievous  effects  are  prevented  which  their  longer  retention
iu  the  body  would  have  on  the  mingling  of  the  other  elements.

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  53

Moreover,  many  regulated  functions  of  the  living  body  bring
together  those  elements  which  by  their  action  and  reaction
tend  to  strengthen  its  fabric  and  accelerate  the  repair  of  its
waste  ;  while  they  separate  those  whose  meeting  might  set  up
chemical  processes  of  far-reaching  destruction.  Thus  from
decomposition  and  redintegration  arises  that  slow  change  of
elements  which,  imperceptibly  distributed  over  long  intervals
of  time,  makes  the  living  body  appear  to  us  a  persistent
unity.  All  these  favourable  circumstances  are  absent  in  the
dead  body.  "With  the  ceasing  of  all  functions  the  paths  become
closed  by  which  wasted  tissue  might  be  removed  and  fresh
obtained  ;  the  already  decaying  substances,  collected  together
without  motion,  work  longer  on  each  other  and  wear  away
the  partition-walls  that  formerly  kept  them  apart ;  spreading
around  and  no  longer  under  the  check  of  any  order,  the
chemical  processes  together  bring  about  the  repulsive  spec
tacle  of  putrefaction.  "\Ve  may  further  convince  ourselves  oj^
the  great  importance  (for  the  processes  of  organic  chemistry)
of  this  abnormal  grouping  of  the  accessory  determining
circumstances,  from  observations  made  on  various  diseases,
where  symptoms  of  partial  corruption  follow  the  cessation  or
weakening  of  certain  of  these  motive  and  regulative  arrange
ments.  These  facts  in  no  wise  compel  us  to  seek  in  the  living
body  a  peculiar  and  special  force,  which,  in  direct  opposition
to  universal  chemical  laws,  should  keep  its  constituents
in  a  combination  antagonistic  to  their  natural  tendencies.
On  the  contrary,  it  attains  this  result  when  in  complete
accordance  with  these  laws  it  allows  the  decomposition  of
that  which  under  actual  conditions  cannot  retain  its  com
position,  and  by  means  of  a  well-arranged  series  of  complex
movements,  prevents  the  injurious  effects  of  processes  which
it  has  no  power  to  hinder,  and  supplies  the  losses  due
to  the  destructive  influence  of  those  processes.  Doubtless,
therefore,  the  same  laws  of  chemical  affinity  govern  the
decay  of  the  dead  and  the  vigour  of  the  living  hotly ;  but
in  contrast  to  the  painful  putrefaction  of  the  former,  life  is
an  organized  decomposition,  dependent  upon  the  order  in

54  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

which  incessantly  continued  operations  allow  the  substances
to  act  upon  one  another.

I  would  remark  in  conclusion,  that  we  ought  perhaps  to
have  begun  by  pointing  out  the  exaggeration  with  which  the
perishableness  of  organic  bodies  is  described.  Is  it  true,  for
instance,  that  the  wood  which  we  use  in  our  buildings,
furniture,  and  ships,  the  quills  taken  from  the  wings  of  birds
and  with  which  the  strange  assertions  we  refer  to  are  penned,
and  the  skins  of  animals  that  protect  our  bodies  against
inclemencies  of  weather,  do  really  perish  so  very  rapidly  ?  The
contrary  is  true,  for  they  are  among  the  most  durable  of  all
structures,  and  succumb  but  slowly  to  the  hostile  influence  of
external  circumstances,  whilst  many  products  of  inorganic
chemistry  are  abruptly  resolved  into  their  constituents  by
slight  changes  of  temperature,  or  by  contact  with  air  or  water.
Hence  it  appears  that  among  organic  materials  it  is  only  those
in  which  the  plan  of  life  requires  facility  of  change  that  are
very  easily  decomposable  ;  and  even  of  these  it  remains
doubtful  to  what  extent  they  are  perishable,  and  whether  the
force  which  dissolves  the  connection  between  their  constituents
is  not  primarily  constituted  by  the  action  of  other  living
organisms  which  strive  to  develop  themselves  at  the  expense
of  the  former.

This  peculiar  play  of  changes  in  substance,  which  we  have
here  made  use  of  simply  as  a  fact  for  the  explanation  of  a
remarkable  phenomenon,  we  shall  afterwards  study  in  its
bearing  on  the  establishment  of  life  ;  in  the  first  place,  we  find
it  used  by  the  advocates  of  the  opposite  view  as  a  fresh  proof
of  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  vital  force.  For,  say  they,  while
in  the  inorganic  world  each  force  is  inherent  in  a  particular
mass,  and  changes  according  as  this  increases  or  diminishes,
the  vital  force  lasts  beyond  the  flux  of  the  constituents  of  the
body,  and  in  contrast  to  their  perishableness  manifests  itself  as
a  power,  not  chained  to  matter,  but  higher  and  more  permanent.
This  opinion,  however,  would  hardly  deserve  an  articulate
refutation,  if  it  did  not  present  an  opportunity  of  throwing
additional  light  on  the  real  peculiarity  of  life.  For  it  is

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  f>5

evidently  too  mucli  to  assert  in  general  that  the  vital  force
endures  longer  than the  perishable  constituents  of  the  body.
On  the  contrary,  there  are  but  few  parts  of  the  body  that
at any  moment  can  be  given  up  to  decomposition  without  a
disturbance  of  the  course  of  life,  which  finds  a  sufficiently
secure  foundation  for  its  preservation  in  the  disproportionately
larger  quantity of  constituents  continuing during  this time
in  undisturbed  cohesion  and  combination. The  most  ordinary
experiments  show  that  these  conditions  are  too  simple  to  form
a mark of essential distinction between vital organic and
inorganic  processes. The  coherence  of  parts  in  any  structure
is  usually  firm  enough  to  allow  of  a  loose  stone  being  now
and then, without danger to the form of the structure,
taken away to be replaced by another. But such
observations show at the same time that,  while repair is
going  on,  the  parts  of  the  building  cannot  bear  the  same  strain
as they  could  previously when it  was  perfect. Therefore,
while  the  removal  of  one  element  does  not  alter  the  external
figure  of  an  adjusted  system  of  molecules,  or  perhaps  even
visibly  affect  the  course  of  its  internal  movements,  it  may  yet
most  essentially  diminish  the power  of  the  system to  resist
••xtraneous  disturbance  and  the  amount  of  work  which  it  can
accomplish. We have no reason to believe that in this
respect it is otherwise witli life. For what we directly
observe  is  no  more than  this,  that  the  velocity  with  which
the change of  material usually  goes  on in  a  healthy  body
does  not  strikingly  modify  the  character  of  its  vital  operations
und their natural sequence ; and  the phenomena  yield  no
basis  for  the  affirmation,  that  the  amount  of  power  of  resist
ance  to  external  influences  and the  capacity  of  vital  action
are  also  unaffected  by  fluctuations  in the  molecular  constitu
tion  of  the  body. Of  course,  so  long  as  parallel  currents  of
decomposition  and  repair  neutralize  one  another,  the  bodily
force will remain at the same level ; on the other  hand,
where  within  given  periods  there  is  increase  or  diminution  in
the  change  of  material,  there  we  shall find  periods  of  greater
ur less capacity of resistance to disturbance. Finally, the

56  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

universal  mortality  of  living  beings  proves  that  the  vital  force
does  not  always  go  on  beyond  the  constant  change  of  the
constituents,  but  that  the  latter,  even  without  the  occurrence
of  outside  accidents,  leads  to  new  relations  between  the
constituent  parts,  incompatible  with  the  continuance  of  the
earlier  play  of  movements.  It  is  not,  therefore,  as  a  spirit
brooding  over  the  waters  that  the  vital  force  persists  in  the
transformation  of  masses,  but  the  fixed  mode  of  combination
of  the  parts  (which  do  not  all  disappear  at  the  same  rate  of
velocity,  a  more  slowly  altering  trunk  being  always  there
to  form  a  pattern  nucleus  for  the  aggregation  of  the  new
matter)  makes  it  possible  for  the  vital  phenomena  to  go  on
for  a  long  time,  without,  however,  being  able  to  ward  olf
their  final  termination.

§  3.  But  the  new  life  developing  itself  with  exhaustless
energy  out  of  that  which  is  passing  away,  suggests  new  doubts;
in  propagation  the  vital  force  is  without  any  impairment  of  its
strength  distributed  over  the  newly-produced  organisms,  while
inorganic  forces,  diffused  over  an  increasing  quantity  of  matter,
display  everywhere  only  that  fraction  of  their  power  which
answers  to  the  quantity  of  matter.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  wre
perceive  in  children,  along  with  whose  life  that  of  the  parents
goes  on,  not  only  no  weakening,  but  an  evident  increase  of  vital
force.  But  it  is  merely  first  impressions,  not  closer  examination,
that  make  us  see  here  anything  more  perplexing  than  in  lifeless
Nature.  Does  not  the  magnet  also  impart  its  energy  to  many
iron  rods,  without  thereby  losing  any  itself  ?  And  does  not
the  burning  body  set  an  indefinite  number  of  others  on  fire
without  thereby  cooling  ?  Forces  are  never  and  nowhere
transferred  by  one  substance  to  another  like  divisible  iluids
that  can  change  their  place ;  on  the  contrary,  in  every  case
of  mutual  action,  the  one  agent  brings  the  other  into  altered
outer  and  inner  states,  in  which  new  capacities  of  action  are
acquired,  or  former  ones  are  set  free  from  obstacles  to  their
manifestation.  A  blow  struck  upon  a  rigid  mass,  whose
internal  connection  it  cannot  alter,  will  merely  communicate
to  it  a  motion,  the  velocity  of  which  varies  inversely  as  the

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  57

mass  over  which  the  effect  of  the  blow  has  to  be  dis
tributed  The  effect  will  be  different  if  the  same  blow  is
given  to  a  small  quantity  of  fulminating  silver,  whose  violent
explosion  will  occasion  a  far  greater  disturbance  among
contiguous  objects  than  could  have  been  occasioned  by  the
blow  itself,  if  it  had  fallen  directly  upon  those  objects.
Unquestionably  a  great  increase  of  force  has  here  taken  place
by  the  intervention  of  the  explosive  substance.  The  original
shock  indeed  communicated  directly  to  the  parts  of  that
substance  only  the  trifling  velocity  which  it  would  have
communicated  to  any  body  of  equal  mass  ;  but  here  this
insignificant  primary  impetus  encountered  particles  that  had
only  to  be  quickly  moved  nearer  one  another  in  order  thai
the  chemical  affinities  long  existing  between  them  should
receive  the  iinal  requisite  to  their  bursting  into  noisy  activity.
Thu.-.  in  this  case  a  slight  impetus  is  sufficient  to  bring  about
a  great  effect  instantaneously ;  it  will  even  suffice  to  produce
a  long  and  enduring  series  of  processes  evolved  one  out  of
another  and  increasing  to  great  results,  when  the  forces  which
it  has  released  from  their  equilibrium  are,  by  the  natural
relations  of  the  particles  to  which  they  belong,  made  capable
of  only  gradually  unrolling  their  results.

Therefore,  however  much  the  propagation  of  life,  by  means
of  the  careful  arrangement  of  harmonious  activities  which  it
presupposes,  may  always  excite  our  admiration,  it  does  not
give  rise  to  the  same  difficulties  that  we  have  already  found
to  favour  the  assumption  of  a  peculiar  vital  force.  For  its
real  process  consists  simply  in  this — that  a  very  insignificant
portion  is  detached  from  the  maternal  organism,  with  whose
vital  processes  it  stood  in  no  important  connection,  and  becomes
the  germ  of  a  new  being.  Even  were  we  to  assume  that  to  it
was  transferred  part  of  the  vital  force  of  its  parents,  this  part
could  only  be  an  infinitesimal  quantity ;  for  the  vital  energy
of  the  germ  we  find  to  be  at  first  very  slight,  and  it  attains
the  capacity  of  a  considerable  amount  of  work  only  after  a
long  course  of  growth,  during  which  it  adds  to  its  strength  by
the  assimilation  of  material  from  the  outer  world.  Thus  eveu

58  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

in  that  case  the  organism  producing  it  would  lose  but  little,  and
certainly  observation  will  not  justify  the  assertion  that  this
trifling  loss  is  not  accompanied  by  a  correspondingly  trifling
diminution  of  the  parental  vital  energy.  But  it  is  of  little
use  to  pursue  a  train  of  thought,  the  general  impracticability  of
which  we  have  already  recognised;  forces  are  not  communicated
by  one  thing  to  another,  only  movements  can  be  communicated ;
or  substances  may  be  set  free  from  a  larger  group  to  carry  on  an
independent  existence.  All  propagation  must  therefore  depend
on  its  being  possible  for  the  parent  to  set  up  a  germ,  which,
trilling  in  mass,  is  distinguished  only  by  the  carefully  arranged
combination  and  mixture  of  its  constituents,  and  only  by  this
means  is  made  capable  of  developing  into  a  living  being,  with
increasing  strength,  under  external  favouring  conditions.  The
original  production  of  a  new  being  is  therefore  not  an  effort,
from  which  it  were  natural  to  expect  a  diminution  of  the
parents'  energy ;  though  it  may  well  be  that  the  many
exertions  which  in  many  instances  the  maternal  organism  has
to  make  for  the  early  invigoration  and  development  of  the
germ,  seriously  imperil  its  vital  powers.

But  do  we  not  forthwith  again  meet  the  same  problem
from  which  we  have  been  trying  to  free  the  mystery  of
propagation,  in  the  mystery  of  growth,  of  the  continual
increase  of  energy  and  mass  in  the  newly  produced  organism  ?
As  the  frame  increases  which  it  lias  to  control,  we  see  the
vital  energy  increase,  whereas  in  general  every  capacity
dwindles  as  its  tasks  become  heavier.  But  this  difficulty,
too,  is  cleared  up  by  closer  examination  of  the  real  process,
and  it  deserves  mention  only  on  account  of  a  common  pre
judice  associated  with  it.  When  the  growing  body  absorbs
the  substances  of  the  outer  world  and  presses  them  into  its
service,  we  too  often  imagine  this  acquired  material  as  so
indifferent  and  so  devoid  of  activity  that  it  would  seem  to
need  a  special  cohesive  force  to  retain  it  in  the  same
combination  when  it  has  once  been  brought  together.

O  O

Our  ideas  of  the connection of  organic  parts are  too  much
modelled  on  that  of  a  bundle  of  objects,  which  being  indifferent

THE  UASIS  OF  LIFE.  5(J

to  one  another  and  totally  destitute  of  cohesive  power,  need
to  be  tied  together  by  a  baud  external  to  them  all.  That  is
the  meaning  of  the  common  craving  to  know  the  bond  that
holds  together  the  body  and  the  soul,  or  the  constituents  of
the  body,  or  lastly  the  mental  elements.  For  the  connecting
principle  of  these  last,  though  probably  conceived  as  higher
in  its  nature  than  a  material  bond,  is  yet  not  thought  of
as  essentially  different  from  a  cord ;  for  it  seems  to  be
regarded  as  something  which,  while  itself  one  and  indivisible,
fastens  together  a  plurality  of  hitherto  unrelated  parts  by
very  much  the  same  folds  and  knots  as  a  cord.  The  reality
is  different.  To  obtain  the  materials  by  which  the  organic
body  grows,  may  require  peculiar  exertions,  of  which  we  shall
elsewhere  speak  ;  but  their  retention  in  the  particular  positions
which  they  have  once  taken  up  relatively  to  one  another,  is
no  act  of  violence  which  they  resist,  so  that  a  special  vital
force,  stronger  than  the  forces  of  all  the  parts,  would  bo
necessary  to  carry  it  out ;  the  elements  are  not  even  indifferent
to  this  task,  but  carry  it  out  themselves.  For,  in  entering
the  region  of  the  living  body,  they  do  not  divest  themselves
of  the  forces  that  were  before  peculiar  to  their  nature;  but
by  means  of  these  forces  they  cohere  with  one  another,  and  thus
conform  in  common  and  in  accordance  with  the  needs  of  the
organism  to  the  same  laws  which  formerly  they  obeyed  when
separated,  outside  the  organism.  Hence,  instead  of  one  band
enclosing  with  surface  coils  the  innumerable  parts,  we  find
innumerable  ligaments  each  uniting  two  single  elements  of  the
body,  and  these  are  nothing  else  than  the  peculiar  forces  of  the
elements  themselves,  which  do  not  need  to  be  impelled  by  any
superior  mandate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function  congenial  to
their  nature,  and  which  would  not  submit  to  be  impelled  to  one
alien  to  it.  Every  individual  atom  by  which  the  mass  of  the
body  is  increased,  enters  the  system  by  virtue  of  the  attractive
force  exerted  on  it  by  some  one  part ;  kept  in  its  place  by  the
same  force,  whose  exercise  involves  no  effort  to  the  body,
it  now  sets  at  the  body's  disposal  its  own  mass  with  all
the  forces  mechanical  and  chemical  belonging  to  it.  and  thus

60  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

the  body  acquires  a  greater  power  of  acting  on  the  external
world,  and  consequently  increased  energy.  The  work  of
vitality  consists  only  in  this — that  the  already  existing  stock
of  corporeal  constituents  be  at  all  times  so  arranged  and  in
such  wise  come  into  contact  with  the  material  of  the  outer
world,  that  the  action  originated  and  consequently  the  fresh
supply  of  particles  may  be  adapted  to  the  needs  of  life.

This  task  also  can  be  so  regarded  as  to  revive  the  old  diffi
culties.  As  before  a  bond  was  sought  for  the  inert  elements,
so  now  perhaps  a  bridle  is  desired,  by  which  their  activities
might  be  now  permitted,  now  checked,  at  one  time  hastened,  at
another  retarded.  This  would  indeed  be  a  nearly  impracticable
task  if  it  had  to  be  committed  to  a  single  force,  by  which  the
plan  of  the  organization  should  be  carried  on  at  each  moment
by  special  help.  But  this  work  also  is  performed  of  itself,  so
long  as  external  disturbances  do  not  derange  the  relations
beyond  calculation.  A  group  of  particles  forming  the  germ
of  an  organic  being,  can  easily  be  so  arranged  that  in  th<j
course  of  its  development  only  particular  spots  are  left  for
future  action  and  reaction ;  others  become  so  rigid  that  the
substances  of  the  outer  world  pass  by  them  without  producing
any  effect,  in  order  to  diffuse  themselves  by  paths  which  are
organized  exclusively  for  the  progress  of  the  organism,  and
which  render  possible  a  steady  course  of  growth  according
to  a  permanent  model.  Even  in  the  crystal  the  new  accretion
of  the  same  substance  does  not  settle  anywhere,  but  the  forces
of  the  existing  form  prescribe  to  the  later  additions  the  place
and  manner  of  their  aggregation,  and  during  their  accretion
preserve  the  original  figure  or  at  least  the  original  law  of  its
formation.  What  inorganic  Nature  here  executes,  is  performed
with  incalculably  greater  delicacy  and  complexity  by  the  living
body,  but  not  on  different  principles  of  working,  and  a  closer
examination  of  its  structure  and  its  operations  will  show  how
much  that  seems  difficult  is  easily  and  automatically  performed,
because  gradually  in  the  long  course  of  development  each  prior
state  limits  the  number  of  indefinite  possibilities  of  further
work,  and  confines  later  events  to  lines  more  strictly  marked  out.

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  Gl

§  4.  Thus  also  the  maintenance  of  order  in  the  changeful
multiplicity  of  vital  processes  would  be  caused  not  by  the
ever  renewed  assaults  of  a  special  regulative  power,  but  by  the
arrangement  of  a  system  of  particles  once  for  all  established,
and  then  realized  through  the  usual  operations  of  these  indi
vidual  elements.  We  have  already  added  that  this  result
presupposes  the  warding  off  of  external  disturbances.  But
here  we  meet  with  a  new  peculiarity  of  life,  viz.  that  with
appropriately  reacting  remedial  energy  it  survives  and  removes
even  these  disturbing  causes.  All  its  other  phenomena  mny
be  looked  on  as  the  gradually  and  regularly  succeeding
movements  of  a  machine,  whose  structure  once  there  and  set
in  motion  gives  rise  to  a  variety  of  effects  which  follow  one
another;  but  the  adjusting  activity  that  accommodates  itself
to  circumstances,  and  always  seeks  with  the  choice  of  the
best  instruments  to  keep  to  the  original  plan,  seems  to  be
possible  only  for  a  vital  force,  guided  not  like  the  other
physical  forces  by  a  monotonous  law  of  working,  but  by  a
modifiable  regard  to  the  end  of  the  work.  But  then  how
much — alike  observation  and  reflection — concurs  to  render
questionable  this  illusory  conclusion  !  For  illusory  it  is,  first
in  that  it  presents  the  facts  in  a  far  too  favourable  light,  and
keeps  back  the  deep  shadows.  Death,  that  brings  so  much
life  to  an  end  before  the  natural  close  of  its  evolution,
proceeding  from  disturbances  so  slight  as  to  elude  our  obser
vation,  first  of  all  convinces  us  that  the  body's  recuperative
power  is  not  absolute,  and  the  multitude  of  diseases  that,
but  partially  overcome,  embitter  future  years,  show  further
that  it  is  exceedingly  limited.  Even  healthy  life,  seeing  it  is
not  a  play  of  self-caused  movements,  but  flows  on  in  constant
action  and  re-action  with  the  outer  world,  includes  a  great
multitude  of  bodily  changes  which  are  primarily  to  be
regarded  as  disturbances  of  its  system,  for  whose  counter
action  a  variety  of  ever-continued  operations  are  provided
in  the  original  plan  of  the  body.  Now  a  system  of  parts
having  relations  so  suitably  arranged  that  within  certain  limits
its  activity  can  subdue  the  lawless  influences  of  the  outer

62  BOOK  i. CHAPTER  nr.

world,  does  not  lose  this  capacity  at  the  very  moment  when
these  limits  are  transgressed  under  unusual  circumstances.
With  the  various  ingenious  contrivances  which  it  before
possessed,  it  often  succeeds  in  overcoming  even  amounts  and
kinds  of  disturbance  for  which  it  was  not  adapted,  either
wholly  or  at  least  so  far  that  the  injury  received  does  not
conspicuously  affect  the  character  of  its  movements.  But,  of
course,  it  is  irrecoverably  damaged  so  soon  as  there  is  in  its
structure  and  its  organs  no  favourable  circumstance  to  bring
the  disturbance  to  an  end  by  means  of  the  reaction  produced
in  the  system  by  its  stimulation.  We  see  from  a  host  of
examples  how  far  this  problem  can  be  solved  even  by  human
skill,  with  the  imperfect  means  at  its  command.  Machines
can  be  constructed  so  that  the  unequal  expansion  of  different
metals  at  the  same  degree  of  temperature  does  away  with  the
injurious  effects  which  variations  in  temperature  might  have
on  the  precision  of  their  operations  ;  the  steam-engine  can
be  compelled,  while  in  motion,  itself  to  set  going  a  con
trivance  by  which  the  lubricating  oil  is  supplied  to  the
wheels  in  just  such  measure  as  is  required  by  the  actual
velocity  of  the  train.  If  we  look  on  these  achievements  with
a  certain  pride,  it  shows  the  narrow  tether  of  human  power
that  we  can  be  proud  of  such  results ;  they  certainly  are
exceedingly  trifling  in  comparison  with  the  infinite  delicacy
and  versatility  with  which  the  living  body  resists  innumerable
minute  disturbances  all  at  once  ;  but  this  difference  in  value
does  not  entitle  us  to  infer  an  equally  wide  difference  in  the
method  of  working.

In  the  organism  also  the  curative  reaction  is  connected
with  the  purposive  character  of  its  internal  arrangement,  and
extends  only  so  far  as  external  assaults  leave  this  arrange
ment  unaltered  in  its  essential  character.  We  shall  vainly
expect  it  to  act,  when  the  violence  of  the  disturbance  has
deranged  these  favouring  circumstances,  though  even  then
the  after-effects  of  the  original  adaptability  are  so  great  that
health,  now  become  impossible,  is  not  at  once  succeeded  by
complete  dissolution,  but  by  a  state  which  is  endurable,

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  C3

capable  of  some  duration,  and  conservative  of  at  least  the
main  outlines  of  the  vital  plan.  On  the  other  hand,  we  never
see  a  curative  reaction  of  such  a  new  and  quite  unusual
character  occur,  that  healthy  life  has  not  already  made  con
stant  use  of  it.  Only  sometimes  with  heightened  impetuosity
and  in  a  different  combination  external  disturbances  excite
these  always  already  existing  activities,  and  this  very  agitation,
while  sometimes  causing  unusual  results,  in  quite  as  many
cases  entails  complete  dissolution.  Did  a  peculiar  curative
energy  animate  the  body,  dealing  with  the  physical  and
chemical  forces  of  masses  with  any  freedom  of  choice  what
ever,  and  at  all  independently,  it  would  be  difficult  to  explain
why  it  could  ever  fail  in  the  execution  of  its  designs,  when  once
raised  above  natural  necessity.  We  understand  the  necessity
of  its  limitation,  when  we  take  it  as  the  sum  of  that  which  the
living  body  with  activities  adjusted  to  the  usual  circumstances
of  life,  can  accomplish  even  under  such  as  are  unusual.

§  5.  So  great,  however,  is  the  admiration  extorted  by  the
complicated  structure  of  life  even  from  those  who  hold  the
mechanical  conception  of  it,  that  we  do  not  become  impatient
with  our  adversaries  even  when  they  are  always  pressing  on
us  their  idea  of  a  peculiar  vital  force  in  fresh  forms.  "  \Ve  do
not  ask  "  say  they  "  a  new  force,  a  healing  activity  that  should
all  at  once  begin  to  work,  and,  without  any  foundation  in  the
constant  arrangements  of  life,  should  only  intervene  in  case  of
disturbance ;  but  we  only  can  understand  the  whole  course  of
the  phienomena  of  life  if  the  vital  Idea  of  the.  whole  is  ever
binding  the  parts  together  as  the  ruling  principle ;  it  is  the
activity  of  this  which,  while  less  obtrusive  in  health,  to  whose
perpetual  wonders  we  are  accustomed,  becomes  more  evident  in
its  heightened  reaction  against  the  violence  of  any  disturbances
of  it.  Only  in  unorganized  structures  does  the  whole  arise  out
of  the  composition  of  the  parts — in  living  beings  it  precedes
the  parts."  It  is  clear  that  this  last  assertion  can  have  no
other  meaning  than  that  the  form  of  the  whole  is  already
present  in  the  developing  body  as  an  animating  and  regulating
power,  even  before  the  whole  sum  of  parts,  by  which  its  out-

C4  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

line  is  one  day  to  be  filled,  are  yet  in  existence  or  in  then
right  places.  In  fact,  several  processes  in  the  first  develop
ment  of  the  germ  show  that  in  the  places  afterwards  to  be
occupied  by  definite  organs  shapeless-looking  masses  are  at
first  deposited,  in  which  the  division  into  parts  pertaining  to  the
perfect  organ  is  afterwards  developed.  Circumstances  of  this
sort  may  temporarily  favour  the  view  under  discussion  ;  but
these  regular  developments  adapted  to  a  common  plan  of  the
whole, and  going  on  simultaneously  at  different  spots  in  the  germ,
lose  their  harmony  when  the  mechanical  connection  of  the  parts
of  the  germ  is  disturbed  by  derangement  or  lesion.  This  fact
shows  that  the  disconnected  formative  processes  are  maintained
not  solely  by  an  Idea  hovering  above  them,  but  by  the  definite
arrangement  of  the  reciprocal  actions  taking  place  between  all
the  single  parts  in  virtue  of  their  fixed  position  relatively  to
one  another.  By  these  reactions  the  material  capable  of  being
formed  is  deposited  at  prescribed  places,  and  through  their
further  operations,  which  subsequently  acquire  new  conditions
in  consequence  of  this  first  result,  the  gradual  articulation  of
infinitesimal  constituent  parts  takes  place.  Would  it  be  less
marvellous  if  the  organism,  starting  from  a  single  centre,
produced  the  immediately  adjacent  parts  at  once  in  their  final
form, — would  we  not  consider  this  still  more  mysterious  ?
The  formation  of  every  organic  part  thus  depends  on  its  being
developed  in  constant  association  with  all  the  others  belonging
to  the  same  whole  ;  but  this  consists  not  in  their  all  being  em
braced  by  an  active  Idea,  but  in  all  being  woven  into  a  system
of  physical  actions  and  reactions,  from  which  each  receives  the
form  and  velocity  of  its  development  and  movement.1

The  facts  at  least  permit  this  view  ;  a  more  general  con
sideration  shows  it  to  be  necessary.  For  the  expression
Idea  of  the  whole  has  a  twofold  meaning.  We  may  denote
by  it,  in  the  first  place,  the  pattern  and  the  plan  which  we
perceive  to  be  embodied  in  the  complete  organic  structure,  or
persistently  followed  out  in  its  gradual  development.  But  no
pattern,  no  plan,  regarded  as  the  end  of  a  natural  process,  is

1  Entwicklungsbewegung.

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  G5

realized  of  its  own  accord ;  it  will  be  realized  only  when  the
substances  in  whose  grouping  it  is  to  be  manifested  are  compelled
by  an  original  arrangement  of  their  relations  to  produce  by
their  forces  what  it  prescribes  according  to  the  universal  laws
of  the  course  of  Nature.  Thus  it  constantly  exerts  but  an
apparent  power,  and  as  little  as  we  look  upon  the  Idea  of
disorder  as  an  active  and  moving  principle  in  a  random  series
of  changes,  so  little  can  we  consider  the  Idea  of  any  order  as
the  efficient  and  sustaining  cause  of  a  regular  cycle.  In  both
cases  what  takes  place  is  that  which  must  occur  in  the  given
state  of  things,  arid  the  superiority  of  the  latter  consists  not
in  a  constantly  maintained  purposive  activity,  but  in  the
persistent  after-effects  due  to  the  purposiveness  of  the  first
arrangement.  "  But "  it  will  be  objected  "  whence  proceeds
this  original  arrangement  ? "  We  know  not,  and  this  is
not  the  place  to  set  forth  the  conjectures  which  we  may
form  in  regard  to  it.  It  is  not  our  intention  to  deny  in
the  organic  world  the  traces  of  a  wisdom  that  point  us  beyond
the  mechanical  concatenation  of  mere  events  to  an  uncompre-
hended,  creative  Tower  ;  but  neither  is  it  our  task  to  seek  the
first  origin  of  life  ;  we  are  simply  investigating  the  laws  by
which  within  the  limits  of  our  observation  the  mysterious
creation  is  maintained.  And  we  find  that  within  these  limits
HO  new  life  arises,  that  the  maintenance  of  life  is  on  the  con
trary  dependent  on  the  uninterrupted  transmission  of  certain
substances  with  their  particles  in  a  certain  conformation,  as  in
propagation  they  are  unceasingly  transferred  from  one  organism
to  another.  Here  we  find  a  proof  that  Ideas  are  no  longer
capable  of  being  embodied  in  substances  unless  their  internal
distribution  is  already  most  carefully  so  arranged  that  from
this  alone,  without  any  further  assistance  from  Ideas,  nay,  even
in  opposition  to  them,  the  form  prescribed  by  them  must  of
itself  arise.  Ideas  may  indeed  at  the  beginning  of  the  world
have  been  the  determinants  of  the  first  connections  of  things  ;
in  their  maintenance,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  activities
of  the  parts  that  realize  the  content  of  the  Ideas.

\Ve  are  indeed  aware  that  the  advocates  of  the  view  against

VOL.  I.  E

GO  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

which  we  are  contending  do  not  conceive  the  Idea  of  the
whole  as  an  unreal  pattern,  powerlessly  confronting  the
reality  of  substances.  Yet,  holding  the  Idea  to  be  itself  a
living  and  eflicacious  power,  they  are  constrained  to  go  over
to  the  other  definite  signification  that  may  be  given  to  this
much  misused  term.  Should  the  efficacy  of  the  individual
parts  not  suflice  for  the  harmonious  evolution  of  the  whole,
the  higher  bond  that  is  to  be  the  complement  must
everywhere  receive  an  impression  from  the  situation  of
things  with  which  it  is  to  interfere,  in  order  at  the  right
moment  to  bring  about  that  which  is  adapted  to  the  actual
situation.  Such  impressions  may  be  viewed  as  alterations  of
the  state  of  the  bond,  which  excite  a  definite  reaction  from  it
with  regular  necessity.  It  is  obvious  that  on  this  hypothesis  the
bond  plays  no  higher  part  than  each  of  the  material  substances,
which,  receiving  impressions  from  one  another,  on  our  view
also  produce  the  formation  of  the  organism  by  the  mutual
influence  of  their  reactions.  The  only  peculiarity  of  this
view  would  be  that,  instead  of  making  all  the  parts  contribute
equally  to  the  establishment  of  life,  it  puts  par  excellence,  as
the  focus  in  the  middle  of  the  others  a  single  one,  in  which
the  concurrent  effects  of  all  produce  a  plurality  of  harmonious
activities.  !N"ow,  no  doubt  it  is  the  case  that  the  various
parts  are  of  very  various  importance  for  the  establishment
and  maintenance  of  a  definite  form  of  life ;  yet  we  shall  look
in  vain  within  experience  for  any  fact  entitling  us  to  consider
one  of  these  as  exclusively  representing  the  Idea  of  the  whole.
But  then  that  view  does  not  wish  to  see  in  the  higher  bond
which  it  seeks  the  same  lifeless  necessity  of  working  that  it
desired  to  banish  from  the  organism  altogether.  It  will  require
that  this  bond  react  on  the  impressions  which  it  receives  in  such
a  manner  as  to  be  in  accordance  with,  but  not  necessarily  depen
dent  on  physical  laws.  And  such  reaction  being  required  by  the
scheme  of  the  organization,  the  bond  itself  is  supposed  to  give
rise  to  it,  and  in  tliis  way  complete  the  circle  of  natural  causes,
otherwise  not  absolutely  closed.

2sow,  if  we  will  not stray  into  vagueness,  and  choose  for

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  G7

our  basis  of  explanation  something  of  whose  nature  and
essence  we  cannot  form  the  remotest  idea,  we  must  be
fain  to  confess  that  this  kind  of  purposive  working  belong;?
exclusively  to  a  soul  and  not  to  an  Idea,  and  we  must  convert
the  shifting  conception  of  the  Idea  into  this  more  distinct
notion.  The  soul  alone,  endowed  with  the  capacity  of
recalling  past  impressions,  can  fill  up  this  chasm  in  natural
causation.  Acted  on  by  a  variety  of  stimuli,  in  which  never
theless  the  complete  conditions  of  the  desired  result  are  not  to
be  found,  it  evolves  in  addition  a  representation  of  that  which
is  temporarily  lacking  in  the  reality.  From  this,  which  is
substituted  for  the  actual  impression,  it  arrives  at  the  pur-
po-ivo  resolution,  which  in  turn  begins  to  exert  an  active
influence  on  external  reality.  Thus  the  connection,  after
having  been  severed  in  the  physical  sphere,  is  restored  by  a
series  of  effects  in  the  mental  sphere  that  join  together
two  events,  of  which  the  first  did  not  contain  the  whole
ground  of  the  second.

Accordingly,  the  further  hypothesis  has  not  been  absent
from  the  history  of  science,  that  it  is  the  soul  whose  activity
controls  the  order  and  fitness  of  organic  development.  But
if  this  view  contains  a  part  of  truth  on  which  we  shall
subsequently  have  occasion  to  enlarge,  yet  experience  is  not
in  favour  of  the  attempt  to  set  it  up  as  a  more  satisfactory
explanation,  in  opposition  to  the  mechanical  conception  of  life.
It  may  be  otherwise  in  the  souls  of  the  lower  animals,  into
which  we  cannot  transport  ourselves :  in  our  soul  at  all  events
we  find  no  consciousness  of  this  formative  activity.  And  yet
this  capacity  of  the  soul  to  perform  more  than  the  mere  course
of  Nature  depends  on  consciousness  and  the  peculiar  laws  of  the
train  of  ideas.  It  is  only  where,  in  consequence  of  former
exercise,  a  habit  of  purposive  working  has  become  confirmed  as
a  second  nature  in  the  soul,  that  the  train  of  ideas  that  underlies
it  may  no  longer  come  into  consciousness  in  each  particular  ca<e.
( )n  the  other  hand,  the  supposition  that  the  soul  from  the  first
organizes  the  body  with  unconscious  activity,  would  only  lead
us  to  regard  it  as  well  as  all  the  material  parts  of  the  latter

68  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

as  an  element  without  freedom,  which,  stimulated  by  circum
stances,  develops  necessary  effects  according  to  universal  laws.
Perhaps  on  account  of  this  suggestion  the  view  in  question
has  value  ;  among  the  many  constituents  that  make  up  the
fabric  of  life,  there  is  perhaps  one  separated  from  the  rest  by
a  special  difference  in  its  nature ;  nevertheless,  its  presence
would  not  alter  the  fact  that  all  purposive  operations
in  the  vital  organism  necessarily  depend  on  the  mode  of
combination  of  the  parts  among  which  it  exists.  On  the
other  hand,  to  require  that  the  soul  should  effect  what  has  not
£.11  adequate  foundation  in  this,  and  that  it  should  uncon
sciously  bring  about  such  an  effect,  would  be  to  require  it  to
perform  a  task,  and  at  the  same  time  to  deny  the  one  condi
tion  on  which  it  could  be  performed.

§  G.  We  have  pursued  the  doctrine  of  a  special  vital  force
into  the  various  forms  in  wThich  it  has  successively  sought
acceptance  ;  directly  or  indirectly  all  arose  either  from  observ
ing  that  the  reactions  of  living  beings  on  the  impressions  to
which  they  are  liable,  seemed  not  to  have  their  entire
foundation  in  these  stimulations,  or  from  noticing  that  the
successive  forms  into  which  they  are  developed  without
,'iny  apparent  impetus  from  without  are  not  completely
explained  by  their  antecedents.  This  excitability  through
which  the  external  influence  is  followed  by  unexpected  re
actions,  corresponding  to  it  neither  in  strength  nor  in
duration  nor  yet  in  form,  seemed  to  divide  the  region  of
life  from  that  of  lifelessness  ;  for  the  actions  of  the  latter,
it  was  believed,  could  be  completely  developed  from  the
sum  of  all  the  given  conditions  as  obviously  necessary
consequents.  There  is  some  self-delusion  as  regards  both
clauses  of  this  proposition.  "Where  any  external  shock  falls
on  a  compact  wrhole  of  many  parts,  the  magnitude,  duration,
and  form  of  the  final  effect  produced  never  depend  on  it
alone,  but  conjointly,  and  generally  in  a  far  higher  degree,  on
the  internal  connection  of  the  parts  struck.  Through  their
mutual  relations  the  amount  of  the  impression  received  can
be  diminished,  increased,  or  distributed  in  the  most  diverse

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  GO

manner  over  a  given  number  of  points,  or  directed  in  its
diffusion  so  as  to  be  enabled  to  set  free  fettered  energies,  or
convert  kinetic  into  potential  energy.  These  manifold  inter
mediating  circumstances  finally  lead  to  a  result  by  no  means
resembling  the  original  shock  by  which  they  are  produced.
Every  machine  has  this  capacity  of  excitation.  While  the
workman  is  turning  an  outer  wheel  with  a  constant  rate  of
velocity,  the  internal  machinery  on  which  the  blow  falls  is
worked  by  the  alternate  upward  and  downward  movement  of
a  piston,  which  itself,  according  to  the  mode  in  which  it  i.?
combined  with  external  objects,  can  in  very  various  ways
transmit  further  the  force  of  its  movement.  Precisely  in  the
same  manner  the  infinite  variety  of  the  parts  of  the  body,  with
their  perpetual  internal  movements,  stand  midway  between
the  impressions  which  we  see  made  from  without  on  the  living
body,  and  the  final  reaction.  If  we  are  entitled  in  general  t<>
refer  to  this  intermediate  link  the  phenomena  of  vital  excit
ability,  without,  however,  being  able  to  trace  the  chain  of
intermediate  links  completely  in  the  great  complexity  of  vital
processes,  we  can  see  in  it  not  a  peculiar  operative  vital  force,
but  merely  a  kind  of  operation  common  to  the  living  body
along  with  every  mechanism.

IJut  we  would  1)0  wrong  to  limit  this  excitability  to
composite  systems,  to  which  the  name  is  chiefly  applied.
It  is  no  less  characteristic  of  the  simplest  substratum.  Or
can  we  prove  how  in  the  heightened  temperature  and  the
mutual  approximation  of  two  elements  the  necessity  of  their
chemical  union  is  already  fully  established  ?  On  the  con
trary,  we  must  suppose  that  a  qualitative  peculiarity  of  their
nature  is  only  stimulated  by  these  external  circumstances  to
an  effect  such  as  the  circumstances  themselves  would  not
produce  if  they  worked  on  other  substances.  The  result  taking-
place,  everywhere  depends  not  only  on  the  external  conditions
with  which  it  is  associated,  but  also  on  the  nature  of  tbat
on  which  these  work.  The  reaction  of  inorganic  substances
is  only  simpler,  owing  to  the  fact  that  it  usually  follows  on
similar  stimulations  in  identical  kind  and  amount,  because  it

"70  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

starts  from  a  persistent  excitability  unalterable  in  its  con
stitution.  Organisms,  on  the  other  hand,  internally  in
constant  motion,  present  to  the  same  stimuli  at  different
times  a  different  excitability,  and  their  reactions  thereby
assume  the  appearance  of  arbitrariness  in  a  higher  degree
than  the  more  uniform  ones  of  lifeless  matter,  from  which,
however,  they  in  no  wise  differ  as  regards  the  ultimate  laws  of
their  origin.

Thus  from  these  considerations  also  we  return  to  that
mechanical  conception  which  in  life,  as  everywhere,  makes
the  possibility,  the  kind,  and  the  concatenation  of  compound
results  dependent  on  the  harmonious  efficacy  of  the  parts,
and  the  idea  is  given  up  of  a  single  force  witli  fluctuating
energy,  guided  solely  by  regard  to  the  attainment  of  an  end.
But  we  will  endeavour  by  some  further  remarks  to  obviate
the  unfavourable  light  in  which,  as  contrasted  with  the
opposite  views,  ours  must  appear.  We  cannot  indeed  promise
to  offer  the  same  advantage  as  is  contained  in  the  fundamental
idea  of  the  view  which  we  reject.  We  cannot  ascribe  the
origin  of  the  fair  unity  and  subjectivity  of  life  that  is  wont
to  chain  our  admiration,  to  the  mutual  action  of  parts  which
in  even  their  closest  relations  to  one  another  yet  remain  and
must  remain  different,  if  they  are  to  form  that  plurality  of
active  and  passive  points  on  whose  manifold  connection  the
very  advantages  of  our  own  view  depend.  Nevertheless,  it
would  hardly  be  fair  to  reproach  us  with  regarding  the  living-
body  simply  as  a  machine.  For  ready  as  we  are  to  acknow
ledge  that  we  really  do  assume  the  same  universal  laws  of
action  for  both,  yet  in  the  manner  in  which  these  laws  are
applied  in  the  products  of  our  skill  there  is  a  certain
pettiness  that  we  should  be  reluctant  to  see  ascribed  to  the
voluntary  automata  of  Nature.

Our  machines  work  with  second-hand  forces  ;  they  are
founded  on  the  solidity,  the  cohesiveness,  the  elasticity  of
certain  substances  ;  but,  instead  of  producing  any  of  these
properties  afresh,  they  presuppose  that  they  are  already  formed
by  the  elemental  forces  in  the  material  supplied  by  external

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  71

Nature.  A  fixed  invariable  degree  of  these  properties  is  what
is  required  to  make  the  machine  work ;  every  alteration  of
this  degree  acts  as  a  disturbance  or  a  waste  of  the  proper  rela
tions.  Further,  the  rhythm  according  to  which  the  trans
mitted  impelling  movement  is  propagated  is  based  on  an
ingenious  interlacing  of  single  parts  ;  but  this  mode  of  com
bination  is  not  produced  by  the  active  living  attraction  of  the
constituents  themselves  ;  here  we  see  firm  cohesion  produced
by  nails,  bolts,  rings,  and  screws,  moveability  of  parts  related
to  one  another  secured  by  revolution  round  fixed  axes  ;  every
where  we  find  the  immediate  attractions  and  repulsions  of
the  elements  not  applied  at  first  hand,  but  their  static
products,  rigidity  and  impenetrability,  made  use  of  to  attain
by  external  composition  the  end  of  the  machine.  Just  so  the
active  element  in  it  is  hardly  ever  a  newly-evolved  force  or
movement,  but  all  its  operations  depend  on  the  communica
tion  or  propagation  of  an  impetus  received  from  without.
T.ut  then  in  our  time  this  impetus  itself  is  most  frequently
produced  by  the  use  of  elemental  forces,  the  vivid  elasticity
of  steam  being  developed  by  heightened  temperature.  Yet
even  that  vivid  force  serves  only  in  general  to  excite  a  motion
in  itself  formless  ;  and  the  impetus  given  receives  its  definite
conformation  and  consequently  its  adaptability  for  the  purpose
of  the  machine  solely  from  the  position  of  the  rigid  wheels
or  springs  on  which  it  strikes.

It  is  different  with  the  voluntary  agencies  of  Nature.  No
material  band  connects  the  planet  with  the  sun,  but  the  direct
efficacy  of  an  elemental  force,  universal  attraction,  invisibly
holds  the  two  together  with  an  elasticity  in  their  interaction
that  no  artificial  construction  can  imitate.  Xo  fixed  axis,  no
screw-worm,  no  winding  and  unwinding  rope,  compels  the
planet  to  leave  its  motion  in  a  straight  line  for  a  curved  path,
but  the  perpetually  continued  and  perpetually  varying  conflict
between  its  original  velocity  and  the  attraction  that  impels  it
towards  the  sun,  leads  it  invisibly  but  surely  to  and  fro  on  a
fixed  path,  and  no  wear  of  the  means  of  locomotion  mars  the
continuance  of  this  admirable  adjustment.  Yet  this  rests  on

72  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

no  other  universal  laws  of  action  than  those  which  hold  good
as  well  for  our  machines.  The  same  kind  of  activity  is  again
exemplified,  and  with  infinitely  greater  variety,  in.  the  living
organism.  This,  too,  works  with  no  merely  external  combina
tions  of  means  indifferent  to  one  another;  in  it  too  the
springs  of  action  everywhere  disappear  below  the  current  of
immediate  effects  ;  each  of  its  elements,  while  developing,  retro
grading,  and  changing,  displays  towards  its  neighbours  the  whole
store  of  those  primary  forces  which  belong  peculiarly  to  it,
and  here  these  effects  are  not  interruptions  of  the  progress  of  the
whole,  but  form  the  conditions  which  are  always  afresh  giving
rise  to  its  reality  as  well  as  to  all  the  marvellous  delicacy  of
its  form.  And  even  where,  for  the  fulfilment  of  certain  of
its  tasks,  the  living  body  does  make  use  of  the  machine's
mode  of  working,  as  in  the  movement  of  the  limbs,  whose
rigid  bones  it  draws  according  to  the  laws  of  the  lever  by  the
ropes  of  the  muscles,  even  there  it  forms  and  maintains  lever
and  ropes  by  an  unremitting  activity  consisting  in  a  compli
cated  chain  of  direct  working  of  atom  upon  atom.

It  is  the  limitation  to  rigid  instruments  already  prepared,
and  to  an  external  connection  between  them,  that  gives  me
chanical  work  that  uncanny  appearance  which  causes  us  to  feel
most  repugnance  to  a  comparison  of  it  with  life.  We  often  see
two  parts  of  some  mechanism  out  of  relation  with  one  another,
perhaps  the  one  motionless,  the  other  in  a  state  of  motion  to
which  all  around  is  indifferent ;  suddenly,  when  a  particular
position  has  at  last  been  reached,  a  shock  takes  place,  and
the  single  parts  are  at  once  drawn  into  mutual  action,  without
having  shown  any  signs  of  a  gradually  advancing  prepara
tion,  and  they  next  moment  relapse  into  their  indifferent
repose.  In  consequence  of  the  uninterrupted  stream  of  action
that  is  ever  flowing  from  one  atom  to  another  through  their
immediate  forces,  and  thus  at  each  moment  bringing  about  a
complete  connection  of  the  whole,  living  beings  escape  from
this  inequality  of  development.  Each  infinitesimal  part
seems  to  have  a  knowledge  of  what  is  going  on  in  another,
and  the  reciprocal  action  of  all,  kept  up  unremittingly  and

THE  BASIS  OF  LIFE.  73

not  distributed  in  shocks  over  distinct  moments,  gives  the
development  that  admirable  appearance  of  softness  and  mild
grace  which  sets  anything  living  in  such  triumphant  contrast
to  the  spectral  disjointedness  of  the  movements  of  artificial
automata.

Thus  in  our  opinion  also  there  is  in  organized  beings  a  real
life,  in  sufficiently  sharp  contrast  with  the  apparent  activity
of  machinery  to  distinguish  its  divine  origin  from  the  pool-
productions  of  human  art.  Yet  we  would  once  more  revert  to
the  grounds  of  the  obstinacy  with  which  we  hold  fast  this
view  in  apparent  opposition  to  many  mental  cravings,  whoso
rights  we  yet  fully  acknowledge.  It  is  not  from  an  inclination
to  look  on  life  as  the  result  of  an  accidental  assemblage
of  parts ;  on  the  contrary,  we  provisionally  forbear  to  discuss
its  origin,  as  a  mystery ;  it  is  only  its  maintenance  which  we
bolieve  to  be  committed  to  the  connection  of  the  course  of
Nature  without  the  intervention  of  new  forces.  And,  just  as
the  laws  according  to  which  our  planetary  system  revolves
were  laid  down  in  a  hitherto  uncontroverted  science,  before  a
credible  conjecture  had  yet  been  made  as  to  the  origin  of  its
present  arrangement,  so  an  independent  theory  of  the  main
tenance  of  life  may  precede  any  views  as  to  its  origination  ;
nay,  it  will  be  from  the  complete  elaboration  of  the  former
that  we  shall  learn  in  what  direction  we  may  hope  for
the  elucidation  of  the  latter.  We  are  actuated  solely  by  the
conviction  that  Nature,  not  only  in  its  import,  but  also  in  the
laws  of  its  economy,  necessarily  forms  a  whole,  whose  various
products  are  distinguished  from  one  another,  not  by  different
laws,  but  by  a  different  mode  of  applying  the  same  system  of
laws.  On  this  assumption  rest  all  the  hopes  which  we  cherish
for  the  progress  of  science,  and  all  the  habits  of  our  practical
life.  The  feeling  of  those  who  recoil  from  the  stupendous  task
of  actually  tracing  back  to  these  beginnings  the  infinite  variety
of  life,  is  one  which  we  fully  share.  Lut  the  magnitude  of
the  required  problem  must  not  induce  us  to  choose  for  its
easier,  but  only  apparent,  solution  principles  of  which  wo
do  not  clearly  discern  even  the  possibility.  Of  such  prin-

74  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  III.

ciples  the  idea  of  a  single  operative  vital  force  is  one.  Tt
is  not  obvious  where  such  a  force  could  be  inherent,  unless  in
the  sum  of  living  parts  and  their  systematic  combinations  ;
it  is  not  obvious  how  it  should  come  to  alter  its  mode  of
operation  and  at  each  moment  to  effect  what  is  necessary,  so  long
as  we  do  not  suppose  that,  by  regular  necessity,  it  becomes
different,  and  works  differently,  under  altered  circumstances,
like  every  force  which  is  the  result  of  a  variety  of  changeable
parts.  That  it  is  associated  with  these  parts  and  dependent
on  the  manner  in  which  they  are  combined,  that  it  only
effects  anything  by  constant  action  and  reaction  witli  the
inorganic  world,  is  the  universal  testimony  of  experience.
We  have  no  right  to  neglect  this  testimony  and  to  conceive
that  which  we  see  only  as  dependent  on  fixed  conditions,  as  a
power  rising  superior  to  these  conditions  in  an  independence
and  freedom  which  it  is  impossible  accurately  to  define.
How  little  the  characteristics  that  have  been  dwelt  on  as
distinctive  attributes  of  the  vital  force  necessitate  any  such
assumption,  we  have  shown  at  more  length.  We  should  be
as  much  at  a  loss  to  give  any  further  reason  for  making  the
assumption,  as  tc  point  to  any  use  which  science  has  hitherto
derived  from  iU

CHAPTER IV.

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.

Constant  and  Periodic  Operations,  and  Progressive  Development — Anomalous
Disturbances— The  Application  of  Chemical  Forces  and  their  Results  as
regards  Life — The  Development  of  Forms  from  formless  Germs — Change  of
Material  ;  its  Significance,  Mode,  and  Organs.

§  l.TX  our  survey  of  the  transformations  which  the  general
-*-  conception  of  Nature-  has  undergone  in  the  course  of
human  history,  we  remarked  ho\v  vain  it  would  he  to  seek  to
apply  the  attractive  idea  of  animating  impulses  to  the  explana
tion  of  the  embodiment  and  conservation  of  individual  pheno
mena  in  the  economy  of  Nature.  "We  saw,  further,  how  from
the  nature  of  its  problems,  physical  investigation  has  necessarily
been  driven  to  regard  every  composite  being  that  developes
itself  in  a  course  of  changing  evolution  as  the  result  of
many  forces,  whose  total  effect  receives  its  definite  form  from
the  mode  in  which  the  subjects  of  those  forces  arc  combined.
Finally,  the  consideration  of  the  phenomena  familiar  to  all  as
the  leading  traits  of  life,  served  to  confirm  our  conviction
that  even  life,  however  immeasurably  it  may  surpass  all  other
existence  in  value  and  in  significance,  yet  does  not  require
us  to  go  back,  for  an  explanation  of  its  connection  and  its
performances,  to  the  hypothesis  of  a  vital  force  of  a  special
nature.  The  more  imperatively  are  we  now  required  to
render  an  account  of  those  peculiar  arrangements  by  which
the  constituent  parts  of  the  living  body  are  enabled  without
the  continual  intervention  of  a  higher  force  to  carry  out  this
complex  process  of  development.  The  more  accurately,
however,  we  compare  the  variety  of  the  phenomena  presented
to  us  with  the  knowledge  we  have  as  yet  acquired  of  their
conditions,  the  less  shall  we  cherish  the  presumptuous  hope  of

76  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

ever  reaching  a  full  solution  of  this  problem.  Over-confident
attempts  to  answer  decisively  every  question  with  the  exceed
ingly  insufficient  means  now  at  our  command,  can  but  confirm
the  opposite  opinion  when  it  infers  from  the  difficulties,
which  it  more  justly  estimates,  that  the  end  is  impracticable,
which  in  spite  of  being  unattainable  must  yet  determine  the
line  of  our  inquiries.  At  the  same  time  our  ignorance  is  not
so  great  but  that  in  the  description  of  particular  vital
processes  we  can  trace  the  mechanical  concatenation  of  effects
for  a  long  way,  and  our  survey  of  the  whole  is  not  so  limited
but  that  we  can  distinguish  some  of  the  fundamental  features
by  which  the  application  of  Nature's  general  means  to  the
ends  of  life  is  distinguished  from  the  other  ways  in  which
we  find  these  made  use  of.

We  see  various  modes  of  occurrence  of  processes  cross  one
another  in  the  living  organism.  Some  operations  last  through
long  intervals  unaltered  and  with  a  uniform  force ;  others
traverse  in  unequal  periods  complete  cycles,  and  return
almost  to  the  same  state  from  which  they  for  a  time  deviated
But  these  constant  or  recurring  motions  are  everywhere
attended  by  another  progressive  evolution,  owing  to  which  the
living  body,  by  an  inherent  law  of  gradual  development,  has
its  outward  figure  and  the  internal  connection  of  its  processes
transformed,  in  order  to  end  with  the  dissolution  that  forms
not  only  the  inevitable,  but  the  naturally  predestined  close  of
its  phenomenal  existence.  But  even  this  progressive  evolu
tion  and  the  regular  sequence  of  its  stages  are  interrupted  at
every  moment  of  life  by  the  variety  of  external  impressions
and  an  equal  variety  of  reactions,  in  which  the  living
organism  sometimes  with  transient  excitement,  sometimes
with  persistent  effort,  moves  both  itself  and  the  objects  of
the  outside  world.  Neither  impressions  nor  movements  are
governed  by  a  fixed  law  as  to  their  times  of  recurrence  or
their  rotation ;  set  at  work  or  in  motion  with  arbitrary
casualness,  they  may  at  first  be  looked  on  merely  as  disturb
ances  of  the  body  and  of  those  arrangements  which  form  the
basis  of  the  invariably  connected  course  of  its  definitely

THE  MECHANISM  UF  LIFE.  77

shaped  development.  Nevertheless,  the  essential  characteristic
of  animal  life  lies  not  in  quiet  steady  development,  but  just
in  the  capacity  of  action  which  at  every  moment  is  able
to  direct  an  excess  of  vital  energy  against  chance  impressions.
Hence  at  least  the  general  possibility  of  these  reactions,  which
could  not  be  singly  foreseen  and  calculated,  must  be  regarded
as  an  essential  feature  of  animal  economy.

AVe  may  easily  ascertain  in  the  inorganic  world  examples
both  of  the  persistent  continuance  of  one  and  the  same  event
and  of  the  complete  cycle  of  a  recurring  development.  In
fact,  for  the  persistence  of  every  simple  motion  of  a  body  no
further  agency  would  be  required  than  the  keeping  away  of
disturbing  causes;  again  the  occurrence  of  a  single  disturb
ance — say,  of  that  attraction  which  draws  one  moving  body
to  another — would  be  sufficient  to  make  its  path  a  curve,
and  but  a  few  more  special  conditions  would  be  needful  to
convert  that  into  the  elliptical  orbit  in  which  the  planet
revolves  round  its  central  body.  This  regular  interchange  of
movements  between  two  bodies  would  be  endlessly  continued
and  repeated,  so  long  as  they  remained  withdrawn  from  all
internal  alterations  in  their  mass  and  forces,  as  well  as  from
all  impressions  from  the  surrounding  world.  But  it  would
be  a  delusion  were  we  to  adduce  these  examples  of  constantly
uniform  or  recurrent  evolution  as  evidence  of  the  ease  with
which  life  also  must  succeed  in  producing  actions  of  a
similar  character.  For,  though  its  activity  also  ultimately
rests  on  the  application  of  the  simple  laws  of  the  conservation
and  composition  of  forces,  yet  on  closer  inspection  we  find
that  the  operations  carried  on  unremittingly  within  the  living
body,  as  well  as  the  constant  assimilation  and  conservation  in
the  particles,  are  effected  by  far  more  complicated  processes
than  could  be  divined  from  the  apparent  simplicity  of  the
result

They  resemble  the  quiet  light  of  a  wax-candle,  whose
uniform  radiance  tells  nothing  of  the  series  of  complicated
operations  by  which  it  is  sustained.  "When  the  first-lighted
part  of  the  wick  entered  into  combination  with  the  oxygen  of

78  r.OOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

the  atmosphere,  it  produced  while  burning  more  heat  than
was  needful  sufficiently  to  warm  the  contiguous  part  to  enable
it  to  enter  into  the  same  combination  with  the  oxygen.  Thus
the  flame  spread  from  this  second  part  to  the  third  and  over  the
whole,  each  point,  by  a  part  of  its  released  heat,  setting  free
the  confined  forces  of  another  so  as  to  bring  it  into  a  similar
blaze.  But  the  flame  would  too  quickly  have  consumed  the
delicate  texture  of  the  threads,  if  another  part  of  the  dis
engaged  heat  had  not  liquefied  the  wax  whose  office  is  to
feed  the  fire.  In  consequence  of  the  capillary  attraction  of
the  wick  the  fluid  mass  mounts  upward,  and,  after  having  by
saturation  prevented  the  texture  of  the  wick  from  being
too  quickly  destroyed,  it  reaches  a  point  through  whose  high
temperature  it  is  itself  kindled  ;  while  the  mounting  current  of
heated  air,  rising  from  the  flame,  is  at  this  point  followed  by
a  fresh  draught  from  below,  that  keeps  up  the  blaze.  Thus
the  molten  iluid,  now  itself  volatilized  by  the  lire,  is  again
emptied  from  the  filled  threads  of  the  wick,  affording  to  the
new  material,  to  whose  melting  it  has  contributed,  free  space
to  continue  the  same  series  of  processes  as  it  moves  upward.

The  apparently  simple  and  uniform  operations  of  the  living
organism  depend  on  similar  arrangements.  Only,  while  the
flume  goes  out  so  soon  as  its  fuel  is  consumed,  in  the  organism
the  connection  of  the  whole  makes  it  possible  for  the  vital
activities  to  be  resumed  afresh.  They  thus  manifest  themselves
not  so  much  as  elemental  processes  which  by  their  uniform
persistence  form  an  abiding  basis  for  the  variations  of  the  others,
but  rather  as  operations  which  the  unity  of  a  wider  and  more
complicated  plan  brings  about,  simple  indeed  in  their  course,
but  refined  and  highly  intricate  in  their  antecedents.  Equally
inadequate  would  be  an  explanation  from  the  analogies  of  the
planetary  revolution,  of  the  periodical  cycles  which  we  see
completed  by  other  movements  of  the  living  organism.  The
pulsations  of  the  heart,  the  rhythmical  contractions  of  the
intestines,  the  cycle  of  respiration,  are  all  processes  having
no  resemblance  to  the  simple  motions  of  detached  bodies.  We
see  here  a  great  number  of  firmly  connected  parts  co-operating

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  7'J

in  joint  movements  that  necessarily  imply  for  their  execution  a
change  in  the  combination  of  the  parts,  and  a  sacrifice  of  some
of  the  conditions  on  which  their  individual  efficacy  depends.
Hence  these  actions  are  subordinated  to  a  more  general  and
comprehensive  scheme,  which  secures  the  repair  of  exhausted
powers  and  the  regular  recurrence  of  the  needful  stimulations.
We  should  look  in  vain  in  the  inorganic  world  for  the
third  of  the  above  -  mentioned  modes  in  which  complex
processes  run  their  course, — progressive  development  through
a  gradation  of  predetermined  states.  It  belongs  exclusively
to  life,  and  appears  in  the  full  beauty  and  purity  of  its
significance  in  the  development  of  plants.  Nevertheless
it  is  not  wholly  useless  to  trace  the  comparatively  im
perfect  anticipations  of  it  which  we  may  find  in  unorganized
existence.  Only  between  two  bodies,  as  we  have  already
indicated,  could  the  reciprocal  action  of  a  circular  planetary
motion  go  on  with  unceasing  regularity  ;  the  addition  of  a
third  would  alter  the  mutual  relations  of  the  two,  and  compel
them  to  move  in  orbits  that  revealed  the  influence  of  external
disturbance.  Only  in  periods  of  considerable  length,  if  at
all,  would  this  system  of  bodies  succeed  in  returning  once
more  to  exactly  the  original  relative  positions,  and  i:i
thence  repeating  its  completed  motion  without  any  modifica
tion.  With  the  number  of  the  active  members  the  difficulty
of  u  rhythmically  recurrent  course  of  changes  will  increase,
and  it  will  require  particularly  favourable  conditions  to  limit
the  mutual  disturbances  to  such  a  minimum  amount  that
they  shall  not  on  the  whole  materially  affect  the  character  of
the  system  and  of  its  motions.  Such  conditions  actually  obtain
in  our  solar  system,  and  chief  among  them  is  the  fact,  that,  with
all  its  variety  of  internal  motions,  it  forms  an  independent  and
isolated  whole,  not  reached  in  any  perceptible  degree  by  the
influences  of  those  parts  cf  the  universe  that  lie  beyond  it,
the  more  distant  fixed  stars.  The  results  would  be  different
if  this  system,  like  the  body  of  the  plant,  were  exposed  to
influences  from  without,  and  like  it  had  all  the  move
ments  which  it  naturally  executes  influenced  and  changed

80  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

by  a  regular  or  irregular  recurrence  of  external  impres
sions.  Let  us  suppose  that  a  system  of  heavenly  bodies
moved  through  a  space  in  which  it  met  with  masses  (dis
tributed  according  to  any  law)  on  which  its  power  of  attrac
tion  could  act ;  now  not  only  would  it  grow,  from  drawing
these  into  the  sphere  of  its  own  movements  and  henceforth
attaching  them  to  itself,  but  further,  by  the  accession  of  these
new  constituents  the  mutual  relations  of  the  prior  ones
would  be  altered,  and  the  motion  of  the  whole  would
constantly  assume  new  forms,  each  one  necessarily  evolved
from  that  immediately  preceding,  and  from  the  effect  of  the
new  conditions  of  the  moment.  Thus  a  regular  gradation  of
states  would  arise,  comparable  to  the  single  successive  phases
of  vital  evolution.  For  the  living  body  is  just  such  a  system
of  parts,  not  secluded  from  external  influences,  but  open  to
them  and  needing  them  for  its  development.  The  ground  of
that  into  which  it  develops  is  not  wholly  contained  in  itself ;
it  requires  not  only  the  afflux  of  the  materials  which  are  to
make  up  its  increasing  figure,  but  also  stimulating  impressions,
which  shall  determine  for  its  own  forces  the  direction  and
order  of  their  manifestations.  Though  apparently  isolated,
the  body  is  yet  but  one  half  of  the  basis  of  life,  while  its
complement  lies  still  without  form  in  the  universal  current
of  the  course  of  Xattire  that  is  surging  up  around  it.

§  2.  The  development  of  life  is  not,  however,  exclusively  thus
determined  ;  we  must  add  a  further  peculiarity,  which  would
serve  broadly  to  distinguish  it  from  such  an  evolutionary
planetary  system  as  we  have  pictured.  The  extensive  application
of  chemical  affinities  and  of  attractions  at  imperceptible  distances
takes  the  place  of  gravitation,  which  pervades  the  universe
and  binds  together  its  most  distant  parts.  The  ordinary  view,
in  regarding  only  the  body  of  the  plant  and  the  animal  as  a
living  connected  whole,  while  it  considers  the  planetary  system
as  a  congeries  of  separate  units,  is  not  without  grounds  for  this
distinction ;  it  coincides  with  that  difference  of  powers,  which
in  both  cases  has  the  most  important  part  in  the  production
of  the  varying  development.  Even  the  planetary  bodies  are

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  81

formed  and  held  together  by  attractions  which  are  efficacious
only  in  close  continuity,  and  disappear  at  finite  distances,
and  incessant  chemical  changes  are  always  transforming  at
least  their  surfaces;  but  these  internal  fluctuations  are  of
no  consequence  as  regards  the  attraction  in  virtue  of  which
each  holds  its  place  as  a  whole  in  the  circle  of  the-  heavenly
bodies.  In  the  living  body,  on  the  other  hand,  weight  tells
everywhere,  so  far  as  is  compatible  with  universal  laws  ;  but,
however  important  and  significant  these  effects  may  bo  in
individual  cases,  they  have  no  pervading  influence  on  the
character  of  the  vital  phenomena.  In  consequence  of  that
attraction  at  a  distance,  whose  efficacy  extends  through  un
measured  regions  of  space,  the  planetary  system  possesses  that
apparently  so  slight,  and  yet  really  so  firm  union  of  parts,
the  amount  of  which  decreases  in  proportion  to  the  distance
between  them  ;  the  living  body,  on  the  other  hand,  through
forces  that  no  longer  act  at  a  short  distance  from  their  starting-
point,  but  overcome  great  resistance  when  the  parts  acting
on  each  other  are  in  immediate  contact,  acquires  that  firm,
compact  structure  by  which  it  invariably  stands  out,  as  a
separate  whole,  from  its  surroundings.  And  this  distinction
is  not  merely  apparent.  The  connection  of  a  planetary
system,  left  to  itself,  may  be  firm  ;  but  as  it  is  the  result
of  forces  acting  at  a  distance,  so  also  it  can  be  shaken  by
such  as  come  from  a  distance,  and  will  show  by  corresponding
fluctuations  the  influence  of  the  slightest  alterations  in  tin-
adjustment  of  the  world  external  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,
the  peculiar  nature  of  its  forces  serves  to  protect  the  living
organism,  which  is  destined  to  be  continually  in  action  ami
reaction  with  the  outer  world ;  from  the  shortness  of  the
distance  at  which  chemical  affinity  and  cohesion  cease  t<»
be  efficacious,  it  is  surrounded  by  a  neutral  zone,  while  these
same  forces  hold  together  its  own  contiguous  parts  so  strongly
as  to  resist  even  actual  violence.  While,  therefore,  the  loosely
compacted  structure  of  a  planetary  system  would  with  admir
able  susceptibility  reflect  in  its  own  variations  the  variations
of  the  rest  of  the  universe,  the  living  organism — herein  of
VOL.  L  *'

BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

tougher  nature — returns  to  the  former  disposition  of  its  parts,
even  after  great  fluctuations,  and  thereby  presents  the  spec
tacle  of  an  unchanging  and  yet  not  rigid,  but  inovcable  figure.
We  would  fain  mention  here  yet  another  advantage  that
accrues  to  the  living  organism  from  the  same  circumstance,
though  it  may  at  first  sight  appear  a  disadvantage.  We  have
become  so  accustomed  to  see  in  the  exceedingly  intimate
mutual  connection  of  the  parts  one  of  the  most  essential  and
wonderful  prerogatives  of  life,  that  it  may  seem  strange  when
we  lay  stress  on  the  absence  of  such  in  a  certain  sense  as  its
real  attribute.  Nevertheless  this  absence  is  real,  and  we  may
easily  convince  ourselves  that  there  lies  in  this  fact,  which  for
particular  ends  is  again  neutralized  by  special  provisions,  a
better  warrant  for  the  continuance  of  life  than  would  lie  in
the  excess  of  pervading  connection,  which  we  do  not  find.
Were  all  the  parts  of  the  living  body  directly  connected  by
reciprocal  actions,  so  that  every  slight  change  of  the  one  must
be  reflected  on  all  the  rest,  there  would  be  here  an  abundant
source  of  endless  disturbances  of  the  whole,  which  would
require  equally  complex  arrangements  for  their  counteraction.
For  it  would  not  always  be  possible  to  discharge  the  disturbance
by  means  of  its  own  results,  and,  even  where  this  was  done,
the  very  instability  thereby  introduced  into  the  whole  would
be  an  evil,  if  it  could  not  be  incidentally  applied  to  the
attainment  of  other  ends.  In  the  planetary  system  we  see
the  result  of  this  pervading  reciprocal  action,  seeing  that  no
single  planet  can  describe  its  orbit  as  it  would  describe  it  but
for  the  disturbances  produced  by  the  attraction  of  the  others.
The  living  body,  by  the  peculiar  structure  of  its  nervous
system,  establishes  a  closer  connection  of  the  greatest  fineness
where  and  as  it  is  best  adapted  to  the  operations  of  life  ;  but
each  single  part,  from  the  narrow  working  sphere  of  the  forces
which  are  chiefly  active  in  it,  coheres  with  but  few  of  its
next  neighbours  so  closely  that  every  state  of  the  one  must
be  communicated  to  the  other  with  perceptible  effect.  Hence
single  groups  of  parts  are  left  free  to  develop  their  form,
their  texture,  and  their  composition  with  a  certain  tenacious

TUB  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  83

independence,  and,  undisturbed  by  passing  fluctuations  of  the
p'st,  to  execute  operations  on  whose  regular  course  the  coher
ence  of  the  whole  depends.

It  is  now  hardly  needful  to  enlarge  on  the  peculiar  results
that  are  brought  about  for  life  by  the  application  of  chemical
processes.  The  celestial  motions  are  those  of  uniformly
existing  masses  ;  mechanical  skill  does  indeed  make  use  of
chemical  forces  to  bring  about  the  moving  impetus,  but  it  at
the  same  time  allows  the  kind  of  action  to  be  determined  by
;i  rigid  framework  of  unvarying  parts  ;  life  alone  presents  a
development,  the  subjects  of  which  not  only  increase  in  bulk,
but  during  their  activity  undergo  a  previously  determined
alteration  of  nature.  In  this  case  therefore,  far  more  properly
than  in  the  other,  every  subsequent  result  is  conditioned  by
the  immediately  preceding  state.  In  the  machine  too  the
subsequent  operation  is  successful  only  in  virtue  of  the  prior
on.-,  that  moved  the  parts  of  the  fabric  into  the  required  posi
tion;  but  there  remain  alike  in  the  one  case  and  in  the  other
the  same  ctticient  masses  and  the  same  forces ;  the  action  of
the  whole  is  hence  limited  to  a  perhaps  highly  complex,  but  a
recurring  and  not  increasing  series  of  results.  In  the  living
body  every  chemical  change  that  takes  place  sets  to  work  forces
not  before  in  existence  and  brings  others  to  a  pause;  thus  at
each  moment  there  is  laid  for  subsequent  development  a  new
foundation,  such  as  gives  occasion  sometimes  for  a  continuance
of  prior  states,  sometimes  for  an  evolution  into  new  ones,
sometimes  by  a  combination  of  both,  for  expansion  into  a  far
fuller  manifestation  of  character  and  activity.

AVe  must  keep  in  view  this  gradual  laying  again  of  founda
tions,  if  we  will  understand  the  way  in  which  the  organism
originates  from  its  germ,  without  requiring  the  continual  inter
vention  of  a  fashioning  power.  Experience  indeed  makes  it  so
highly  probable  as  to  be  almost  certain  that  in  the  present  course
of  Nature  no  organism  is  the  direct  product  of  a  combination  of
elementary  substances  ;  only  in  propagation  by  means  of  what
is  similar  is  the  chain  of  life  carried  on,  holding  together  con
tinuously  in  the  seed  and  the  egg  the  definitely  adjusted  sum

84  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

of  parts  from  whose  excitation  by  external  stimuli  the  series
of  vital  phenomena  may  be  again  evolved.  Even  this  tradi
tion,  however,  often  seems  to  us  too  faint,  this  point  of  view
too  simple,  to  let  us  suppose  that  in  it  alone  are  contained  the
conditions  of  the  subsequently  renewed  development.  Then
we  forget  that  it  is  really  a  long  process  that  leads  through
countless  agencies  from  the  invisible  germ  to  the  perfect
flower  and  fruit,  and  that  at  each  stage  of  this  course
possibilities  arise,  which  were  absent  in  the  preceding  one.
We  are  very  far  from  being  in  a  position  to  write  a  history  of
these  transformations  and  of  the  laws  according  to  which
they  actually  succeed  one  another  in  a  definite  series  in  the
development  of  life  ;  but  we  are  able  in  some  measure  to
take  account  of  the  resources  of  which  Xature  can  here  avail
herself,  and  through  whose  agency  the  great  chasm  between
the  commencement  and  the  termination  of  the  development
is  lessened  by  division  into  a  number  of  intermediate  stages.

Even  if  nothing  at  first  lay  before  us  but  a  fluid  with  its
ingredients  mixed  in  accurately  fixed  proportions,  without
any  solid  germ  being  yet  distinguishable  as  the  basis  of  the
infant  organism,  the  first  chemical  influences  of  the  environ
ment  might  yet  be  sufficient  to  produce  this  germ.  One
constituent  would  become  detached  by  coagulation,  and  not
only  is  there  a  definite  form  corresponding  to  the  nature  of
each  substance,  which  it  assumes  when  left  to  itself,  but,
under  certain  circumstances,  the  maximum  size  of  the  figure
may  be  determined  which  its  forces  will  allow  of  its  holding
together.  Accordingly  this  solidifying  substance  could  fall
into  a  fixed  number  of  parts,  occupying  the  relative  position
which  sets  them  in  equilibrium  with  all  the  actual  conditions.
Whether,  however,  the  first  solid  germ  of  the  subsequent
development  be  given  thus  or  through  the  existing  structure
of  the  seed, — we  need  nothing  more  than  a  slight  difference
of  its  arrangement  in  different  directions  to  enable  us  to  see
how  the  development  of  the  next  stage,  bringing  to  bear
identical  external  stimuli  on  these  variously  constructed  parts,
increases  their  dissimilarity,  and  thus  prepares  for  the  rise  of

THE  MECHANISM  OK  LIFE.  85

various  and  widely  differing  forms  from  an  apparently  similar
U-^i  lining.  Each  chemical  transmutation  that  takes  place
will,  iirst  of  all,  involve  the  arrangement  in  space  correspond
ing  to  the  alteration  in  the  substance  ;  but  every  change  of
conformation  thus  brought  about  will  likewise  help  to  con
dition  the  subsequent  effects  of  the  stimuli,  by  preventing
(hem  from  reaching  parts  now  rendered  inaccessible,  con
centrating  them  upon  others  left  open,  and  so  prescribing
tolerably  well  marked  lines  to  the  subsequent  development.

As,  however,  every  chemical  composition  entails  a  fixed
shape,  so  also  the  acquired  shape  brings  about  new  habits  of
chemical  action.  In  our  workshops  we  seek  to  prevent  the
vessel  from  sharing  in  the  chemical  vicissitudes  of  its  contents  ;
in  the  living  body  the  tissues  do  not  form  merely  an  uncon
cerned  stage  on  which  other  substances  come  into  reciprocal
action,  but,  by  their  degree  of  density,  their  form,  and  the  forces
of  attraction  or  repulsion  which  they  bring  to  bear  on  their
content,  they  exert  their  share  of  influence  on  the  course  of
the  transmutation  of  substances.  ]>y  means  of  this  gradually
advancing  development  of  the  vessel  in  which  they  are
contained,  the  nutritive  lluids  are  elaborated  for  the  pro
duction  of  more  delicate  compounds,  and  a  more  and
more  definitely  marked  field  is  opened  up  for  the  action  of
external  vital  stimuli.  "We  must  not  despise  any  of  these
co-operating  elements,  and,  fully  as  we  are  convinced  that
none  of  all  these  processes  of  vital  evolution  can  escape  from
the  universal  laws  of  physical  and  chemical  action,  we  can
have  but  little  expectation  of  explaining  with  these  laws  as
hitherto  ascertained  the  immense  complexity  with  which  the
constant  changes  in  the  form,  the  blending,  and  the  mode  of
access  of  the  external  stimuli  here  act  on  one  another.  Least
of  all  can  we  venture  to  hope  that  human  art  will  ever
succeed  in  producing  by  imitation  any  essential  constituent
of  a  living  body.  For,  while  it  is  certain  that  no  living
product  could  have  come  into  being  by  means  of  any  other
forces  than  those  of  the  general  course  of  Nature,  no  less
necessary  to  its  origin  was  the  fixed  adjustment  of  these

86  BOOK  I. CIIAPTEH  IV.

forces  and  their  subjects,  which  could  alone  determine  the
character  of  the  subsequent  product.  This  adjustment  we
never  see  spontaneously  reproduced  ;  Nature  has  entrusted
its  maintenance  to  continual  transmission  by  propagation.
Any  hope  of  artificially  creating  life  anew,  would  imply  the
presumptuous  belief  that  with  fewer  and  more  insufficient
means  and  in  shorter  time  we  could  produce  that  which
Nature  herself  can  execute  only  by  means  of  a  long  course  of
development  and  the  introduction  of  forces  already  organically
systematized.

Now  the  growing  capacities  of  the  different  parts  of  a
system  thus  developed  come  to  an  end  at  different  times ;
some  have  gone  through  the  series  of  transformations  of  which,
under  existing  circumstances,  they  were  capable,  while  others
are  still  in  the  middle  of  their  course  of  development.  Thus
the  stem  of  the  plant,  as  it  turns  to  wood,  gradually  with
draws  from  participation  in  its  further  development,  but  it
continues  to  serve  the  whole  with  its  physical  properties  of
solidity  and  rigidity,  assigning  to  the  parts  that  have  remained
mobile  the  stage  of  their  activity.  Thus  in  endlessly  various
ways  the  development,  as  it  goes  on,  makes  for  itself  new
supports,  from  which  it  extends  further ;  but  at  the  same
time  it  thereby  creates  for  itself  limits  which  confine  the
possibility  of  action  to  definite  forms,  and  thus  bring  about
either  the  persistence  of  a  prevailing  type  of  growth,  or  the
final  expiry  of  life  and  the  complete  extinction  of  all  oppor
tunities  of  further  work.  "VYe  find  all  these  characteristics,
that  compose  for  us  the  image  of  a  self-contained  development,
connected  with  the  employment  of  chemical  affinities,  and  the
application  of  molecular  forces  that  act  only  under  condition
of  contact.

§  3.  The  life  of  the  plant,  the  most  distinct  example  of
this  development,  has  as  its  sole  task  the  perfecting  of  its
own  form.  Did  the  outer  world  yield  it  substances  all
ready  to  be  made  use  of  for  that  structure,  it  would  have
nothing  to  do  but  to  absorb  them,  and  there  would  be  no
necessity  that  in  return  it  should  before  its  total  destruction

THE  MECHANISM  OP  LIFE.  87

render  back  substances  to  the  outer  world  ;  those  once
absorbed  would  form  its  abiding  constituents.  But  it  does
not  find  this  ready  material,  and  is  compelled  to  produce  it
from  its  elements.  During  this  process  one  part  of  the  used
up  material  may  drop  out  as  an  unprofitable  incidental  product
and  be  restored  to  the  outer  world.  Other  substances,  such
as  the  great  bulk  of  the  water  absorbed,  circulate  through
the  vegetable  structure,  not  to  become  part  of  it  as  con
stituents,  but,  as  means  of  detachment,  to  secure  the
mobility  of  the  more  active  parts  ;  they  too  return  to  the
outer  world  after  they  have  done  their  work ;  lastly,  much
that  was  valuable  at  certain  periods  of  growth,  by  becom
ing  dried  up  or  withered,  is  detached  from  the  whole  after
the  fulfilment  of  its  oflice.  But  we  have  no  reason  to
suppose  that  substances  which  have  once  entered  the  solid
structure  of  the  plant,  are  subjected  to  a  repeated  renewal.
The  animal  body,  as  is  well  known,  is  different  in  this  respect,
and,  though  all  doubts  as  to  the  extent  of  its  transmutation
of  substance  are  not  removed,  it  is  yet  certain  that  a  great
part  of  its  bulk  is  constantly  engaged  in  decomposition  and
renovation  by  fresh  accretions.  This  fact,  into  the  extent
of  which  we  shall  hereafter  inquire,  we  have  meanwhile
to  consider  in  its  significance  with  regard  to  that  feature  of
animal  life  with  which  it  unquestionably  stands  in  the  closest
connection,  namely,  with  the  operations  executed  by  the
animal  body  without  any  fixed  law  of  recurrence  and  suc
cession,  in  addition  to  the  development  and  preservation  of  its
own  form.

Xone  of  the  countless  impressions  with  which  the  outer
world  is  continually  besieging  the  senses  at  random,  and  tin-
conversion  of  which  into  sensation  is  the  task  of  the  animal
soul,  can  bo  received  by  the  body  without  the  receptive
organs  undergoing  a  change  of  the  state  in  which  their
active  parts  are  at  the  moment  of  rest.  None  of  the
equally  numerous  movements  by  which  the  internal  life  of
the  animal  reacts  on  these  stimulations,  can  be  performed
without  the  great  change  in  the  position  of  the  limbs  being

88  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

prepared  for  by  a  countless  multitude  of  changes  in  the
relative  situation  of  their  minutest  particles.  All  these
processes,  seeing  that  they  take  place  not  like  predetermined
states  of  development  in  a  systematic  sequence,  but  outside  of
all  mathematical  laws,  can  be  regarded  as  nothing  else  than
disturbances  of  the  relations  imposed  on  the  constituents  of
the  body  by  the  type  of  its  species.  Did  we  choose  to
indulge  in  speculations  that  have  no  demonstrable  connection
with  reality,  we  might  perhaps  imagine  the  bodily  structure
F-O  designed  that  its  organs,  after  each  of  these  disturbances,
returned  with  perfect  elasticity  to  its  former  state.  Lut  we
find  this  supposition  but  slightly  justified  by  experience.
The  cohesive  forces  of  the  parts  of  solid  tissues  are  indeed
strong  enough  to  overcome  temporary  displacements.  The
exhaustion  of  the  senses,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fatigue  of  the
muscles,  which  after  a  certain  duration  of  uninterrupted  labour
inevitably  supervenes,  are  enough  to  convince  us  that  this,
though  perhaps  conceivable,  does  not  at  any  rate  actually
occur,  and  that,  with  such  means  as  are  supplied  by  the  ordi
nary  course  of  Xature,  life  could  not  form  any  organs  that
would  not  be  gradually  worn  out  by  the  reciprocal  action
involved  in  the  stimulations  designed  for  it.  But  it  is  one  of
the  ends  of  life  to  obliterate  almost  everywhere  the  traces
of  prior  impressions,  and  to  bring  back  the  organs  to  a  state
in  which  they  shall  undertake  newly -imposed  tasks  quite
unshackled  and  imweakcncd  by  the  kind  and  amount  of  the
operations  which  they  have  already  performed.  The  question
is,  how  this  need  of  a  constant  repair  of  capacities  can  be
most  simply  satisfied.

Instead,  however,  of  imagining  remote  possibilities,  such  as
some  overlooked  circumstance  would  too  easily  convert  into
impossibilities,  we  proceed  to  point  out  in  the  unremitting
change  of  material  the  simplest  means  of  satisfying  this
need,  and  of  its  actual  employment  we  are,  moreover,  informed
\>\  experience.  For  life  to  take  perishable  materials  into  its
service,  and  embody  its  phenomena  in  ever-changing  masses,
was  the  means  by  which  it  was  most  easy  to  maintain  a

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  81)

normal  condition  in  the  struggle  with  incalculable  disturbances.
Should  slight  and  delicate  impressions  of  the  outer  world
possess  a  power  of  stimulating  the  organs  of  the  body,  in
particular  should  minute  distinctions  of  external  stimuli  be
separated  for  our  apprehension  by  perceptible  differences  in
their  effects,  or  movements  in  every  possible  gradation  of
strength,  duration,  and  velocity  be  capable  of  being  executed,
the  internal  states  of  the  instruments  adapted  for  all  these
operations  would  be  strongly  susceptible  of  injury.  This
necessary  property  was  bound  up  with  the  transient  nature  of
the  chemical  composition,  and  living  Nature  escaped  from  this
consequence  not  by  withholding  through  higher  forces  the
disturbed  substances  from  the  decomposition  to  which,  by  the
universal  laws  of  chemical  processes,  they  would  naturally  fall
a  prey  ;  it  allowed  the  disordered  to  perish,  while  holding  fast
the  necessary  foundations  for  the  restoration  of  that  which  had
been  used  up.

lint  not  only  that  which  lias  been  destroyed  by  its  activity,
also  that  which  has  remained  inert  beyond  the  period  during
which  its  composition  could  subsist,  is  left  to  its  fate,  and
advances  towards  decomposition  only  less  swiftly  than  the
former.  Through  this  proceeding  Nature  avoids  the  necessity
of  meeting  each  single  disturbance  with  a  remedial  reaction
suited  to  its  nature  and  degree,  and  thereby  it  escapes  nume
rous  disadvantages,  that  seem  hardly  separable  from  any  other
procedure.  Besides,  it  could  display  reactions  of  such  a  kind
only  if  the  disturbance  itself  brought  them  on  with  mechanical
necessity,  and  were  thus  counteracted  by  a  part  of  its  own
consequences.  Lut  such  a  reaction,  bursting  forth  only  at  the
moment  of  need,  would  recur  as  irregularly  as  the  disturbance
by  which  it  was  excited ;  it  would  therefore  itself  be  a  new
disturbance,  such  as  would  not  occur,  except  under  especially
favourable  conditions,  without  injury  to  the  connection  of  the
whole.  The  case  would  be  similar,  if  the  constituents  of  the
body  were  in  themselves  unchangeable,  and  only  became
decomposed  when  shattered  by  the  impressions  of  external
stimuli  and  their  after  effects,  requiring  restoration  immediately

90  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

after  such  stimuli,  but  needing  none  during  the  intervals
between  them.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sum  of  the  effective
parts  is  engaged  in  a  perpetual  motion  of  flux  and  reflux,  this
current  is  always  carrying  oil'  the  debris  of  decomposition,  and
constantly  laying  new  foundations  for  further  action,  and  thus
guards  the  vital  whole  against  the  sudden  and  violent  con
vulsions  that  any  defence  improvised  at  the  moment  of  need
would  entail.  It  even  ceases  to  be  needful  to  produce  for
every  disturbance  the  remedy  corresponding  to  its  kind  and
degree ;  instead  of  the  open  conflict  against  the  very  various
effects  of  impressions,  life  practises  the  stratagem  of  perpetual
retreat,  for  by  working  from  the  first  with  varying  instru
mentality  it  gives  up  everything  which,  shaken  by  external
assaults,  only  rushes  more  quickly  towards  the  decomposition
for  which  it  was  at  any  rate  destined.  Of  course  we  now  find
in  the  living  body  express  provisions  for  causing  reactions  to
succeed  impressions  at  particular  moments,  which  apparently
are  adjusted  to  the  duration,  the  kind,  and  the  degree  of  these
stimulations ;  but  even  the  cOicacy  of  these  means,  of  which
we  shall  have  occasion  later  to  speak,  is  after  all  only  rendered
possible  by  this  continual  and  general  flux  of  the  change  of
substance.

On  closer  consideration,  however,  we  have  no  demonstrable
right  to  call  this  flux  quite  general,  and  it  is  to  exaggerate
the  perishableness  of  the  animal  body  to  suppose  that  we  can
assign  periods  within  which  its  whole  bulk  has  undergone
transformation  by  change  of  material.  The  substances  produced
by  organic  chemical  processes  are  not  all  so  easily  disturbed
in  their  composition  as  (misled  by  the  striking  sight  of  the
decay  of  some)  we  are  apt  to  imagine.  AVe  are  familiar  with
the  durability  of  wood,  bones,  sinewrs,  and  skin,  and  make
manifold  use  of  it ;  we  are  familiar,  on  the  other  hand,  with
the  often  speedy  effect  of  weather  on  stone,  which,  it  seemed,
would  have  been  much  more  durable.  It  is  not  quite  decided
whether  the  constituents  whose  coherence  is  strong  undergo
and  require  during  life  any  considerable  amount  of  repair  :
it  is  even  doubtful  whether  many  others,  which  we  see

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  91

rapidly  decomposed  after  death,  would  not  be  preserved  for
a  long  time  during  life  in  virtue  of  the  more  favourable  cir
cumstances  under  which  they  then  exist.  Lastly,  in  regard  to
many  substances  we  know  not  the  kind  of  renewal  which  they
undergo,  and  are  ignorant  whether  individual  and  complete
elements  of  form,  such  as  the  fibres  of  the  nerves  and  muscles,
are  preserved  as  wholes  and  undergo  perpetual  renovation
only  in  their  infinitesimal  particles,  or  whether  they  too  under
certain  circumstances  full  to  pieces  and  are  replaced  by
perfect  ones.  Least  of  all,  finally,  can  we  determine  the
amount  and  velocity  of  the  waste  and  renewal  undergone  by
particular  structures  under  the  ordinary  circumstances  of
healthy  life.  In  spite  of  this  defectiveness  of  our  knowledge
we  can,  however,  fill  up  the  picture  of  tho  change  of  substance
by  the  certainly  correct  supposition  that  the  decay  and  inter
change  of  the  constituents,  should  it  be  universal,  at  any  rate
proceeds  with  very  various  degrees  of  velocity,  and  that  at
every  moment  a  considerable  stock  of  constituents  maintains
iUelf  with  a  iixed  or  but  slowly  changing  mass  in  permanent
modes  of  combination,  and  uninterruptedly  presents  a  regula
tive  nucleus  for  the  new  formation  of  the  other  constituents
which  circulate  around  it  with  greater  capacity  of  decomposi
tion  and  more  rapid  changes.

It  remains  for  the  future  to  decide  whether  this  current
lias  a  perfectly  motionless  ground,  and  to  what  extent.  Our
ordinary  idea  is,  of  course,  that  the  parts  of  the  body  are  like
the  stones  of  a  building,  which,  by  their  unceasing  forces  and
their  adjustment  given  once  for  all,  perform  their  function  in
a  state  of  rest,  and  need  motion  only  in  order  to  overcome  the
disturbances  which  threaten  the  whole,  by  an  elastic  return
to  their  former  positions.  l>ut  it  may  very  well  be  that  the
change  of  material  serves  life  not  only  by  continually  restoring
the  old  fabric,  so  that  it  might  be  dropped  if  there  were  any
means  of  preserving  the  organic  form  without  it ;  that,  on  the
contrary,  the  processes  of  constant  forming  and  reforming,
themselves  yield  those  motive  shocks  which  life  requires  for
the  fulfilment  of  its  development — just  as  the  burning  coal —

92  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

not  through  what  it  was  or  through  what  it  is  to  be,  but  through
the  motion  of  the  transition  itself,  the  burning — generates  the
heat  that  affords  the  first  impelling  agency  for  the  action  of
the  machine.  But  we  are  very  far  from  being  able  to  carry
out  this  thought  further.  So  accustomed  are  we  in  processes
of  nutrition  and  excretion  to  think  only  of  the  acquisition  or
getting  rid  of  useful  or  pernicious  material,  that  the  question
lias  as  yet  been  little  raised  whether  here  the  process  itself
and  the  excitation  of  forces  effected  by  it  is  not  sometimes  of
greater  value  than  the  shifting  of  the  substances  themselves,
which  here  and  there  perhaps  form  only  the  indifferent  material,
in  whose  elaborations  those  excitations  arise,  and  can  be  main
tained.  Only  in  one  case  has  even  science  as  yet  adopted
this  mode  of  thinking ;  it  has  indicated  the  temporary  appro
priation  of  a  great  multitude  of  substances  by  the  organism
as  means  to  the  production  of  heat,  which  originates  in  their
chemical  alteration,  and  through  the  communication  of  which
to  the  tissues  of  the  body  the  essential  task  of  the  absorbed
masses  is  discharged.

§  4.  After  we  have  thus  undertaken  to  indicate  the  signifi
cance  for  the  general  ends  of  life  of  this  perpetual  trans
formation  of  the  body,  we  would  fain  complete  the  picture  by
a  description  of  the  definite  chemical  processes  from  whose
systematic  interaction  the  regular  change  of  material  proceeds.
The  spirit  of  inquiry  has,  with  the  utmost  ingenuity  and
industry,  in  recent  times  applied  itself  to  these  questions ;
but  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena  and  the  difficulty  of
investigating  them  is  so  great,  that  from  the  multitude  of
valuable  individual  discoveries  that  must  be  overlooked  in
our  general  survey,  hardly  more  than  a  few  more  compre
hensive  results  have  been  gained,  which  can  defy  any  fear
of  repeated  alteration  from  the  farther  advance  of  investi
gation.

So  far  as  we  are  acquainted  with  organic  life,  we  find
figured  masses  everywhere  composed  of  various  chemical
combinations  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen.
None  of  these  peculiar  combinations  can  be  proved  to  be  pro-

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  93

duced  spontaneously,  without  an  organic  germ  or  some  remnant
of  decomposing  matter  forming  the  first  nucleus  through
M'hose  assimilative  power  the  suhstances  everywhere  present
in  the  atmosphere  might  be  condensed  into  a  new  growing
structure.  The  plant  is  able,  with  the  means  afforded  by  its
organization,  to  combine  oxygen  and  hydrogen  in  the  pro
portions  in  which  they  form  water,  with  various  quantities  of
carbon,  and  thereby  to  produce  a  series  of  substances,  the
carbo-hydrates,  from  one  of  which,  cellulose,  are  composed  the
delicate  walls  of  its  cells  and  the  whole  framework  of  its
structure,  while  others,  as  sugar  and  starch,  are  contained  in
it  in  solution  or  deposit,  as  means  of  further  growth.  The
conversions  of  these  substances  and  the  increase  to  which
they  minister,  seem,  however,  to  be  possible  only  witli  the
co-operation  of  another  group  of  chemical  combinations,  which
add  nitrogen  to  the  former  ingredients,  and,  on  account  of  the
resemblance  of  their  character  to  animal  albumen,  are  com
prehended  under  the  name  of  albuminous  bodies  or  protein.
These  occur,  like  the  fatty  ingredients  of  oils,  widely  diffused
in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  and  by  means  of  the  vegetable
nutrition  to  which,  directly  or  indirectly,  all  animal  organiza
tion  is  limited,  they  pass  over  into  the  animal  body,  whose
vital  processes  are  incapable  of  condensing  the  simple  elements
which  external  Nature  affords  into  organically  available  com
binations.  Thus  the  vegetable  kingdom,  in  this  too  a  pre
paratory  stage  for  the  animal  world,  offers  to  the  latter  its
constituents  in  all  essential  particulars  already  formed,  leaving
to  the  peculiar  activities  of  each  species  to  elaborate  them
according  to  its  needs.

The  bird  about  to  be  hatched  must  have  produced  out  of
the  albumen,  and  the  albuminous  and  oily  ingredients  of  the
yolk,  all  the  tissues  as  yet  contained  in  its  body;  from  milk,
which,  along  with  albuminous  and  fatty  substances,  contains
further  a  considerable  quantity  of  sugar,  the  young  mammal,
long  limited  solely  to  this  form  of  nourishment,  must  be
able  to  produce  the  various  structures  required  by  the  plan
of  its  species;  finally,  the  blood,  in  which  all  these  sub-

04  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

stances  recur,  must  be  the  source  of  supply  of  the  continual
reparation  of  all  the  parts  of  the  tissues  that  are  consumed
by  use.  Hence  the  albuminous  substances  are  undoubtedly
to  be  regarded  as  the  foundation  of  all  those  nitrogenous
compounds  which  we  find  approaching  one  another  in  the
quantitative  proportions  of  their  composition  in  flesh,
cellular  tissue,  cartilage,  hair,  feathers,  horns,  while  in
appearance,  hardness,  solidity,  and  ductility  they  differ  widely
from  one  another.  But  it  would  be  vain,  in  the  present
state  of  the  investigation,  to  attempt  to  trace  the  chemical
processes  by  which  the  common  material  is  worked  up  into
each  of  these  peculiar  forms.  Those  parts  retain  with  least
alteration  the  original  character  of  albumen,  which  most
energetically  serve  the  ends  of  the  organism  by  their  own
activity, — the  axis  cylinder  of  the  nerves,  the  substance  of
the  brain.  In  respect  of  composition  the  fibrous  substance
of  the  muscles  is  also  similar,  but  its  destination  for  vital
contractile  power  seems  to  have  necessitated  a  different  dis
position  of  the  infinitesimal  particles,  or  an  alteration  of  the
structure  which  is  still  inscrutable  by  us.  A  further  trans
formation  is  to  be  seen  in  the  tissues  which  become  glutinous
by  steady  boiling,  and  which  are  used  to  form  the  cartilagi
nous  and  dermic  bases,  partition-walls,  and  ligaments,  which
support,  enclose,  and  unite  the  vitally  active  parts.  The
last  and  most  distant  links  in  this  chain  of  substances
are  the  tougher,  drier,  horny  and  feathery  fabrics,  which
develop  themselves  with  the  utmost  variety  of  form  especi
ally  in  outer  coverings.  None  of  the  carbo-hydrates,  which,
by  vegetable  nutrition,  are  conveyed  to  the  animal  body,
has  any  share  in  the  formation  of  the  tissues  in  the  higher
species  of  the  animal  kingdom;  their  office  may  consist  in
the  generation  of  heat,  which  they  effect  by  means  of  their
slow  combustion,  with  the  inhaled  oxygen,  and  in  a  number
of  subsidiary  operations,  with  which  they  take  part  in  the
chemical  transformations  of  the  other  substances.  Of  greater
importance  seem  to  be  the  fatty  elements,  which  are  not
merely  useful  from  their  physical  properties  in  keeping  up

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  95

heat  and  diminishing  friction,  but  necessary  as  essential
elements  of  the  chemical  composition  of  some  structures  and
tliu  interaction  of  others.  Many  other  inorganic  substances
— metals  and  salts  of  the  alkalis  and  earths — are  along  with
the  albuminous  bodies  used  by  the  organism  to  establish
particular  physical  properties  of  its  tissues ;  others  seem  only
to  traverse  it,  in  order  to  exert  favourable  influences  of  various
kinds  on  the  course  of  the  change  of  substance.  If  we  are
little  acquainted  with  the  progressive  formation  of  the  con
stituent  parts  of  the  body,  we  are  equally  in  the  dark  as  to
the  retrogressive  conversion  by  which  they  are  gradually  pre
pared  for  death.  A  very  large  number  early  attain  a  stable
equilibrium  of  internal  composition,  and  these  structures,  drying
up,  are  thrown  off  by  the  bod}-  in  largish  masses,  and  without
decomposition  of  form,  c.y.  the  hair,  the  nails,  and  the  covering
of  the  epidermis,  which  is  constantly  scaling  off.  Others,
through  the  activity  of  peculiar  organs,  undergo  a  transfor
mation  still  little  understood,  after  which  they  leave  the
body  as  complex  structures,  such  as  mucus  and  gall,  and  the
organic  constituents  of  urine,  partly  as  they  are,  partly  dis
solved  in  watery  media ;  another  very  considerable  residuum
of  this  decomposition,  so  little  known  in  detail,  is  carbonic
acid,  which  is  ejected  by  expiration  in  the  form  of  a  gas,
united  with  aqueous  vapour.  Among  all  the  individual  sub
stances  that  circulate  through  the  body,  oxygen,  perhaps,  lias
most  to  do  in  gradually  dissolving  the  nnion  of  the  elements
in  the  organic  constituents  by  its  preponderant  affinity,  and
bringing  back  their  originally  varied  composition  to  simpler
forms,  more  resembling  those  of  inorganic  matter,  in  which
the  substances,  having  become  more  soluble,  as  they  fall  to
pieces,  at  last  quit  the  limits  of  the  body.  If  in  former
times  oxygen  was  looked  on  as  the  special  awakener  and
bringer  of  life,  we  may  now,  without  denying  that  it«
powerful  interference,  even  as  a  generative  force,  can  set
up  conditions  of  vital  activities,  find  another  and  an  equally
important  part  of  its  functions  in  the  power  of  slow  de
struction  with  which  it  removes  the  obstacles  to  life,  di8-

96  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  IV.

missing,  by  more  complete  decomposition,  the  masses  that
have  become  unfit  for  use  from  among  those  which  are  still
vigorous.

Lastly,  a  peculiar  importance  for  the  sum  of  the  vital
operations  is  possessed  by  water,  which  we  find  circulating
in  extraordinary  quantities  through  plants  and  the  animal
body.  The  great  proportion  of  chemical  interactions  are
determined  by  it  as  a  solvent;  on  its  fluidity  depends  the
possibility  of  the  circulation  and  of  the  uninterrupted  distribu
tion  of  nutritive  material ;  on  its  capacity  to  absorb,  to  conduct,
and  by  evaporation  to  limit  heat,  depends  the  equilibrium
of  temperature  requisite  for  the  continuance  of  the  opera
tions  of  the  living  body.  Xo  less  essentially  does  it  enter
into  the  compounding  of  the  organic  constituents ;  from  its
presence,  and  its  peculiar  affinity  with  them,  the  animal
tissues  acquire  that  moisture,  and  consequently  that  pliability,
elasticity,  and  ductility,  by  which  they  are  distinguished  alike
from  inorganic  matter,  and  from  their  own  friability  and
rigidity  after  they  have  become  dried.  In  no  inorganic  sub
stance  is  the  relation  of  water  to  the  solid  part  of  quite
the  same  peculiar  kind  which  we  find  here,  and  which  allows
us  to  speak  of  juices  in  the  living,  but  never  in  the  lifeless
body.  The  crystallizing  salt,  after  having  made  over  the
greater  part  of  its  solvent  to  evaporation,  and  absorbed  a
smaller  quantity  of  the  water  into  its  chemical  composition,
appears  dry,  and  its  particles  have  taken  up  fixed  relative
positions.  A  part  of  the  surrounding  atmospheric  moisture
may,  indeed,  become  hygroscopically  condensed  in  it ;  but
this  absorption  of  water  only  disturbs  its  adjustment,  without
the  separated  parts  having  passed  through  that  state  of  tough
softness  and  elastic  ductility  acquired  by  all  the  substances
used  for  the  proper  structure  of  the  animal  body  through  their
peculiar  affinity  for  water.  In  this  way,  doubtless,  are  deter
mined  the  special  shaping  impulses  of  organic  Nature,  which
are  so  widely  different  from  the  rigidity  of  crystallization,
that  on  the  whole  but  few  organic  substances  are  capable  of
this  kind  of  form,  and  those  which  do  actually  exhibit  it  are

THE  MECHANISM  OF  LIFE.  97

by  their  very  receptivity  rendered  unfit  for  the  constructive
needs  of  the  living  body.

^  .".  We  are  acquainted  with  no  organic  juice  capable  of
urrowth  that  presents  an  absolutely  homogeneous  fluidity,  and  is
without  microscopically  small  punctiform  granules,  the  forma
tion  and  composition  of  which  cannot  be  traced  further.  They
can  have  originated  only  from  the  coagulation  of  the  fluid
elements,  and  they  increase  either  by  the  continued  accretion
of  homogeneous  coagulating  masses,  or  from  the  already
detached  granule  collecting  about  itself  through  chemical
elective  affinity  other  substances  different  from  it.  The  in
crease  of  this  nucleus,  whether  homogeneous  or  consisting
of  different  chemical  combinations,  never  exceeds  very  small
microscopic  dimensions,  but  even  within  these  limits  a  second
formative  process  takes  place,  that  of  the  delicate,  transparent
structureless  skin,  that  forms  round  the  nucleus,  and  with  it
produces  the  closed  iigure  of  a  cell,  with  its  interior  filled
with  fluid  round  the  nucleus.  In  what  manner  this  delicate
membrane  is  formed  by  the  forces  of  the  nucleus  itself  is  not
clear ;  but  the  cell  itself, — in  plants  frequently  the  scene  of
vigorous  movements,  in  the  course  of  which  its  granular  con
tents  are  carried  about, — though  presenting  in  the  animal  no
such  striking  phenomena,  remains  a  living  centre  of  chemical
reciprocal  action  with  the  surrounding  fluid,  by  whose  dis
solved  constituents  its  enclosing  membrane  is  permeated.  In
consequence  of  this  mutual  action  a  gradual  alteration  takes
place  in  the  composition,  the  internal  adjustment,  and  in
the  shape  of  the  cell,  and  instead  of  its  original  round  form  it
COIIH-S  to  have  that  of  a  number  of  longish,  unequal,  ramify
ing  bodies,  the  manner  of  whose  origination  is  still  as  obscure
as  their  value  for  the  vital  operations.  The  plant  retains  the
original  cellular  form  to  a  greater  extent  than  the  animal
organism  ;  in  the  organs,  mostly  glandular  in  structure,  that
serve  for  nutrition  and  transmutation  of  elements,  the  cellular
form  of  the  infinitesimal  particles  of  the  tissues  is  still  dis
tinctly  perceptible,  and  their  perpetual  dissolution  and  renova
tion  are  partly  certain,  partly  probable ;  but  the  peculiar  needs  of

VOL.  I.  r,

98  BOOK  T. CHAPTER  IV.

animal  in'e  have  brought  about  a  new  form  with  its  numerous
applications,  that  of  the  fibre,  which  does  not  everywhere
originate  even  secondarily  from  a  series  of  cells.  AVe  find  the
fibres  partly  arranged  in  parallel  lines  without  ramification,  as
in  the  nerve  trunks  and  the  muscles,  the  bundles  being  then
united  by  commissures  and  sheaths,  partly  woven  together
into  solid  and  firm  twists,  among  which  appears  as  specially
important  the  form  of  the  hollow  tube  of  circular  section.

Lastly,  from  combinations  of  these  relatively  simple  forms
of  tissue  proceed  those  composite  formations  which  we  are  wont
to  comprehend  under  the  name  of  organs,  and  which  unite
the  physical  and  organic  operations  of  the  single  tissues  into
the  whole  of  a  definite  function.  In  most  organs  we  find,
besides  a  number  of  membranous  sheaths  and  ligaments,  that
secure  the  connection  of  the  whole  and  the  relative  situation
of  the  particular  constituents,  vessels  and  nerves  traversing,
in  very  various  proportions  of  quantity,  a  mass  fundamentally
consisting  of  cells.  The  name  of  parenchyme  (poured  between)
applied  to  this  must  not  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  it  is  properly
the  efficacious  element  of  the  whole  compound,  while  the
vesicular  channels  and  the  nerves  merely  convey  to  it  the
material  that  is  to  be  worked  up  and  the  stimuli  to  work,  or
carry  off  to  the  rest  of  the  organism  the  material  product  of
its  operations  and  the  serviceable  excitations  proceeding  IVoin
its  activity.

CHAP  TEH V.

STKUCTUliE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.

The  I5ony  Framework —The  Muscles  and  the  Motor  Nerves — The  Vascular
System  and  Circulation  of  the  Blood  —  Respiration  —  Nutrition  and
Kxeretiou.

§  1.  ^ITTIIILE  laying  down  the  general  points  of  view  which
we  desire  to  fix  for  the  investigation  of  vital  pheno
mena,  we  were  at  liberty  to  assume  that  natural  familiarity  with
the.su  and  with  the  structure  of  the  living  body  would  mean
while  supply  the  place  of  concrete  descriptions.  Even  now,
in  attempting  to  give  a  description  of  the  particular  processes
and  operations  with  which  the  various  instruments  of  life
work  on  one  another,  it  is  not  our  intention  to  follow  out
all  tin*  trains  of  thought  suggested  by  the  consideration  of
the  human  body,  the  proper  subject  of  our  inquiries.  Wo
shall  contemplate  it  neither  in  the  beauty  of  its  shape  nor
in  the  peculiar  significance  of  its  forms,  which  present  in
absolute  perfection  a  type  of  structure  carried  through  half  of
the  animal  series.  Leaving  all  this  to  future  occasions,  we
shall  content  ourselves  with  bringing  into  exclusive  promi
nence,  in  the  connection  of  our  present  reflections,  the  instru
ments  by  which  the  body  of  man — in  this  respect  identical
with  the  higher  species  of  animals — executes  the  rotation  of
its  vital  operations.

Concealed  everywhere  beneath  covering  sheaths  of  greater
or  less  strength,  the  bony  framework  forms  the  firm  outline
of  the  bodily  shape.  Nature  has  formed  from  a  basis  of  trans
parent  elastic  cartilage  and  of  the  phosphate  of  lime  which
is  imbedded  in  a  peculiar  manner  in  its  tissue,  those  durable
supports  which,  in  the  moist  state  which  is  theirs  during  life,
offer  the  advantages  of  rigidity  without  too  great  brittleness.

99

100  BOOK  I. C1IA1TEH  V.

On  the  outer  surface  smooth  and  hard,  within  in  some  places
of  denser,  in  others  of  more  delicate  and  spongier  texture,
according  to  the  end  to  be  attained,  this  bony  structure
presents  the  most  various  forms,  here  hollow  tubes  of  consider
able  length,  there  flat  plates,  again  variously  curved  and  bent
blades,  all  so  arranged  in  couples  that  a  vertical  section  of
the  body  through  its  median  plane  would  divide  the  bony
framework  into  two  quite  symmetrical  halves.  With  their
indented  edges  fitting  into  one  another,  mussel-si laped  curved
bones  combine  to  form  the  firm  arch  of  the  skull,  the  strong
covering  of  the  brain,  immoveably  fastened  to  one  another  or
permitting  only  imperceptible  deviations,  which  can  at  most
somewhat  break  the  violence  of  rude  shocks.  To  these  adjoin,
firmly  growing  to  them  in  front  and  below,  the  bones  of  the
middle  of  the  face,  the  lower  part  of  which  is  completed  by
the  moveable  under-jaw.  From  the  interior  of  the  arch  of
the  skull  to  its  outer  surface  lead  both  open  cavities  between
the  edges  of  several  bones,  and  also  closed  channels  of  greater
or  less  width,  that  traverse  the  substance  of  particular  bones,
and  allow  free  passage  to  the  vessels  and  nerves.  Through  a
larger  opening  on  its  lower  surface,  the  occipital  foramen,
the  cavity  of  the  skull  is  connected  with  the  long,  broadish
channel  of  the  spine,  which  is  loosely  filled  almost  to  its
lower  extremity  by  the  thick  strand  of  the  spinal  cord,
as  an  immediate  continuation  of  the  brain.  A  good  many
single  bones,  of  somewhat  the  form  of  a  short  cylinder,  are
here  superposed  so  as  to  form  a  long  column,  and  bound
together  very  firmly  and  durably  by  Hut  elastic  cushions
inserted  between  the  adjacent  surfaces  of  each  two.  Hence
only  a  very  slight  movement  is  possible  between  two  adjoining
links  of  this  chain,  but  yet  the  considerable  number  of  them
allows  to  the  whole  of  the  column,  by  the  summing  up  of
these  small  movements,  considerable  curvatures  in  wide  and
large  arcs.  By  this  construction  of  the  whole  from  a  multi
tude  of  smaller  parts,  strength  of  connection  is  united  with
sufficient  mobility,  and  at  the  same  time  the  injurious  effect
is  avoided  which  sharp  angles  in  this  bony  framework  would

STRUCTURE  OF  TIIK  ANIMAL  BODY.  101

have  on  the  delicate  tissues,  whose  protecting  receptacle  it  is
intended  to  be.  For  from  the  bony  cylinder  just  described,
/'.'•.  from  each  single  vertebra  of  the  spine,  proceed  towards  the
sides  two  bony  arches,  which  meet  behind  like  a  ring,
leaving  between  them  an  open  space  of  a  roundish  heart
shape.  With  these  openings  superimposed  on  one  another
like  the  vertebrae  from  which  they  spring,  these  single
rings  consequently  circumscribe  a  long  hollow  channel,
without  wholly  enclosing  it.  For,  as  they  are  of  less
height  than  the  vertebra*,  two  adjacent  rings  do  not  every
where  touch  one  another,  but  leave  free  intervals,  and  only
at  three  points  are  united  together  by  connecting  projections  in
a  manner  that  admits  indeed  of  movement,  but  of  movement
limited  by  firm  ligatory  Haps  to  a  very  narrow  range.  Thus
the  vertebral  column  presents  the  appearance  of  a  long
cavity,  whose  front  and  far  thicker  wall  is  undivided,  while
the  thinner  side  and  back  walls  are  interrupted  by  many
openings.  In  the  interior  of  this  space,  which  is  lined  by
smooth  membranes,  the  spinal  marrow  is  attached  in  a  float
ing  manner  such  as  best  wards  off  injury  from  the  frequent
curves  and  distortions  of  its  bony  walls.

In  front  no  bony  structure  joins  on  to  the  highest  of  the
vertebra1,  those  of  the  neck  ;  the  twelve  following,  those  of
the  chest,  support  in  front,  corresponding  to  the  vertebra
at  the  back,  the  much  wider  bony  arch  of  the  ribs,  that,
with  their  posterior  extremity  attached  (to  some  extent
moveably)  to  the  vertebra1,  meet  in  front  in  the  flat
breast-bone.  They  thus  form  the  side  limits  of  the  thorax,
whose  upper  opening  is  contracted  only  by  the  less  width
of  the  first  vaultings  of  the  ribs,  and  whose  lower  and  wider
expanse  is  separated  from  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  only
by  the  muscular  diaphragm,  and  not  by  any  osseous  forma
tion.  The  five  next,  the  lumbar  vertebra-,  like  those  of  the
neck  support  no  ribs,  and  only,  from  their  especially  strong
and  massive  structure,  fix,  at  the  back  only,  the  height  of
the  abdominal  cavity,  whose  side-walls  are  formed  entirely
of  soft  textures.  The  lower  wall  of  the  abdomen,  on

J  02  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

the  other  hand,  designed  to  support  the  weight  of  the  bowel?^
is  formed  of  the  great  osseous  round  of  the  pelvis,  which,
starting  from  the  lowest  spinal  vertebra?  that  grow  together
into  the  broad  os  sacrum,  sends  out  broad  wings  on  both
sides,  which,  sloped  off  from  above  and  without  downwards
and  towards  the  inside,  and  united  in  front  by  lower  bones,
leave  between  them  a  pretty  considerable  space  closed  only
by  soft  tissues.

Finally,  to  this  framework,  which,  from  the  slight  mobility
of  its  parts,  is  liable  to  but  slight  alterations  of  form,  are
attached  the  osseous  tubes  of  the  limbs,  for  which  the  mode
of  their  ligature  affords  the  greatest  facilities  for  changes  in
situation  and  shape.  The  shoulder-blade,  kept  in  its  place  at
the  back  merely  by  soft  tissues,  in  front  moveably  connected
through  the  collar-bone  with  the  breast-bone,  supports  at  its
upper  and  outer  extremity,  in  a  flat  joint-cavity,  the  head  of
the  upper  arm,  while  the  outer  surface  of  the  pelvis  supports
below,  in  a  deep  round  joint-cavity,  the  head  of  the  thigh.  The
nature  of  their  joints  permits  to  both  bones  movements  in
every  direction,  the  extent  of  which  is  limited  only  by
collision  with  the  environment ;  both,  on  the  other  hand,  are
so  connected  with  the  bones  of  the  lower  arm  and  lower  leg
that  the  latter,  in  respect  of  them,  can  move  only  in  a  single
plane.  But  both  these  relations  and  the  further  structure  of
the  hands  and  feet,  by  the  delicate  organization  of  which  the
human  frame  is  distinguished  from  that  of  all  the  lower
species,  we  defer  for  later  consideration.  Let  us  merely  add
that  numerous  sinewy  ligaments  unite  all  the  bones,  moveably
fitted  into  one  another,  that  at  the  joints  special  cuticular
capsules  surround  their  heads,  which  are  turned  towards  one
another  and  lubricate  the  surfaces  of  the  joints  with  a  slimy
secretion,  and  we  shall  have  before  us  a  complete  picture  of
the  rigid  framework,  whose  parts  are  then  singly  moved  by
the  vital  activity  of  the  muscles.

§  2.  The  numerous  gaps  and  intervals  left  between  the  par
ticular  bones,  are  filled  up  or  covered  over  for  the  most  part
with  the  flesh  of  the  muscles,  and  the  skeleton,  clothed  in  its

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  103

muscular  sheaths,  thus  almost  completely  fills  the  external
outline  of  the  bodily  form.  Extremely  thin  and  delicate
fibres,  invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  unite,  running  parallel  to
each  other,  into  the  finest  threads,  which,  again  in  like  manner
massed  into  thicker  bundles,  are  familiar  to  us  as  the  con
stituents  of  the  flesh.  United  groups  of  these  flesh-fibres,
co-operating  in  one  and  the  same  operation,  traversed  by
numerous  capillary  blood-vessels,  and  divided  from  homo
geneous  or  dissimilar  adjacent  tracts  by  tolerably  distinct
envelopes  of  cellular  structure,  form  the  individual  muscles,
which,  without  closer  mutual  connection,  and  solely  in  con
sequence  of  their  position  adapted  to  common  ends,  become
combined  in  larger  groups  and  systems.

Under  the  influence  of  various  stimuli  tho  muscles  are
capable  of  contracting  longitudinally  in  the  direction  of  their
fibres.  "\Vhile  each  one  of  the  latter  contracts  by  a  part  of
its  length,  frequently  very  considerable,  in  consequence  of  an
approximation  of  the  particles  still  little  understood,  the
transverse  section  of  the  muscle  is  correspondingly  enlarged
and  its  density  at  the  same  time  slightly  increased.  If
we  suppose  a  bundle  of  fibres  fastened  by  its  two  extre
mities  to  two  moveable  parts,  it  will  seek  by  its  vital
contraction  to  bring  both  nearer  each  other  in  a  straight
line,  and  the  force  with  which  it  executes  this  operation
will  depend  on  the  number  of  efficient  fibres,  i.e.  on  the
thickness  of  the  bundle  or  muscle,  while  the  amount  of  the
approximation  or  extent  of  the  produced  movement  depends  on
the  other  hand  on  its  length.  AVhcre,  therefore,  the  limbs,
without  describing  great  arcs,  have  to  execute  vigorous
movements,  or  retain  positions  in  which  they  must  resist
a  considerable  weight,  we  usually  find  short,  thick  muscles,
consisting  of  a  number  of  fibres,  applied  ;  on  the  other
hand,  where  a  movement  through  a  considerable  space,  but
without  the  exhibition  of  any  particular  force,  is  intended,
longer  and  often  thinner  muscles  are  stretched  between  the
moveaMe  points.  Yet  there  are  exceptions  to  this  simple
practical  rule.  For  only  a  few  muscles  extend  between

104  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

points  whose  approximation  in  a  straight  line  is  possible;
most  adhere  at  both  ends  to  bones  that  are  united  together
by  a  joint,  and  can  move  towards  each  other  only  by
turning  round  that  joint.  The  muscle,  running  beyond  this,
and  as  is  required  by  the  laws  of  the  lever  for  the  greatest
possible  effect,  applied  as  far  as  may  be  from  the  fulcrum,
would,  as  it  contracted,  considerably  diminish  the  angle
formed  by  the  two  bones  at  the  joint,  hut  at  the  same  time
fill  up  the  opening  of  the  joint  with  its  condensed  mass.  The
form  of  the  limbs  would  thus  undergo  an  alteration  such  as
even  in  the  arm,  in  which  the  simplest  example  of  it  would  be
found,  but  much  more  in  other  cases  would  be  anything
but  favourable  to  the  end  in  view  in  the  movement  made.
Great  variety  is  introduced  into  the  application  of  muscular
activity  alike  by  this  regard  to  the  avoidance  of  changes  of
contour  contrary  to  the  end  in  view,  and  by  other  circum
stances  ;  but  to  trace  these  relations  farther,  even  were  it  here
possible,  would  yield  no  further  advantage  to  our  inquiry  than
is  to  be  drawn  from  what  has  been  already  said.

It  is  not  only  here  and  there,  in  the  structure  of  the  move-
able  framework  of  the  body  and  in  the  provision  for  its  move
ments  just  described,  that  we  find  analogies  with  the  modes
of  procedure  made  use  of  by  mechanical  skill.  But  the  total
of  these  operations  is  altogether  and  with  the  utmost  variety
and  delicacy  of  execution  founded  on  the  instrumentality,
means,  and  laws  of  which  we  avail  ourselves  in  our  daily
attempts  to  invent  instruments  for  moving  masses,  only  with
less  complete  success.  The  same  rigid  rods,  the  same  junc
tion  and  fastening  by  various  ligaments,  the  same  turning  of
the  moveable  parts  by  means  of  connecting  flaps  that  exactly
determine  the  possible  directions  of  the  turning,  the  same
draw-lines  together  with  rollers  and  braces,  which  alter  the
direction  of  their  working  according  to  necessity  and  con
venience  :  all  these  expedients  we  find  equally  in  machines
and  the  living  body  ;  and  we  find  them  nowhere  else  in  Nature.
Forces  traversing  space  guide  the  stars  in  their  courses
by  invisible  threads  ;  mutual  pressure  of  particles,  tension  of

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  105

masses  evaporating  or  increasing  by  suction,  lastly  chemical
attractions  and  the  immediate  counteractions  of  the  substances
in  contact  in  space,  are  the  forces  at  work  in  meteoric
phenomena  and  vegetable  life.  The  orderly  and  harmonious
system  of  mechanical  arrangements  under  the  law  of  the  lever
iirst  appears  in  animal  life,  and  just  where  its  special  dis
tinctive  task  has  to  be  accomplished, — change  of  figure  and
place.  Thus  so  little  is  life  averse  from  the  use  of  means
that  we  are  wont  to  term  contemptuously  artificial  or  mechani
cal  contrivances,  that  on  the  contrary  its  articulation  may
be  held  to  be  the  prototype  of  the  machine,  given  by  Nature
herself  as  the  most  perfect  type,  yet  only  given  here  in  this
her  most  perfect  product.  There  is,  however,  one  point  in
which  life  surpasses  all  that  we  can  do  to  copy  it,  viz.  the  fact
that  the  spring  of  this  whole  array  of  means  lies  in  the
peculiar  inherent  contractility  of  the  muscles,  while  our
mechanical  skill  can  only  shorten  the  draw-lines  by  rolling
them  round  cylinders  and  wheels,  which  again  require  other
instruments  to  move  them.

The  muscles  receive  the  impetus  to  contract  from  the
nerves  extending  between  them  and  the  brain  and  spinal
marrow.  The  microscopically  fine  nerve-fibres,  spun  out  to  a
great  length  and  consisting  of  a  delicate  transparent  sheath
and  viscous  medullary  content,  are,  on  the  way  from  the
central  organs  to  the  movcable  limbs,  formed  within  a  common
case  into  largish  bundles,  without  being  divided  or  blending
together  on  their  passage.  From  these  thicker  trunks  smaller
bundles  proceed,  according  as  they  are  required  for  conve
nience  of  distribution  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  muscles,
till  the  single  threads  are  finally  lost  in  the  fibres  of  the
muscles,  and  separate  now  for  the  first  time  into  fine  rami
fications.  In  newly  killed  animals  pressure  and  pulling,
chemical  agencies,  and  the  influence  of  electric  currents
applied  at  any  point  in  the  course  of  a  nerve,  excite  contraction
in  the  muscle  to  which  it  runs, — a  proof  that  the  equilibrium
of  the  minutest  elements  of  the  nerve-substance  is  so  unstable
as  to  be  disturbed  by  many  kinds  of  shocks,  and  easily  to

106  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

propagate  its  disturbances  from  point  to  point.  Recent  minute
investigations  have  made  it  credible  that  an  alteration  in  its
electric  state  running  quickly,  though  not  instantaneously
through  the  nerve,  is  the  process  by  whose  effect  on  the  muscles
the  contraction  of  the  fibres  is  effected.  While  important  in
regard  to  the  special  inquiries  of  physiology,  the  decision  of
this  question  would  yet  add  nothing  essential  to  the  general
sketch  which  we  have  here  in  view  ;  it  is  enough  that  some
change  in  its  physical  condition,  advancing  from  point  to
point  in  the  nerve,  occasions  either  a  temporary  twitching  or
a  permanent  tension  of  the  muscles  dependent  on  it.

§  3.  The  irritability  of  the  nerves  and  muscles  is  per
manently  maintained  only  so  long  as  both  are  acted  upon  in
their  natural  positions  by  the  circulating  blood.  In  order
that  this  stimulating  nourishment  may  extend  everywhere,
all  the  limbs  are  traversed  by  the  vascular  system,  resembling
a  finely  ramified  network  of  radicle?.  Its  strong  main
branches,  distributed  through  the  larger  cavities  of  the  body,
are  divided  by  an  oft-repeated  dismemberment  into  a  closely
intertwined  network  of  the  finest  tubes,  running  more  or
less  abundantly  round  the  minutest  elements  of  the  tissues,
and  conveying  to  all  in  a  ceaseless  current  the  nutritive
blood-lluid.  This  motion  also  has  been  ascribed  by  fanciful
theorists,  in  open  contradiction  to  facts  easily  observed,  to
a  peculiar  mysterious  power  of  the  fluid,  which  seeks  and
chooses  its  paths  in  the  service  of  life ;  we  shall,  on  the
contrary,  find  that  it,  like  the  motion  of  the  limbs,  is  based  on
the  finest  adaptation  of  the  very  means,  which  in  such  theories
are  regarded  only  as  coarse  and  wretched  aids  to  human  craft.

If  in  a  circular  channel,  filled  with  fluid  contents  and
enclosed  by  elastically  dilatable  walls,  a  single  spot  were
surrounded  by  fibres  that  could  be  contracted,  each  contraction
of  this  spot  (which  we  shall  forthwith  designate  as  the  heart)
would  drive  the  fluid  to  both  sides,  and  two  waves  would
spread  on  the  right  and  left  by  means  of  the  momentarily
expanding  and  then  elastically  contracting  arms  of  the  circular
vessel.  If  a  valve  were  placed  in  the  interior  of  the  vessel  on

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  107

the  one  side  of  the  heart,  so  that  it  would  be  closed  by  a  current
from  the  one  side  and  opened  by  one  from  the  other,  this  would
permit  instead  of  the  double  wave  only  a  flow  of  blood  in  one
direction  through  the  whole  circuit  of  the  vessel,  and  this
returning  to  the  heart  from  the  other  side,  would  open  the  valve
in  order  to  be  again  propelled  in  the  same  direction  as  before
by  a  second  contraction.  If  we  suppose  that  the  circular
simple  vessel  divides  at  some  distance  from  the  heart  into
several  branches,  which  by  fresh  ramification  part  again  into  an
indistinguishable  multitude  of  the  finest  tubes,  that  further,
these  very  fine  channels  collect  again  into  somewhat  larger
trunks,  before  finally  discharging  themselves  into  the  heart  in
two  main  currents,  we  have  set  fortli  in  this  simple  repre
sentation  the  changes  which  we  must  bear  in  mind  in  order
to  have  an  idea  of  the  nutritive  vascular  system.  The  heart
does  really  consist  of  a  strong  muscular  bag,  whose  energetic
contractions  drive  the  contained  blood  into  the  main  artery  of
the  body,  the  aorta,  one  of  the  arms  of  the  large  vascular
ring,  which  is  at  first  undivided.  A  cuticular  valve  in  the
heart,  closed  during  its  contraction  by  the  pressure  of  the  blood
against  it,  prevents  the  escape  of  the  blood  on  the  other  side
of  the  way,  and  forces  it  to  take  its  course  in  one  direction
through  the  large  trunk  into  the  farther  ramifications  of  the
arterial  system.  The  blood  always  finds  the  vessels  into  which
it  is  driven  already  filled  ;  but  on  its  way  from  the  heart,
while  it  is  pouring  in  at  the  entrance  to  the  aorta,  it  pushes
back  the  wall  of  it  breadthwise  and  lengthwise,  and  for  a
moment  finds  room  in  this  greater  extent  of  the  dilated  vessel.
But  the  elastic  wall  of  the  vessel,  formed  of  strong  and  toiHi

O  O

circular  and  longitudinal  fibres,  struggles  with  great  force  to
contract  to  its  former  dimensions,  and  thereby  drives  on  along
the  same  path  the  excess  of  blood  by  which  it  is  expanded,
the  proximate  part  of  the  vessel  undergoing  a  similar  expan
sion,  from  which  it  immediately  rebounds.  Thus,  advancing
quickly  along  the  whole  length  of  the  vessel,  a  wave  of
expansion  arises  —  as  can  easily  Ix*  made  perceptible  by
filling  the  intestine  of  an  animal  with  water  so  as  to

108  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

dilate  its  walls  sufficiently,  then  closing  both  ends,  and
exerting  on  the  one  a  sudden  pressure.  We  know  this
imdulatory  movement  of  the  arteries  under  the  name  of  the
pulse ;  it  becomes  less  distinct  in  the  smaller  branches,  and
disappears  entirely  in  the  widely  extended  network  of  the
capillary  vessels.  The  blood  flows  through  these  in  a  quietly
even  current,  in  order  to  return  without  pulsation  to  the  heart
by  the  again  collected  larger  trunks,  the  veins.  Since  in  the
aorta  fluid  meets  fluid  after  each  heart-beat,  various  inter
mixtures  will  take  place,  and  a  part  of  the  newly  entering
blood  may  be  driven  to  a  greater  or  less  distance  by  that  already
there,  while  another  part  of  the  new  blood  pushes  before  it
a  part  of  the  old.  The  path  described  by  a  single  particle  of
blood  may  therefore  be  very  various ;  only  in  the  middle  part
of  the  vascular  passage  will  it  be  uniformly  progressive;  at  the
entrance  to  the  aorta  the  circumstances  already  stated  may  make
it  very  irregular,  in  the  capillary  vessels  many  little  accidental
shocks  from  without  and  other  incidents  may  convert  it  for  a
long  time  into  a  fluctuating  progression  and  retrogression
through  the  variously  communicating  paths  of  this  labyrinth.
Hence  the  estimates  according  to  which  the  blood  is  supposed
to  circulate  through  the  whole  system  of  the  vessels  in  about
a  minute,  while  the  heart  makes  from  sixty  to  eighty  beats,
may  indicate  the  average  result  of  the  whole  circulation,  but
not  the  motion  of  each  single  particle.

The  larger  vessels,  arteries  and  veins,  divided  by  thick
impenetrable  layers  of  skin  from  the  substance  of  the  parts
through  which  they  run,  are  merely  channels  in  which  the  flux
and  reflux  of  the  blood  take  place  ;  the  capillary  vessels  alone,
with  their  thin  delicate  walls,  passing  through  and  twining
round  the  minute  elements  of  the  tissues  in  an  exceedingly
fine  and  multiplex  ramification,  form  the  scene  of  the  trans
formation  of  substance.  From  these,  by  a  perpetual  process
of  osmosis,  the  fluid  constituents  of  the  blood  pass  into  the
intervals  of  the  texture,  and  in  exchange  the  dissolved  remains
of  the  used-up  and  decomposed  corporeal  substance  press  into
them,  in  order  to  be  carried  away  to  the  various  organs  of

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  109

excretion  in  the  current  of  the  blood.  We  are  very  slightly
acquainted  with  the  kind  of  chemical  transformation  undergone
by  the  tissues  in  course  of  time  from  these  operations,  and
just  as  slightly  with  the  order  of  succession  of  the  forms  into
which  they  are  converted  by  advancing  decomposition,  till  the
final  process  when,  having  become  perfectly  soluble  and  more
similar  in  their  chemical  composition  to  the  simpler  inorganic
substances,  they  are  ready  to  be  dismissed  from  the  body.
We  observe  only  one  more  definite  result  of  this  activity
continually  proceeding  in  all  parts  of  the  body,  viz.  the  forma
tion  of  carbonic  acid,  from  whose  entrance  into  the  capillary
vessels  the  blood  receives  on  its  return  through  the  veins  that
dark-red  colouring  which  now  distinguishes  it  from  the  bright-
red  arterial  blood  ilowing  from  the  heart.  The  larger  amount
of  absorbed  oxygen,  by  which  the  latter  is  distinguished,
disappears  mostly  in  the  capillary  vessels,  and  is  used  for  the
constitution  of  the  carbonic  acid  collecting  in  the  venous
blood.  Now  in  whatever  manner  the  necessary  carbon  may
L>e  extracted  from  the  constituents  of  the  body,  and  by
whatever  intermediate  agencies  the  carbonic  acid  may  finally
be  formed,  we  must  at  all  events  consider  this  slow  process
of  combustion  going  on  constantly  in  all  parts  as  the  source
of  animal  heal.  A  certain  height  of  temperature  is  an
indispensable  condition  lor  the  possibility  of  vital  operations.
But  not  every  part  that  needs  for  its  action  a  definite  degree
of  heat,  is  permitted  by  the  nature  of  its  own  action  to
satisfy  that  need  by  vigorous  change  of  substance.  The
vessels  form  the  channels  through  which  the  heat  generated
elsewhere,  communicated  to  the  blood,  is  equally  difl'used  over
the  body  ;  and  from  this  second  use  of  the  blood, — to  be  an
apparatus  for  the  distribution  of  heat, — particular  refinements
of  its  organization  are  more  easily  understood  than  from  the
first—  to  minister  to  the  diffusion  of  the  nutritive  juices.
Thus  the  superfluity  of  parts  in  which  there  is  active  change
of  substance  is  of  advantage  even  to  those  which,  on  account
of  their  smaller  transformation  or  their  less  favourable  situa
tion,  are  not  themselves  capable  of  generating  and  maintaining

110  BOOK  I. CIIAPTEIi  V.

the  requisite  height  of  temperature ;  thus  in  particular  tho
external  surface  of  the  body  receives  compensation  for  the
considerable  radiation  of  heat,  owing  to  which  it  is  constantly
growing  cold  from  its  contact  with  the  atmosphere.

§  4.  We  have  hitherto  regarded  the  vascular  system  filled
with  blood  as  the  store-room  from  which  alike  nutritious  com
pensation  and  necessary  heat  are  conveyed  to  the  bodily  tissues.
This  store  would,  however,  soon  be  exhausted  if  oxygen  was
not  continually  supplied  anew  by  means  of  respiration,  if  the
existence  of  the  parts  capable  of  growth  was  not  maintained
by  digestion,  and  if  the  remains  of  decomposition  that  have
become  unfit  for  use  were  not  removed  from  the  blood  by
excretion.  Of  these  operations  respiration  first  of  all  deter
mines  in  the  higher  animals  the  development  of  a  particular
department  of  the  vascular  system,  designed  to  free  from  its
carbonic  acid  the  venous  blood,  altered  by  the  absorption  of
substances  unfit  for  further  use.  This  freeing  is  effected
by  means  of  a  successful  interaction  with  the  outer  air,  which
fills  it  anew  with  oxygen.  Instead  of  the  one  heart,  from
which,  as  we  formerly  supposed,  the  arterial  current  proceeds,
and  into  which  the  venous  blood  immediately  returns,  let
us  now  suppose  two  hearts  similarly  constructed;  on  its
way  back  from  the  capillary  tubes  the  venous  current
first  enters  into  the  one,  is  driven  out  from  it  into  a
less  extended  arc  of  the  vascular  ring,  and  only  when  it
flows  back  from  that  reaches  the  second  heart,  in  order
to  be  conveyed  thence  into  the  already  familiar  path  of
the  main  circulation  of  the  body.  The  shorter  arc  between
the  two  hearts  forms  the  path  of  the  lesser  circulation,  in
which  the  blood  is  subjected  to  the  influence  of  the  air ;  the
heart  into  which  the  venous  current  discharges  itself  is  the
right,  the  other,  from  which  that  which  has  become  arterial
issues,  the  left  heart ;  both  lie  in  the  body  close  beside  one
another,  though  always  with  cavities  completely  separated
from  each  other,  and  the  blood,  flowing  from  the  right  to  the
left  one  through  the  vascular  extension  of  the  minor  circula
tion,  returns  at  the  end  of  this  movement  almost  to  the  same

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  AKIMAL  BODY.  Ill

point  of  space,  divided  from  the  place  of  its  exit  only  by  the
muscular  partition-wall  that  sunders  the  two  hearts  that  have
grown  together.  The  vascular  passages  along  which  it  goes
between  the  two  points  resemble  in  their  structure  those  of
the  main  circulation.  A  large  trunk,  the  pulmonary  artery,
comparable  to  the  aorta,  first  receives  the  venous  blood,  driven
out  by  the  beat  of  the  right  heart,  taking  place  simultaneously
with  that  of  the  left ;  it  soon  divides  into  two  great  branches,
each  of  which  fills  one-half  of  the  chest  cavity  by  means  of  a
tree  -  like  ramification  of  finer  and  finer  channels.  These
capillary  vessels  also  join  together  into  larger  trunks,  the  pul
monary  veins,  in  which  the  blood  (which  in  the  meanwhile  has
become  of  a  bright  red  in  consequence  of  the  respiration)  flows
Ixick  into  the  left  heart,  to  begin  once  more  the  main  circula
tion.  Through  the  intervals  left  in  the  fine  network  of  the
capillary  tubes  a  second  system  of  channels  grows  everywhere
for  the  conveyance  of  air.  The  windpipe,  at  first  simple,
begins  in  the  back  part  of  the  cavity  of  the  mouth  as  a  wide
opening,  protected  against  being  crushed  together  by  cartila
ginous  rings,  and  capable  of  being  closed  above  by  the
epiglottis ;  descending  under  the  skin  of  the  throat  and  a  thin
covering  of  muscles,  it  divides,  below  the  beginning  of  the
sternum,  into  two  main  trunks,  that,  separated  on  the  right
and  the  left  into  smaller  and  smaller  branches  covered  with  a
thin  membrane,  form  those  two  great  trees  whose  twigs  are
lost  in  the  line  network  of  the  blood-vessels,  which  have  like
wise  developed  into  two  intricate  systems  ramifying  in  various
directions.  A  general  membranous  envelope,  carried  into  but
a  few  of  the  larger  sections  of  this  intimately  connected
double  organ,  is  spread  over  each  of  the  two  ramifications,  the
two  lungs,  of  which  the  larger  on  the  right  occupies  its  half
of  the  chi'.-st  cavity,  while  on  the  left  the  smaller  encloses
the  heart  behind,  above,  and  partly  in  front,  with  a  flap  extend
ing  downwards — the  heart  lying  in  the  middle  to  the  left.
The  middle  part  of  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  the  fissure  sepa
rating  the  two  lungs,  is  the  space  into  which  the  aorta
extends,  making  a  curve  upwards  and  then  descending

112  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

behind,  and  it  is  from  this  cavity  that  the  blood-vessels  enter
the  texture  of  the  lungs  sideways  and  the  two  trunks  of  the
windpipe  from  above.

The  finest  ramifications  of  the  air  and  blood  vessels,  which
are  intricately  intertwined,  are  in  this  case  also  the  special
scene  of  activity.  The  extremities  of  the  delicate  air-tubes
spread  out  into  little  bulbs  along  whose  sides  the  capillary
vessels  run,  and  are  divided  only  by  an  exceedingly  thin
covering  from  the  air  filling  the  interior  of  these  little  lung-
cells.  By  means  of  equally  delicate  moist  membranes  an
interchange  of  different  gases  takes  place  outside  the  living
body,  in  obedience  to  laws  not  yet  fully  elucidated  in  their
details.  The  carbonic  acid  of  the  venous  blood,  which  in  these
partition -walls  is  carried  past  the  air,  passes  by  diffusion
from  the  vessels  into  the  cavity  of  the  lung-cells  ;  the  oxygen
of  the  atmospheric  air  therein  contained  pushes  its  way,  on
the  other  hand,  through  the  walls  of  the  capillary  vessels,  and
along  with  the  blood  become  arterial  from  having  absorbed  it,
is  now  conveyed  to  the  left  heart,  and  through  that  to  the
main  course  of  circulation.  The  perpetual  continuance  of
this  process  is  finally  secured  by  the  movements  of  the  chest,
the  alternations  of  inhalation  and  exhalation.  In  inspiration
the  muscles  raise  the  moveable  ribs  upwards,  and  seek  in  this
way  to  expand  the  cavity  of  the  chest ;  but  closed  on  all
sides  as  it  is,  it  cannot  conform  to  this  effort  unless  the
atmospheric  air,  forcing  its  "way  through  the  larynx  and  wind
pipe  into  the  lung-cells,  iill  the  vacuum  thus  caused.  These
vigorous  movements  of  the  chest-muscles  cease  when  inspira
tion  has  been  completed,  and  the  peculiar  elasticity  of  the
texture  of  the  lungs  expanded  by  the  air  introduced  is
sufficient  by  its  efforts  at  contraction  to  effect  exhalation  of
the  air,  and  the  letting  down  of  the  raised  ribs  then
follows  of  itself.  Jlence  only  inspiration  necessarily  brings
the  vital  activity  of  the  muscles  into  play ;  expiration  takes
place  in  the  ordinary  course  of  respiration  without  its  co
operation,  though  it  may  assist  to  empty  the  lungs  as
completely  as  possible.

STKUCTUKE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  1 1  3

§  5.  The  interior  of  the  cavity  of  the  chest  is  filled  by  the
heart,  the  lungs,  and  the  great  vascular  trunks.  Below  it
is  divided  by  the  diaphragm  from  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,
the  seat  of  the  alimentary  canal  and  its  dependencies.  Flat
muscular  plates,  whose  fibres  cross  eacli  other  in  various
directions,  spring  from  the  spine,  from  the  lowest  rib,  and  from
the  lower  extremity  of  the  breast-bone,  and,  uniting,  form  the
partition-wall  that,  extending  downwards  further  behind  than
in  front,  and  arching  upwards,  projects  into  the  cavity  of  the
chest.  On  it  rest  heart  and  lungs,  and  through  a  fissure  left
between  them  at  the  spine  by  their  bundles  of  fibres,  the
aorta  passes  close  beside  the  vertebral  column  into  the
abdominal  cavity,  in  order  soon  to  divide  into  the  two  great
vascular  trunks  of  the  legs.  The  contraction  of  the  muscles
of  the  diaphragm  flattens  the  vaulting  of  it  which  arches
upwards,  and  thereby  assists  the  expansion  of  the  cavity  of
the  chest  for  inspiration;  the  contraction  of  the  muscular
walls  of  the  abdominal  cavity,  on  the  other  hand,  pressing
upwards  the  contained  intestines,  increases  that  vaulting,  and,
by  narrowing  the  chest,  assists  deep  expiration.

At  the  back  of  the  cavity  of  the  mouth  begins  the  muscular
tube  of  the  oesophagus,  passing  first  between  the  vertebral
column  and  the  windpipe,  then  within  the  chest  to  the  front
and  left  side  of  the  aorta,  to  descend  to  the  abdominal  cavity,
into  which  it  makes  its  way  through  an  opening  in  the
diaphragm.  Solid  food  ground  down  by  mastication  and  also
fluids  are  driven  between  the  walls  of  thi?  passage  by  the
muscles  of  the  mouth  and  throat ;  while  behind  it  the  muscular
wall  contracts,  the  bolus  opens  its  way  step  by  step  through
this  tube,  whose  walls,  not  kept  asunder  like  those  of  the  air-
passages  by  elastic  cartilages,  are  in  their  normal  condition
superimposed  on  one  another  without  any  interval.  Helped
in  this  manner  as  far  as  to  the  abdominal  cavity,  nutriment
arrives  at  that  section  of  the  alimentary  canal  in  which  the
chemical  activity  of  assimilation  begins.  Tn  many  windings,
the  situation  of  which  is  determined  only  for  particular
segments,  the  intestinal  canal  passes  through  the  abdominal

VOL.  I.  II

114  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

cavity,  everywhere  composed  of  an  external  muscular  sheath
and  an  internal  velvety  shining  mucous  membrane,  both
pierced  by  many  blood-vessels,  and  both  generally  similar
in  structure,  yet  in  different  sections  of  the  whole  differently
organized  in  minute  details  to  suit  different  ends.  Immediately
after  its  entrance  into  the  abdominal  cavity  the  oesophagus
extends  into  a  spacious  sack-shaped  organ,  the  extension  of
which  in  a  rounded-off  bag  is  prolonged,  without  any  opening,
to  the  left  of  the  place  of  its  entrance,  while  the  other  longer
part  is  continued  in  the  prolongation  of  the  intestinal  canal.
The  muscular  membrane  of  this  organ,  the  stomach,  consisting
of  various  flat  bundles  of  fibres,  can  carry  backwards  and
forwards  the  chyme  brought  thus  far,  by  means  of  its  undula-
tory  slight  contractions,  and  thus  bring  it  into  manifold
contact  with  the  internal  mucous  membrane.  Piich  in  blood
vessels,  that  receive  an  increased  supply  during  digestion,
this  membrane  secretes  (from  peculiar  microscopic  glandules,
which,  imbedded  in  it,  run  along  the  greater  downward  curve
of  the  stomach)  a  product  designated  by  the  name  of  pepsine,
the  composition  of  which  is  little  known,  but  which,  in  com
bination  with  the  watery  gastric  juice  containing  muriatic  and
lactic  acid,  exerts  the  first  powerfully  solvent  and  chemically
transforming  influence  on  the  nutritive  contents.  Here  the
starchy  constituents  of  the  latter  are  converted  into  sugar ;
the  albuminous  and  fibrous  parts  of  moat  lose  in  disintegra
tion  some  of  their  properties  ;  the  fatty  substances  seem  to
pass  through  unmodified.  Of  liquids  and  the  liquefied  parts
of  the  food  much  is  here  absorbed  by  the  blood-vessels  of  the
stomach ;  the  substances  that  have  not  become  completely
soluble  pass  by  degrees,  for  further  elaboration,  through  the
opposite  aperture  in  the  stomach  into  the  next  division  of  the
alimentary  canal,  the  duodenum.

Here  they  are  subjected  to  the  influence  of  two  organs,  the
liver  and  the  pancreas,  to  be  most  briefly  described  for  our
purpose  as  appendages  of  the  alimentary  canal  turned  inside
out.  Let  'as  imagine  a  hollow  fold  outwards  of  the  alimentary
canal  gradually  growing  into  a  long  and  thin  canal,  with  its

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  115

rcry  narrow  cavity  opening  into  the  much  wider  one  of  the
alimentary  canal.  This  canal,  which  is  called  the  gall-duct,
then  parts  into  two  branches,  of  which  the  one  very  soon  ends
in  a  bulbous-shaped  swelling,  the  gall-bladder,  while  the  other,
like  the  windpipe,  ramifies  into  a  network  of  fine  branches.
Into  this  network  another  double  one  forces  its  way  as  in  the
lun<rs.  Xot  only  does  the  main  circulation  send  arteries  out

O  +>

from  the  aorta,  which  spread  here  into  a  network  of  capillary
vessels,  but  the  venous  blood  also,  returning  from  the  intestines
of  the  abdomen,  gathers  into  a  great  trunk,  the  vena  portcc,  and
this,  again  dividing  into  a  network  of  capillary  veins,  likewise
accompanies  with  its  line  ramification  the  branchings  of  the
gall-ducts.  Thus,  in  combination  with  the  cellular  mass,  this
threefold  twist  forms  the  liver  ;  formed  by  an  enveloping
membrane  into  a  compact,  bulky  organ,  and  extending  from
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  across  its  line  of  bisection,  it
hangs  below  the  diaphragm,  fastened  in  a  fold  of  a  closed
membranous  bag,  the  peritoneum,  whose  surface  in  front
extends  over  the  inside  of  the  muscular-wall  of  the  abdomen,
and  at  the  back,  with  several  folds  inwards  into  the  interior  of
the  bag,  receives  and  holds  firm  the  most  important  segments
of  the  alimentary  canal.  The  yellow  bitter  gall  is  secreted  into
the  minutest  branches  of  the  gall-ducts  out  of  the  cells  of  the
parenchyme  of  the  liver  in  which  these  end.  That  this  fluid
exerts  an  important  influence  on  digestion  seems  to  be  proved
by  the  constancy  with  which  in  the  higher  classes  of  animals
the  liver  is  everywhere  so  constituted  that  from  it  and  from
the  gall-bladder,  in  which  is  collected  the  always  prepared
product,  the  gall  is  conveyed  to  the  alimentary  canal,  through
the  above-mentioned  means  of  exit,,  in  proportion  to  the  food
which  enters  it  from  the  stomach.  But  1  naturally  avoid
entering  into  the  more  special  theories  which  physiologists
have  tried  to  establish  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  this  effect.
Enough  that  exceedingly  laborious  and  meritorious  investiga
tions  have  hitherto  done  very  little  to  make  us  thoroughly
acquainted  with  the  working  into  each  other  of  the  vegetative
operations,  and  that  our  views  of  the  chemical  processes  of

116  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

digestion  and  assimilation  are  still  undergoing  perpetual
modification.  Instead  of  dwelling  on  such  details,  I  refer  to
a  conception  in  which  chemical  investigators  have  given
expression  to  their  view  of  the  general  purport  of  the  reci
procal  actions  here  observed.  The  animal  body,  of  course,
is  nourished  only  by  substances  brought  to  it  from  outside,
which  on  the  whole  have  already  the  same  composition  as  its
own  constituents  ;  the  complete  assimilation  of  the  absorbed
material  seems,  however,  only  possible  through  the  effect
of  substances  already  belonging  to  the  organism  and  supplied
by  it  as  corrective  ferments  in  order  to  guide  the  chemical
reactions  of  the  absorbed  foreign  material  in  a  direction
favourable  for  the  ends  of  assimilation.  A  great  number  of
such  substances — pepsine,  gall,  and  the  juices  of  the  pancreas
and  of  the  many  glands  of  the  alimentary  canal — are  in
this  way  constantly  introduced  by  the  organism  among  the
chemical  reciprocal  actions  to  which  the  elements  of  the
nutritive  matter  would  be  liable  by  their  own  nature.  We
are  ignorant  what  particular  operations  are  incumbent  on
these  single  agents,  and  even  the  pathological  phenomena
due  to  the  disturbance  of  the  one  or  the  other  do  not  enable
us  inductively  to  distinguish  their  several  functions ;  we  must
thus  content  ourselves  with  this  general  conception,  and  leave
to  the  future  its  verification  in  detail.

§  6.  The  function  of  conveying  the  prepared  chyme  to  the
blood,  and  from  it  to  the  constituents  of  the  body,  is  divided
between  two  systems  of  vessels.  The  blood-vessels  that  in
fine  meshes  traverse  the  whole  extent  of  the  alimentary
canal  seem  to  absorb  only  the  dissolved  inorganic  con
stituents,  such  as  the  salts,  and  of  the  organic  compounds  those
which,  after  being  completely  diluted,  are  not  needed  in  the
formation  of  tissues,  but  are  intended  to  perform  other  offices  in
the  body.  This  absorption  is  so  rapid  that  fluid  poisons,  a
few  minutes  after  they  have  been  swallowed,  make  themselves
perceptible  in  the  blood  and  the  secretions  by  their  reactions,
in  the  rest  of  the  body  by  their  effects.  The  reception  of
the  tissue-forming  nutritive  substances — of  albuminous  and

STUUCTUItE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  117

along  with  them  of  fatty  elements  —  falls  to  the  other
system,  the  lymphatic.  The  velvety  appearance  by  which
from  the  stomach  downwards  the  inner  surface  of  the
mucous  membrane  is  more  and  more  marked,  when  looked
ut  under  the  microscope  is  found  to  be  produced  by  fine
villous  formations  projecting  into  the  intestinal  cavity.  In
the  upper  part  of  the  alimentary  canal  conical  elevations  with
a  broad  base,  they  become,  in  the  lower  part,  tongue-shaped
organs,  pressed  together  to  the  number  of  40  to  90  to  a
square  line  of  the  mucous  membrane.  The  light-coloured
indefinitely  fibrous  base  of  their  texture  is  surrounded  on  the
outside  with  a  covering  of  cylindrical  cells,  under  which  on
two  sides  its  blood-vessels  mount  upwards  connected  by  an
intervening  network  ;  the  middle  is  occupied  by  the  beginning
of  a  lacteal  with  a  knotty  or  blunt  end.  These  lacteals,
whii-h  gradually  run  together  into  larger  trunks,  are  after
wards  united  with  the  branches  of  the  lymphatic  vessels,
that  absorb  from  the  other  parts  of  the  body  the  superfluous
discharged  blood-lluid,  and  the  two  canal  systems  which  greatly
resemble  one  another  in  structure  and  action  finally  convey
their  fluid  contents  through  a  common  outlet  into  one  of  the
main  trunks  of  the  venous  system  of  vessels,  the  vena  cavct.

Neither  in  the  lacteals  nor  in  the  blood-vessels  are  open
ings  for  the  passage  of  the  substances  to  be  conducted  by
them  perceptible ;  in  them  too,  therefore,  absorption  must
take  place  through  the  walls,  and  must  be  confined  to  fluids
or  to  solid  parts  of  such  minuteness  that  they  can  penetrate
the  invisible  intervals  which  we  may  suppose  occur  between
even  the  smallest  particles  of  these  walls.  Even  on  this
supposition,  however,  the  mechanism  of  this  absorption  pre
sents  peculiar  difficulties,  hardly  to  be  removed  except  by
supposing  a  chemical  attraction  of  the  inside  of  the  closed
vessels,  which  determines  the  entrance  of  the  fluid,  and
prevents  its  regress  through  the  coat.  On  this  hypothesis
the  considerable  amount  of  elasticity  possessed  by  the  walls
of  the  vessels  would  sufficiently  explain  the  onward  pressure
of  the  contents  by  which  they  are  distended,  in  the  free

118  BOOK  I. CIIAPTEli  V.

direction  towards  the  circulating  channels  of  the  blood  ;
moreover,  the  action  of  this  propelling  force  is  aided  by  a
number  of  valves,  which  the  current  opens  when  running  this
way,  but  would  shut  were  it  to  flow  backwards.

Up  to  the  time  when  they  enter  the  blood,  chyle  and
lymph  are  subjected  in  numerous  glands,  with  which  their
vessels  become  entwined,  to  the  transforming  influence  of  the
blood  itself,  to  whose  composition  theirs  is  always  more  and
more  approaching.  Peculiar  granular  bodies,  of  microscopic
minuteness,  formed  from  albuminous  matter,  occur  in  both.
They  are  apparently  the  first  beginnings  of  a  formation  by
which  blood  is  distinguished  from  other  juices — i.e.  the  red
blood  corpuscles.  As  disc-shaped  smooth  cells  these  swim  in
immense  numbers  in  the  blood ;  they  are  formed  from  a
viscous  clear  fluid  without  any  solid  nucleus,  and  enveloped
in  a  very  elastic  transparent  outer  membrane,  whose  con
stituents  are  an  albuminous  body,  globuline,  and  a  red
pigment  containing  iron,  hematine,  likewise  albuminous.  We
are  not  as  yet  free  from  doubts  in  regard  to  the  mode  of
their  origination,  or  the  way  in  which  they  perish  as  they
grow  old,  or  the  services  rendered  by  them  to  life,  which  we
have  much  reason  to  look  on  as  highly  important.  Their
function  is  supposed  to  consist  partly  in  their  being  appli
cable  to  nutrition  and  the  formation  of  tissue,  partly  in  their
actively  promoting  the  transmutation  of  substances  by
absorbing  alternately  oxygen  and  carbonic  acid,  under  whose
influence  they  bring  about  the  difference  in  colour  of  arterial
and  venous  blood.  In  disease  the  fluctuations  of  their
quantity  in  the  blood  are  found  to  influence  considerably  the
vividness  of  the  operations  of  the  nerves.

Chyle  and  lymph  are  the  only  sources  of  fresh  supply  for
the  blood ;  the  modes  in  which  it  gives  out  its  constituents
are  far  more  varied.  Probably  only  a  comparatively  small  part
of  what  is  given  out  is  applied  to  the  reparation  of  the  textures
worn  out  with  their  operations  ;  perhaps  one  more  considerable
contributes  to  the  production  of  a  variety  of  parts  such  as
hair,  nails,  epidermis,  which  are  perpetually  growing,  and

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ANIMAL  BODY.  119

detach  themselves  in  solid  form  from  the  body  by  breaking
or  peeling  oif;  still  more  considerable  apparently  is  the
amount  of  the  secretions  from  the  blood,  which,  like  the
numerous  juices  of  the  alimentary  canal  and  its  associated
glandular  organs,  arc  again  made  use  of  as  subsidiary  means
to  the  ends  of  assimilation,  before  being  removed  from  the
body.  The  bulkiest  of  all  excretions,  however,  takes  place
through  evaporation  from  the  skin  and  lungs,  and  through  the
secretion  of  urine.  Jioth  processes  are  designed  merely  for  the
removal  of  masses  become  unlit  for  use,  though  the  first
perhaps  serves  to  neutralize  many  disturbances  of  the  bodily
mechanism  by  means  of  the  accessory  effects  that  attend  or
follow  the-  activity  of  the  excretion.  The  nitrogenous  con
stituents  of  urine,  sometimes  dissolved  in  a  large  variable
quantity  of  water,  sometimes  deposited  from  it  in  solid  form,
make  it  unquestionable  that  it  is  mostly  in  this  way  that,
the  residuum  of  the  albuminous  substances  is  got  rid  ot
when  chemically  decomposed.  One  of  them,  urea,  has  been
found  already  formed  in  the  blood,  and  to  it  at  least  the
kidneys  are  related  not  as  a  productive  organ,  but  only  as
a  peculiarly  fashioned  filter,  whose  texture  lets  its  watery
solution  pass  through  into  the  cavity  of  the  passages  of
exit,  while  it  forces  the  other  dissolved  and  still  service
able  constituents  of  the  blood  to  remain  behind.

The  exhalation  of  carbonic  acid  from  the  lungs  is  attended
by  an  abundant  development  of  watery  vapour,  which  makes
the  breath  visible  at  a  low  temperature,  and  contains  the  car
bonic  acid  as  it  passes  into  the  outer  world.  Again,  from  the
moist,  thick  mucous  coat,  abundantly  pierced  with  vessels,
and  lying  under  the  epidermis,  water  is  constantly  forcing
its  way  to  the  outside,  and  escaping  in  the  form  of  vapour
through  the  horny,  thin  layer  of  the  epidermis,  which  every
where  forms  the  outmost  covering  of  the  body.  The  greater
part  of  the  whole  perspiration  from  the  skin  seems  to  take
place  in  this  way,  a  smaller  part  being  the  product  of  peculiar,
small  glandules,  that,  imbedded  in  the  mucous  network  of  the
dcrmis,  .send  outwards  a  spirally-winding  line  outlet,  from

120  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  V.

whose  aperture  the  detached  fluid  evaporates,  but  does  not
appear  as  a  liquid,  in  the  form  of  sweat,  except  where  the
production  is  too  abundant,  or  the  external  atmosphere  does
not  sufficiently  absorb  it.  Besides  the  ordinary  salts  of  the
blood  and  very  small  quantities  of  organic  constituents,  sweat
contains  only  water,  lactic  acid,  and  ammonia ;  its  com
position  therefore  does  not  seem  to  justify  the  importance
ascribed  to  the  activity  of  the  skin,  or  the  many  bad
effects  which  result  from  its  suppression.  But  it  is  quite
possible  that  its  more  important  function  is  not  the  removal
of  these  unimportant  substances,  but  the  labour  of  the
removal,  or  that,  in  other  words,  the  constant  carrying  on  of
this  process  of  evaporation  occasions,  for  the  extremities  of
the  nerves  lying  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  in  the  skin
itself,  conditions  that  are  indispensable  to  the  due  fulfilment
of  their  functions.  While  we  cannot  pursue  this  branch  of
the  advantage  afforded  by  the  secretion  from  the  skin,  we  may
further  merely  note  that  it  serves  as  an  efficacious  means
of  moderating  the  heat  of  the  body  (apt  to  be  increased
by  many  causes),  and  in  particular  of  the  blood.  A  large
quantity  of  heat  is  laid  hold  of  and  removed  from  the  body
in  the  abundant  evaporation,  whether  sensible  or  insensible,
constantly  going  on  from  its  surface,  and  the  same  takes
place  without  interruption  through  the  exhalation  of  the
lungs.

Not  all  the  constituents  of  the  body  have  been  mentioned
in  this  sketch  of  its  structure  and  operations.  "We  have  left
many  of  the  greatest  importance  to  be  dealt  with  later,  as  our
present  purpose  is  only  to  illustrate  the  great  extent  to  which
life  employs,  for  the  execution  of  its  functions,  the  same
means  by  which  human  mechanical  skill  produces  its
works.

CHAPTER VI.

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.

Physical,  Organic,  and  Psychical  Compensation  of  Disturbances— Examples  of
the  Establishment  of  Equilibrium  — The  Sympathetic  System  —  Ceaseless
Activity  of  all  that  is  Organic— General  Sketch  of  Life.

^  1.  TT  is  on  the  direct  interaction  of  infinitesimal  par-
-*-  tides  Unit  the  preservation  of  the  bodily  form  and
the  capacity  of  vital  operations  everywhere  depend.  Of
these  nothing  is  disclosed  either  by  the  aspect  of  the  living
body,  or  by  our  internal  observation;  quietly  and  unawares
to  ourselves  there  go  on  all  the  chemical  transmutations  of
substances,  all  the  stages  of  their  formation,  the  regular  addition
of  some,  the  gradual  removal  of  others.  AVhat  forces  itself
<>n  our  observation  as  evidence  of  life — the  constant  alter
nation  of  breathing,  the  unceasing  pulsation  of  the  heart,
the  heat  that  pervades  all  parts  of  the  body, — all  this  is  but
the  manifestation  of  mediating  activities,  by  means  of  which
the  organism  seeks  each  moment  to  re-establish  the  conditions
necessary  for  the  continuance  of  the  invisible  play.  Jiut  even
from  this  point  of  view  these  preliminary  operations  are  of
great  importance  ;  in  fact  it  is  the  very  peculiarity  of  life  that,
by  means  of  the  iixed  modes  of  connection  in  which  it
combines  the  elementary  substances  into  mutual  relations,  it
directs  and  compels  their  inherent  forces  to  unwonted  results.
It  is  therefore  well  worth  the  pains,  after  having  described
the  mutual  effect  of  these  activities,  further  to  inquire
what  are  the  forces  and  the  laws  by  which,  according  to
varying  requirements,  the  amount  and  the  vivacity  of  each
individually  is  at  eacli  moment  determined,  as  well  as  the
manner  in  which  it  usefully  co-operates  with  all  the  others.

While presenting  a wide field still left open for future

it)

122  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  VI.

investigations,  this  inquiry  concerning  the  general  plan  and
order  of  animal  economy  furnishes  for  our  purpose  only  the
indication  of  a  few  points,  that  we  may  be  able  once  more  to
make  use  of  the  general  view  by  which  we  have  been  hitherto
guided,  and  thus  to  complete  our  picture  of  life.

As  it  appears  from  our  former  observations  that  the
removal  of  disturbances  can  be  successfully  carried  out  only
where  these  somehow  set  in  motion  compensatory  activities
of  the  body  antagonistic  to  themselves,  so  also  cravings  of
all  kinds  can  only  be  satisfied  by  the  state  requiring  modi
fication  itself  exciting  the  reactions  essential  to  its  alteration.
This  general  condition  may  be  fulfilled  in  various  ways.  The
structure  of  the  single  parts  itself,  when  once  established,-
may,  as  in  every  case  of  elasticity,  develop  an  effort  to  return
to  its  prior  condition,  and  this  effort  (at  least  within  certain
limits)  may  increase  in  direct  proportion  to  the  amount  of
deviation  from  it.  Here  the  disturbance  is  removed,  in
the  most  direct  way,  by  the  forces  inherent  in  the  particles
whose  relations  it  had  altered,  whether  because  the  remedial
reaction  steadily  grew  along  with  the  disturbance,  or  because
the  disturbance  compels  the  internal  relations  of  the  parts
in  question  to  a  suddenly  exhibited  reaction,  after  it  lias
reached  a  certain  height.  Did  the  body  consist  of  parts
of  which  each  had  to  care  merely  for  its  own  preserva
tion,  we  would  find  this  simplest  form  of  neutralization
more  frequently  applied,  or  rather  the  parts  so  constructed
that  its  application  would  invariably  be  possible.  But  it
is  one  of  the  ends  of  life  to  use  the  needs  and  disturbances
of  one  part  in  order  to  excite  the  operations  of  others,  and
to  adjust  commotion  in  one  part,  not  in  the  shortest
way,  but  in  that  which  admits  of  necessary  and  useful
incidental  effects  being  gained  for  the  advantage  of  the
whole.  We  therefore  iind  a  second  form  of  adjustment
largely  applied  ;  the  disturbance  of  one  part  diffuses  its
consequences  over  a  considerable  section  of  the  organism,
and,  not  content  with  exciting  the  resisting  forces  of  the
spot  directly  affected,  on  the  contrary,  by  its  communicated

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  123

impetus,  rouses  remote  parts  to  a  more  extended  and  various
reaction.  Starting  from  constituents  by  which  this  impetus
was  received  in  regular  mutual  combination,  and  connected
bv  a  variety  of  relations,  the  reaction  may  also  be  far  more
intense  and  complex  than  would  have  been  that  of  the  simple
resisting  force  of  the  separate  parts  originally  subjected  to  dis
turbance  ;  it  will  not  merely  remove  the  single  disturbance,
but  at  the  same  time  evolve  from  it,  in  different  directions,
impulses  favourable  to  the  further  continuance  of  the  vital
operations.  As  the  ingenious  machine  restores  to  the  outer
world  the  simple,  almost  formless,  impetus  which  it  received,
transformed  into  a  variety  of  movements,  which  are  intricately
adjusted  to  one  another,  so  the  not  Jess  ingeniously  adapted
connections  of  living  parts  intervene  between  the  single
disturbance  and  the.  whole  of  the  organism,  and  satisfy
special  needs  with  due  regard  to  the  wellbeing  of  the  latter.
In  the  nervous  system  we  shall  meet  with  provision  for
binding  tin;  states  of  locally  separated  particles  into  re
ciprocal  action,  which  their  situation  and  structure  would
not  of  themselves  allow,  and  by  which  at  the  same  time
the  disconnected  and  fragmentary  satisfaction  of  particular
necessities  is  converted  into  the  harmonious  carrying  on  of
a  general  economy.  If  we  call  this  new  kind  of  adjust
ment  organic,  in  contrast  to  the  simpler  physical  one,  we  do
not  mean  thereby  to  imply  any  difference  in  the  efficient
forces,  except  that  difference  in  their  application  by  which
our  conception  everywhere  distinguishes  systematically  ordered
life  from  the  substances  of  the  inorganic  world  which  are
isolated  or  accidentally  thrown  together.  Even  this  kind  of
adjustment  and  preservation  is  not  the  last  and  highest ;
beyond  the  limits  of  our  present  inquiry,  but  yet  requiring
mention  here,  lies  the  co-operation  of  the  soul.  The  dis
turbed  part  cannot  always  lind  the  means  of  remedy  in  itself;
often  it  does  not  find  them  even  in  the  resources  of  the
nervous  system,  to  which  it  turns  for  aid ;  but  its  disturbance
becomes  converted  into  feeling  and  sensation  of  the  soul,  and,
quitting  the  too  confined  physical  region,  the  excitement  is

124  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  VI.

carried  on  in  that  of  the  mind,  in  order  to  summon  all  the
resources  of  insight,  to  finally  react  on  the  bodily  organs,
with  the  acquired  help  of  a  resolution,  and  to  thus  open
up  to  them  ways  of  satisfaction  which  they  would  not  have
discovered  for  themselves.

We  reserve  for  future  occasions  the  consideration  of  this
supplementing  of  the  bodily  by  the  mental  life  ;  meanwhile  let
us  try  to  present  by  a  few  examples  a  sufficient  sketch  of  the
simple  physical,  and  of  the  organically  prepared  adjustment.

§  2.  In  so  far  as  it  is  possible,  Nature  has  preferred  the
direct  settlement  of  disturbances  and  the  satisfaction  of  needs
by  forces  proper  to  the  parts,  to  the  employment  of  peculiar
organic  means ;  she  frequently  turns  to  account  in  this  way
properties  belonging  to  the  tissues  either  permanently  or,  at
least,  without  interruption  for  a  long  time,  and  keeps  in
reserve  those  other  energies  which  it  does  not  seem  possible
to  exert,  without  using  up  the  matter  in  which  they  inhere.
Even  muscular  movement  we  see  in  many  cases  replaced  by
the  physical  elasticity  of  the  tissues.  The  contraction  of  the
heart  is  indeed  carried  out  by  means  of  the  vital  drawing
up  of  its  muscular  iibres,  but  its  expansion  is  effected  by
means  not  of  an  opposite  vital  energy,  but  partly  of  the
slight  elasticity  of  its  texture,  partly  of  its  retreat  before  the
advancing  current  of  venous  blood.  Each  muscle  of  itself
regains  its  former  length  after  the  moment  of  contraction,
without  requiring  a  special  expansive  force.  The  distension
of  the  lungs  is  effected  by  means  of  the  vital  energy  of  the
muscles  of  respiration,  expiration  by  the  voluntary  elastic
drawing  in  of  the  stretched  tissue.  Much  work  is  saved  in
the  most  ordinary  operations  of  the  limbs  by  favourable
relations  in  their  structure.  An  oscillatory  movement,
initiated,  without  the  exertion  of  vital  force,  by  mere  gravity,
carries  the  leg  that  is  behind  in  walking,  past  the  one  in
front  to  the  point  whence  the  new  step  forward  can  be
taken  ;  the  body  itself  acquires  in  walking  a  tendency  for
ward  that  leaves  nothing  to  be  done  by  the  vital  exertion
of  the  muscles  but  to  support  it  and  to  stretch  out  firmly

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  125

the  advancing  leg.  At  the  same  time  the  top  of  the  thigh  is
kept  firm  yet  moveable  in  its  deep  socket,  not  by  special
activities  only,  but  also  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  and
similar  examples  of  the  economizing  of  vital  energy  would
be  furnished  in  abundance  by  a  more  detailed  consideration
of  bodily  movements.  Even  the  regularity  of  the  circulation
of  the  blood  is,  within  wide  limits,  self-maintained,  the
amount  of  possible  divergence  from  it  being  at  the  same
time  fixed.  Should  the  arterial  system  be  tor  the  moment
overfilled  with  blood,  the  tension  of  its  walls  thereby
increased  would  tend  with  the  greater  force  and  rapidity  to
remove  the  excess,  and  the  diminished  current  conveyed
to  the  heart  by  the  proportionally  less  filled  venous  tract
would  of  itself  prevent  that  organ  from  keeping  the  arteries
in  their  Hooded  state.

Tin*  comparative  constancy  witli  which,  under  the  most
various  influences  of  food  and  mode  of  life,  the  blood  main
tains  or  restores  its  normal  composition,  gives  probability  to
the  conjecture  that  its  separate  constituents,  like  the  elements
of  a  stable  chemical  combination,  cleave  to  one  another
more  firmly  in  the  proportions  forming  its  normal  composi
tion  than  in  other  reciprocal  proportions,  temporarily
determined  by  chance.  This,  however,  would  not  prevent
the  blood  from  continually  absorbing  new  ingredients  through
attraction  from  the  tissues,  from  dissolving  them,  and  causing
them  to  take  part  in  its  circulation ;  only  these  superfluous
additions  would  remain  outside  of  its  regular  combination,
and  very  soon  fall  a  prey  to  the  forces  determining  the
separation  and  conversion  of  substances,  while,  after  their
special  oflice  had  been  performed,  the  blood  would  once  more
return  to  its  normal  constitution.  This  would  be  a  process
the  same  as  that  which  takes  place  when  an  aqueous
crystal  is  separated  from  a  watery  solution  ;  the  water  belong
ing  to  its  chemical  composition  resists  the  evaporation  by
which  the  rest  is  detached  ;  nevertheless  the  crystal  remains
soluble  in  water ;  thus,  although  its  chemical  formula  con
tains  only  a  fixed  quantity  of  it,  this  does  not  prevent  it

126  BOOK  L CHAPTER  VI.

from  further  being  able  to  attract  greater  quantities,  only
that  it  cannot  retain  the  latter  so  firmly  as  the  former  in
face  of  unfavourable  circumstances.  On  such  a  hypothesis
it  would  be  intelligible  how  the  blood  can  itself,  by  its
actual  condition,  direct  the  amount  of  absorption  and  removal.
Tf  it  comes  into  contact  with  the  thinly  fluid  gastric  juice
or  the  plastic  lymph  everywhere  diffused,  in  a  degree  of
concentration  at  which  it  contains  only  the  necessary  con
stituents  of  its  normal  constitution,  it  will  be  able  to  absorb
large  quantities  of  both  ;  but  this  absorption  will  diminish,
the  more  material  the  blood  has  taken  in  beyond  its  neces
sary  supply.  It  is  thus  prevented  from  becoming  overloaded
by  reaching  a  condition  of  satiety  such  as  exhausts  the  powers
of  absorption  or  attraction,  and  of  itself  determines  a  certain
proportion  between  the  fresh  supply  and  the  demand  which
it  meets.

Now  the  blood  is  being  perpetually  conveyed  to  the
secretory  organs,  under  a  certain  pressure  of  its  walls,  after
the  modifications  which  it  may  have  undergone  in  its  course.
This  pressure  will  hardly  alone  suffice  for  the  production  of
any,  certainly  not  of  every,  secretion ;  the  organs  to  which
this  operation  is  assigned  cannot  be  regarded  as  mere  filters,
through  whose  pores  fluids  are  forced  by  the  pressure  of  the
blood  ;  their  office  is  often,  as  we  have  already  seen,  more
varied  and  complicated.  Nevertheless,  at  least  the  water
and  the  salts  which  it  holds  in  solution,  will  undergo  no
further  elaboration  in  secretion ;  we  may  apply  our  general
considerations  to  their  removal.  If  the  blood  becomes  so
diluted  that  its  aqueous  content  exceeds  that  of  its  normal
formula,  the  secretory  forces  of  the  organ — whatever  these
may  be — will,  under  the  pressure  of  the  blood,  be  more
favourable  to  the  passage  of  the  surplus  than  to  the  further
separation  of  any  of  that  amount  of  water  required  by  the
composition  of  blood.  For  that  is  subjected  to  the  action  of
the  secretory  forces  not  uncombined,  but  in  association  alike
with  the  albumen  which  it  holds  in  solution  and  with  the
other  ingredients  of  the  blood,  and,  in  virtue  of  these  detain-

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  127

ing  conditions,  can  resist  those  forces, — as  can  likewise  the
salts  which  enter  in  fixed  quantities  into  the  composition  of
the  blood.

Again,  we  can  further  apply  the  same  reasoning  to  the
organic  ingredients  that  are  discharged  from  the  blood  alike
in  nutritive  and  excretory  secretion,  sometimes  not  without
having  undergone  some  chemically  transforming  influence  of
the  secretory  organs.  A  part  of  the  tissue  whose  formation  is
absolutely  normal,  and  which  therefore  has  no  need  of  repair,
will  have  no  particular  attraction  for  the  nutritive  material
circulating  around  it ;  one  whose  constitution  has  been  altered,
and  which  on  this  very  account  has  become  more  dissimilar  to
that  material,  will  attract  it  more  powerfully,  arid  thus  bring
to  bear  a  new  condition  favourable  to  its  exit  from  the  vessels.
Here  too,  then,  the  demand  would  directly  determine  the
adequate  amount  of  thf  supply.  Tf  blood  richer  in  sub
stances  offers  to  the  secretory  organs  larger  quantities  of
that  which  they  are  always  working  up  by  their  energy,
the  mere  presence  of  the  more  abundant  material  may
suffice  to  cause  an  increase  of  this  energy,  at  least  where
the  latter  does  not  depend  on  internal  changes  in  the  organ,
that  have  themselves  a  fixed  maximum  of  intensity  and
velocity.  It  is  more  evident  that  the  secretory  activity
will  invariably  meet  with  a  growing  resistance  when  its
material  is  conveyed  to  it  only  in  such  quantity  as  per
tains  to  the  stable  constitution  of  the  blood  and  is  kept  back
l>y  the  latter.  If,  further,  any  obstacle  checks  the  secretory
activity  of  one  organ,  the  molecules  obstructed  here  will  seek
egress  wherever  else  it  is  under  these  altered  circumstances
possible  or  easiest  for  them.  The  suppression  of  skin-evapo
ration  throws  the  body  of  water  that  should  escape  from  the
surface  back  into  the  interior,  and,  as  no  organ  is  imper
vious  to  it,  we  find  the  inactivity  of  the  skin  followed  by
augmented  watery  secretions  from  all  the  separator}'  surfaces,
first  and  chiefly  from  that  one  which,  in  the  sum  of  the
given  circumstances,  offers  least  resistance  to  the  exit.  It
is  equally  well  known  that  excessive  skin  evaporation  reduces

128  BOOK  I. CHAl'TEU  VI.

the  quantity  of  the  other  secretions  and  increases  their  con
centration, — a  result  to  be  explained,  apart  from  any  particular
expenditure  of  compensatory  activity,  by  the  absence  of
proper  solvents.  Many  means  of  egress  are  not,  however,
open  to  all  excretions  ;  the  suppression  of  a  given  secretion
may  either  wholly  prevent  the  formation  of  the  substance  to
be  removed, —  this  having  perhaps  been  possible  only  through
the  peculiar  energy  of  the  organ  now  in  repose, —  or,  where
the  substance  is  already  as  such  present  in  the  blood,  its  exit
may  be  prevented  in  the  form  which  it  lias  there,  and  in  which
it  could  have  found  a  free  passage  only  through  the  now
blocked-up  organ.  In  this  case  substitutory  processes  will
develop  themselves  ;  either  the  material  from  which  the  sub
stance  to  be  removed  was  to  be  formed,  or  that  already  formed,
will  have  to  undergo  still  further  transformations  and  divisions,
and  finally  to  assume  forms  in  which  its  removal  is  possible
through  the  other  still  open  organs.  As  the  substances  in
process  of  being  re-formed  undergo  in  the  blood  an  ever
continued  reaction  with  oxygen,  such  as  seems  favourable
to  their  reduction  to  a  simpler  and  looser  combination,  it  is
conceivable  that  this  change  also,  in  the  direction  of  secretory
energy,  is  self-determined,  without  the  interference  of  a  special
regulating  force,  Nevertheless  the  evil  consequences  for  the
health  of  the  whole  which  result  from  the  stoppage  of
important  secretions,  show  us  that  this  substitution  of  one
activity  for  another  involves  difficulties,  and  is  hardly
calculated  to  serve  as  a  means  of  adjusting  disturbances  to
any  large  extent.

§  3.  Our  purpose  has  only  been  to  make  clear,  from
the  examples  cited,  the  possibility  of  a  purely  physical  com
pensation  of  disturbances,  but  we  cannot  be  by  any  means
certain  that  in  them  a  beginning  of  organic  compensation  is
not  involved  by  the  application  of  a  system  of  organs  or
energies  expressly  designed  for  this  end.  So  much  in  the
deeper  connection  of  vital  phenomena  is  still  obscure,  that  an
operation  often  seems  to  us  simpler  than  it  is  in  reality,
and  that  we  can  often  explain  what  we  know  of  it  with

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  129

few  means  of  explanation,  whereas  from  the  greater  expedients
actually  used  by  Nature  we  must  conclude  there  are  difficulties
unknown  to  us  lying  in  the  way.  I  have  above  stated  the
general  grounds  which  include  the  inadequacy  of  merely  physi
cal  compensations.  They  would  all  finally  aim  at  the  re-
establishment  of  the  former  equilibrium  ;  but  Nature  does  not
always  care  about  that  equilibrium  ;  she  even  sometimes  would
have  it  altered  for  the  sake  of  the  ends  of  development.  With
this  purpose  she  must  bring  into  mutual  vital  action  even  such
parts  as  could  not  directly  transfer  their  states  to  one  another.

The  nervous  system  is  designed  for  the  performance  of  this
task.  We  have  already  mentioned  the  motor  nerve-fibres
that,  proceeding  from  the  brain  and  the  spine,  convey  to  the
muscles  of  the  body  the  impulses  to  motion  there  arising
from  the  mental  life,  and  occasion  in  them  contractions  some
times  momentary,  sometimes  continuous.  In  like  manner
the  sensory  fibres,  which  in  outward  appearance  are  identical
with  the  others,  and  differ  only  in  the  results  of  their  opera
tion,  connect  all  the  sensitive  points  of  the  body  from  which
they  run  with  the  central  organs  to  which  all  impressions
must  be  transmitted,  in  order  that  they  may  exist  for  con
sciousness.  On  these  two  kinds  of  fibres  and  on  the  masses
of  the  brain  and  spinal  marrow,  in  which  they  end  or  from
which  they  start,  depend  all  the  services  that  have  to  be
rendered  by  the  corporeal  life  to  the  ends  of  the  mental.
A  more  precise  description  of  them  may  be  deferred  to  a
future  opportunity.  Besides  these  organs,  which  we  com
prehend  under  the  name  of  the  cerebro-spinal  system,  there
is  the  other  system  of  the  sympathetic  nerves,  which,  from
the  many  glomerate  or  twisted  protuberances  (the  ganglia)
into  which  its  far  finer  fibres  are  knotted,  has  received  the
name  of  the  ganglionic  system  :  to  it  is  for  the  most  part
committed  the  maintenance  of  the  internal  order  of  the  bodily
operations.

The  less  any  part  of  the  body  is  designed  for  volun
tary  movement,  the  less  its  capacity  to  convey  to  con
sciousness  impressions  of  its  states  and  the  more  energetic  ita

VOL.  i.  I

130  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  VI.

change  of  substance  or  plastic  activity — the  more  frequently
do  we  find  in  the  nerve-bundles  which  it  contains  the  delicate
fibres  of  the  sympathetic  along  with  the  thicker  ones  of  the
cerebro-spinal  system.  Observation  and  experiment  unite
in  confirming  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  cir
cumstance  in  itself,  that  this  second  nervous  system  has
to  minister  to  the  sum  of  the  vegetative  operations,  the
chemical  transformation  of  substances,  their  sustenance  and
reproduction,  the  construction  of  particles,  finally,  the  pur
posive  harmony  between  the  amounts  and  kinds  of  the
separate  actions.  This  mutual  adaptation  of  the  operations
of  various  parts  presupposes  that  the  impressions  received  by
the  single  fibres  of  the  states  of  the  place  to  which  they  run,
are  brought  into  reciprocal  relation  and  accord,  and  that  there
are  centres  in  which  their  various  excitations  come  into  con
tact,  and  thus,  by  their  effect  on  one  another,  yield  the
impetus  to  a  definite  reaction,  adapted  to  the  actual  situation.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  ganglia  found  in  great  num
bers  in  the  different  vegetative  organs,  are  the  instrumental
points  of  this  mutual  influence  ;  but  we  are  not  yet  suffi
ciently  acquainted  with  the  conditions  under  which  a  transfer
ence  of  the  states  of  one  fibre  to  another  takes  place,  which  is
not  met  with  elsewhere.  For  not  even  here  can  we  observe
a  direct  confluence  of  several  fibres  to  form  a  common  trunk  ;
but  scattered  between  the  fibres  there  are  peculiar  elements,
roundish  vesicles  containing  a  nucleus,  the  so-called  ganglionic
cells,  from  which  not  only  do  single  fibres  proceed,  but  of
which  several  are  sometimes  uninterruptedly  connected  with
each 'other  by  fibrous  prolongations  which  they  send  out  in
different  directions.  It  is  reserved  for  the  future  to  decide
finally  as  to  the  functions  of  these  parts,  many  like  to  which
occur  also  in  the  brain  and  spine,  and  to  determine  their
utility  for  the  mutual  action  of  the  individual  fibres.  Sup
posing  such  reciprocal  action  somehow  originated,  each
ganglion  will,  in  the  first  place,  be  an  intermediate  link
through  which  the  impression  travelling  from  any  part  of
the  body  is  enabled  to  exert  an  influence  on  states  of

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  131

another  part  with  which  the  former  is  not  in  direct  con
nection  ;  and  at  the  same  time  it  will  also  act  as  a  central
organ,  inasmuch  as  it  will  nob  henceforth  allow  to  this  im
pression  the  amount  and  kind  of  further  work  that  correspond
to  its  nature  and  strength  by  themselves,  but  will  fix  its
effect  in  accordance  with  the  simultaneous  demands  of  the
other  parts  with  which  it  is  also  connected.  There  is  no
difficulty  in  supposing  that  the  small  ganglia  (directly  con
trolling  the  internal  relations  of  a  limited  symmetrical  region
of  parts  again  united  to  each  other  by  commissures  or  con
nected  with  larger  ganglia  as  central  organs  of  a  higher  order)
bring  the  operations  of  more  extensive  organs  and  systems  of
organs  into  mutual  harmony,  till  finally,  by  their  close  inter
lacement,  all  the  vegetative  processes  of  the  body  are  brought
into  the  unity  of  regular  progress,  encircling  support,  and
adjusting  reciprocal  action.  These  connections  of  the  central
organs  do  in  fact  exist,  and  from  the  neck  through  the
cavities  of  the  chest  and  abdomen  there  runs  down  on  both
.sides  of  the  spine  the  chain  of  the  chief  ganglia,  which,  united
by  nerve-fibres,  send  out  other  fibres  to  join  the  numerous  tissues
that  are  associated  with  the  separate  divisions  of  the  intestines.
In  former  times,  the  sympathy  by  which  the  disturbances
of  one  organ  so  frequently  affect  others,  even  those  locally  at
a  distance,  was  supposed  to  be  dependent  on  the  efficiency  of
this  system,  and  not  inaptly  it  has  received  from  these
sympathies  its  name  of  the  sympathetic  system,  though,
according  to  the  results  of  recent  investigations,  many  of  them
>pring,  without  its  participation,  from  the  reciprocal  action  of
the  cerebro-spinal  nerves.  Observation  and  experiment  have
in  part  informed  us  in  what  form  of  energy  it  carries  out  its
functions,  while,  however,  we  are  unable  exhaustively  to
determine  the  extent  of  its  effects.  "What  has  been  certainly
established  is  in  the  first  place  its  influence  on  the  move
ments  of  the  intestines,  whose  muscular  coatings  contract
after  the  irritation  of  the  ganglia  that  control  them.  Not  at
once,  like  the  muscles  of  voluntary  motion,  but  some  time
after  the  application  of  the  stimulus,  the  intestinal  canal

132  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  VI.

contracts  by  the  drawing  up  of  the  thin  muscular  sheath  by
which  it  is  circularly  surrounded,  and  this  shrinking,  lasting
longer  than  the  applied  stimulus,  gradually  advances  in
undulations,  after  the  re-expansion  of  one  part  the  contiguous
portion  contracting  without  any  fresh  external  impulsion.
Similar  signs  of  a  slow  contraction  are  observed  in  the  larger
vascular  trunks,  into  whose  coatings,  consisting  not  merely  of
elastic  but  also  of  vitally  contractile  muscular  fibres,  sympa
thetic  filaments  run.  The  periodical  pulsations  of  the  heart
depend  on  a  system  of  microscopically  small  ganglia,  imbedded
in  its  peculiar  muscular  substance.  In  cold-blooded  animals
the  pulsations  of  the  heart  go  on  regularly  for  a  good  while,
even  after  its  removal  from  the  body  ;  even  the  single  parts  of
the  mutilated  organ  still  contract,  only  those,  howrever,  which
contain  the  ganglia.  These  facts  prove  that  both  excitation
to  movement  in  general,  and  the  ground  of  the  rhythmical
alternation  of  tension  and  relaxation,  lie  in  these  nervous
central  organs  ;  but  we  know  neither  whence  they  themselves
draw  their  excitative  force,  nor  in  what  precise  manner  the
periodicity  of  their  activity  is  brought  about.

The  sympathetic  nerves  do  not  seem  to  be  capable  of
giving  rise  to  sensations.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  things
we  have  no  impression  of  the  states  of  the  parts  that  they
mainly  control,  of  the  condition  of  digestion,  assimilation,  and
secretion,  of  the  distension  of  the  vessels;  we  come  to  know
them  only  when  their  influence  is  more  widely  extended  to
other  parts,  whose  sensitive  nerves  convey  to  us  these  indirect
stimulations,  or  when  very  important  changes  and  anomalous
states  occur  in  them.  It  is  uncertain  whether  in  the  latter
case  the  sympathetic  fibre  takes  on  itself  the  conducting  of
impressions  to  consciousness,  of  which  it  is  usually  incapable,
or  whether  the  cerebro-spinal  filaments,  which,  though  few  in
number,  are  never  wholly  absent  in  its  train,  here  as  elsewhere
perform  this  office.  Perhaps  also  the  sympathetic  fibre  is
not  generally  quite  destitute  of  the  capacity  for  producing
sensations,  only  those  produced  are  lacking  in  the  delicacy
and  sharpness  necessary  to  their  being  distinctly  separated

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  133

from  the  general  sense  (or  organic  feelings,  Gemcingefuhl}.
Without  doubt,  on  the  other  hand,  these  fibres  fulfil  for  the
ganglia  partly  the  same  office  which  the  sensory  fibres  of  the
eerebro-spinal  system  fulfil  for  the  brain ;  they  serve  as
carriers  and  messengers,  to  make  known  to  the  ganglion  the
states  of  the  parts  from  which  they  come,  that  as  the  central
organ  it  may  resolve  on  the  necessary  reaction.

The  important  influence  unquestionably  exerted  by  the
sympathetic  system  on  the  changes  of  composition  of  the
corporeal  juices,  is  very  little  known  as  regards  the  manner
in  which  these  are  brought  about,  yet  various  possibilities
may  easily  be  conceived,  among  which  the  future  perhaps
will  decide.  The  contractions  caused  by  the  energy  of  Un
sympathetic  fibres  in  the  muscles  make  it  probable  that  also
other  tissues  may  under  the  same  influence  undergo  altera
tions  in  the  situation  of  their  infinitesimal  particles.  As
the  chemical  composition  of  the  juices  unquestionably
depends  to  a  great  degree  on  the  nature  of  the  coatings
through  which  they  react,  exude,  or  are  absorbed,  a  change
in  the  physical  condition  of  the  membranes  would  easily
explain  the  manifold  deviations  of  the  secretions,  which  are
found  to  occur  under  the  influence  of  violent  nervous  irrita
tion,  and  which  certainly  go  on  all  through  life,  though  less
obtrusively  and  with  less  abrupt  alternations.  A  membrane
through  which  two  fluids  strive  to  act  upon  one  another  will,
with  different  degrees  of  tension  and  a  different  collocation  of
its  infinitesimal  particles,  not  always  bring  together  in  the
same  manner  the  substances  seeking  to  act ;  it  will  be  able
sometimes  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  one,  and  to  facilitate
that  of  the  other.  In  thus  hindering  the  occurrence  of  a
single  customary  chemical  process,  it  can  easily  impart  new
and  widely  diverse  forms  to  the  total  result  of  its  activity.
l»ut  the  other  possibility  also  remains  open,  that  the  nerve-
fibre,  at  the  moment  of  its  activity,  directly  causes  a  chemical
reciprocal  action,  inasmuch  as  (like  the  electric  current,  that
causes  the  already  present  but  still  delaying  constituents  of  a
future  combination  to  realize  it  at  once,  or  as  swiftly  dissolves

134  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  VI.

other  combinations)  it  introduces  into  the  play  of  the  sub
stances  a  condition,  which  gives  new  directions  to  the
chemical  affinity  between  them.  We  have  least  evidence  of
any  direct  formative  action  of  the  nerves,  and  we  may  suppose
that  their  function  is  fulfilled  in  the  establishment  of  the
chemical  nature  of  the  substances,  and  that  these  then  under
the  direction  of  their  own  forces  and  of  the  united  impression
of  the  already  organized  environment,  assume  the  forms
adapted  to  them.

By  means  of  contraction  of  the  vessels  the  nervous  force
would  increase  the  pressure  of  the  bloocl  on  its  walls,
and  thereby  alter  the  conditions  of  all  the  activities  of
absorption  and  secretion.  By  means  of  the  shrinking  of
particular  parts  of  the  tissues  it  would  determine  in  a
peculiar  manner  the  afflux  and  reflux  of  the  blood  for  these
parts,  and  be  able  to  bring  together  accumulations  of  efficient
matters  flowing  past  with  less  velocity  where  they  were
rendered  necessary  by  more  vigorous  growth  and  more  rapid
change.  By  acceleration  of  the  muscular  movements,  which,
on  the  whole,  introduce  and  carry  out  the  locomotion  of  the
matters,  it  would  guide  and  complete  the  draining  away  of
the  excreted,  the  reception  of  the  newly -acquired  material.
Finally,  through  altered  tension  of  the  membranes,  it  would
be  able  to  determine  the  amount  of  the  change  of  substances
in.  the  whole,  and  the  fluctuations  of  its  activity  in  particular
parts.  And  the  nervous  system  would  be  determined  to  all
these  manifestations  of  its  energy,  partly  by  means  of  the  im
pression  of  the  disturbances  to  be  neutralized,  while  at  the  same
time  the  normal  processes  in  the  body  would  be  continually
conveying  to  it  stimulations,  which,  accumulating  at  particular
moments,  exert  a  suitable  effect  when  they  have  reached  a
definite  strength.  Thus  would  occur  at  one  place  varying
fluctuations,  at  another  regularly  and  rhythmically  recurring
periods  of  activity  and  rest.  It  is  needless  further  to  describe
these  events,  whose  forms  of  manifestation  are  known  to  all,
while  their  definite  conditions  are  grasped  by  none ;  let  us
rather  supplement  this  mention  of  them  by  the  remark  that,

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  135

Ihough  displaying  this  abundance  of  operations,  the  system  of  the
sympathetic  nerves  does  not  nevertheless  depend  in  total  isola
tion  on  its  own  resources,  but  that  it  is  connected  by  numerous
filaments  with  the  cerebro-spinal  system.  These  were  long  re
garded  as  the  real  roots  of  the  ganglionic  nerves,  which  were  held
to  be  not  an  independent  system,  but  the  dependent  extension
and  intertwining  of  many  cerebral  and  spinal  nerves.  Xowmany
grounds  have  at  present  given  preponderance  to  the  idea  of
an  independent  ganglionic  nervous  system ;  yet  its  numerous
connections  with  brain  and  spine  cannot  have  exclusively
the  object  of  guiding  in  these  organs  also  the  reparation
which,  worn  out  by  their  operations,  they  may  need;  on  the
contrary,  they  seem  just  as  much  at  least  to  admit  of  these
foci  of  proper  animal  life  having  a  certain  influence  on  the
course  of  the  forming  and  preserving  processes.  The  plant
alone  preserves  its  life — as  long  as  it  does  preserve  it—
exclusively  through  the  harmonious  action  of  its  material
constituents.  The  animal  organism,  though  infinitely  more
complex  in  its  arrangement,  yet  forms  within  itself  no
independent  cycle  of  operations.  Anywhere  and  in  any  form,
however  subordinate,  we  may  see  elements  of  mental  life
intervening  between  the  operations  of  the  corporeal  organs,
and  filling  gaps  left  between  the  single  links  of  the  chain  of
vital  processes.  The  plant,  immersed  in  its  elements  of  life,
air  and  water,  finds  itself  by  no  effort  of  its  own  in  perpetual
action  and  reaction  with  the  supplies  which  it  needs ;  the
animal  has  to  seek  its  food,  and  cannot  perform  this  part  of
its  vital  round  without  having  recourse  to  various  means  of
mental  activity.  If  we  rooted  out  all  those  instincts  by
which  the  animal  seeks  for  its  states  of  sensation  remedies,
with  all  of  which  the  course  of  Nature  does  not  of  itself
supply  it,  its  organism  would  be  capable  of  nothing  more
than  restricted  and  quickly  terminated  self-preservation  ;  and
far  from  being  the  spontaneously-acting  machine,  which  an
inaccurate  analysis  of  facts  has  so  often  taken  it  to  be,  it  is
but  one  half  of  a  whole,  unable  to  live  without  the  other,  the
outer  world  and  the  soul

136  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  VI.

§  4.  How  entirely  in  fact  has  the  course  of  our  inquiry  over
turned  the  prejudices  suggested  to  us  by  the  immediate  sight
of  life,  the  dreams  of  unity,  independence,  and  constancy  in
the  living  form  !  We  can  as  yet  hardly  say  what  are  even
the  local  boundaries  that  divide  the  organism  from  its
environment.  When  does  the  air  in  our  lungs  begin  to
belong  to  us,  and  when  does  it  cease  to  be  a  constituent  of
the  body  ?  Has  it  become  ours  when  it  is  absorbed  by  the
blood,  and  was  it  not  ours  when  it  was  still  in  the  cells  of
the  lungs  ?  Is  the  chyle  a  part  of  our  body  after  it  has
made  its  way  into  the  chyle-vessels,  or  are  not  it  and  the
blood  but  a  piece  of  the  outer  world  drawn  into  the  circuit
of  the  body,  superficially  altered  by  the  vital  forces,  but  still
with  only  an  approach  to  participation  in  life  ?  And  do  not
many  substances,  such  as  the  soluble  salts  of  the  terrestrial
crust,  circulate  through  our  body,  through  blood  and  organs,
and  yet  always  remain  foreign  ingredients  ?  At  no  one
moment  does  the  body  contain  only  what  properly  belongs  to
its  constitution  ;  we  always  find  in  it  substances  that  are  about
to  become,  others  that  have  ceased  to  be,  its  own ;  materials
for  the  future  and  ruins  of  the  past  are  associated  in  it  witli
the  living  stem  of  the  present  and  with  fragments  accidentally
detached  from  the  outer  world.

Just  as  little  in  the  course  of  its  development  in  time  as
in  space  is  the  body  rounded  off  into  strict  unity.  Since  its
supplies,  its  growth,  and  its  evolution  are  not  effected  from
its  own  resources,  it  must,  on  the  contrary,  everywhere  have
recourse  to  the  favourable  assistance  of  the  outer  world.  Its
life  is  like  an  eddy  produced  in  the  bed  of  a  stream  by  a
peculiarly  shaped  obstacle.  The  general  course  of  Nature  is
the  stream,  the  organized  body  the  obstacle  against  which
this  breaks,  and  its  peculiar  shape  converts  the  uniform
and  straight  current  of  the  water  into  the  strange  windings
and  crossings  of  the  whirlpool.  So  long  as  the  form  of  the
river-bed  remains  the  same,  and  as  the  waves  flow  on,  this
play  of  movement  will  be  continually  repeated,  with  always
the  same  apparently  unchanged  figure,  though  from  moment

CONSERVATION  OP  LIFE.  13?

to  moment  the  stream  is  different  that  produces  it  coming,
and  <roin<f  leaves  it.  But  the  form  of  the  river-bed  will  not

i"> o

remain  the  same ;  the  force  of  the  torrent  will  be  always
changing  it,  and  what  that  cannot  do  will  be  accomplished  by
the  native  force  of  the  eddy  itself,  still  more  destructive.
As  a  sea  current  by  the  dash  of  its  waves,  which  is  caused
by  the  special  form  of  the  shore,  levels  the  shore,  and  thus
itself  removes  the  cause  of  its  peculiar  movement,  so  also  do
the  exerted  energies  of  life,  all  the  manifestations  and  opera
tions  of  its  organization,  turn  back  with  slow  but  sure  force
to  disturb  the  foundation  on  which  they  rest.  The  eddy  of
to-day  is  not  that  of  yesterday ;  the  continual  reconstitution  is
bringing  back  always  similar,  never  identical,  states.

We  shall  not  leave  this  comparison  without  borrowing  from
it  a  final  comprehensive  view  of  vital  processes.  According
to  a  widespread  delusion,  the  highest  and  noblest  phenomena
of  Nature  as  well  as  of  the  mental  world  are  distinguished  by
unconstrainedness  in  the  strict  sense,  and  have  secured  to
them,  by  the  immovable  stability  of  their  nucleus,  immunity
against  all  assaults  of  the  external  world,  and  steadiness  of
development  by  the  simplicity  of  their  internal  structure.
But,  in  truth,  the  higher  forms  of  being  have  more
conditions  than  the  lower,  and  the  strength  of  their  existence
consists  only  in  the  ingenious  calculation  with  which  they
meet  the  increased  variety  of  their  wants.  Living  bodies  are
not  animated  by  a  simple  moulding  impulse,  independent  and
powerful  from  its  intensity  ;  their  constituents  do  not  com
bine  with  extraordinary  unconquerable  forces  to  a  more  solid
unity,  as  might  be  possible  for  the  unorganized ;  depending  on
a  constant  ilux  of  their  mass,  they  are,  as  compared  with
these,  frail  and  perishable  structures.  Yet  the  advancing
current  of  countless  physical  events  is  broken  by  the  favourable
conditions  under  which  the  parts  of  these,  united  together,  meet
the  course  of  Nature,  and  assumes  the  shape  of  a  stable  figure,
that  draws  into  itself  the  substances  of  the  outer  world,  holds
them  fast  for  a  time,  and  then  restores  them  to  the  more
chaotic  vortex  of  inorganic  Nature.  This  manifold  play  of

138  BOOK  I. CHAPTER  VI.

events  is  not  attached  to  a  rigid  substratum,  but,  like  the  many-
coloured  radiance  of  the  rainbow,  moves  and  flutters  above
a  ceaselessly  changing  scene  below.  Nay,  so  little  do  we
find  in  organic  bodies  any  inherent  self-sufficient  vital  force,
that  we  can,  on  the  contrary,  regard  them  only  as  the  places
in  space  where  the  matter,  the  forces,  and  the  motions  of  the
general  course  of  Nature  meet  each  other  in  relations  so
favourable  that  variable  masses  can  be  solidified  into  a  form
that  is  nevertheless  ere  long  to  perish,  and  their  reciprocal
actions  go  through  a  course  of  flourishing  and  decaying
development.  However  much  we  may  be  tempted  to  admire,
as  stable  units  and  as  self-contained  wholes,  the  form  of  the
plant  with  its  tranquil  growth,  and  the  figure  of  the  animal  with
its  power  of  locomotion — finally,  however  urgently  we  may  be
impelled  by  ethical  motives  to  look  on  ourselves  in  the  same  way
in  contrast  to  the  rest  of  the  universe,  within  which  is  contained
the  material  that  we  can  mould  by  our  actions :  nevertheless
science,  seeking  the  physical  basis  of  our  existence,  cannot
view  the  rest  of  Nature  as  a  foreign,  formless  chaos  extending
around  the  individual  living  being,  and  waiting  to  receive
connection,  form,  and  development  from  its  vital  energy.
'Hie  focus  of  a  lens  condenses  the  heating  force  of  light  or
renders  the  graceful  outline  of  a  figure  by  no  merit  of  its
own,  but  derives  from  the  convergence  of  the  rays  the  privilege
of  being  the  scene  of  these  remarkable  phenomena :  almost
as  little  by  its  own  exertions  does  the  living  body  collect  the
substances  and  motions  of  the  environment  to  compose  the
detached  figure  of  its  own  form.  It  is  indeed  partly  the
refractive  power  of  the  lens  that  collects  the  rays,  but  even
this  element  of  efficacy  it  owes  to  a  transmission  in  which  the
forces  of  the  outer  world  actively  co-operate.  Thus  it  is
what  it  is  by  virtue  of  the  circumstances  from  which  it
sprang;  selected  for  harmonious  evolution,  if  they  concur
favourably  in  its  production,  condemned  to  a  sickly  and
wretched  existence  if  discordant  conditions  cross  each  other
in  its  beginning.  The  ceaseless  universal  motion  of  Nature  is
the  all-ernbracing  tide,  in  whose  most  agitated  part — not

CONSERVATION  OF  LIFE.  130

indeed  like  steady  islands,  but  only  like  whirling  eddies —
living  beings  emerge  and  disappear,  as  the  masses  in  their
onward  course  experience  momentarily  a  common  impetus
into  a  new  path,  a  concentration  into  a  definite  shape,  before
being  ere  long  again  cast  headlong  and  in  fragments  into  the
formless,  universal  tide,  by  the  same  forces  that  brought  them
to  this  point  of  intersection.

BOOK II.

THE SOUL.

CHAPTER I.

TIIK  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.

Reasons  for  believing  that  there  arc  Souls  —  Freedom  of  the  Will  —  Incomparabiiity
of  PhvMcal  and  Psychical  Processes,  and  Necessity  of  two  diverse  Grounds  of
Kxplanation  —  Hypothesis  of  their  Union  in  the  same  Being  —  The  Unity
of  Consciousness  —  What  it  is  not,  and  what  it  really  is  —  Impossibility  of
explaining  it  as  a  Combination  of  a  Plurality  of  Effects  —  Relating  Know
ledge  contrasted  with  the  Composition  of  Physical  Results  —  Supersensuous
Nature  of  the  Soul.

\  1.  ""YT()^V  i»  this  perpetual  ilux  of  elements,  attracted  to
^  and  repelled  from  one  another,  \vhat  is  our  own
place  :;  To  whom  belongs  our  manifold  inner  life,  with  its
play  of  knowledge,  its  pain  and  pleasure;,  its  ever-varying
energy  of  volition  ?  May  all  this  be  after  all  but  a  subtle
form  of  illusion,  but  a  reflection  of  the  inner  movements  of  the
eddy,  like  the  play  of  colour  that  ilickers  in  the  light  spray
•ibovc  the  heavier  surging  of  the  waters  ?  Or  is  there  within
all  this  externality  a  genuine  stable  point,  to  which  all  cor
poreal  growth  is  but  a  home  and  an  environment,  and  all  the
unrest  of  the  change  pervading  the  visible  form  but  a  varying
incentive  to  the  many-sided  development  of  the  unity  of  its
own  life  ?

In  opposition  to  what  experience  sets  before  our  eyes,  the
natural  reflection  of  the  human  race  has  always  decided  in
iavour  of  this  belief.  We  have  no  opportunity  of  observing
mental  life  except  in  constant  connection  with  the  bodily
form  and  its  development  ;  we  see  the  two  unfold  together,
and  as  the  bodily  frame  falls  to  pieces,  the  fulness  and
energy  of  the  mind  that  animated  it  also  disappear  wholly
from  our  ken,  leaving  no  trace  behind.  Experience  endeavours,
with  what  would  seem  to  be  the  most  distinct  intimations,  to
persuade  us  that  all  internal  activity  springs  from  the  com-

148

144  BOOK  II. CIIAPTKK  I.

bination  of  materials,  and  vanishes  with  their  separation,  and
yet  the  living  intelligence  of  all  nations  has  in  the  name
Soul  expressed  the  conviction  that  not  merely  a  difference
of  outward  appearance  distinguishes  internal  phenomena  from
corporeal  life,  but  that  an  element  of  peculiar  nature,  diffei-
ently  constituted  from  the  materials  of  the  frame,  lies  at  the
base  of  the  world  of  sensations,  of  emotions,  of  volitions,  and
by  its  own  unity  binds  them  into  the  whole  of  a  rounded-off
development.  So  universal  a  prejudice  never  can  arise
without  strong  grounds  contained  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,
and  yet  we  must  preliminarily  regard  it  as  but  a  prejudice,
the  examination  and  proof  or  disproof  of  which  is  reserved
for  an  express  inquiry.  For,  as  surely  as  the  universal
instinct  of  human  intelligence  does  not  proceed  to  such
conceptions  without  the  deeper  justification  of  irresistible
cravings,  so  little  can  we  take  for  granted  that  it  is  invariably
fortunate  in  its  results,  and  that  it  is  not  seeking  satisfaction
in  a  wrong  path,  the  illusoriness  of  which  must  in  the  end  be
detected  by  the  practised  eye  of  science.  And,  in  fact,  when
we  come  to  test  the  reasons  tacitly  underlying  the  opinion  of
the  multitude  when  it  seeks  to  withdraw  mental  life  from  the
domain  of  Nature,  we  shall  find  that  its  opinion  does  not  rest
on  all  with  the  same  amount  of  justification,  and  that  in  but
a  small  circle  of  phenomena  are  contained  the  determining
grounds  for  explaining  internal  events  by  peculiarity  of
nature.

§  2.  By  three  characteristics  above  ail  does  psychic  life  seem
to  be  differentiated  most  unquestionably  from  the  whole  course
of  Nature.  On  none  of  these  is  more  stress  laid  in  the
ordinary  view  than  on  the  most  equivocal  of  all — namely,  the
Freedom  of  internal  Self-determination,  of  which  we  think  we
have  in  ourselves  direct  and  indubitable  experience,  in  contrast
to  the  unbroken  chain  of  necessity  with  which  the  states  of
unorganized  matter  are  evolved  out  of  one  another.  All  that
distinguishes  our  spiritual  existence,  all  the  dignity  with
which  we  think  it  necessary  to  surround  it,  all  the  worth  of
our  personality  and  of  our  actions,  seems  to  us  to  depend  on

TIIK  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  145

this  setting  our  being  free  from  the  constraint  of  the  mechanical
succession  of  whose  dominion  we  are  aware,  not  only  over
what  is  lifeless,  but  also  over  the  development  of  our  bodily
life.  And  yet  a  little  reflection  is  sufficient  to  show  that
neither  does  that  freedom  form  an  observable  fact  of  our
inner  life,  nor  is  our  own  opinion  of  the  value  to  be  attached
to  it  always  the  same.  It  is  true  that  self-observation  very
frequently  indicates  no  determining  motives  on  which  our
resolutions  and  other  internal  motions  may  be  recognised  as
depending  ;  but  then  our  attention  is  reflected  back  on  ourselves
in  so  unconnected  and  fragmentary  a  fashion,  that  to  its
imperfect  survey  an  act  may  readily  appear  free  self-determi
nation,  for  which  it  would  perhaps  find  constraining  grounds,
did  it  go  back  a  step  further  in  the  analysis  of  our  internal
states.  It  is  true  that  impressions  made  on  us  call  forth
reactions  corresponding  to  them  neither  in  amount  nor  in
kind,  and  that  at  various  moments  the  most  various  mani
festations  answer  to  the  same  impulse  experienced  from
without.  ]5ut  yet,  with  all  this  incalculableness  of  conduct,
we  have  but  repeated  in  our  intellectual  life  the  universal
phenomenon  of  excitability,  which,  common  alike  to  bodily
and  to  inanimate  existence,  is  no  release  from  the  thraldom
of  activity  according  to  law,  but  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  true
idea  of  that  activity  itself.  For  nowhere  does  even  an  active
cause  transfer  the  effect  complete  to  the  element  which  it
affects,  so  as  to  receive  back  the  mere  echo  of  its  own  action  ;
everywhere  the  impression  made  moves  to  utterance  the
peculiar  nature  of  that  on  which  it  was  made,  and  the  form
of  the  event  to  come  is  determined  equally  by  this  and  by
the  peculiar  energies  which  its  presence  awakens  in  that  which
is  affected  by  it.  Sometimes  we  are  acquainted  with  tin-
internal  structure  of  the  objects  on  which  the  stimulation
falls,  and  able  to  trace  its  path  and  the  chain  \A  the  reactions
that  it  calls  forth  as  it  advances.  I>ut  oftener  the  internal
relations  of  what  is  stimulated  are  obscure  to  us,  and  only  tin-
first  external  shock  and  the  final  form  of  the  last  reaction  fall
under  our  observation  ;  the  multitude  of  intermediate  links
VOL.  i.  K

1-iG  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

that  necessarily  connect  tlie  end  with  the  beginning  lie
unknown  between.  Thus  in  numerous  gradations  the  series
of  phenomena  presents  to  us  here  events  the  sum  of
whose  conditions  falls  within  our  range  of  vision,  and  which
therefore  stand  before  us  as  fully  determined  consequents  of
their  antecedents ;  there,  results  whose  form,  having  been
most  essentially  modified  by  the  hidden  nature  of  complex
intermediate  links,  no  longer  stands  in  any  conceivable  relation
to  the  simple  stimulus  that  originally  caused  it.  In  such
cases  we  are  always  inclined  to  think  that  the  chain  of  neces
sary  connection  has  been  broken ;  this  we  found  to  be  the
case  in  the  explanation  of  corporeal  life ;  the  same  thing
meets  us  again  here,  where  the  far  greater  complexity  of
coefficient  and  yet  for  the  most  part  hidden  conditions
makes  the  reaction  still  more  unlike  the  excitation,  and
persuades  us  the  more  strongly  of  the  freedom  of  uncaused
self-determination.  Now,  if  we  become  convinced  of  the
erroneous  nature  of  the  reasoning  that  denies  the  thorough
going  determinedness  of  mental  life,  because  it  cannot  invari
ably  be  proved,  we  may  perhaps  try  to  retain  freedom  as  a
necessary  consequence  of  ethical  truths  or  an  imperative-
condition  of  the  fulfilment  of  moral  obligations.  In  fact,  we
would  allow  to  such  a  proof,  were  it  unquestionable,  fully  as
much  value  as  a  basis  for  our  opinions,  as  we  attach  to  an
observed  fact.  But,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  the
universal  judgment  is  not  agreed  as  to  this  ;  we  often  doubt
whether  at  all,  or  in  what  definite  form,  this  unconditioned
freedom  is  helpful  or  needful  to  the  satisfaction  of  moral
cravings  :  it  has  not  appeared  to  all  indispensable,  and
the  attempt  to  make  it  more  definite  leads  to  questions  the
answer  to  which,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  at  any  rate  far  from
having  the  clearness  necessary  to  a  thought  fitted  to  form  the
basis  of  an  important  view.  Finally,  we  must  add,  this
opinion  can  speak  and  means  to  speak  not  of  a  freedom  of  the
inner  life  generally,  but  of  a  Freedom  of  Will  in  particular ;
in  the  train  of  our  ideas,  our  feelings,  and  our  desires  the
traces  of  a  universal  regularity  of  laws  are  so  distinct  and

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  147

obtrusive  that  no  philosophy  has  ever  ventured  to  withdraw
these  pluenomena  from  the  domain  of  mechanical  necessity.
Further  investigation  would  perhaps  remove  these  scruples,
and  show  us  how  little  ground  we  have  to  dread  this  com
bination  of  freedom  and  mechanism  in  the  nature  of  the  soul ;
but  certainly  at  the  beginning  of  the  inquiry  the  evident
prevalence  of  universal  law  in  the  greater  part  of  our  inner
life  can  only  be  adverse  to  belief  in  the  "freedom  in  a  smaller
part,  which  we  cannot  observe.

But  just  as  little,  on  the  other  hand,  does  experience  con
vince  us  of  its  non-existence,  and  those  who,  with  confident
urgency,  call  our  attention  to  the  unbroken  connection
between  mental  pluenomena  and  corporeal  changes,  arbitrarily
and  erroneously  interpret  a  familiar  fact,  when  they  think  to
iiml  in  it  a  proof  that  everything  in  mind  is  explicable  from
properties  of  the  matter  with  which  it  is  united.  It  is  indeed
matter  of  universal  and  incessant  experience  that  the  changes
cif  our  mental  states  are  dependent  on  external  impressions
and  the  reciprocal  action  between  them  and  the  material
constituents  of  our  bodies.  Our  sensations  vary  as  our  sense-
organs  are  variously  affected,  different  feelings  and  volitions
arise  when  external  influences  or  the  transformations  of  vital
energies  perpetually  going  on  within  have  altered  our  bodily
conditions ;  to  the  fullest  extent  do  we  find  the  vividness  and
activity  of  our  train  of  thought  connected  with  fluctuations  in
our  corporeal  states,  by  which  they  are  sometimes  favoured,
sometimes  lessened  and  hindered.  And  after  careful  inquiry
we  shall  have  to  confess  that  in  even  the  highest  phenomena
of  mental  life,  as  they  have  been  produced  by  the  historical
sequence  of  human  development,  there  are  still  traces  of  the
influence  exerted  on  mental  progress  by  frames  of  body  not
the  same  in  all  ages.  But  after  all,  these  facts  prove  only
that  the  changes  of  physical  elements  represent  a  set  of  con
ditions  on  which  the  existence  and  character  of  our  internal
states  necessarily  depend  ;  they  do  not  prove  that  such  changes
are  the  single  and  sufficient  cause  from  which,  in  virtue  of  its
own  energy  and  without  the  co-operation  of  a  quite  different

148  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

principle,  the  manifold  variety  of  psychic  life  is  exclusively
evolved.

A  second  glance  at  the  nature  of  this  connection  will  suffice
to  show  the  chasm  between  this  apparently  sufficient  reason
and  its  alleged  consequent.  All  that  happens  to  the  material
constituents  of  external  Nature  or  to  those  of  our  own  body,
whether  singly  or  in  combination,  the  sum-total  of  all  deter
minations  of  extension,  composition,  density,  and  motion, —
all  this  it  is  wholly  impossible  to  compare  with  the  peculiar
character  of  the  mental  states,  with  the  sensations,  the  feelings,
the  volitions,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  we  find  succeeding  to
them,  and  erroneously  believe  to  arise  from  them.  ]STo  com
parative  analysis  would  discover  in  the  chemical  composition
of  a  nerve,  in  the  tension,  the  collocation,  and  the  mobility  of
its  infinitesimal  parts,  the  reason  why  a  wave  of  sound,
reaching  and  affecting  it,  should  produce  in  it  more  than  an
alteration  of  physical  states.  However  far  we  pursue  the
course  of  the  sense-excitation  through  the  nerve,  in  however
many  ways  we  suppose  its  form  changed,  and  converted  into
ever  finer  and  more  delicate  movements,  we  can  never
prove  that  it  is  in  the  nature  of  any  movement  so  produced
to  cease  as  movement  of  its  own  accord,  and  to  reappear
as  a  bright  colour,  as  a  tone,  as  a  sweet  taste.  The  chasm
is  never  bridged  over  between  the  last  state  of  the  material
elements  within  our  reach  and  the  first  rise  of  the  sensation,
and  scarce  any  one  will  cherish  the  vain  hope  that  at  a
higher  stage  of  development  science  will  find  a  mysterious
bridge  in  a  case  where  it  is  the  impossibility  of  any  sure
crossing-over  that  forces  itself  on  us  with  the  most  evident
distinctness.  On  the  recognition  of  this  absolute  incompar-
(ibility  with  one  another  of  physical  events  and  conscious
states,  has  always  rested  the  conviction  of  the  necessity  of
finding  a  special  ground  of  explanation  for  psychic  life.

It  is  doubtless  the  interest  of  science  to  group  a  multi
tude  of  different  pha3nomena  under  a  single  principle,  but
yet  the  greater  and  more  essential  interest  of  all  knowledge
is  no  other  than  to  trace  back  that  which  happens  to  the

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  149

conditions  on  which  it  is  really  dependent,  and  the  craving
for  unity  must  give  way  to  the  recognition  of  a  plurality  of
different  sources  where  the  facts  of  experience  do  not  entitle
us  to  derive  different  things  from  one  and  the  same  origin.
Xo  general  scruple  must  therefore  hinder  us  from  accepting
for  the  two  great  distinct  groups  of  physical  and  of  psychical
phenomena  grounds  of  explanation  equally  distinct  and
independent ;  moreover,  the  search  for  unity  would  involve
merely  the  demand  that  in  the  whole  of  the  cosmos  those
elements  should  finally  be  combined  which  to  our  immediate
observation  appear  separated  ;  we  might  require  that  the
different  branches  should  spring  from  one  root,  but  not  that  the
branches  themselves  should  coalesce  or  the  one  sprout  from  the
other  instead  of  independently  beside  it  from  the  root.  Let  us
therefore  leave  this  question  for  subsequent  consideration,  and
at  present  content  ourselves  with  the  right  of  insisting  on
requiring  distinct  grounds  of  explanation  for  phenomena  that
cannot  be  compared.

This  right  we  claim  not  otherwise  than  as  it  has  always
been  conceded  for  the  phenomena  of  the  domain  of  Nature
itself.  Wherever  we  see  an  element  produce  results  such  as
neither  its  ordinary  nature  nor  the  motion  in  which  it  is  for
the  moment  engaged  enables  us  to  understand,  we  seek  the
complementary  ground  of  this  effect  in  the  different  constitu
tion  of  a  second  element,  which,  acted  on  by  that  movement,
evolves  from  itself  the  part  or  the  form  of  the  result  which
we  would  in  vain  try  to  derive  from  the  former.  It  is  not
the  spark  of  fire  that  imparts  explosive  energy  to  the  gun
powder,  for  when  it  falls  on  other  objects  it  produces  no
similar  effect  ;  neither  in  its  temperature,  nor  in  its  kind  ol
motion,  nor  in  any  other  of  its  properties,  could  we  find  that
which  enabled  it  to  evolve  this  destroying  force  from  itself
alone  ;  this  it  finds  in  the  powder  on  which  it  falls,  or  more
correctly  it  does  not  even  here  find  it  all  ready,  but  it  finds
several  substances  in  a  combination  that  under  the  influence
of  the  heightened  temperature  which  it  brings,  must  suddenly
and  with  violence  expand  into  the  form  of  a  gas.  The  cause

150  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

of  the  form  of  the  effect  produced  thus  lies  solely  in  the
mixture  of  the  powder,  the  glowing  heat  of  the  spark  adds  the
final  necessary  completing  condition.  We  are  enabled  to
draw  the  same  conclusions  by  the  difference  of  category  of
material  states  and  their  mental  results.  However  indissolubly
the  latter  are  associated  with  the  former  as  their  conditions,
they  must  yet  have  the  ground  of  their  form  in  another  prin
ciple,  and  anything  that  we  can  conceive  as  an  energy  or
efficacy  of  matter,  instead  of  producing  mental  life  from  itself,
only  occasions  its  manifestation  by  stimulating  to  expression
a  differently  constituted  element.

§  3.  But  we  must  still  more  narrowly  define  the  inference
which  we  venture  to  draw  from  these  considerations.  "We  wera
entitled  to  seek  different  grounds  of  explanation  for  the  two
diverse  groups  of  phaBiiomena,  but  we  are  not  on  that  account
yet  entitled  to  distribute  these  grounds  to  different  kinds  of
beings.  If  we  cannot  account  for  the  appearance  of  a  mental
state  by  those  properties  in  virtue  of  which  we  call  matter
matter,  what  hinders  us  from  supposing  that  besides  those
properties  there  is  a  store  of  inner  life  which  usually  escapes
our  attention,  and  finds  no  other  opportunity  of  manifestation
than  in  what  we  call  mental  life  ?  Why,  in  opposition  lo
matter  as  an  ever  dead  substance,  should  all  mental  activity
be  condensed  into  the  special  nature  of  a  soul,  destitute  on
its  side  of  the  properties  by  means  of  which  the  physical
elements  make  themselves  of  account  in  Nature  ?  Might  not
the  visible  substance  have  directly  a  double  life,  appearing
outwardly  as  matter,  and  as  such  manifesting  no  property
other  than  those  mechanical  ones  with  which  we  are  familiar,
— internally  on  the  other  hand  moved  mentally,  aware  of  the
changes  in  its  states,  and  accompanying  with  efforts  the
activity,  whose  general  subjection  to  law  it  is  certainly  not  in
its  power  arbitrarily  to  alter  ?

Only  by  degrees,  in  the  course  of  these  inquiries,  shall  we
be  able  to  return  a  full  answer  to  these  questions  ;  at  present
it  must  be  sufficient  to  point  out  how  little  at  this  their
initial  stage  an  affirmative  reply  to  them  would  alter  the

TI1K  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  151

position  of  matters.  For  still  this  feeling  and  willing  sub
stance  would  remain  a  double  being ;  however  intimately  it
combined  in  the  unity  of  its  nature  the  properties  of
materiality  and  those  of  mental  life,  they  would  never
theless  always  remain  incompatible,  and  we  would  never  be
able  to  infer  from  an  alteration  of  its  material  states,  as  a
consequent  necessity,  that  on  its  mental  side  it  must
undergo  a  corresponding  alteration.  It  would  go  through  two
courses  of  development,  from  neither  of  which  can  there  be
conceived  a  transition  to  the  other;  as  externally  adjusted,
the  stages  of  the  one  course  would  indeed  as  a  matter  of  fact
correspond  to  those  of  the  other,  but  here  too  the  material
change  would  draw  after  it  a  mental  one  only  because  it
found  on  the  other  side  of  this  twofold  being  the  mental
nature  that  it  could  stir  to  action.  Here  it  is  that  we  find  at
once  the  justification  and  the  source  of  the  barrenness  of  this
view.  Its  justification  : — for  the  evil  materialism  that  is  the
real  destroyer  of  all  cosmic  conceptions  consists  exclusively  in
the  wealth  of  mind  being  held  to  spring  spontaneously  as  a
mere  addition  from  the  reciprocal  action  of  material  substances
as  substances,  from  impact  and  pressure,  from  tension  and
expansion,  from  composition  and  decomposition,  in  its  Vicing
supposed  as  self-evident  that  the  endless  variety  of  the  inner
life  arises  from  the  mutual  crossing  of  physical  processes,
as  that  the  resultant  of  two  equal  forces  tending  in  opposite
directions  is  rest,  or  of  two  that  are  different,  motion  in  a
third  and  intermediate  direction.  This  it  is  that  must
ever  be  repugnant  to  serious  reflection,  —  the  inaccuracy
of  thought  that  takes  the  forms  of  mechanical  procedure,
which  have  everywhere  the  function  of  acting  merely  as
means  of  communication  between  the  inner  natures  of  indivi
dual  beings,  for  the  original  stock  whence,  as  an  incidental
and  subsidiary  result,  is  evolved  all  the  energy  and  activity
of  these  minds  themselves.

This  error  is  of  course  avoided  in  that  form  of  con
ception  which  ascribes  to  matter  a  secret,  mental  life  ;
for  according  to  it,  the  mental  element  springs  not  from

152  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

its  physical  properties,  but  from  that  which  makes  matter
really  better  than  it  seems.  But  we  find  here  no  advantage
to  be  turned  to  account  for  the  benefit  of  the  first  form  of
our  views.  If  the  properties  of  materiality  and  mentality  are
actually  united  in  the  same  substance,  yet  so  that  the  one
cannot  be  derived  from  the  other,  any  investigation  of  the
particular  phenomena  can  apprehend  the  changes  of  the
physical  side  of  this  twofold  being  only  as  occasions  of  the
manifestation  of  the  mental  states.  It  could  not  explain
how  it  happens  that  a  physical  change  draws  after  it  a  dis
similar  mental  one  only  because  both  have  the  same  subject,
and  it  could  develop  the  universal  laws  by  which  the  alterations
of  the  one  of  these  series  of  states  depend  on  the  alterations
of  the  other,  no  better  from  the  unity  of  the  substance  acting
on  itself  than  would  be  possible  on  the  supposition  of  a
reciprocal  action  between  two  different  subjects.  It  may  be
that  neverthless  in  this  uniting  of  all  internal  and  external
phenomena  into  the  same  reality  there  is  a  truth  that  in
another  place  and  a  different  application  will  become  impor
tant  ;  here  it  appears  unfruitful.  Xot  merely  unfruitful ;  fur,
in  fact,  a  third  consideration  is  already  claiming  attention,
which  will  prevent  us  from  here  making  such  use  as  was
proposed  to  us  of  the  view.

§  4.  We  must  single  out  as  the  decisive  fact  of  experience,
that  compels  us  in  the  explanation  of  mental  life  to  put  in
the  place  of  matter  an  immaterial  form  of  being  as  the  subject
of  the  phenomena,  that  Unity  of  Consciousness  without  which
the  sum-total  of  our  internal  states  could  not  even  become
the  object  of  our  self-observation.  So  many  misconceptions
have  gathered  round  the  simple  name  under  which  we  have
spoken  of  this  fact,  that  we  are  forced  to  point  out  more
explicitly  what  we  mean  by  it.  So  long  as  particular  causes
do  not  drive  us  to  other  conjectures,  we  are  in  the  habit  of
supposing  for  each  separate  living  form  only  one,  soul,  to
whose  inner  life  the  former  yields  an  enclosing  envelope  and
an  array  of  efficient  organs.  Everyday  life  does  not  suggest
the  idea  that  besides  the  soul  that  forms  our  peculiar  ego,

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  153

oilier  beings  exist  within  our  bodies,  which  in  like  manner,  as
meeting-points of  ineunt and exeunt actions, elaborate the
excitations  which  reach  them  into  a  world  of  conscious  states.
Observations  on  all  the higher animals confirm us in this
habit,  or at  least only  isolated phenomena  more patent  to
the observation of  science than to that of  daily life,  cast
doubt on that unity of consciousness according to which
there  is  one  soul  to  each  living  form. It  is  not  till  we  direct
our  attention  to  the  lower  classes  of  animals  that  we are  first
reminded that we are too much inclined to consider this
actual  relation  as  universally  necessary. The  severed  parts
of  the  mutilated  polyp  become  wholes  by  growing  into  perfect
animal forms,  in  each  of  which  is  fully  evolved  the  sum  of
psychic capacities that belong to the original uninjured
creature. But  this effect  would not  follow on any  mutila
tion  which  we  chose  to  make  ;  the possibility  of  completion
seems to be  dependent  on  the  severed  part  retaining a per
haps  insignificant,  yet  definite  amount  of  internal  organization
as  a  germ  to  be  developed. We  observe  these noteworthy
phenomena  not  merely  after  artificial  section  ;  in  many  animal
species propagation takes place by means of spontaneous
severance of the body, the fragments of  which,  partly  in
connection with it,  partly after their detachment,  develop
the  perfect  form  and  organization  of  the  species. Finally,  we
see that  in  other  species  single  individuals  are  evolved,  like
the buds of trees, from a common and continuous stem,
isolated in  the scanty  exercise  of  vital  activity  within their
power,  and  yet  by  their  mutual  connection  subject  in  common
to  many  external  influences. These  groups  of  animals  show
distinctly  that  the  corporeal  mass,  in  which  the  vitality  of  the
individual  soul  can manifest  itself  is  not  everywhere  finished
off  into  a  circumscribed  whole  ;  at  particular points  of  a  con
nected  organic  mass  there  are  here  several  independent  beings,
whose  operations  may  cross  each  other  in  the  common stem
and  afford  to  each  only  a  limited  sphere  for  the  exercise  of  its
spontaneous  energy. What  here  appears  as  a  persistent  vital
form,  may  be  exhibited  in  the  animals  whose  species  is  pro-

154  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

pagated  by  means  of  division,  only  in  that  process,  while  in
those  which  can  be  severed  into  several  individuals  by
artificial  section,  the  majority  of  the  single  beings  capable
of  vitality  that  are  united  within  the  limits  of  one  and  the
same  corporeal  form,  perhaps  never  find  an  opportunity  of
independent  development,  unless  it  is  procured  for  them  by
chance  or  by  arbitrary  interference.  Section  would  have  cleft
in  two  not  the  soul  of  the  polyp,  but  the  corporeal  bond  that
held  together  a  number  of  souls  so  as  to  hinder  the  individual
development  of  each.  Though  we  may  be  entitled  to  regard
these  processes  thus,  we  cannot  certainly  determine  before
hand  how  far  this  allotment  of  a  plurality  of  souls  to  one
common  corporeal  mass  may  extend  in  higher  species  of
animals  also.  Without  here  settling  a  question,  the  answer
to  which,  in  so  far  as  possible,  is  more  fitly  reserved  for  a
later  part  of  this  work,  we  must  mention  that  the  unity
of  consciousness  does  not  mean  that  the  number  of  beings
animating  an  organic  form  is  limited,  and  that  it  is  far  from
being  invalidated  by  an  appeal  to  the  phsenomena  of  which
we  have  spoken.  On  the  contrary,  we  would  maintain,  in
regard  to  each  of  the  severed  parts  of  the  polyp,  that  if  a
soul  is  in  any  sense  its  moving  principle,  the  unity  of  con
sciousness  must  hold  good  of  that  in  the  same  sense  in  which
we  ascribe  it  to  our  own  personality.

This  sense  we  now  proceed  more  precisely  to  define.  We
come  to  understand  the  connection  of  our  inner  life  only  by
referring  all  its  events  to  the  one  ego,  lying  unchanged  alike
beneath  its  simultaneous  variety  and  its  temporal  succession.
Every  retrospect  of  the  past  brings  with  it  this  image  of  the
ego  as  the  combining  centre  ;  our  ideas,  our  feelings,  our
efforts  are  comprehensible  to  us  only  as  its  states  or  energies,
not  as  events  floating  unattached  in  a  void.  And  yet  we  are
not  incessantly  making  this  reference  of  the  internal  manifold
to  the  unity  of  the  ego.  It  becomes  distinct  only  in  the
backward  look  which  we  cast  over  our  life  with  a  certain
concentration  of  collective  attention.  On  the  other  hand,  the
single  sen3ation  at  the  moment  when  it  is  produced  by  the

Tin- EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  155

external  stimulus,  the  single  feeling  springing  from  the  bene*
ficial  or  hurtful  interference  of  the  external  world,  even  the
desires  and  efforts  often  suddenly  awakened  within  us  by  a
passing  cause,  are  by  no  means  universally  accompanied  to
any  perceptible  degree  by  this  reference  to  the  unity  of  our
nature,  by  which  they  are  mutually  related.  Of  many  im
pressions  we  remain  unconscious  when  they  come  into  being,
and  we  sometimes  detect  them  in  ourselves  as  if  accidentally,
after  their  efficient  causes  have  again  disappeared :  others
remain  forgotten  during  long  intervals,  and  even  the  express
attention  which  is  set  to  seek  them  fails  to  get  possession  of
them  ;  of  the  manifold  contents  of  our  consciousness  at  one
time,  many  fragments  remain  disconnected  side  by  side,
neither  fused  into  the  whole  of  one  identical  round  of
thought,  nor  placed  in  a  distinct  relation  to  our  indivisible
personality.  Hence  the  unity  of  consciousness  spoken  of
can  not  mean  that  we  have  a  persistent  consciousness  of  the
unity  of  our  being,  and  the  inferences  which  it  has  been
attempted  to  draw  from  this  assumption  are  for  us  inept

On  the  other  hand,  however,  there  lies  in  the  body  of
facts  which  we  have  recognised,  no  such  difficulty  as  to
render  it  impossible  to  infer  from  the  nature  of  our  con
sciousness  the  unity  of  a  being  conscious  of  itself.  For
it  is  not  necessary  and  imperative  that  at  every  moment
and  in  respect  to  all  its  states  a  being  should  exercise  the
unifying  efficiency  put  within  its  power  by  the  unity  of  its
nature  ;  the  work  done  by  any  power  depends  on  conditions,
and  may  be  prevented  by  such  as  are  unfavourable,  without
on  that  account  the  power  being  neutralized  in  virtue  of
which  under  more  propitious  circumstances  it  would  have
come  to  pass.  Therefore,  even  if  many  of  the  soul's  states
remain  unconnected,  and  never  are  realized  in  its  conscious
ness  as  mere  states  of  its  substance,  no  conclusion  can  be
drawn  from  these  facts  against  the  unity  of  its  being.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  the  soul,  even  if  but  rarely,  but  to  a
limited  extent,  nay  but  once,  be  capable  of  bringing  together
variety  into  the  unity  of  consciousness,  this  slender  fact  ia

150  HOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

sufficient  to  render  imperative  an  inference  to  the  indivisi
bility  of  the  being  by  which  this  operation  can  be  performed.
For  the  moment  I  leave  this  simple  idea  to  its  own  persuasive
power,  and  reserve  the  illustration  of  it  till  later  ;  but  I  here
add  further,  that  even  our  knowledge  of  the  above  acknow
ledged  fact  of  the  imconnectedness  of  many  internal  states  is
comprehensible  only  on  the  supposition  of  the  unity  of  the
cognitive  being.  It  may  be  that  at  the  moment  of  sense-
perception  the  relation  of  the  rising  sensation  to  the  unity  of
the  ego  does  not  obtrude  itself  on  us,  that,  on  the  contrary,  we
are  merged  without  a  sense  of  self  in  the  matter  of  sensation  ;
but  the  very  fact  of  this  relation  could  never  afterwards
become  to  us  an  object  of  apprehension  and  astonishment,  if,
at  the  very  moment  of  its  rise,  the  sensation  had  not  belonged
to  the  unity  of  our  being,  and  been  retained  by  it,  in  order
afterwards  to  be  recognised  as  having  always  been  in  cohesion
with  our  ego.  Grant  that  many  impressions  remain  isolated
at  the  moment  of  their  rise,  and  grant  that  it  is  only  after-
reflection  which  brings  a  judgment  as  to  their  relation  with
ourselves,  there  is  yet  in  that  primitive  distraction  no
argument  against  the  unity  of  our  mental  being,  nay,  in  the
possibility  of  subsequent  concentration,  there  is  constraining
ground  for  holding  it  to  be  real.

I  would  fain,  lastly,  remove  once  for  all  a  remaining  mis
conception,  from  which  the  train  of  thought  pursued  in  the
preceding  observations  may  perhaps  not  be  secure.  For  I  do
not  mean  that  our  consciousness  of  the  unity  of  our  being  is
in  itself,  by  what  it  directly  reports,  a  guarantee  of  that  unity.
Certainly  it  might,  at  least  plausibly,  be  objected  to  that
conception,  that  in  the  course  of  our  internal  development
many  convictions  present  themselves  with  almost  irresistible
persuasive  force,  that,  in  spite  of  the  triumphant  clearness
with  which  they  take  possession  of  the  unsophisticated  rnind,
yet  appear  fallacies  to  riper  reflection,  in  contrast  to  the  laws
of  thought,  which  alone  must  remain  beyond  doubt  as  to  us
the  inevitable  standard  of  all  truth.  So  too  this  unity  of  the
ego  may  be  merely  the  form  in  which  our  own  being  appears

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  Sul'L.  157

to  itself,  and  just  as  we  do  not  obtain  directly  an  insight
into  the  true  nature  of  other  things  from  the  manner  in  which
they  appear  to  us,  so  our  own  being  is  not  necessarily  an  indi
visible  unity,  because  such  we  seem  to  ourselves.  I  will  not
inquire  whether  this  thought  is  not  one  of  those  over-refine
ments  of  accurate  discrimination  which  secretly  revolve  round
the  fallacies  they  would  fain  avoid;  in  the  form  in  which  it
is  usually  expressed,  it  does  not  touch  what  we  here  wish  to
prove.  For  our  belief  in  the  soul's  unity  rests  not  on  our
appearing  to  ourselves  such  a  unity,  but  on  our  being  able
to  appear  to  ourselves  at  all.  Did  we  appear  to  ourselves
something  quite  different,  nay,  did  we  seem  to  ourselves  to
be  an  unconnected  plurality,  we  would  from  this  very  fact,
from  the  bare  possibility  of  appearing  anything  to  ourselves,
deduce  the  necessary  unity  of  our  bt-ing,  this  time  in  open
contradiction  with  what  self-observation  set  before  us  as  our
own  image.  What  a  being  appears  to  itself  to  be  is  not  the
important  point ;  if  it  can  appear  anyhow  to  itself,  or  other
tilings  to  it,  it  must  be  capable  of  unifying  manifold  phe
nomena  in  an  absolute  indivisibility  of  its  nature.

What  is  apt  to  perplex  us  in  this  question  is  the  some
what  thoughtless  way  in  which  we  so  often  allow  ourselves
to  play  fast  and  loose  with  the  notion  of  appearance.  We
are  content  with  setting  in  contrast  to  it  the  being  that
appears,  and  we  forget  that  the  appearance  is  impossible
without  another  being  that  sees  it.  We  fancy  that  appear
ance  comes  forth  from  the  hidden  depths  of  being-in-itself,
like  a  lustre  existing  before  there  is  any  eye  for  it  to  arise  in,
extending  into  reality,  present  to  and  apprehensible  by  him
who  will  grasp  it,  but  none  the  less  continuing  to  exist  even
if  known  by  none.  We  here  overlook  that  even  in  the
region  of  sensation,  from  which  this  image  is  borrowed,  the
lustre  emitted  by  objects  only  seems  to  be  emitted  by  them,
and  that  it  can  even  seem  to  come  from  them,  only  because
our  eyes  are  there,  the  receptive  organs  of  a  cognitive  soul,  to
which  appearances  are  possible.  The  lustre  of  light  does  IK  it
spread  itself  around  us,  but  like  all  phenomena  dwells  only

158  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

in  the  consciousness  of  him  for  whom  it  exists.  And  of  this
consciousness,  of  this  general  capacity  that  makes  the  appear
ance  of  anything  possible,  we  maintain  that  it  can  be  an
attribute  only  of  the  indivisible  unity  of  one  being,  and  that
every  attempt  to  ascribe  it  to  a  plurality,  however  bound
together,  will,  by  its  failure,  but  confirm  our  conviction  of
the  supersensible  unity  of  the  soul.

§  5.  This  simple  thought  would  seem  to  me  hardly  to  need
further  proof,  were  there  not  so  many  attempts  to  evade  it.
For  still  we  hear  sometimes  repeated  the  confident  assertion
that  the  comprehensive  unity  of  consciousness  may  be  under
stood  as  the  natural  result  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  many
elements  and  their  states.  Let  us  therefore  try  to  discover  how
far  such  a  production  of  the  one  out  of  the  many  is  possible.

The  composition  of  several  motions  in  space  into  a  common
resultant  lias  always  been  the  example  on  which  has  more  or
less  directly  rested  any  hope  for  the  success  of  these  attempts.
Just  as,  then,  two  motions  of  different  directions  and  velocities
unite  to  produce  a  third  simple  motion  in  which  is  preserved
no  trace  of  the  diversity  that  gave  it  birth,  so  (it  is  said)  the
unity  of  consciousness  is  derived  as  a  resultant  from  the
variety  of  mental  elemental  motions  going  on  in  the  dif
ferent  constituents  of  the  living  body.  But  the  plausibility
of  this  analogy  rests  on  an  inaccuracy  in  its  expression,  and
wholly  disappears  when  that  is  removed.  For  this  unques
tionable  law  of  physical  mechanics  refers  not  to  any  two
movements,  but  merely  to  two  movements  of  one  and  the
same  indivisible  molecule  at  one  and  the  same  moment,
the  execution  of  which  is  required  by  any  forces.  The
simple  validity  of  the  lawr  ceases,  and  gives  place  to  a  more
complex  calculation  of  the  result  to  be  reached,  so  soon  as
we  put  in  the  room  of  the  indivisible  point  a  system  of
several  masses,  however  firmly  compacted,  and  suppose  the
different  forces  to  act  on  different  points  of  this  united
plurality.  And  just  as  little  is  the  simple  resultant  itself,
which  comes  into  being  in  the  former,  more  favourable  case,
simply  some  movement  having  its  direction  and  velocity

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  159

subject  to  law,  while  the  mass  remains  undetermined  by
which  it  is  executed ;  it  is  of  course  to  be  conceived  only  as
a  movement  of  the  same  indivisible  point  on  which  the
different  forces  were  simultaneously  acting.  If  one  supplies
those  few  complementary  ideas  which  are  never  forgotten  in
stating  the  elements  of  mechanics,  but  not  usually  repeated
at  length  in  short  references  to  this  fundamental  law,  one
takes  in  at  a  glance  the  hopelessness  of  all  attempts  to
commend  the  derivation  of  conscious  unity  from  the  mutual
action  of  a  number  of  parts  by  means  of  the  trustworthiness
of  the  indisputable  mechanical  theorem.  For  in  this  deriva
tion  it  is  just  the  essential  point  of  the  theorem  that  is
commonly  missed  ;  the  cohesion  of  the  different  states  of
different  elements  is  dwelt  on  at  length,  but  nothing  is  said
of  the  indivisible  subject  in  which  they  cohere,  through
whose  unity  it  is  alone  that  they  are  compelled  to  produce  a
resultant,  and,  lastly,  as  whose  state  exclusively  that  resultant
can  be  conceived  to  become  actual.  Consciousness  floats,
like  a  new  being  evolved  out  of  nothing,  above  the  mutual
actions  of  the  many  elements,  in  unsupported  isolation, — a
consciousness  without  any  being  whose  consciousness  it  can
be.

Now  let  us  try  to  get  rid  of  this  defect,  and  to  fix  the
results  to  which  we  may  be  brought  on  this  path.  Let  us
first  suppose  that  each  one  of  the  numerous  elements  whose,
reciprocal  action  we  take  for  granted,  fuses  within  itself  the
impressions  which  it  receives  from  others  into  the  unity  of  a
resultant  final  state, — then  the  sum  of  these  resultants  might
indeed  in  a  certain  sense  be  regarded  as  the  total  state  of  tin:
united  plurality  of  elements,  but  not  in  the  sense  of  resem
bling  the  unity  of  consciousness  of  which  we  are  in  search.
For  at  bottom  that  holds  good  of  all  active  or  passive  states
which  we  maintain  in  regard  to  consciousness :  they  can  with
strict  accuracy  be  predicated  only  of  indivisible  units.  If  we
imagine  a  number  of  atoms  immutably  combined  in  whatever
way,  so  that  they  can  only  in  concert  obey  any  impetus  to
motion :  then,  if  this  whole  body  moves  forward  in  a  straight

160  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

line,  its  motion  will  still  be  merely  the  sum  of  the  absolutely
identical  motions  of  its  several  parts.  Nay,  it  is  even  going
too  far  to  speak  of  a  sum  of  motions :  in  reality  only  the
same  process  is  repeated  as  often  as  there  are  atoms  in  which
it  can  be  exhibited,  and  these  processes  being  in  themselves
apart  from  each  other,  form  neither  a  sum  nor  a  whole.
They  become  such  only  under  one  of  two  conditions.  In  the
iirst  place,  if  we  suppose  all  the  particular  movements  of
these  atoms  transferred  to  one  and  the  same  indivisible
element,  they  will  there  gather  into  the  unity  of  a  state,
whose  subject  is  the  element ;  but  simultaneously  the  character
of  the  event  will  have  altered,  and  in  place  of  a  total  motion
of  many,  there  will  be  only  one  effect  of  that,  the  motion  of
a  unit.  Without  that  alteration  the  total  movement  of  a
combined  plurality  takes  place  only  under  the  second  con
dition,  which  occurs  when  the  one  indivisible  consciousness
of  an  observer  sets  in  relation  to  one  another  the  ideas  of  the
several  movements,  without  confounding  them,  but  yet  bring
ing  together  their  abiding  plurality  under  the  notion  of  unity.
If  wTe  further  conceive  another  system  of  atoms  more  loosely
connected  together  and  engaged  in  motions  of  varying  velocities
and  directions,  we  should  still  have  to  speak  of  a  total  motion
of  the  system  only  in  this  second  sense.  We  might,  of
course,  fix  the  amount  of  motion,  which  the  whole  system  has
at  its  disposal  for  transference  to  an  element  outside  itself,
after  deduction  of  the  contrary  actions  that  would  neutralize
each  other.  But  it  is  still  more  evident  in  this  example  than
in  the  former  that  the  unity  of  this  producible  result  is  not
convertible  with  the  total  motion  of  the  system  itself,  for  into
the  latter  undoubtedly  entered  the  manifold  movements  in
which  its  parts  met  one  another,  and  which  have  disappeared
in  the  simplicity  of  the  result.  There  is  indeed  but  one
point  where  this  manifold  whole  is  an  actual  unit,  and  that
is  the  concentrating  thought  of  the  observer.  There  alone
does  the  past  cohere  with  the  present  and  the  future,  in
reality  the  one  is  when  the  other  is  not ;  only  in  that  thought
does  any  beauty  of  form,  any  fulness,  and  any  significance  of

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  1G1

development  truly  exist,  for  only  in  it  properly  consist  those
relations  of  the  one  to  the  other,  on  which  all  such  merits
depend  ;  in  reality  each  part  is  working  as  if  in  the  dark,  and
does  not  see  its  position  in  respect  of  the  other  parts,  although
it  may  perhaps  fuse  the  influences  which  it  receives  from
them  into  the  feeling  of  a  state  into  which  it  enters.  Thus
all  the  operations  of  a  joint  plurality  either  remain  a  plurality
of  separate  operations,  or  become  truly  fused  into  one  only
when  transferred  to  the  unity  of  a  being  as  its  states.  Of
consciousness  we  can  say  that,  as  the  energy  of  an  indivisible
being,  it  does  render  possible  the  composition  of  the  many
into  the  one,  but  that  the  unity  of  consciousness  never  can
spring  solely  from  the  mutual  action  of  the  many.

From  these  general  discussions  we  return  once  more  to  our
IKJculiar  subject.  AVe  once  again  take  for  granted  in  the
multitudinous  connected  atoms  of  the  body  that  internal
psychic  life  which,  according  to  the  view  from  which  wy
started,  must  be  attributed  to  all  matter.  Xow  let  a  common
sensory  stimulus,  as  before  a  motor  impulse,  act  on  all  at
once,  we  can  yet  seek  the  rising  sensation  nowhere  else  than
in  the  interior  of  each  single  atom.  It  will  be  present  as
many  times  as  there  are  indivisible  beings  in  this  united
multitude,  but  these  many  sensations  will  never  coalesce  into
a  joint  sensation,  unless  we  suppose  in  addition  to  them  a
favoured  being  to  which  all  transfer  their  states  ;  and  then
that  will  be  the  soul  of  such  a  body.  If  again  we  suppose,
as  before  various  movements,  so  now  various  sensations,  to
arise  in  the  several  elements  of  this  total,  and  further,  each
element  to  have  it  in  its  power  somehow  to  convert  its  own
stimulation  into  the  excitation  of  another,  here  too  every
unit,  according  to  its  peculiar  position  in  regard  to  the  rest,
will  undergo  influences  from  these  in  its  own  fashion,  and
fuse  or  combine  in  itself  the  impressions  streaming  in  all
around.  Yet  the  new  sensation  or  cognition  proceeding  from
these  reciprocal  actions  will  always  have  its  existence  only  in
the  several  elements,  each  of  which  brings  the  manifold
impressions  together  to  a  focus  in  its  unity.  There  was  a

VOL.  I.  L

162  BOOK  II. CIIAPTEi:  I.

repetition  of  homogeneous  cognition  when  each  element
underwent  in  identical  fashion  the  influences  of  all  the  others ;
here  cognitions  manifoldly  different  will  have  arisen,  if  the
various  relations  in  which  the  several  elements  stand  to  one
another  bring  about  in  each  a  particular  blending  of  the
impressions  that  succeed  in  reaching  it.  But  in  the  latter
case  none  of  them  will  survey  the  variety  of  all  the  states
that  have  arisen  ;  the  sum-total  of  sensation  or  of  knowledge
will  as  such  exist  only  for  a  new  observer  outside,  who  again
collects  the  scattered  facts,  in  the  unity  of  his  indivisible
being,  into  a  total  image  present  to  himself  alone.  Just  as  the
spirit  of  the  age,  public  opinion,  does  not  hover  beside  and
among  personal  beings,  but  exists  only  in  the  consciousness
of  individuals,  incomplete  and  fragmentary  in  those  who,
without  taking  any  general  view,  are  as  it  were  interwoven
with  the  reciprocal  actions  among  which  they  find  them
selves  placed,  more  complete  in  those  who,  with  critical
eye,  compare  the  multitude  of  characters  falling  beneath
their  observation :  so  here  the  various  mental  elements  com
posing  this  vital  system  will  evolve  various  views  of  the
whole  of  which  they  form  part,  but  the  most  complete  will
arise  in  that  element  which,  in  virtue  of  some  original
advantage  of  its  nature,  or  of  a  favourable  position  towards
the  rest,  like  that  of  the  ruling  monad,  most  effectually
collects  all  the  mutual  actions  of  the  parts  of  the  whole  in
itself,  and  is  able  most  effectually  to  react  upon  the  im
pressions  thus  communicated  to  it.

To  this  conception  we  are  in  truth  carried  back  by  the
attempt  to  derive  the  unity  of  consciousness  from  the  mutual
action  of  a  multitude.  Even  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  psychic
life  in  all  matter,  we  come  on  this  path  to  an  alteration
indeed,  but  not  an  abolition,  of  the  contrast  between  body  and
soul.  Of  course  on  that  hypothesis  they  are  distinguished
by  no  qualitative  difference  in  their  natures,  but  still  less  do
they  blend  into  one ;  the  one  individual  ruling  soul  always
remains  facing,  in  an  attitude  of  complete  isolation,  the
homogeneous  but  ministrant  monads,  the  joint  multitude  of

c

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  163

which  forms  the  living  body.  It  may  for  the  present  remain
undecided  whether  this  conception  of  life,  as  a  reciprocal
action  of  souls,  does  or  does  not  offer  greater  advantages  in
the  explanation  of  phenomena  than  the  contrast  of  mind  and
corporeal  matter,  which  we  have  made  the  basis  of  our
considerations.  If  the  ruling  monad  is  that  soul  whicli
forms  our  ego,  and  whose  internal  motions  we  are  seeking  to
understand,  the  interior  of  the  other  monads  at  least  to  us
inquirers  remains  absolutely  closed  ;  we  are  acquainted  only
with  the  reciprocal  actions  in  virtue  of  which  they  appear  to
us  as  matter,  and  only  under  that  designation  and  with  tlu-
claims  founded  upon  it  can  we  make  use  of  them  in  the
investigation  of  particular  processes.

vj  G.  We  did  not  conclude  that  the  soul  is  one,  because  we
appear  to  ourselves  a  unity ;  but  we  were  convinced  of  the
indivisibility  of  our  being  by  the  fact  that  anytliiivj  can
appear  to  us.  My  arguments  will  perhaps  be  found  mon-
cogent  if  I  bring  into  prominence  the  distinctive  character  (.f
consciousness,  which  I  have  hitherto  tacitly  assumed.  The,
idea  of  the  fusion  of  several  states  into  one  blended  state
of  resultant  forces  or  results  springing  from  the  meeting  of
particular  activities,  has  had  a  far  from  beneficial  effect  on
the  explanation  of  internal  phenomena ;  it  is  worth  while  to
point  out  how  absolutely  different  is  the  nature  of  thought,
and  how  utterly  in  this  sphere  are  we  deserted  by  the
ordinary  conceptions  of  physical  science,  which  we  have
hitherto  seemed  to  treat  as  directly  applicable  to  the  case  in
point.

Consciousness  nowhere  shows  anything  resembling  what  we
see  in  Xature,  viz.  the  resultant  of  two  forces  producing  at
one  time  a  state  of  rest,  at  another  a  third  intermediate  motion,
in  whicli  they  have  become  merged  beyond  recognition.  Our
ideas  preserve  through  all  the  vicissitudes  through  which  they
pass  the  same  content  as  formerly,  and  wo  never  iind  that  in
our  recollection  the  images  of  two  colours  blend  into  tl.c
compound  image  of  a  third,  or  the  sensations  of  two  tones
mingle  into  that  of  a  simple  intermediate  toiie,  or  the

164  BOOK  u. ciiAi'TEi;  i.

impressions  of  pain  and  of  pleasure  neutralize  each  other  so
as  to  form  the  rest  of  an  indifferent  state.  Only  when
different  stimuli,  proceeding  from  the  outer  world,  produce
according  to  physical  laws  a  medium  state  within  the
corporeal  nervous  tract,  through  whose  instrumentality  they
act  upon  the  soul,  does  this  state  (conveyed  to  the  mind  as  a
simple  impulse)  develope  one  compound  sensation  instead
of  the  two  several  sensations  which  we  should  have  had,  if
the  stimuli  could  have  reached  us  separately.  Thus  to  our
sense  colours  are  indeed  blended  at  the  edges  at  which
they  are  in  direct  contact  in  space ;  but  the  images  of
colours,  coexisting  in  our  remembrance  without  extension
and  without  lines  of  demarcation,  do  not  run  together  into
the  uniform  grey,  that  would  be  the  inevitable  result  did
different  impressions  blend  into  one  in  our  souls.  On  the
contrary,  consciousness  keeps  those  which  are  different  asunder
at  the  very  moment  when  it  seeks  to  combine  them ;  it  does
not  indistinguishably  merge  the  various  impressions,  but
leaves  to  each  its  peculiar  character,  moves  comparing  among
them,  and  at  the  same  time  is  aware  of  the  amount  and  kind
of  the  transition  by  which  it  passes  from  the  one  to  the  other.
It  is  in  this  act  of  relating  and  comparing,  the  rudiments  of
all  judging,  that  we  have  what  answers  in  the  wholly  different
mental  sphere  to  the  composition  of  results  in  the  material
world  ;  here,  at  the  same  time,  lies  the  true  meaning  of  the
unity  of  consciousness.

When  a  louder  and  a  softer  tone,  the  same  in  pitch  and
timbre,  strike  on  our  ear,  we  hear  only  the  same  tone  louder,
not  two  tones  separately ;  their  effects  are  coincident  in  the
auricular  nerve,  and  the  soul  can  find  in  the  simple  stimulus
which  reaches  it,  no  reason  for  a  separation  into  two  percep
tions.  But  if  the  two  tones  sounded  successively,  so  that
the  organ  of  sense  could  convey  their  impressions  separately,
there  would  no  longer  arise  from  the  ideas  of  them,  preserved
in  memory  and  brought  back  to  consciousness  both  at  the
same  moment  for  the  purpose  of  comparison,  the  idea  of  a
third  tone  of  greater  strength,  but  both  would  remain  distinct

THE  FA'ISTF.XCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  1C."

and  in  mutual  contrast,  though  present  without  division
in  the  unextendedness  of  conception.  If  a  third  middle
tone  did  arise,  it  would  not  be  a  comparison  of  both,  but
only  an  increase  of  the  materials  of  comparison  for  a  con
sciousness  that  knew  how  to  compare.  The  comparison
really  effected  consists  in  our  becoming  conscious  of  the
peculiar  change  that  takes  place  in  our  state,  as  we  pass  in
thought  from  the  one  tone  to  the  other,  and  in  it  we  gain,
instead  of  a  third  similar  tone,  a  far  greater  advantage — the
idea  of  an  intensive  more  or  less.  Red  and  yellow  mingle
when,  blending  already  in  the  eye,  they  are  conveyed  to  our
soul  only  as  a  simple  blended  stimulus ;  in  our  memory
those  which  were  separately  received  remain  separate,  and
there  docs  not  arise  from  them  the  impression  of  orange  ;  if  it
did  arise,  the  effect  would  be  merely  to  increase  the  materials
fur  comparison,  not  to  complete  the  process  of  comparison.
This  is  completed  when  we  become  conscious  of  the  kind  of
change  that  passes  over  our  state  in  the  transition  from  red
to  yellow,  and  through  that  we  acquire  the  new  idea  uf
qualitative  resemblance  and  difference.  Finally,  if  we  com
pare  an  impression  with  itself,  the  result  is  not  that  from
having  been  doubly  thought  its  strength  becomes  simply
doubled,  but  that  by  perceiving  the  energy  of  the  transi
tion,  without  observing  any  difference  in  its  results,  we  arrive
at  the  notion  of  identity.  There  is  no  reason  why  these
examples  should  be  multiplied;  the  inner  life  is  sufficiently
familiar  to  inspire  all  with  the  conviction  that  all  the  higher
problems  of  our  knowledge  and  of  our  whole  intellectual
training  depend  on  the  forbearance  with  which  consciousness
leaves  to  the  multitude  of  impressions  their  variety  and  all  the
distinctions  of  their  colouring,  and  that  nothing  can  be  so  far
removed  from  the  necessary  habitudes  of  the  soul  as  that
forming  of  resultant  mixed  states  by  means  of  which  we  so
often  and  so  heedlessly  think  we  can  explain  the  higher
advance  or  even  the  primitive  stages  of  our  internal
energies.

These  acts  of  a  relating  and  comparing  knowledge  hardly

166  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  I.

any  one  will  be  inclined  to  regard  as  performed  by  an
aggregate  plurality.  So  long  as  the  matter  under  discussion
was  only  that  all  ideas  are  collected  in  the  same  consciousness,
that  all  exert  a  mutual  influence,  driving  back  or  bringing
forward  one  another,  one  might,  at  least  to  some  extent,  be
under  the  delusion  that  these  phenomena  themselves  render
necessaiy  the  unity  of  their  subject.  Consciousness  might  be
viewed  as  the  space  in  which  this  motley  play  goes  on,  and  it
might  be  left  undecided  what  is  the  precise  origin  of  the
illumination  of  dawning  knowledge  in  which  it  moves.  But
that  most  peculiar  bond  of  the  multitudinous,  the  active
element  that,  passing  from  one  to  another,  leaves  both  in
existence,  while  it  is  aware  of  the  kind  and  direction  of  its
transition,  cannot  itself  be  multitudinous  ;  as  all  actions  are
united  only  in  the  unity  of  an  indivisible  being  in  which  they
meet,  so  a  fortiori  does  this  special  method  of  combining
plurality  require  strict  unity  in  the  combining  principle.
Any  attempt  to  substitute  for  it  a  plurality  casually  combined,
could  here  again  only  bring  us  back  to  the  consequences  of
which  we  have  already  spoken,  and  on  which  we  need  not
again  dwell.

§  7.  The  necessity  of  first  of  all  seeking  two  distinct
principles  of  explanation  for  two  wholly  dissimilar  cycles  of
phenomena,  shuts  us  off  from  any  attempt  to  derive  the  inner
life,  as  a  self-evident  result,  from  operations  of  material  sub
stances,  in  so  far  as  material.  The  other  necessity — recognition
of  the  fact  of  the  unity  of  consciousness,  and  our  discernment
of  the  impossibility  of  producing  that  unity  from  the  reciprocal
action  of  any  plurality  whatever — left  us  no  ground  for
expecting  any  help  in  the  explanation  of  particular  phenomena,
even  from  the  assumption  of  a  secret  psychic  life  in  all  that
we  call  matter.  We  may  therefore  most  simply  state  the
result  reached  as  yet  in  the  traditional  form  of  a  separation
of  the  supersensuous  soul  from  the  material  body,  no  matter
on  what  the  existence  or  the  phenomenal  appearance  of  the
latter  may  itself  depend.  Our  way  will  still  be  a  long  one
and  many  of  its  turns  may  perhaps  open  up  to  us  new  views

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  SOUL.  167

in  regard  to  what  we  can  now  see  only  in  the  outline  just
mentioned.  But  we  should  regard  as  mistaken  any  craving
for  unity  that  would  at  once  hastily  merge  this  sharp  contrast
in  something  higher,  for  in  reality  it  would  only  confuse
the  distinct  and  necessary  conception  of  it.  "\Ve  do  not
deny  that  there  may  be  a  point  of  view  so  elevated  that  t<»
those  occupying  it  the  distinction  between  the  mental  and  the
corporeal  fades  away,  or  may  even  be  held  to  be  a  delusion.
But  there  is  less  advantage  to  be  won  for  our  speculations
from  the  attainment  of  this  point  of  view,  than  risk  to
be  apprehended  from  a  premature  anticipation  of  it.  Even
the  toils  and  struggles  of  life  seem,  on  a  final  general  survey,
as  exercises,  the  value  of  which  does  not  properly  lie  in  the
attainment  of  an  end  ;  earthly  aims  may  shrink  into  infini
tesimal  proportions  in  comparison  with  the  final  destiny  which
we  dimly  discern ;  jarring  discords  of  our  existence  lose  their
harshness  and  importance  measured  by  the  eternal  and
infinite  towards  which  our  longing  eyes  are  turned.  And  yet
we  must  continue  these  exercises,  devote  to  these  contracted
aims  all  the  ardour  of  our  souls,  painfully  feel  these  discords,
and  again  and  again  renew  the  conflict  concerning  them ; —
our  life  would  not  be  ennobled  by  depreciation  of  its  condi
tions,  and  of  the  stage  which  it  offers  to  our  struggling  energy.
Thus  even  the  contrast  between  corporeal  and  mental  existence
may  not  be  final  and  irreconcilable, — only  our  present  life  is
passed  in  a  world  where  it  has  not  yet  been  resolved,  but  yawning
underlies  all  the  relations  of  our  thinking  and  acting.  And,
even  as  it  will  always  be  indispensable  to  life,  it  is,  at  present
at  least,  indispensable  to  science.  Things  that  appear  to  us
incompatible,  we  must  first  establish  separately  each  on  its  own
foundation.  If  we  have  made  ourselves  acquainted  with  the
natural  growth  and  the  ramification  of  each  one  of  the  groups
of  phenomena  which  we  have  thus  discriminated,  we  shall
afterwards  find  it  possible  to  speak  of  their  common  root.
To  try  prematurely  to  unite  them  would  only  mean  to  obscure
the  survey  of  them,  and  to  lower  the  value  which  every
distinction  possesses  even  when  it  may  be  done  away  with.

CHAPTEE  II.

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.

Plurality  of  Faculties  in  the  Soul— Defects  of  this  View— Possibility  of  combin
ing  it  with  the  Unity  of  the  Soul — Original  and  acquired  Faculties —
Impossibility  of  a  Single  Primitive  Faculty — Ideation,  Feeling,  and  Will
— Constant  Activity  of  the  whole  Nature  of  the  Soul — Lower  and  Higher
Reactions — Mutability  of  the  Soul  and  its  Limits — The  Known  Nature
and  the  Unknown  Nature  of  the  Soul — Use  of  knowing  the.  Unknown
Nature  of  the  Soul,  and  the  Reason  why  we  seek  to  know  it.

§  1.  rjlHE  phenomena  which  we  have  hitherto  been  con-
-*-  sidering  have  only  entitled  us  to  see  in  the  soul  that
unknown  being  whose  undivided  unity  holds  together  the  variety
of  the  inner  life  :  they  have  not  yet  thrown  any  light  on  the
essential  nature  with  which  the  soul  fills  up  the  bare  outline  of
unity,  and  develops  the  motley  multitude  of  its  states.  The
only  means  of  solving  this  question,  however,  will  be  to  make
a  more  complete  survey  of  internal  experience ;  we  have  no
other  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  soul  than  that  which  is
afforded  by  inferences  from  the  observed  facts  of  our  con
sciousness.  We  have  thus  to  conceive  its  nature  as  it  must
be  in  order  that  it  should  pass  through  what  we  know  in
ourselves  as  its  states,  and  perform  what  we  find  in  ourselves
as  its  actions.  Hence  we  must  start  from  a  comparison
between  mental  phenomena ;  putting  together  the  like,  and
separating  the  unlike,  we  shall  sort  the  heterogeneous  multi
tude  into  groups,  each  of  which  includes  all  that  have  one
common  stamp,  and  excludes  whatever  is  of  a  divergent  kind.
Mental  phenomena  differ  sufficiently  among  themselves  to
make  it  probable  that  this  comparison,  if  made  steadily  from
one  point  of  view,  will  end  in  discovering  several  separate
groups,  for  whose  peculiar  distinctions  no  common  expression
can  be  found.  Such  slighter  distinctions  as  divide  in
ench  dopartment  the  phenomena  that  fall  within  it  while

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL. 169

leaving  untouched  their  more  general  similarity  of  character,
are  indeed  to  be  conceived  as  dependent  on  the  variable
external  conditions  by  which  the  soul's  energy  is  brought  into
play.  But  for  the  whole  of  eacli  department  of  phenomena
we  must  attribute  to  the  soul  a  peculiar  faculty  to  energize  in
that  manner  which  predominates  uniformly  throughout  all  its
component  parts.  Accordingly  we  must  suppose  the  soul  to
possess  as  many  separate  faculties  as  there  are  groups  of
phenomena  left  unresolvable  by  observation  ;  but  we  shall
at  the  same  time  be  left  with  the  conviction  that  they  are  not
imprinted  in  its  nature  as  an  unconnected  assemblage  of
faculties,  but  that  there  is  between  them  an  affinity  by  which,
as  various  manifestations  of  one  and  the  same  being,  they  are
harmonized  into  the  whole  of  its  rational  development.

Thus  has  grown  up  the  familiar  doctrine  of  the  mental
faculties,  in  its  initial  stage  forming  part  of  the  ordinary  view
of  everyday  life.  Long  cherished  as  a  favourite  subject  of
speculation,  and  repeatedly  expanded  into  elaborate  systems,
it  has  gradually  fallen  into  disrepute,  and  is  now  hardly  looked
on  as  more  than  a  first  and  preliminary  review  of  the  facts  pre
paring  the  way  for  an  investigation  by  which  it  is  to  be  followed.
And  in  fact  we  must  acknowledge  that  it  does  not  suffice  to
explain  the  phenomena.  It  would  be  a  delusion  to  suppo.se
that  we  possess  in  the  notion  of  mental  faculties  a  means  of
investigation  as  efficacious  as  that  won  by  physical  science  in
the  notion  of  energy.  "What  makes  the  latter  fruitful  is
lacking  to  the  former,  which  nevertheless  repeats  all  the  faults
owing  to  which  the  kindred  notion  of  vital  energy  exhausts
itself  in  vain  efforts  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  life.  Where
physics  applies  its  notion  of  energy,  it  is  not  content  with
defining  it  by  the  character  and  appearance  of  its  result ;  it
does  not  speak  generally  of  powers  of  attraction  and  repulsion,
but  adds  a  law  according  to  which  the  amount  of  its  efficacy
alters,  when  precisely  definable  conditions  to  which  it  is
attached  undergo  an  equally  measurable  alteration  of  value.
Only  thus  can  it  calculate  the  exact  amount  of  work  which
under  given  circumstances  each  force  will  perform;  only  thus

1VO  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  II.

does  it  succeed  in  linking  to  the  unvarying  energy  of  the
same  force  the  most  various  effects,  at  first  distinguished  only
by  their  difference  of  amount,  but  leading,  as  they  meet  with
other  effects  determined  in  the  same  manner,  to  a  countless
multitude  of  the  most  dissimilar  events.  These  advantages
are  not  yielded  by  the  notion  of  mental  faculties.  While
it  is  exclusively  derived  from  the  general  form  common  to
a  number  of  heterogeneous  processes,  each  of  these  again
reciprocally  determines  of  course  only,  in  general,  the  form
proper  to  its  own  manifestations.  Thus  unquestionably  the
ideational  faculty  will  give  rise  to  ideas,  the  faculty  of
feeling  to  feelings;  but  there  is  a  lack  of  rules  going  beyond
this  idle  certainty,  and  guiding  to  a  conclusion  as  to  what
idea  will  arise  under  what  circumstances,  or  what  will  take
place  when  several  manifestations  of  the  same  faculty  meet.

Even  physical  science  has  not  everywhere  been  able  to
define  the  laws  of  action  of  its  forces  ;  but,  where  this  is  the
case,  men  of  science  freely  confess  that  they  have  not  yet
advanced  so  far  as  to  be  able  really  to  explain  the  phenomena.
Yet  even  here  the  notion  of  energy  offers  advantages  not  to
be  found  in  that  of  mental  faculties.  The  actions  of  natural
forces  are  always  comparable  with  each  other  ;  for,  however
marvellously  different  may  be  the  internal  states  of  elements,
the  external  changes  in  which  they  become  apparent  may
always  be  ultimately  reduced  to  motions  in  space,  differing
only  in  velocity  and  direction.  Hence  it  is  possible  to  apply
to  them  the  universal  rules  of  mathematical  calculation,  and
definitely  to  formulate  the  result  produced  by  the  meeting  of
several  forces  in  the  same  element ;  from  two  simple  motions
in  a  straight  line  we  see  sometimes  the  equilibrium  of  rest,
sometimes  a  uniform  velocity  in  an  intermediate  direction,
sometimes  continued  revolution  in  curved  lines.  And  from  this
comparability  of  the  forces  it  is  always  possible,  even  when
their  laws  are  not  known  in  detail,  to  draw  from  the  character
of  their  action  at  least  a  probable  conjecture  as  to  the  result
of  their  conjoint  working,  and  to  fix  its  presumable  value
within  definite  limits.  The  mental  faculties,  however,  seem

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL. 171

incapable  of  comparison  with  one  another  ;  for  each  of  them
was  based  only  on  the  peculiar  character  of  its  manifestations,
which  it  seemed  hopeless  to  bring  under  a  common  category
with  the  distinctive  stamp  of  the  others.  Thus  how  an  act
of  the  ideational  faculty  will  act  on  the  faculty  of  feeling,
how,  further,  the  latter  will  promote  or  hinder  efforts,  we
can  guess  pretty  well  without  science,  by  simply  following  the
instinct  of  our  inner  experience  ;  but  there  is  in  the  notion  of
these  faculties  nothing  to  enable  us  to  raise  the  tact  of  sound
judgment  to  a  clear  scientific  insight  into  the  mutual  depend
ence  of  these  processes.

One  further  remark  we  must  add.  Physical  science  states
precisely  the  conditions  under  which  exclusively  the  assumed
forces  can  exhibit  efficiency.  It  distinguishes  those  funda
mental  forces  which  are  conceivable  as  perpetually  inherent  in
bodies,  because  their  conditions  are  perpetually  realized,  and
which  therefore,  ever  ready,  seem  to  wait  only  for  an  object  in
which  their  influence  can  become  visible ;  it  sets  over  against
them  those  other  capacities  of  action  which  an  element  does
not  originally  possess,  but  under  certain  circumstances  acquires,
and  which  therefore,  as  they  now  appear  and  now  again  are
lost  sight  of,  have  a  history  that  can  be  scientifically  traced.
Even  here  the  psychological  doctrine  finds  itself  at  a  dis
advantage.  It  could  not  represent  any  of  its  faculties  as  an
energy  constantly  exercised  by  the  soul  ;  a  perception  that  had
not  yet  found  its  object,  a  feeling  of  no  particular  quality,  a
volition  without  a  purpose,  seemed  too  glaringly  preposterous
notions  ;  it  was  felt  that  they  are  all  operations,  the  perform
ance  of  which  the  soul  requires  to  be  incited  to  and  qualified
for  by  definite  impressions  ;  on  this  very  account  they  were,
under  the  name  of  faculties,  put  in  contrast  to  forces.  But
the  history  of  their  genesis  from  the  reciprocal  influence  of
such  impressions  and  the  nature  of  the  soul,  has  been  too  little
investigated,  and  the  want  of  such  information  is  not  to  be
supplied  by  an  arrangement  of  the  different  faculties  as  super-
ordinate  and  subordinate,  according  to  the  comparative  uni
versality  or  particularity  of  their  manifestations.  For  in  this

172  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  II.

way  much  always  presented  itself  as  original,  that  is  really
acquired  only  by  means  of  the  progressive  growth  of  life, — much
as  simultaneous,  that  in  the  actual  development  of  intelligence
occurs  at  various  successive  points.  Finally,  the  vague  notion
of  a  slumber  and  subsequent  awakening  of  particular  faculties
was  not  fitted  to  make  up  for  the  general  absence  of
insight  into  the  simultaneous  action  and  mutual  co-operation
of  their  effects.

Thus  the  proper  end  of  scientific  investigation  was  lost
sight  of — that  search  for  causal  connection,  by  which  each
event  of  mental  life  is  shown  rising  out  of  its  antecedents
and  again  modifying  that  which  is  its  immediate  consequent.
But  every  science  that  values  its  future  applications  must  be
careful  to  secure  for  itself  the  possibility  of  conjecturing  the
past  and  the  future  from  the  present  state.  Where,  as  in  the
case  of  mental  life,  the  bewildering  complexity  of  the  con
ditions  concerned  must  make  the  complete  solution  of  this
problem  impossible,  we  must  at  least  strive  to  gain  such  a
view  of  the  causal  connection  as  may  teach  us  to  discern  the
outlines  of  the  future  and  the  bases  of  the  present  in  the  past
with  more  precision  than  belongs  to  the  indefinite  estimate  of
a  natural  instinct.  Such  knowledge  alone  would  enable  us
in  education  to  set  in  motion  the  counter-forces  that  are
fitted  to  alter  undesirable  results  for  the  better.  But  of  this
problem  the  doctrine  of  the  mental  faculties  offers  no  solution  ;
it  really  does  no  more  than  repeat  faintly  and  from  afar  that
general  image  of  phenomena  which  we  observe  directly
within  ourselves  in  all  the  variety  of  its  vivid  local  colour
ing,  while  having  not]) ing  to  say  about  the  agencies  beyond
our  observation  that  produce  this  scene  of  manifold  activity
no  less  secretly  than  the  imperceptible  vibrations  of  the
ether  give  rise  to  the  world  of  light  and  its  marvellous
refractions.

§  2.  Now  one  might  be  inclined  to  ascribe  this  deficiency
not  to  the  fundamental  idea,  but  to  the  imperfect  elaboration
of  the  doctrine.  Perhaps,  after  careful  observation  has  dis
criminated  from  the  original  mental  faculties  those  which

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  173

seem  to  be  merely  capabilities  acquired  in  the  course  of
development,  it  will  succeed  in  discovering  the  laws  regu
lating  the  activity  and  mutual  influence  of  those  fundamental
powers.  But,  before  allowing  ourselves  to  cherish  this  hope
any  further,  we  must  refer  to  an  objection  by  which  its  exist
ence  is  threatened.

Any  plurality  of  original  faculties,  it  is  urged,  is  opposed
to  the  soul's  unity  ;  to  start  with  the  assumption  of  such  is
as  incompatible  with  accuracy  of  thought  as  unfruitful  for
the  purpose  of  explanation,  the  satisfaction  of  which  would  be
curtailed  by  assuming  that  a  variety  of  operations  (which  it
must  be  the  task  of  science  to  show  proceeding  from  a  single
source;  are  co-ordinate  and  require  no  light  thrown  on  their
origin.  People  have  become  so  much  accustomed  to  regard
this  as  the  most  decisive  objection  to  the  doctrine  of  the
mental  faculties,  that  we  almost  hesitate  to  advocate  an
opposite  opinion.  Those  faculties  have  no  doubt  been  often
spoken  of  as  if  they  were  ready-made  dispositions,  impressed
one  alongside  of  another  on  the  soul,  but  without  any  further
mutual  connection ;  and  over  against  this  incomplete  descrip
tion  is  set  the  rightful  demand  to  regard  the  various  properties
of  a  being  as  so  many  different  manifestations  of  its  one  and
identical  nature,  wrung  from  it  by  the  reciprocal  action  evolved
between  it  and  other  elements.  But  perhaps,  in  opposition  to
this  slovenly  mode  of  speech,  the  novelty  and  value  of  the
objection  in  question  have  been  too  highly  rated.  That
bodies  are  coloured  only  in  light,  hard  only  when  their
resisting  force  has  been  called  forth  by  the  pressure  of  a
weight,  fluid  at  one  degree  of  temperature,  solid  at  another,
— all  these  are  reflections  suggested  by  the  most  ordinary
experience.  It  was  easy  to  pass  from  them  to  the  conviction
that  at  least  the  sensible  properties  of  things  are  not  fixed
determinations  stamped  upon  them,  but  changeful  appear
ances,  coming  into  being  and  passing  away,  which  wo  see
their  nature  successively  assume  under  altering  conditions.
Bui  it  was  much  more  natural  still  to  apply  the  same  view
to  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  whose  very  name  suggested  that

174  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  II.

they  were  to  be  regarded  not  as  actualities,  but  merely  as  the
different  potentialities  of  expression  standing  at  the  disposal
of  the  one  nature  of  the  soul,  when  it  is  roused  into  activity
by  various  stimuli, — the  necessity  of  whose  co-operation  was
not  forgotten.  Thus  it  will  perhaps  be  well  to  leave  out
of  view  many  awkwardnesses  of  expression  that  have  been
allowed  to  slip  into  the  question,  and  to  allow  to  this
violently  assailed  doctrine  that  it  arose  naturally  out  of
the  very  conviction  which  is  opposed  to  it  by  the  objection
referred  to.  The  first  part  of  it  at  all  events  it  does  not
deserve ;  it  too  looked  on  all  faculties  as  results  of  the  soul's
one  nature,  only  it  did  not  believe  that  their  interdependence
is  so  close  that  from  one  all  the  rest  proceed.  Now,  whether
it  was  right  here,  and  whether  it  did  not  unduly  curtail  the
claims  of  science,  in  being  too  easily  satisfied  with  the  assump
tion  of  original  capacities  and  neglecting  to  trace  them  actually
back  to  one  source,  is  another  question  still  to  be  determined.
But  even  as  to  the  second  part  of  the  above-mentioned  charge
we  cannot  fully  share  the  opinion  now  widely  diffused.

Assuredly  our  science  can  go  no  further  than  our  means  of
knowledge,  and  it  must  accept  as  a  series  of  given  facts  what
it  finds  itself  unable  to  deduce  from  a  single  principle.  To
seek  completeness  here  at  any  price  only  leads  to  the
temptation  of  unconsciously  curtailing  somewhat  the  matter
of  fact,  in  order  more  easily  to  explain  the  more  manageable
remainder.  Even  in  this  psychological  problem  there  is  such
a  temptation.  "We  recognise  the  justice  of  the  requirement
that  all  the  manifestations  of  a  being  shall  be  regarded  but
as  various  results  of  its  single  nature,  but  we  are  impotent
actually  to  carry  it  out  in  science.  Given  a  few  points  in  the
heavens  occupied  at  different  times  by  a  comet,  we  hence  infer
the  path  on  which  it  must  farther  travel  ;  the  laws  of  the
celestial  motions  do  not  permit  of  its  occupying  these  points
without  of  necessity  subsequently  also  passing  through  the
others  that  form  along  with  them  a  regularly  determined  curve.
The  like  consistency  we  take  for  granted  in  the  nature  of  the  soul.
If  its  nature  manifests  itself  in  response  to  one  stimulation  in

MATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  175

a  given  manner,  the  other  manifestation  by  which  it  will
respond  to  a  second  is  no  longer  indefinite  or  arbitrary  ;  the
one  step  decides  all  the  others,  and  by  whatever  impressions  of
various  kinds  it  may  be  affected,  its  conduct  in  regard  to  each
of  these  is  determined  by  that  which  it  followed  in  regard  to
the  first.  Thus  in  it  too  the  manifold  reaction  drawn  forth
by  stimulations  of  various  kinds  will  not  be  mutually  uncon
nected,  but  form  the  harmonious  whole  of  a  nature  expressing
itself  in  consistent  manysidedness.  But  this  assumption,  no
less  imperative  here  than  in  the  former  case,  is  not  as  fruitful
here  as  there.  We  know  that  for  the  comet  the  laws  of
Attraction  and  Persistence  are  the  bond  by  which  all  the  parts
of  its  course  are  brought  into  demonstrable  connection  ;  for  the
soul  we  would  need  a  far  more  deeply  grounded  law,  that
should  enable  us  to  conceive  of  different  energies,  unlike  in
their  forms  of  manifestation,  as  nevertheless  parts  of  one  and
the  same  course  of  development.  We  ought  to  be  able  to  say
why  a  being  that  in  consequence  of  the  undulations  of  the
ether  sees  light  and  colours,  cannot  but  hear  tones  when
atmospheric  vibrations  act  on  its  organs  of  sense,  or  why  its
nature,  while  evolving  intuitive  but  indifferent  perceptions
under  certain  impressions,  must  under  others  experience  feel
ings  of  pleasure  and  pain.  We  hardly  venture  on  the  express
assertion  that  this  extraordinary  problem  has  never  yet  been
solved,  and  that  we  see  no  prospect  of  even  the  possibility  of  its
solution ;  every  system  of  psychology  acknowledges  that  there
must  be  in  the  nature  of  the  soul  this  unbroken  consistency,
but  none  can  formulate  its  law.  The  requirement  of  such
unity  in  the  soul  will  therefore  always  remain  a  guiding  con
sideration  by  which  the  general  sequence  and  conduct  of  our
inquiries  is  controlled,  but  in  carrying  out  our  explanations
we  must  be  content  to  accept  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  variety
of  psychic  manifestations.

The  theories  set  up  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of
faculties  have  in  fact  ended  in  the  recognition  of  this  variety.
But  they  have  made  a  distinction  between  the  plurality  of  thu
simple  and  as  it  were  original  energies,  that  proceed  not  one

1*7G  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  II.

out  of  another,  bnt  all  alike  from  the  nature  of  the  soul,  and
those  higher  activities  which,  not  belonging  to  it  originally,
proceed  from  concatenations  of  the  simple  states,  and  to  refer
which  directly  to  peculiar  faculties  is  to  curtail  science  of
their  explanation.  The  doctrine  of  the  mental  faculties  can
not  in  all  cases  vindicate  itself  against  this  charge.  When,
for  instance,  we  find  judgment  and  imagination  placed  among
them  alongside  of  one  another,  we  must  unhesitatingly  grant
that  these  two  do  not  form  part  of  the  original  mental  stock,
but  are  capabilities  developed  in  the  advance  of  life,  the
one  slowly,  the  other  quickly.  We  must  at  the  same  time
acknowledge  that  to  explain  their  growth  nothing  is  needed
beyond  the  laws  of  association,  according  to  which  every
percept  may  remain  in  memory,  and,  after  having  been  lost
to  consciousness,  may  be  restored  to  remembrance  by  the
resuscitation  of  others  with  which  it  was  formerly  associated.
We  do  not  seek  in  the  soul,  before  it  has  had  experience,  the
capacity  of  readily  and  accurately  apprehending  resemblances
and  differences  in  impressions,  and  at  once  ranging  each  in
the  general  category  answering  to  its  character.  But  every
percept  retained  in  memory,  when  it  is  recalled  by  a  new
and  similar  one,  brings  back  to  consciousness  the  others  with
which  it  was  connected,  but  which  are  strange  to  the  new
impression,  and  thus  invites  to  discriminating  and  associating
comparisons.  The  repetition  of  this  simple  process  increases
the  number  of  points  of  view,  the  subsequent  remembrance  of
which  meets  new  observations  and  assists  their  collocation  in
the  circle  of  kindred  ideas.  Thus  soundness  of  judgment
is  gradually  and  progressively  developed,  all  newly  acquired
knowledge  being  by  degrees  added  to  the  stock  of  discernment,
by  means  of  whose  advancing  ramification  the  task,  which  was
at  first  difficult,  and  often  fruitless,  conies  at  last  to  be  performed
with  the  ease  of  a  seemingly  innate  faculty.  Still  more
erroneous  would  it  be  to  refer  the  operations  of  the  imagina
tion  to  an  innate  power, — operations  so  endlessly  varied  in
appearance  that  for  their  performance  the  consistency  of  a
single  energy  regulated  in  its  exercise  by  a  constant  law

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  177

illicit  be  deemed  far  less  favourable  than  a  general  arbitrari
ness  of  action.  The  ground  of  this  power  really  lies,  not
indeed  in  any  such  absence  of  law,  but  in  the  fact  that
its  results  are  not  brought  about  by  any  special  faculty.  A
happy  variety  of  experiences  has  put  at  the  disposal  of  the
train  of  ideas  an  abundant  store  of  impressions ;  other
favourable  circumstances,  connected  with  the  bodily  develop
ment  and  the  disposition  of  mind,  concur  to  leave  to  its  action
all  that  mobility  with  which  it  spontaneously  evolves  the
most  diverse  combinations  of  ideas,  brings  together  those
which  are  akin,  sets  in  contrast  those  which  are  dissimilar,
and  carries  on  trains  of  ideas  already  begun.  Thus  both
these  faculties  have  their  history;  we  can  trace  their  advance
by  means  of  increasing  experience,  their  deterioration  in  con
sequence  of  the  poverty  of  the  impressions  received,  their
perversion  from  a  one-sided  conduct  of  life  and  from  the
influence  of  morbid  obstacles,  and  in  order  to  explain  these
results  we  need  not  assume  special  capacities  appropriated  t»
these  operations.  Both  presuppose  the  energy  of  other  powers
for  the  performance  of  their  functions;  but  from  these  their
peculiar  tasks  can  be  fully  explained.

§  3.  Now,  can  we  carry  further  this  speculation,  so  that  finally
there  should  be  left  only  a  single  primitive  mode  of  mental
manifestation,  from  which,  as  from  a  common  root,  the  other
apparent  faculties  should  proceed  ?  Can  the  latter  resemble
leaves,  blossoms,  and  fruit,  which,  all  alike  products  of  the
same  power  of  growth,  owe  their  diverse  forms  partly  to  the
variety  of  external  influences,  partly  to  the  propitious  effect
of  circumstances,  whence  it  comes  that  tin*  higher  product
can  start  from  the  completion  of  the  next  lower  ?  To  this
question  the  older  psychology  returned  a  negative  answer ;  it
was  confident  that  Feeling  and  Will  contain  peculiar  elements,
arising  neither  from  tin;  nature  of  Ideation  nor  from  tin-
general  character  of  Consciousness,  in  which  all  three  take
part ;  they  were  accordingly  co-ordinated  with  the  faculty  of
Cognition  (or  Ideation)  as  two  equally  original  capacities,  and
more  recent  conceptions  do  not  seem  to  be  successful  in

VOL  I.  M

178  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  II.

refuting  the  grounds  on  which  this  triad  of  original  faculties
was  based.  We  could  not  indeed  wish,  to  maintain  that
ideation,  feeling,  and  will  share  between  them  the  realm  of
the  soul,  as  three  independent  series  of  development  springing
from  distinct  roots,  each  growing  on  unconnected  with  the
others,  and  coming  in  contact  with  the  others  in  varied  action
and  reaction  only  in  the  final  ramifications  of  their  branching
growth.  It  is  too  obvious  from  observation  that,  in  general,
incidents  in  the  train  of  ideas  form  the  points  of  junction  of
the  feelings,  and  that  from  these,  from  pain  and  pleasure,  are
evolved  motions  of  desire  and  aversion.  And  yet  this  evident
connection  does  not  dispose  of  the  question  whether  here  the
preceding  event  does  indeed  give  rise  by  its  own  energy
to  that  which  immediately  succeeds,  as  its  full  and  complete
efficient  cause,  or  whether  it  only  draws  the  Litter  after
it,  as  an  exciting  occasion,  from  acting  partly  with  the  ex
traneous  force  of  a  silently  co-operative  condition  that  eludes
our  notice.  This  doubt  must  be  set  at  rest  by  a  more
accurate  analysis  of  the  actual  data.  Where  we  find  actually
given  each  several  germ  and  constituent  of  that  which  is  to
be,  and  these  germs  further  in  a  state  of  motion,  from  which,
if  prolonged,  the  new  form  of  the  subsequent  result  must  of
itself  emerge,  we  may  regard  what  preceded  as  the  sufficient
cause  of  the  latter.  Where,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a
residuum  that  cannot  have  been  produced  by  the  conditioning
circumstances,  but  has  been  added  to  them  as  a  foreign
accretion,  we  shall  conclude  that  those  circumstances  did  not
form  the  entire  ground  of  the  succeeding  phenomenon,  but
that,  unnoticed  by  us,  a  condition  lying  outside,  which  we
have  now  to  seek,  came  in  to  make  them  complete.

A  comparison  of  these  mental  phenomena  forces  us,  if  we
are  not  mistaken,  to  adopt  the  latter  hypothesis.  If  we  look
on  the  soul  as  a  merely  cognitive  existence,  we  shall,  in  no
situation — however  peculiar — into  which  it  may  be  brought
by  the  exercise  of  that  activity,  discover  any  sufficient  reason
why  it  should  depart  from  that  mode  of  manifesting  itself  and
develop  feelings  of  pain  and  pleasure.  Of  course  it  may

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL. 179

,  on  the  contrary,  that  there  is  nothing  so  self-evident  as
that  unreconciled  antagonism  between  different  ideas,  whose
contrariety  does  violence  to  the  soul,  causes  it  pain,  from
which  must  spring  an  effort  after  recovery  and  improve
ment.  But  this  seems  so  to  us  only  because  we  are  more
than  cognitive  beings ;  the  necessity  of  this  sequence  is
apparent  not  in  itself,  but  from  the  invariable  use  and  wont
of  our  internal  experience,  where  we  have  long  been  accustomed
to  it  as  mi  inevitable  matter  of  fact.  This  alone  makes  it
possible  for  us  to  overlook  that  in  truth  between  each  pre
ceding  and  each  subsequent  link  in  the  series  there  is  a
gap,  which  we  can  fill  up  only  by  bringing  in  some  as  yet
unobserved  condition.  Apart  from  this  experience,  the
merely  cognitive  soul  would  find  in  itself  no  reason  for
regarding  an  internal  change — even  were  it  one  fraught  with
risk  to  the  continuance  of  its  existence — otherwise  than  with
tin-  indifferent  keenness  of  scrutiny  with  which  it  would  look
upon  any  other  conflict  of  forces  ;  further,  should  a  feeling,
arising  from  other  sources,  set  itself  alongside  of  the  percep
tion,  the  merely  feeling  soul  would  yet  even  in  the  intensest
pain  find  in  itself  neither  reason  nor  capacity  for  going  on  to
an  effort  after  alteration  ;  it  would  suffer,  without  being  roused
to  will.  Xow  this  is  not  so,  and  in  order  that  it  should
not  be  so,  the  capacity  of  feeling  pleasure  and  pain  must  be
originally  inherent  in  the  soul ;  also  the  separate  events  of  the
train  of  ideas,  reacting  on  the  nature  of  the  soul,  do  not  produce
the  capacity,  but  only  rouse  it  to  utterance  ;  moreover,  whatever
feelings  may  sway  the  soul,  they  do  not  beget  effort,  they  only
become  motives  for  a  power  of  volition  which  they  find  exist
ing  in  tin;  soul,  but  which,  were  it  absent,  they  could  never
inspire.  We  should  be  by  no  means  content  to  accept  in  place
of  this  conviction  the  concession  with  which  we  might  be  met,
— that  to  be  sure  any  actual  state  of  the  train  of  ideas  is  not
itself  the  feeling  of  pain  or  pleasure  or  the  effort  flowing  from
it,  but  yet  that  feeling  and  effort  are  nothing  else  than  the
forms  under  which  that  state  is  apprehended  by  conscious
ness.  We  should  have,  on  the  other  side,  to  add  that  these

180  BOOK  II. CIIArTEll  II.

forms  of  apprehension  are  themselves  not  unimportant
accessories,  to  be  referred  to  by  the  way,  as  merely  occurring
along  with  the  facts  of  the  train  of  ideas,  in  which  alone
the  kernel  of  the  matter  lay ;  on  the  contrary,  the  essential
part  of  the  phenomenon  is  just  this  mode  of  manifestation.
It  is  as  feelings  and  efforts  that  feelings  and  efforts  are  of
consequence  in  mental  life,  the  significance  of  which  lies  not
in  the  fact  that  all  kinds  of  complications  of  ideas  occur,  of
which  men  may  incidentally  become  conscious  under  the  form
of  feeling  and  effort,  but  in  the  fact  that  the  nature  of  the
soul  renders  it  capable  of  bringing  anything  before  itself  as
feeling  and  effort.

These  three  primitive  powers  would  thus  stand  as  progressive
grades  of  capacity,  and  the  manifestation  of  the  one  set  free  the
energy  of  the  next.  Yet  in  this  representation  we  would
acquiesce  only  while  it  is  clearly  kept  in  mind  that  what  we
know  as  three  is  nevertheless  but  one  in  the  being  of  the  soul.
The  soul  does  not  enter  even  into  its  own  manifestations  in  so
fragmentary  a  fashion  that  one  of  its  parts  can  be  awake  while
the  others  are  dormant ;  on  the  contrary,  in  every  mode  of  its
action  the  whole  soul  energizes  ;  nay,  even  in  ideation  not
merely  one  side  of  it  is  active,  the  whole  expresses  itself  in  a
one-sided  way,  because  it  cannot  respond  to  a  definite  excita
tion  save  by  a  definite  power  of  expression.  When  we  com
pare  four  witli  five,  it  is  at  once  apparent  that  the  former  is
a  unit  less  than  the  latter,  but  not  that  four  is  also  the  half
of  eight  and  twice  two ;  further  comparisons  are  required  in
order  that  these  relations  may  be  recalled ;  yet  in  each  the
whole  nature  of  four  is  displayed,  only  one-sidedly,  in  that
direction  alone  for  which  occasion  was  given  to  it.  Or  let  us
return  once  more  to  a  comparison  already  made  use  of.  If
we  look  at  a  moving  body  at  a  single  point  of  its  course,  we
cannot  tell  with  what  direction  and  velocity  it  is  passing
through  this  point,  and  nevertheless  at  this  very  moment  it
exhibits  in  full  force  the  motion  which  at  the  next  will  deter
mine  the  continuance  of  its  course.  When  we  observe  the  soul
only  in  the  act  of  cognition,  its  whole  nature  is  not  uttered  for  us

NATl'KK  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  181

in  this  one  element  of  its  life,  from  which  at  the  next  moment
u  transition  to  feeling  and  effort  may  take  place ;  nevertheless
in  this  mere  fragment  of  its  course  of  development  the  whole
nature  is  active.  Divine  intuition  would  not  need  to  see  a
body  move  through  a  considerable  part  of  its  course,  in  order
to  know  its  motion, — it  would  immediately  be  cognizant  of  it
at  any  indivisible  point ;  even  so,  in  each  several  manifesta
tion  of  the  soul  it  would  see  its  whole  nature  present,  and
discern  the  inherent  necessity  that  under  different  conditions
must  lead  to  different  modes  of  activity.  Our  human  minds
must  be  content  to  exhaust  this  fulness  gradually,  and  to
remember  that  while  we  see  a  plurality  of  capabilities,  unity
of  being  is  a  fundamental  attribute  of  the  soul.  At  the  same
time,  we  have  no  ground  for  regarding  this  hypothesis  of
different  faculties  merely  as  an  expedient  suited  to  the  weak
ness  of  the  human  intellect  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  does  in  a
certain  sense  correspond  to  reality.  It  may  be  that  even
divine  intuition  would  find  in  the  notion  of  cognition  alone
no  necessity  why  feeling  must  spring  from  it ;  it  would  only,
with  greater  clearness  than  we,  see  in  the  whole  rationale  of
psychic  life  the  principle  in  obedience  to  which  the  two
phenomena  coexist  and  succeed  one  another,  even  as  in  a
poem  the  pervading  Idea  binds  together  firmly  and  with
.constraining  power  constituent  parts,  no  one  of  which  could
liftve  spontaneously  evolved  the  other  from  itself.

§  4.  Perhaps  we  have  lingered  too  long  over  these  reflections,
but  they  so  directly  concern  our  most  fundamental  concep
tions  of  the  life  of  the  soul  that  we  must  still  devote  a
moment's  consideration  to  the  general  view  of  mental  phaj-
nomena  flowing  from  them  as  a  direct  consequence.  We
have  said  that  on  any  theory  we  must  conclude  by  recognising
u  plurality  of  modes  of  psychic  manifestation  not  reducible
to  on  i  another.  One  system,  however,  to  which  psychology
is  indebted  for  great  advances,  limits  this  recognition  to  the
reactions  developed  by  the  soul  in  direct  correspondence  with
external  stimuli,  that  is,  to  simple  sensations.  It,  too,  regards
these  primitive  manifestations  with  which  psychic  life  com-

1S2  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  H.

mences,  as  not  reducible  to  one  another,  and  it  does  not
profess  to  be  able  to  say  why  a  being  susceptible  to  light  and
colours  must  apprehend  other  impressions  as  tones.  All  other
higher  energies,  on  the  other  hand,  arising  in  the  elaboration
and  mutual  action  and  reaction  of  these  internal  states,  it
supposes  to  spring  wholly  out  of  them ;  after  the  soul  has
once  produced  from  its  own  nature  the  original  material,  the
world  of  sensation,  its  creative  activity  ebbs ;  it  leaves  these
products  of  its  working  to  themselves  and  to  the  universal
laws  of  their  reciprocal  action,  without  further  interfering
with  its  whole  nature,  or  giving  to  the  relations  brought
into  play  new  applications  not  naturally  arising  from  them  in
virtue  of  the  logical  sequence  of  their  mechanical  course.
Thus  the  soul  is  but  a  stage  for  the  mutual  action  of  sen
sations  and  ideas,  of  course  one  that  accompanies  with
consciousness  all  that  takes  place  on  it,  but  that  does  not
exert  on  it  much  influence  beyond  the  enclosing  and  keeping
together  possessed  by  every  frame  with  regard  to  the
picture  within.  This  is  the  point  where  our  view  diverges.
Not  only  once  for  all,  not  only  in  the  development  of  the
simple  sensations  is  the  soul  active  after  this  creative  fashion ;
even  if  these  first  products  are  to  be  ascribed  to  an  orderly
mechanism,  and  if  the  train  of  ideas,  witli  its  associations
and  separations,  its  forgetting  and  recollecting,  arises  spontane
ously,  without  any  fresh  impetus  given  by  the  soul,  yet  that
is  not  the  whole  of  the  mental  life,  and  the  higher  energies,
which  constitute  its  true  worth,  do  not  proceed  spontaneously
from  this  mechanical  working.  The  determined  course  of
these  internal  events  brings  merely  occasions  which,  solely
from  reacting  on  the  whole  and  ever  present  nature  of  the  soul,
draw  forth  from  it  new  forms  of  action,  which  by  itself  it
could  not  have  produced.  The  position  of  the  soul  in  respect
of  each  one  of  its  internal  states  is  the  same  as  it  was  in
respect  of  the  external  stimuli  to  sensation ;  to  each  it  can
respond  with  a  form  of  energy  which  it  is  impossible  to
derive  from  those  states,  because  in  fact  it  does  not  reside  in
them  alone,  but  which  on  the  contrary  can  be  connected  with

NATUIIF.  AND  FACULTIES  OF  TIIK  SOfL.  183

Lliose  states  only  after  experience  has  taught  that  this  new
form  cf  action  is  the  very  thing  that  has  been  awakened  in
the  soul's  being  by  them  as  stimuli  of  a  superior  order.

We  will  not  shrink  from  repeating  the  same  thought  once
more  us  suggested  by  a  natural  and  yet  hazardous  comparison
of  mental  life  with  the  development  of  an  organism.  The
soul  does  not  grow  as  does  a  plant.  The  form  of  the  latter
comes  forth  from  a  number  of  essentially  distinct  and  inde
pendent  parts,  united  externally  in  a  definite  form,  which,
according  to  universal  laws  of  Nature,  produce  the  gradually
advancing  conformation  ;  nay  further,  the  life  of  the  perfected
plant  is  a  sum  of  actions  going  on  between  different  parts
that  retain  their  independence,  and,  as  in  the  life  of  a  society,
assume  definite  modes  of  procedure  in  virtue  of  the  position
and  the  activity  of  their  co-operant  members.  A  comparison
of  the  several  elements  of  psychic  life  with  these  parts  must
be  made  with  cautious  limitation  ;  for  these  elements  are  not
independent  atoms,  but  mere  states  of  a  single  being  from
which  they  cannot  detach  themselves.  Hence  they  have  not
an  indifferent  stage,  on  which  to  give  themselves  up  undis
turbed  to  their  reciprocal  actions,  subject  to  nought  save  the
might  of  a  universal  mechanism.  On  the  contrary,  the  very
iield  of  their  action  is  even  itself  capable  of  stimulation  with
reference  to  their  subsequent  relations.  The  nature  of  the
soul  does  not,  after  having  once  for  all  produced  them,  thence
forth  serve  merely  as  a  passive  stage  for  their  free  motions,
as  in  fable  the  earth  does  in  respect  of  the  animals  brought
forth  by  it ;  on  the  contrary,  it  feels  every  movement  of  the
train  of  ideas,  and  is  roused  by  this  now  and  then  to  act
itself,  and  to  introduce  into  its  apparently  arbitrary  play  new
elements,  which  cannot  be  explained  from  itself  alone.  This
is  not  absence  of  order,  but  that  order  of  a  more  complicated
kind,  which  we  have  already  indicated  as  possible  in  general,
and  which  only  experience  could  assure  us  does  not  in  this
form  occur  in  the  material  world.  Hence  in  the  development
of  an  organism  the  effect  to  be  produced  by  the  reciprocal
action  of  two  elements  is  wholly  determined  by  the  universal

184  J300K  II. CHAPTER  II.

Jaws  of  Nature  and  the  actual  circumstances  of  the  moment  ;
in  mental  life,  on  the  other  hand,  to  every  pair  of  states  and
to  the  laws  governing  their  reciprocal  action  the  nature  of  the
soul  has  to  be  added  as  a  constant  fourth  element,  by  which
the  coining  effect  is  conditioned  and  modified,  somewhat  as  the
calculation  of  a  motion  made  for  a  vacuum  would  be  modified
by  taking  account  of  a  resisting  medium.  There  may  certainly
be  series  of  changes  within  us,  the  course  of  which  is  not  affected
by  any  interference  of  this  fourth  element,  and  these  will
seem  to  unroll  themselves  one  out  of  another  in  a  mechanical
course  ;  but  only  accurate  internal  observation  can  inform  us
as  to  the  extent  of  this  mode  of  procedure,  which  we  are  not
entitled  to  assume  as  universal.

§  5.  We  quit  these  considerations,  leaving  for  a  future  occa
sion  the  drawing  of  certain  inferences  from  them,  and  apply
ourselves  to  a  long-foreseen  difficulty,  which  is  associated  with
an  assumption  tacitly  made  by  us.  It  is  clear  that  we  have
placed  the  soul  under  the  category  of  beings  capable  of  excitation.
Its  nature  does  not  struggle  into  activity  spontaneously  and
without  foreign  excitation,  nor  can  it  thus  determine  the  end  and
direction  of  its  action,  but  impressions  from  without  rouse  it
to  reactions,  from  whose  further  operation  springs  the  variety
of  the  inner  life.  Here  the  peculiar  form  of  the  manifestation
flows  from  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  abiding
source  of  sensation,  of  feeling,  of  effort  ;  the  stimuli  are
nothing  more  than  the  motive  influences  determining  the
definite  sequence  of  its  manifestations,  and  directing  its  capa
bilities  undecided  in  themselves.  But  we  cannot  hold  this
•  view,  it  would  seem,  without  ascribing  to  the  soul  a  muta
bility  surely  antagonistic  to  that  strict  unity  which  appears
to  have  no  room  for  variation.  This  reasoning  we  cannot
gainsay ;  unquestionably  an  external  stimulus  compels  a
reaction  to  develop  itself  only  when  it  produces  a  real
impression  on  the  soul  so  as  to  affect  its  nature.  The
mere  threat  of  disturbance  cannot  rouse  the  soul  to  defensive
activity ;  for  that  which  is  threatened,  so  long  as  not
experienced,  is  for  the  object  of  the  threat  nothing;  so  soon

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  18o

as  he  is  aware  of  it,  it  has  already  effected  a  change  in  him.
If  it  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  our  thinking  to  suppose  that
impulses  to  a  variety  of  actions  are  spontaneously  evolved
from  the  unchanging  unity  of  a  being,  we  must  acknowledge
that  the  soul  in  action  is  different  from  what  it  was  when  at
rest,  for  nothing  but  its  alteration  can  be  sufficient  reason
lur  an  altered  procedure.

It  is  impossible  to  evade  this  charge,  and  to  vindicate  the
soul  from  mutability  by  an  expedient  similar  to  that  which
enables  physical  science  to  look  on  material  atoms  as  absolutely
ri'.iid  and  immutable  subjects  of  the  most  diverse  phenomena.
As  objects  of  vision  at  a  distance,  coalescing  in  space,  unite
to  form  a  single  impression,  and  as  they  come  nearer  fall
a-nndcr  once  more  into  a  plurality  of  separate  parts,  so  may
the  course  of  Nature  consist  for  us,  its  observers,  of  a  multitude
of  apparent  changes,  which,  nevertheless,  have  really  left
external  objects  what  they  were.  Inasmuch  us  the  atoms,
internally  absolutely  invariable,  enter  into  changing  and
manifold  relations  to  one  another,  and  are  continually  altering
in  their  situation,  distances,  and  motions,  they  produce  on  us
impressions  of  a  like  changeful  nature,  and,  while  in  fact
rigid  and  impenetrable,  seem  to  our  undiscriminating  observa
tion  sometimes  to  be  fused  together,  sometimes  to  be  detached,
sometimes  to  assume  quite  different  properties.  But  if  we
thus  refer  the  changes  in  the  outer  world  to  an  illusion
produced  merely  in  ourselves,  while  in  reality  nothing  more
than  unessential  relations  change  in  the  immutable  elements,
we  cannot  further  hold  that  the  rise  in  us  of  this  illusion  is
also  merely  an  illusion,  which,  to  a  second  observer,  would
apparently  involve  an  alteration  in  our  being,  but  does  not
really  do  so.  On  the  contrary,  the  observer  does  really
undergo  alteration,  not  of  his  external  position,  but  of  his
internal  state,  when  lie  apprehends  in  cognition  the  changes
of  the  external  world,  and  passes  from  one  idea  to  another.
If,  then,  we  could  succeed  in  wholly  eliminating  variability
from  the  external  world,  the  more  inevitably  would  it  adhere
to  the  nature  of  the  soul.  Let  us  then  grant  this  variability,

18G  BOOK  IT. CHAPTER  II.

and  give  up  the  vain  attempt  to  discover  some  expedient  by
which  the  property  of  immovable  invariability  may  become
compatible  with  the  character  of  a  being  destined  to  internal
development.  We  do  not  think  we  shall  by  this  conces
sion  lose  anything  that  in  the  interest  of  investigation  we
ought  to  retain.  When  we  seek  the  subject  of  a  cycle  of
phcenomena,  we  must  indeed  conceive  it  as  stable  and  strong
enough  to  offer  in  itself  a  sufficient  point  of  support  to  the
various  events  of  the  cycle,  but  we  have  no  ground  to  attribute
to  it  the  rigidity  of  absolute  immobility ;  on  the  contrary,  to
do  so  would  be  to  render  the  conception  of  it  useless.  In  one-
sidedly  guarding  its  stability,  we  would  have  disqualified  it
for  performing  the  much  more  important  function  of  acting  as
a  centre  for  the  exeunt  and  ineunt  actions  of  which  the  cycle
of  phenomena  to  be  explained  consists.  "We  need  add  but
a  few  words,  in  order  to  dispel  the  apprehensions  that  may  be
awakened  by  this  idea  of  a  variable  soul.

First  and  foremost  it  does  not  involve  any  risk  of  a
meaningless  variation,  of  a  perpetual  succession  of  new  states
in  whose  flux  the  unity  of  the  original  being  must  wholly
disappear.  Nothing  in  the  world  is  so  indifferent  and
impotent  as  to  receive  its  character  merely  from  external
impressions,  and  itself  to  serve  simply  as  the  means  of  fixing
the  stream  of  content  in  the  actual  world  by  its  hard  reality,
like  the  hook  that  holds  firmly  yet  indifferently  the  most
various  garments.  Nothing  allows  itself  to  be  forced  from  one
form  to  another  by  a  series  of  external  influences  in  such  a  way
that  at  the  end  of  a  number  of  metamorphoses  no  trace  of  its
former  nature  can  be  found.  What  a  being  seems  to  be  sub
jected  to  from  without,  is  in  reality  always  a  manifestation  of
its  own  active  nature,  called  forth  indeed  but  not  made  by  the
foreign  impetus.  Hence  at  every  moment  of  its  series  of
changes  the  present  state  of  a  being  is  a  concurrent — perhaps
the  most  influential — condition  determining  the  effect  of  the
next  impression.  Now  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from
conceiving  the  original  nature  of  a  being  powerful  enough  to
make  its  influence  felt  as  the  most  effective  through  all  the  links

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  187

of  a  prolonged  chain  of  changes,  and  thereby  to  bring  them  all
into  a  consistent  sequence,  as  little  destitute  of  internal  unity
as  the  melody  that  is  expanded  into  a  number  of  successive
variations.  I  know  not  what  could  induce  us  to  require  of  a
substance  forming  the  ground  of  fluctuating  phenomena  more
than  this  kind  of  unity ;  the  soul,  however,  offers  more.  It
is  not  only  the  subject  of  its  phenomena,  but  also  knows
itself  as  such ;  and,  inasmuch  as  it  retains  a  remembrance  of
its  past  experience  along  with  the  impressions  of  the  present,
it  not  only  presents  to  an  external  observer  the  spectacle  of
a  consistent  series  of  changes,  but  itself  gathers  the  different
developments  of  its  mutable  nature  into  a  unity  of  higher
significance  than  could  ever  belong  to  the  unyielding  rigidity
of  an  impassive  substance.

Here  we  have  done  nothing  more  than  indicate  the  general
form  in  which  we  would  take  up  this  question.  An  accurate
review  of  the  actual  pluenoiiiena  of  psychic  life  would  show
that  it  is  far  from  manifesting  the  large  amount  of  varia
bility  that  might  be  vindicated  on  this  line  of  thought.  In
Nature,  as  we  have  already  seen,  no  permanent  alteration
takes  place  in  the  atoms,  at  least  none  of  such  a  nature  as
to  manifest  itself  by  new  modes  of  external  action ;  when
the  altering  conditions  cease  to  act,  the  old  properties
exhibit  themselves  afresh.  This  certainly  is  not  always  the
case  in  psychic  life,  whose  capacity  of  development,  on  the
contrary,  depends  on  perfecting  the  reactions  by  habitual
exercise.  But  we  are  about  to  meet  with  an  extensive
sphere  in  which  its  uniformity  of  demeanour  approaches
to  that  of  physical  effects.  Sense-impressions,  however  often
they  may  have  already  been  experienced,  always  excite  the
same  sensations ;  red  remains  always  red,  pressure  and  heat
are  always  painful,  and  the  same  corporeal  necessities  call
forth  always  the  same  efforts.  All  this  is  so  self-evident  that
to  mention  it  may  seem  strange.  And  yet,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  every  single  sensation  is  an  alteration  in  the  soul's
being  ;  that  its  nature  should  be  capable  of  so  adjust  ing  the
disturbances  perpetually  caused  in  it  by  countless  impressions

188  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  II.

that  it  can  encounter  each  subsequent  one  with  undiminished
composure,  is  a  fact  easy  of  comprehension  as  regards  its
adaptation  to  the  ends  of  mental  growth,  but  the  mechanical
effectuation  of  which — if  we  may  say  so — is  not  at  once  to  be
understood.  We  may  remark  the  same  steadiness  in  the  laws
according  to  which  memory  and  recollection  retain,  associate,
and  recall  ideas ;  moreover,  the  modes  of  procedure  of  the
understanding  in  associating  and  forming  judgments  on
impressions  received  remain  unaltered.  Everywhere  wre  see
that  the  numberless  influences  exerted  on  the  soul,  while
they  cannot  but  produce  some  change  in  it,  yet  do  not  affect
the  steady  and  consistent  exercise  of  the  energies  with
which  it  reacts  on  and  modifies  these  impressions ;  these
energies  seem  only  to  gain  greater  dexterity  with  growing
exercise  by  which  they  have  become  familiar  with  the  com
plexities  of  the  objects  on  which  they  have  to  act.  So  little
do  we  see  the  alteration  of  the  soul  passing  into  indefinite-
ness  and  chaos,  so  conspicuously,  on  the  contrary,  do  we
see  the  continual  moulding  reaction  of  its  fundamental
nature  manifested,  that  we  need  hardly  have  spoken  of  its
alteration  except  for  the  logical  interest  that  would  not
allow  us  to  associate  its  development  with  the  contradictory
notion  of  internal  immobility.  But,  in  truth,  so  great,  in
respect  of  its  significance  and  its  value,  is  the  consistency
of  the  internal  development,  that  it  ever  presents  the
spectacle  rather  of  unbroken  identity  than  of  progressive
transformation.

§6.  In  what,  then,  does  that  consist  which  remains
identical  in  this  development  ?  In  what  that  primitive
being  and  TO  TL  of  the  soul  the  more  precise  delineation  of
which  seemed  to  be  promised  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  ?
We  would  answer,  As  every  being  becomes  known  only
through  the  consequences  by  which  our  observation  finds  it
attended,  so  also  of  the  soul  we  can  say  no  more  than  that
it  contains  the  capacity  for  this  development.  This
answer  will  satisfy  no  one.  All  cognitions  of  ideas,
all  thoughts,  feelings,  and  efforts,  it  would  be  urged

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  180

against  us,  are  but  actions  of  the  soul,  by  whatever  agency
drawn  from  it ;  but  we  seek  to  know  not  how  the  soul  acts,
but  what  it  is  in  itself  in  order  to  be  able  so  to  act,  and  what
must  be  its  fundamental  nature  since  such  capabilities  lie  latent
in  it.  In  reply  to  this  pointed  query  it  would  be  simplest
to  confess  our  conviction  that  what  the  soul  is  we  never  shall
know  ;  but  by  such  a  confession  we  should  create  the  impres
sion  that  through  this  ignorance  we  must  lose  much  that  is  of
importance  for  our  investigation,  and  that  in  regard  to  the
soul  a  dilliculty  is  to  us  insoluble,  which  is  easily  removed  in
regard  to  all  other  things.

How  little  the  latter  is  the  case  appears  on  a  hasty  review
of  the  knowledge  which  we  think  we  have  as  to  the  nature
of  material  things.  If  we  complain  that  we  never  come  to
discern  the  essence  of  the  soul  as  it  is  in  itself,  and  apart
from  all  the  special  conditions  that  determine  it  to  special
manifestations,  we  must  include  in  the  same  complaint  our
ideas  of  all  other  things.  We  think  we  know  what  water
is,  what  mercury  is,  and  yet  we  can  assign  to  neither
constant  properties  belonging  to  it,  apart  from  all  external
conditions.  Both  at  an  average  temperature  are  fluid,  both  at
an  elevated  temperature  gaseous,  both  at  a  low  temperature
solid  ;  but,  apart  altogether  from  temperature,  what  an-  they  ?
We  do  not  know,  we  do  not  even  feel  any  need  to  know,
since  we  perceive  that  nowhere  in  the  universe  can  either  of
the  two  substances  escape  from  the  influence  of  these  con
ditions  ;  we  are  therefore  content  to  regard  water  as  the
body  which  at  one  particular  degree  of  temperature  becomes
solid,  at  another  boils,  and  which  further  proves  its  own
identity  by  the  unvarying  character  of  its  reactions  under
like  conditions.  The  same  holds  true  of  all  that  we  observe
by  means  of  our  senses.  We  become  acquainted  with  every
thing  first  in  one  of  its  single  possible  states,  and  this  we
look  on  as  its  complete  and  permanent  character,  till  experi
ence  shows  us  that  different  conditions  determine  different
states.  Then  we  group  together  the  various  phenomena  as
the  manifold  varying  forms  of  one  and  the  same  being,

190  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  II.

which  we  continue  to  call  by  the  same  name,  although  we
no  longer  distinguish  it  by  a  single  definite  property,  but
conceive  it  as  the  unknown  something  which  is  capable  of
assuming  successively  various  forms  within  this  cycle,  while
never  passing  out  of  it,  and  becoming  something  different.
There  is  nothing  so  stable  and  immutable  that  it  can  escape
this  destiny;  all  our  definitions  of  real  objects  are  hypo
thetical,  and  they  never  denote  the  thing  but  as  that  which,
under  different  conditions,  will  appear  in  different  cha
racters.  In  granting,  then,  that  the  essence  of  the  soul
is  unknown,  we  do  so  only  in  a  sense  that  includes  the
impossibility  of  saying  what  would  be  the  essence  of  any
thing  in  the  entire  absence  of  the  conditions  that  are  the
exciting  occasions  of  its  manifestations.  Just  as  impossible
as  to  tell  how  things  look  in  the  dark,  is  it  to  know  what
the  soul  is  before  it  enters  on  any  of  the  situations  in  which
alone  its  life  unfolds.

§  7.  Here,  however,  we  seem  to  have  gained  nothing  beyond
a  qualification  of  the  reproach  of  ignorance  against  psychology
from  its  being  shown  to  share  it  with  all  the  rest  of  human
knowledge.  But  if  it  be  true  that  the  essence  of  things
in  this  sense  is  to  us  unknown,  is  it  also  true  that  we  lose
much  by  this  ignorance,  and  is  it  in  this  essence  which
eludes  our  grasp  that  we  must  seek  the  essential  that  we
would  not  willingly  fail  to  find  ?  I  do  not  think  this
question  need  be  answered  affirmatively, — indeed  we  treat
it  differently  in  life  from  what  in  science  we  sometimes  think
we  must  do.  In  the  sum  of  another  man's  knowledge,

O *

the  tone  of  his  mind,  the  dispositions  of  his  character,
and  the  peculiar  action  and  reaction  of  these  elements  on
one  another,  we  think  we  have  presented  to  us  his
entire  personality.  If  our  acquaintance  with  him  is  such
that  we  have  mastered  these  items,  we  do  not  fancy  that
we  should  gain  insight  into  the  innermost  core  of  his  being,
by  his  being  set  before  us  as  he  was  originally,  before  in  the
process  of  growth  he  had  acquired  his  present  highly
developed  internal  existence,  or  as  he  is  now  at  bottom,  and

NATURE  AND  FACULTIES  OF  THE  SOUL.  101

would  even  now  show  himself  to  be,  if  all  the  results  of  his
past  life,  as  well  as  all  the  conditions  by  which  he  might
still  be  influenced,  were  removed.  \Ve  acknowledge,  indeed,
that  this  mental  life  could  not  have  developed  itself,  had
there  not  been  previously  a  primitive  soul  as  yet  unexpressed
for  the  influence  of  the  vital  conditions  to  act  upon  as
they  came  into  being ;  but  this,  which  in  other  cases  we  look
on  as  the  peculiar  and  fundamental  essence  of  the  tiling,  we
here  regard  as  an  indispensable,  yet  in  itself  worthless  pre
requisite,  as  a  necessary  means  of  that  development  which
itself  contains  all  value  and  all  essential  significance.  It
seems  to  us  that  the  true  essence  lies  in  that  which  the
subject  of  the  development  has  become,  and  no  more  than
we  believe  we  possess  in  the  unfolded  and  blossoming  plant
something  inferior  to  the  simple  and  shapeless  germ  from
which  it  sprang,  do  we  here  feel  any  inclination  to  look
with  regret  on  the  ideas  in  which  we  share,  on  the  feelings
and  efforts  in  which,  with  all  the  ardour  of  our  sympathy,
we  take  part,  as  a  poor  substitute  for  the;  vision  of  the
undeveloped,  primitive  TO  ri  of  the  soul.

If,  however,  we  find  it  so  hard  utterly  to  relinquish  the
search  after  this  object  which  we  can  never  find,  this  arises
from  another  demand  that  lurks  in  the  inquiry  concerning
the  essence  of  a  tiling.  The  essence  is  held  to  be  not
merely  the  germ  out  of  which  the  being  as  it  subsequently
appears  is  evolved,  and  in  which  it  is  potentially  contained  ;
it  must  likewise  be  that  which  makes  the  potentiality  actual,
which  gives  to  it — in  itself  a  mere  object  of  thought — that
unyielding  and  vigorous  reality  in  virtue  of  which  it  takes
its  place  in  the  world  of  things  as  capable  of  acting  and
being  acted  on.  The  essence  is  at  the  same  time  the  bond
which  by  its  unchanging  nature  gathers  into  itself  the  several
phenomena,  and  makes  it  possible  for  our  ideas  and  all
our  internal  states  to  be  maintained,  to  endure,  and  to  come
together  into  fruitful  mutual  action.  It  thus  appears  that
in  the  soul's  essence  we  seek  not  only  the  basis  of  the  form
and  content  of  internal  evolution,  but  still  more  perhaps

192  BOOK  II. CllAPTEII  II.

the  causa  that  makes  both  actual.  What  we  desire  to
know  is  how  it  comes  about  that  there  can  Ic  this  inner
life,  by  what  talisman  the  creative  world-spirit  succeeds  in
forming  at  the  centre  of  these  changeful  phenomena  some
thing  firm  and  stable,  that  nurtures  them,  bears  them  up  and
gives  them  support,  like  the  skeleton  to  whose  rigid  frame
work  the  outer  form  with  its  bloom  and  beauty  is  attached.
This  problem  of  course  no  cogitation  can  solve ;  we  shall
never  discover  how  existence  and  its  modes  originate,  or
what  it  is  of  which  things  consist.  But  then  this  question
could  be  of  moment  to  us  only  if  our  knowledge  were
to  be  applied  to  the  creation  of  the  universe.  Its  allotted
task,  however,  is  simply  to  apprehend  what  already  exists,
and  it  is  ready  to  acknowledge  that  all  existence  is  a  mystery
to  be  recognised  by  it  as  a  fact,  but  never  to  be  unveiled  in
the  manner  of  its  coming  to  pass.  In  this  sense  the  mode
of  existence  of  all  things  is  for  us  unfathomable ;  but  what
it  is  not  given  to  us  to  know,  forms  not  the  core  of  things,
but  rather  a  husk,  not  the  content  of  their  being,  but  the
nature  of  the  ordering  through  which  they  become  what  they
are.  IVTiat  things  are  is  thus  not  incomprehensible  to  us,
for  that  which  is  in  them  they  exhibit  in  their  outer  mani
festation  ;  Iww  they  can  exist  and  can  manifest  themselves
anyhow,  is  the  universal  enigma.

CHAPTER HI.

OF  THE  TKA.LV  OF  1DKA.S.

Comparison  of  Mental  Life  with  Bodily  Life  and  with  Physical  Nature — Hovf
Ideas  persist,  and  how  they  are  forgotten — Of  their  Interaction,  and  of  the
Narrowness  of  Consciousness — Differences  in  the  Strength  of  Sensations —
Degrees  of  Clearness  in  Memory-Images — Contrast  of  Ideas — The  Inner
Sense — Guidance  of  the  Train  of  Ideas  by  the  Laws  of  Association  and
Reproduction.

§  1 .  A  S  in  the  bodily  life  there  comes  first  a  time  of  uiiob-
-^•*-  served  activity  filled  with  astonishing  new  forma
tions  and  modifications,  while  after  birth  hardly  anything  more
remains  than  to  carry  on  quietly  and  uniformly  the  growth  of
already  fixed  forms,  so  also  in  our  soul  we  lind  abiding  habits
of  working  presented  to  us  as  facts,  so  soon  as  we  begin  with
deliberate  attention  to  make  its  development  the  subject  of
our  reflection.  What  goes  on  before  us  seems  to  be  nothing
but  a  continual  exercise  of  powers  long  since  formed,  an  ever
enlarging  accretion  of  knowledge  cast  in  moulds  made  ready
for  it  by  previous  mental  labour  that  has  remained  unknown ;
lastly,  nn  expansion  of  our  feelings  and  volitions  over  the
widening  sphere  of  points  of  contact  offered  to  them  by  our
experience  as  it  advances  day  by  day.  In  all  these  processes
lie  doubtless  other  very  decisive  reasons  determining  the
peculiar  form  and  the  value  of  the  higher  human  develop
ment ;  but  where  we  are  dealing,  not  with  the  origin  of
humanity,  but  with  the  nature  and  development  of  the
general  psychic  capacities,  from  whose  special  application
that  proceeds,  internal  observation  seems  to  promise  us  little
information.  Most  of  what  we  would  fain  know  lies  anterior
to  experience,  like  the  first  and  chief  great  formative  periods
of  our  terrestrial  globe,  and  only  conjecturally  can  we  infer
from  the  comparatively  uniform  and  limited  processes  still
VOL.  I.  N

194  LOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

going  on  within  us  those  by  which  in  our  soul's  earliest
stage  a  solid  foundation  was  prepared  for  its  subsequent
development.

Xay,  far  more  than  in  geology  are  we  oppressed  by  these
difficulties  ;  for  obscurity  hangs  over  even  the  laws  which
regulate  what  still  takes  place  within  us,  and  by  whose  help
alone  we  can  attempt  to  divine  the  prior  state  of  things.
Countless  impressions  have  already  poured  in  upon  us,  and
their  abiding  force  is  at  every  moment  exerting  on  the  course
of  their  successors  an  operative  influence  that  wo  can  hardly
discriminate  from  the  exclusive  results  of  the  unalterable
universal  laws  of  mental  life.  And  here  it  is  not  possible  as
in  physical  science  by  experiment  artificially  to  separate  the
various  forces,  in  order  to  determine  the  amount  contributed
by  each  to  the  compound  result.  For,  unable  as  we  are  to
do  away  with  our  past  life,  we  can  never  free  ourselves  from
the  dark  unanalyzable  pressure  by  which  it  operates  to
determine  the  whole  subsequent  history  of  consciousness ;
nnd  no  opportunity  ever  occurs  for  us  to  observe  those  simple
and  elementary  processes  from  which  our  present  infinitely
complex  state  must  have  been  evolved.  Thus  we  have
scarcely  any  choice  but  to  keep  meanwhile  to  those  main
outlines  of  what  our  inner  experience  presents  which  cannot
easily  be  mistaken.  By  experimentally  making  more  distinct
the  general  conjectures  to  be  gathered  from  such  a  review,  and
testing  the  greater  or  less  agreement  of  their  results  with
observed  facts,  we  may  perhaps  by  a  circuitous  route  attain
to  a  more  definite  insight  into  the  laws  of  psychic  life.

Now,  endlessly  varied  as  is  the  tenor  of  that  life  in
different  individuals,  the  concordant  result  of  self-observation
has  long  and  generally  been  the  conception  of  a  mechanism
by  which  the  course  of  internal  phenomena  is  directed
perhaps  universally,  certainly  to  a  great  extent, — having
other  forms,  indeed,  and  governed  by  laws  of  its  own  differ
ing  from  those  of  external  Nature,  but  exhibiting  a  like
thoroughgoing  dependence  of  each  several  event  on  its
preceding  conditions.  Distinctly,  however,  as  this  psychic

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  IDEAS.  195

mechanism  shows  itself  in  the  phaenomena  of  memory  and
recollection,  and  in  the  dependence  of  our  feelings  and
volitions  on  certain  impressions  by  which  they  are  regularly
evoked,  securely  and  with  accurate  instinct  as  we  ourselves
reckon  in  daily  life  on  its  unfailing  efficiency,  we  are  yet
unable  to  state  precisely — as  we  can  laws  of  Xature — the
rule;  which  it  obeys.  For  the  difficulties  of  internal  observa
tion,  already  alluded  to,  are  increased  by  the  fact  that  we
have  here  the  aid  of  no  general  intrinsically  certain  doctrine
in  regard  to  the  relations  of  reciprocal  action  necessarily
obtaining  between  the  states  of  each  individual  being.  Most
of  the  principles  which  we  observe  prevailing  in  mental  life
may  be  regarded  merely  as  actual  arrangements,  and,  while
we  often  perfectly  discern  their  importance  for  higher  develop
ment,  we  yet  cannot  prove  that  these  precise  forms  of  action
ari'  the  necessary  consequences  of  the  nature  of  every  im
material  being  open  to  an  indefinite  multitude  of  impressions
from  without.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  prejudicial  such  a  state
of  matters  is  to  the  interests  of  explanation.  When  we  are
referred  to  a  collection  of  facts  of  experience,  we  must  not  go
beyond  what  experience  itself  teaches;  could  we  trace  back
the  facts  to  their  necessary  origin  in  the  nature  of  the  soul,
wo  might  easily  give  them  a  more  accurate  and  profound
expression,  that  would  give  us  access  to  a  whole  multitude  of
inferences  from  which  we  are  now  shut  off.  These  difficulties
we  an;  very  apt  to  underestimate  ;  spoiled  by  the  successes  of
physical  science,  we  too  often  regard  maxims,  unquestionably
valid  for  the  explanation  of  physical  processes,  as  universal
and  necessary  truths,  and  forget  that  the  unprejudiced
observation  of  mental  life  finds  altogether  peculiar  forms  of
existence  and  action,  hardly  to  be  compared  with  physical
phaenomena.  Concerning  the  motion  of  matter  we  possess  a
body  of  scientifically  precise  laws ;  concerning  psychic  mani
festations  a  number  of  empiric  observations  ;  but  we  still  lack
a  third  and  higher  requisite, — a  universal  science  exhibiting
the  laws  that  govern  the  states  of  beings  in  general,  from
which  the  science  of  physical  Nature  and  that  of  mental  life

196  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

should  flow  as  two  different  applications  of  a  common  under
lying  principle.

5  2.  One  of  the  simplest  facts  in  which  we  become  aware  of

0

the  psychic  mechanism  is  the  familiar  experience  that,  of  the
numberless  ideas  which  we  owe  to  impressions  from  without,
but  a  few  are  at  any  moment  present  to  us ;  the  greater
number  have  disappeared  from  consciousness,  without  on  that
account  being  altogether  lost  to  the  soul;  for  without  repe
tition  of  the  impression  from  without  these  forgotten  ideas  are
recalled  to  memory.  One  interpretation  of  these  facts  that
has  been  made,  is  that  the  perpetual  duration  of  every
thought  once  called  forth  is  only  what  was  naturally  to  be
expected ;  of  forgetfulness  alone  was  an  explanation  sought,
and  this  it  seemed  easy  to  find  in  the  mutual  pressure  of  a
multitude  of  ideas  meeting  and  striving  to  jostle  one
another  out  of  consciousness.  But  it  were  vain  to  attempt
to  represent  this  imperishableness  of  ideas  as  the  self-
evident  result  of  a  universal  Law  of  Persistence,  according  to
which  every  state  of  a  being,  if  left  to  itself,  must  continue
until  a  new  action  comes  in  to  alter  or  annul  it.  The  analogy
with  physical  science,  which  in  the  theory  of  the  motions  of
bodies  makes  use  of  that  law  as  one  of  its  most  serviceable
instruments,  is  not  sufficient  to  guarantee  its  applicability
to  the  processes  of  mental  life,  on  account  of  a  palpable  dis
tinction  between  the  two  cases.  For  a  body  has  no  experience
in  connection  with  its  motions,  which  are  to  it  merely  a
change  of  place,  and  of  which  no  one  motion  is  of  more  con
sequence  to  it  than  another ;  its  own  nature  therefore  con
tains  neither  ground  nor  capability  to  resist  this  change.
Ideation,  on  the  other  hand,  as  an  internal  event  necessary
for  the  being  in  which  it  takes  place,  is  a  disturbance  of  its
original  condition ;  now,  it  would  seem  that,  if  we  are  entitled
to  expect  an  idea,  once  presented,  to  go  on  for  ever,  we  are
equally  entitled  to  apply  the  same  law  to  the  nature  of  the
soul ;  we  might  suppose  in  it  an  effort  to  retain  its  previous
condition,  which  would  lead  it  to  seek  the  abrogation  of
every  several  impression  imposed  on  it,  after  the  constraint

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  IDEAS.  197

of  external  power  had  ceased.  Without  entering  into  the
indecisive  discussion  to  which  the  antagonism  of  these  views
would  lead,  we  will  content  ourselves  with  the  more  simple
acknowledgment  that  the  facts  of  consciousness  necessitate
the  assumption  of  this  persistence  of  impressions,  and  defer
for  the  present  any  attempt  to  comprehend  this  matter  of
fact  as  an  inevitable  result  of  the  soul's  nature.  We  need
not  regard  it  as  a  strange  and  peculiar  anomaly,  seeing  it  is
on  this  retention  of  impressions  that  depends  the  fulfilment
of  the  vocation  of  mental  life, — to  unite  what  in  space  and
time  falls  into  unconnected  fragments,  and  to  secure  to  the
past,  through  its  surviving  image,  a  co-operative  influence  on
the  present,  long  after  it  has  itself  ceased  to  form  part  of  the
actual  course  of  things.

No  more  than  we  deny  the  persistence  of  ideas  can  we
hesitate  to  recognise  in  their  mutual  influence  the  ground  of
their  expulsion  from  consciousness.  Lut,  while  the  evidence
of  experience  is  uniformly  in  favour  of  this  influence,  we  can
hardly  give  any  reason  for  its  presence.  It  is  not  sufficient
to  point  to  the  soul's  essential  unity,  as  not  permitting  of  its
different  states  running  on  alongside  of  one  another,  uncon
nected  and  ineffective.  For,  in  the  first  place,  that  unity
would  lead  us  to  expect  nothing  more  than  an  effort  to  fuse
all  the  dissimilarities  of  the  mental  states  into  one  uniform
total  state.  But  we  know  that  such  a  tendency  is  neither
present  in  the  conscious  train  of  ideas, — for  all  the  variety
of  impressions  is  preserved  in  it, — nor  can  occur  in  those
unconscious  states  into  which  vanishing  ideas  are  con
verted,  for  they  come  back  from  forgetfulness  with  tin'
contrasts  which  distinguished  them  in  consciousness  in  un-
dimmed  distinctness.  We  should  thus  have  found  ourselves
wholly  deceived  had  we  attempted  to  base  such  an  expecta
tion  on  the  unity  of  the  soul,  and  the  perception  of  this  calls
our  attention  to  the  fact,  that  while  the  unity  of  a  being  may,
as  a  rule,  lead  to  reciprocal  action  between  its  various  states,
the  particular  form  or  sense  in  which  such  action  takes  place
depends  on  the  special  nature  of  each  individual.  For  the

19 S  BOOK  II. CIIAPTEII  HI.

fact  that  ideas  do  not  blend  into  one  modified  resultant
idea,  but  only  affect  each  other's  degree  of  illumination  by
consciousness,  we  must  seek  an  explanation  in  what  makes
the  soul  such,  or  in  what  distinguishes  consciousness  from
other  manifestations  of  its  energy.

In  everyday  life  we  console  ourselves  with  such  imperfect
ideas  in  regard  to  the  difficulties  presented  by  the  nature  of
consciousness,  that  there  had  been  hardly  any  reason  for
recurring  to  these  vulgar  conceptions,  did  not  the  obtrusive-
ness  of  their  shortcomings  tend  to  set  distinctly  before  us
the  problems  which  they  leave  unsolved.  We  are  wont  to
regard  consciousness  as  a  space  of  limited  extent,  within
which  the  impressions  struggle  for  their  places  ;  we  concern
ourselves  little  as  to  the  reason  why  this  space  is  limited,  and
equally  little  as  to  the  cause  of  the  impressions  thronging
into  it ;  finally,  as  we  are  swayed  by  the  comparison  with
material  forms  from  wrhose  impenetrability  it  arises  that  each
one  withdraws  from  another  the  place  which  it  fills  itself,
it  appears  to  us  self-evident  that  within  the  limited  extent  of
consciousness  only  a  finite  number  of  thoughts  can  coexist.
We  thus  smuggle  in  by  the  way,  under  shelter  of  a  wholly
unauthorized  image,  the  idea  of  a  mutual  incompatibility  of
ideas,  and  of  a  pressure  which  they  of  necessity  exert  on
one  another.  Or  we  speak  of  consciousness  as  a  light  whose
brightness  may  indeed  fluctuate,  but  only  within  Unite  limits,
and  then  take  it  as  a  matter  of  course  that  its  store  of
luminous  energy  is  distributed  over  the  actual  number  of
impressions,  weakened  by  dispersion  among  many,  intensified
by  concentration  upon  a  few.  In  this  comparison  we  are  iii
fact  deserted  by  the  image  that  we  fain  would  follow.  For
every  light,  diffusing  its  radiance  around,  illuminates  many
things  no  less  strongly  than  a  few,  and  we  do  not  find  its
rays  turning  round  in  a  curve  from  the  point  at  which  they
had  found  nothing  more  to  illuminate,  in  order  to  fall  with
greater  intensity  on  the  smaller  number  of  actual  objects.
The  larger  number  are  more  feebly  illuminated  only  when,
by  one  covering  another,  the  light  is  withdrawn  from  some ;

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  IDEAS.  199

and  here  is  the  very  point  requiring  explanation  —  how
between  ideas  relations  can  come  to  hold,  owing  to  which
the  one  makes  it  impossible  for  the  other  to  become  known.
We  should  gain  but  little  if,  quitting  these  spatial  com
parisons,  we  designated  consciousness  generally  as  an  ex
haustible  force,  having  but  a  limited  stock  of  energy  at
its  command.  For  we  should  still  have  no  reason  to  give
why  only  certain  ideas  are  seized  vividly  by  it,  others
allowed  to  drop  out  of  existence  ;  we  would  not  know  why,
instead  of  a  twilight  diffused  with  constantly  diminishing
Clearness  over  a  constantly  increasing  number  of  impressions,
there  should  be  this  alternation  of  full  light  and  utter  dark
ness,  in  which  ideas  emerge  and  again  disappear.

To  this  query  too,  however,  ordinary  opinion  luis  an  answer,
which,  as  it  goes  somewhat  deeper,  constrains  us  also  to  go
deeper.  All  the  stimuli  reaching  the  soul  from  without  are
supposed  to  create  in  it  first  of  all  impressions,  which  as  such
are  not  yet  either  sensations  or  ideas,  but  as  an  accumu
lated  store  of  internal  states  await  a  consciousness  that  will
apprehend  them,  and  by  its  apprehension  first  raise  them
to  the  rank  of  sensations.  Of  the  special  nature  of  these
impressions  we  can  of  course  form  no  conception,  because  by
their  nature  they  remain  permanently  out  of  consciousness,
and  cease  to  be  themselves  as  soon  as  they  are  apprehended
by  it;  but  in  their  infinite  multitude  they  appear  to  us  as  a
diminished  and  approximate  repetition  of  the  outer  world,
transported  indeed  into  the  interior  of  the  soul,  yet  to  con
sciousness  no  less  foreign  than  distant  external  objects  with
which  we  are  connected  by  no  bond  of  reciprocal  action.  Of
these  impressions  the  Law  of  Persistence,  it  is  supposed,  holds
good ;  when  they  have  once  come  into  being,  they  do  not
again  pass  away  ;  but  they  stand  in  no  constant  relation  to
the  mind's  cognitive  energy,  which,  like  an  unsteady  light
shining  now  on  one,  now  on  another,  at  one  moment  takes
them  up,  at  another  lets  them  relapse  into  the  unconscious
existence  of  latent  impressions.

There  is  a  certain  interest  in  tracking  out  the  tacit  assump-

200  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

tions  on  which  this  conception  rests.  Where  we  find  some
element,  under  the  influence  of  an  external  stimulus,  undergo
a  change,  the  particular  form  of  which  is  derived  solely  from
its  own  nature,  not  from  that  of  the  stimulus,  we  can  in
thought  regard  the  whole  process  in  the  element  as  a  sequence
of  two  events, — an  impression  and  a  vital  reaction  to  it.
Now  in  ordinary  life  the  objects  of  our  observation  are
usually  composite  forms  of  being,  and  here  some  time  must
elapse  before  the  disturbance  of  the  part  first  affected  by  the
impression  is  propagated  over  the  whole,  and,  by  stimulating
the  other  parts,  calls  forth  a  reaction  to  the  original  dis
turbance.  We  thus  become  accustomed  to  the  idea  of  u
chasm  between  a  passive  state  and  the  activity  corresponding
to  it.  Now,  when  we  turn  to  consider  the  simple  nature  of
the  soul,  this  conception  no  longer  appears  equally  imperative.
No  doubt,  any  external  stimulus  Mill  determine  action  in  it
only  by  first  making  it  feel,  for  otherwise  —  were  it  not
thus  affected — the  stimulus  would  not  exist  for  it ;  no  doubt
also  its  internal  changes,  its  passivity  as  well  as  its  reaction,
will  be  developed  only  after  an  interval  of  time  ;  but  it  is  at
least  not  necessary  that  these  two  parts  of  the  whole  process,
which  to  our  intelligence  are  quite  distinguishable,  should
succeed  one  another  in  different  sections  of  time,  or  that  in
addition  to  the  impression  of  the  external  stimulus  another
complementary  condition  should  come  into  play  in  order  to
direct  the  attention  of  consciousness  to  it,  while  it  is  itself
unconscious.  On  the  contrary,  we  may  regard  both  as  at  every
indivisible  moment  simultaneous,  as  so  blended  together  that
the  different  names  which  we  give  them  denote  no  longer  two
processes,  but  different  phases  of  one  process,  in  itself  indi
visible.  For  even  what  we  call  a  passive  state  is  no  ready-
made  change  wrought  in  its  subject,  by  which  the  subject  is
merely  affected,  without  feeling  affected  in  definite  form  and
manner.  The  same  impression  produces  different  states  in
different  subjects ;  thus,  then,  suffering  in  some  one  particular
way  is  itself  a  reaction  in  which  the  essential  nature  of  each
subject  vitally  manifests  itself.

OK  THE  TRAIN  OF  IDEAS.  201

If  we  now  consider  the  sensation  directly  produced  in  us  by
an  external  stimulus,  we  must  acknowledge  that  the  whole
aspect  of  this  simple  process  is  far  more  in  favour  of  the  con
ception  of  union  than  of  that  of  division.  We  do  not  know  why
the  wave  of  light  that  strikes  our  eye  should  have  had  first  by
its  action  on  the  soul  to  produce  an  indescribable  unconscious
impression,  which  was  succeeded  as  a  reaction  by  the  sensation
to  which  it  appeared  as  blue  or  red.  The  sight  of  a  particular
colour,  the  hearing  of  a  particular  tone,  may  unquestionably
be  conceived  as  the  single,  undivided  state  into  which  the
soul  passes,  and  we  call  it  impression  when  we  think  of  its
being  caused  by  an  external  stimulus,  but  vital  reaction  when
we  call  to  mind  that  the  same  stimulus  would  have  excited
other  states  in  other  natures — that  consequently  the  form  of
the  state  here  present  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  soul.  We
have,  apparently,  to  conceive  these  processes  in  the  same
manner  in  which  we  calculate  the  distribution  of  motion
among  inelastic  material  points.  We  do  not  suppose  that
a  body  when  struck,  at  first  merely  receives  the  velocity  and
direction  which  the  impact  strives  to  impart  to  it,  and  that
only  afterwards  reacting  on  that  impression  by  means  of
the  motion  which  it  has  acquired,  does  it  strike  the  middle
resultant  line  which  is  to  be  that  of  its  actual  course.  On  the
contrary,  from  the  first  moment  of  impact  we  find  nothing
exhibited  but  the  single  and  undivided  motion  in  which  arc
indistinguishably  blended  together  the  imparted  impression
and  the  efficacy  of  the  original  condition.  Guided  by  such
considerations,  we  might  decline  to  suppose  conscious  sensa
tion  preceded  by  unconscious  psychic  stimulations  ;  it  might
seem  not  merely  idle  but  even  preposterous  to  seek  in  the
mind,  the  seat  of  consciousness  and  of  light,  for  a  dark  back
ground  of  night,  out  of  which  the  lucidity  of  thought  is
developed  as  a  subsequent  phenomenon.  And  in  fact
a  psychological  theory  has  been  formed,  on  which  con
scious  sensations  are  viewed  as  primitive  processes  of  psychic
life,  all  other  phenomena  being  derived  from  their  reciprocal
action.

202  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

This  position  of  matters  is  in  some  measure  altered  by  the
regard  necessarily  had  to  forgotten  ideas.  We  certainly
cannot  find  fault  if  in  everyday  speech  that  which  was  once
an  idea  still  continues  to  he  so  called  long  after  it  has  lost
the  essential  attribute  on  account  of  which  it  received  that
name.  At  the  same  time,  the  philosophical  inquirer  must
bear  in  mind  the  inaccuracy  of  such  a  mode  of  statement ;  he
must  recognise  that  the  names  of  forgotten  or  unconscious
ideas  denote  something  that  is  no  longer  in  any  sense
an  idea,  and  that  these  self-contradictory  appellations  are
merely  to  be  tolerated  as  reminders  of  the  origin  of  the
states  to  which  they  refer,  not  to  be  accepted  as  affirmations
in  regard  to  their  present  nature.  However  much  it  may
remain  customary  to  trace  all  unconscious  processes  within
us  exclusively  to  the  mutual  interference  of  ideas,  that  con
ception  must  imply  the  acknowledgment  that  besides  con
sciousness  there  are  other  mental  states  into  which  conscious
ness  can  be  converted.  But  if  we  once  have  to  allow  this,  it
will  be  hard  to  fix  the  limits  of  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn
from  it.  We  shall  have  recognised  once  for  all  a  constant
reciprocal  action  between  the  clear  life  of  consciousness  and
the  dark  background  of  the  unconscious,  and  thereby  given  an
advantage  to  the  already-mentioned  theory  according  to  which
thought  in  general  is  a  fluctuating  activity,  now  operating
upon  and  now  turning  away  from  the  accumulated  wealth  of
unconscious  impressions.

§  3.  The  antagonism  of  these  two  doctrines  is  undeniably  one
of  the  chief  reasons  why  the  psychological  theories  even  of
the  present  day  diverge  so  widely.  The  fundamental  problem
for  both  must  be  to  account  for  the  fixed  sequence  and  order
exhibited  in  the  train  of  ideas.  This  problem  will  so  pre
sent  itself  to  them  respectively  that  the  one  will  seek  for  the
laws  of  the  mechanism  that  makes  one  conscious  state  expel
another ;  while  the  other  will  have  to  inquire  into  the  reasons
why  certain  unconscious  impressions  draw  the  attention  of
presentative  activity  to  themselves  and  divert  it  from  others.
The  two  will  often  coincide  in  their  results,  both  being  perforce

OF  THE  TKA1N  OF  IDEAS.  203

guided  by  the  consideration  of  one  and  the  same  body  of  facts ;
nevertheless  the  discrepancy  in  their  mode  of  procedure  remains
sufficiently  distinct  to  make  it  worth  our  while  to  dwell  on
it  for  a  little.

The  first  theory  of  course  finds  in  the  greater  or  less
strength  of  ideas  the  standard  of  the  amount  of  expul
sive  influence  exerted  by  them  on  one  another.  Yet
ideas  are  not  originally  endowed  with  repellent  force ;
their  action  and  reaction  on  one  another  become  necessary
only  when  the  soul's  unity  operates  to  combine  them,  but
their  own  mutual  antagonism  resists  combination.  Hence
in  general  the  amount  of  contrast  between  two  ideas  will
determine  the  force  of  their  action  on  one  another, — their
strength,  on  the  other  hand,  will  determine  the  amount  of  thu
influence  from  one  another  which  they  will  severally  undergo.
Now  that  this  conflict,  though  occasioned  by  the  contrasts
between  ideas,  does  not  end  with  their  adjustment,  and  that
only  the  force  of  the  contending  ideas  is  diminished,  while,
their  opposite  characters  remain  unaltered — this  is  a  fact
which  the  theory  in  question  will  do  best  to  treat  as  equally
unexpected  and  inexplicable,  which  we  are  compelled  bv
observation  to  recognise.  Only  after  this  point  has  been  con
ceded  does  it  become  possible  to  trace  back  to  it  the  more
complex  phenomena  ;  we  are  wholly  unable  to  discern  any
inherent  necessity  in  the  relation  itself,  and  gain  nothing  by
the  attempt  to  bridge  over  the  chasm  with  delusive  words.

Nay,  even  those  notions  of  force  and  of  resistance  to  which
we  are  accustomed  in  the  calculation  of  physical  events,
offer  manifold  difficulties  when  we  seek  to  apply  them  to
the  explanation  of  the  train  of  ideas.  The  sensations,  i.e.
those  ideas  awakened  within  us  by  the  present  action  of
an  external  stimulus,  are  doubtless  distinguished  by  various
gradations  of  intensity,  for  none  of  them  is  a  pure  and  in
different  representation  of  its  content  ;  on  the  contrary,  each
is  felt  by  us  as  a  greater  or  less  disturbance,  a  more  or
less  keen  affection  of  our  own  being.  Not  only  in  itself  is
dazzling  light  stronger  than  soft  radiance,  but,  moreover,  our

204  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

sight  encounters  more  in  the  one  than  in  the  other  ;  not  only
in  itself  is  the  louder  sound  something  greater  for  our  appre
hension,  but  also  the  apprehension  of  it  is  in  us  a  stronger
impression  than  that  of  the  softer  tone.  Nor  is  it  only  the
sensations  of  the  same  sense  that  may  be  thus  compared  ;  the
excitations  of  one  may  also  be  set  alongside  those  of  another
as  disturbances  which  are  greater  or  less  for  our  souls.  If,
therefore,  we  conceive  a  soul,  whose  consciousness  is  not  yet
controlled  by  any  remembrance  of  previous  experiences,  exposed
for  the  first  time  to  a  variety  of  external  stimulations,  we
shall  find  it  probable  that  the  sensation  of  stronger  character
will  overpower  that  of  weaker.  In  the  matured  soul  that  has
been  trained  by  experience  the  forms  of  phenomena  are  no
longer  so  simple ;  we  know  that  a  faint  noise  can  distract  our
attention  from  loud  din,  and  that  in  general  the  power  exerted
by  presentations  over  the  direction  of  our  course  of  thought
is  no  longer  in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  their  sensible
content.  During  the  advance  of  life,  on  the  contrary,  the
impressions  have  acquired  a  preponderant  interest  according
to  their  value  as  premonitory,  attendant,  or  following  signs
of  other  events.  Thus  experience — in  each  individual  case
different — determines  differently  also,  for  the  future,  the  values
of  the  several  presentations,  and  does  not  always  decide  them
in  the  same  way  even  for  the  same  individual.  The  constant
nature  of  the  mind  and  the  no  less  constant  principles  of
the  bodily  organization  alone  provide  against  this  variability
extending  beyond  certain  bounds,  while  the  preponderant  force
with  which  certain  impressions  of  sense  and  intelligence  lay
hold  of  all  men  alike,  is  certain  in  the  end  to  reduce  the
value  of  what  is  presented  to  some  common  measure  of
comparison  and  measurement.

It  thus  appears  as  if  we  must  make  a  threefold  distinction,
first  of  the  greater  or  less  amount  of  the  presented  content,
then  of  the  intensity  of  the  stimulation  which  it  produces
in  us,  lastly,  of  the  influence  which  its  impression  exerts
on  our  train  of  ideas  ;  nowhere  but  in  the  sensation  of
a  soul  still  destitute  of  experience  would  these  various

<  F  T1IK  TRAIN  OF  IDEAS.  205

characteristics  quite  coincide.  But  in  memory  the  second
disappears.  While  it  faithfully  repeats  the  content  of  previous
sensations  as  regards  their  character  and  intensity,  it  does
not  repeat  the  disturbance  which  we  underwent  from  them,
— or,  where  it  seems  to  do  this,  it  really  adds  to  the  repro
duced  perception  of  the  previous  content  a  mere  image  of
the  former  disturbance  as  a  second  presentation.  The  rolling
of  thunder,  in  our  remembrance,  however  distinctly  its  peculiar
character  and  its  intensity  may  be  recalled,  is  yet  accom
panied  by  no  more  powerful  excitement  than  the  equally
distinct  idea  of  the  softest  tone ;  we  may  indeed  at  the
same  time  remember  the  stronger  disturbance  occasioned  in  us
by  the  louder  sound,  but  even  this  idea  of  the  more  lively
excitement  is  now  no  stronger  agitation  within  us  than  that —
equally  distinct — of  a  feebler  disturbance.  We  distinguish
in  memory  the  diverse  weights  of  two  objects,  but  the  accurate
representation  of  the  greater  exertion  caused  us  by  the  one
now  no  more  sensibly  affects  us  than  the  not  less  accurate
remembrance  of  the  lighter  burden.  The  idea  of  pain  is  not
pain,  of  pleasure  not  pleasure  ;  without  pain  and  without
pleasure  consciousness,  as  from  a  secure  elevation,  reproduces
the  content  of  past  impressions  with  all  the  variety  of  its
internal  relations,  even  with  images  of  the  feelings  that
attached  themselves  to  it,  but  it  never  confuses  the  fulfilment
of  its  task  by  bringing  back  the  impression  itself  instead  of
the  images.  That  which  it  presents,  it  presents  expressly  as
absent,  and,  without  being  ailected  by  the  greater  more  than
by  the  less,  repeats  both  with  like  ease,  like  two  shadows  of
which  neither  is  heavier  than  the  other,  however  diverse  be
the  weight  of  the  bodies  to  which  they  correspond.

In  reminiscence,  accordingly,  the  train  of  thought  recalls  to
consciousness  its  former  contents  alike  great  and  small,  strong
and  feeble,  but  the  presentative  activity  thus  employed  remains
unvaryingly  the  same.  And  yet,  as  their  respective  contents
do  not  blend  together,  the  reciprocal  action  of  presentations
would  be  dependent  solely  on  distinctions  in  the  presentative
activity,  for  only  in  the  immediate  direct  sensation  will  the

206  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

magnitude  of  the  object  presented,  coinciding  with  the  intensity
of  the  excitement,  decide  the  victory  in  favour  of  the  one  or
the  other.  If,  then,  we  speak  of  strength  of  presentations,  on
the  supposition  that  the  fate  of  presentations  is  thereby  decided
in  their  conflict  with  one  another,  this  can  be  only  in  the
third  sense — that  of  the  influence  exerted  by  each  presenta
tion  on  the  direction  of  the  train  of  thought.  This  influence,
however,  is  not  a  property  already  clear,  by  which  we  may
explain  what  further  happens,  but  is  itself  the  capacity  of
whose  grounds  we  are  in  search.  To  account  for  the  opera
tions  of  ideas  by  strength  in  this  sense,  would  have  no
more  meaning  than  to  say  that  in  a  contest  he  usually
wins  who  for  unknown  reasons  gets  the  upper  hand.  But,
before  seeking  these  unknown  reasons  elsewhere,  we  must
refer  to  certain  other  relationships  that  apparently  give  some
support  to  the  notion  of  a  variable  or  various  strength  in
ideas.

We  are  quite  familiar  with  the  opinion,  that  the  content  of
every  perception,  without  itself  undergoing  any  alteration,
can  be  conceived  in  numberless  degrees  of  clearness  or
strength,  and  that,  as  ideas  run  down  the  scale  of  these
degrees,  they  become  gradually  and  steadily  more  obscure,
till  they  linally  disappear  from  consciousness.  But  this  is
the  description  of  an  event  that  no  one  can  have  observed,
seeing  that  observation  of  the  process  would  make  its  occur
rence  impossible.  Only  afterwards,  when  we  notice  that  an
idea  has  been  for  a  time  absent  from  our  consciousness,  do  we
answer  our  own  question  as  to  the  mode  of  its  disappear
ance  by  this  conjecture  of  a  gradual  extinction,  of  whose
reality  actual  observation,  so  far  as  it  can  reach  the  matter,
affords  no  evidence  whatever.  If  we  recall  our  mental
state  when  a  strongly  aroused  idea  was  for  a  considerable
time  vividly  present  and  seemed  gradually  to  disappear,  we
always  find  that  it  did  not  steadily  become  obscure,  but
with  many  and  abrupt  pauses  was  sometimes  in  conscious
ness,  sometimes  not.  Any  new  impression  whose  content
was  somehow  connected  with  the  idea  in  question,  re-

OF  THE  TUAIX  OF  IDEAS.  207

called  it  for  a  moment  to  memory,  any  one  which  was
alien  ami  made  conspicuous  by  its  novelty,  overpowered  it
momentarily ;  it  thus  resembled  a  floating  body,  that,  as
shifting  wave?  now  suddenly  engulf  it,  now  as  suddenly
cast  it  up,  is  at  one  moment  quite  visible,  at  another  wholly
invisible.  "What  has  to  us  the  semblance  of  gradual  obscura
tion  is  partly  the  lengthening  pauses  between  the  reappear
ances  of  the  idea,  partly  another  characteristic  of  which  we
shall  speak  later.

Xow,  were  we  to  divide  the  motley  multitude  of  ideas
into  the  simple  impressions  of  sensation  and  the  compound
images  formed  from  these  by  manifold  combinations,  we  could
not  say  in  what  the  difference  of  strength  in  the  former  must
consist,  did  we  not  unwittingly  alter  the  content  presented.
We  cannot  have  a  more  or  less  distinct  idea  of  the  same  tone,
\\ith  the  same  pitch  and  loudncss,  and  the  same  harmonic
character  ;  we  either  have  an  idea  of  it  or  we  have  none,  or
else  we  violate  our  own  hypothesis,  and  put  the  idea  of  a
stronger  or  feebler,  i.e.  of  another  tone,  in  the  place  of  a
stronger  or  feebler  idea  of  the  same  tone.  In  like  manner
we  cannot  have  a  more  or  less  distinct  idea  of  the  same  shade
of  the  same  colour  in  the  same  degree  of  light,  but,  when  it  is
indicated  by  a  name  or  description,  we  may  very  well,  in
trying  to  recall  it,  hesitate  uncertain  between  several  allied
images  of  colour  that  present  themselves,  not  knowing  which
of  them  is  the  one  we  seek.  Then  we  falsely  interpret
our  mental  state  and  think  that  we  really  have  the  idea,
only  not  very  clearly,  whereas  in  fact  we  have  it  not,  and
are  only  .seeking  it  among  a  crowd,  with  whose  number  our
uncertainty,  and  so  the  apparent  indistinctness  of  the  idea,
increases.

Still  less  do  our  compound  perceptions  perish  by  a  gradual
obscuration  that  makes  their  whole  image  grow  dim  under  a
gradually  failing  light ;  but  they  become  indistinct  by  a
dissolution  as  if  of  decay.  Of  an  object  once  seen  certain  less
noticed  parts  fall  away  in  our  remembrance,  and  the  parti
cular  mode  in  which  they  were  combined  with  others  is  wholly

208  LOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

forgotten  ;  in  the  effort  to  paint  the  object  in  memory  we
stray  helplessly  among  the  possible  ways  of  filling  up  gaps
or  connecting  the  details  still  clearly  present  to  us.  Thus
here  too  arises  an  apparent  indistinctness  in  the  idea,
which  increases  in  direct  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the
space  within  which  our  imagination  is  left  free  to  make
its  additions.  On  the  other  hand,  every  idea  is  perfectly
distinct  whose  parts  are  conceived  completely  and  at  the
same  time  with  unhesitating  precision  as  to  their  mutual  rela
tions,  and  this  distinctness  is  in  itself  capable  neither  of
increase  nor  of  diminution.  Nevertheless  it  often  seems  to  us
as  if  even  a  presented  content  that  has  been  long  complete
could  still  increase  in  its  strength  of  presentation  ;  but  in
such  cases  it  is  increased  by  a  fresh  element.  As  it  becomes
indistinct  through  hiatuses  that  diminish  its  amount,  so  it
seems  to  gain  in  distinctness  when  over  and  above  its  own
sum  the  manifold  links  by  which  on  all  sides  it  is  bound  to
other  ideas  enter  into  consciousness.  It  is  impossible  for  a
circle  or  a  triangle  to  be  more  or  less  presented ;  one  either
has  or  has  not  a  correct  image  of  them ;  nevertheless  the
conception  of  both  seems  to  become  more  distinct  when  our
geometrical  training  enables  us  to  recall  simultaneously  the
many  important  relations  belonging  to  the  two  figures.  This
is  clearness  such  as  admits  of  gradations  of  difference,  i.e.  a
power  in  the  idea,  springing  not  from  its  own  strength,
but  from  its  connections.  Hence  a  previously  vivid  idea
seems  to  us  to  become  more  indistinct  in  consciousness  when
from  any  cause  it  gradually  ceases  to  bring  to  remembrance
with  itself  all  the  others  which  were  associated  with  it  at
the  first  moment,  when  it  was  most  vivid,  or  whose  pre
sence  it  was  that  caused  it  to  be  vivid.  Thus,  as  we  said
above,  an  idea  awakened  within  us  dies  away,  as,  sometimes
arising,  sometimes  disappearing,  it  brings  back  on  each
resuscitation  a  smaller  fragment  of  the  thoughts  by  which
it  was  previously  accompanied.  And  hence  it  appears  to
us,  when  we  afterwards  look  back  on  a  past  train  of
ideas,  that  a  single  impression  has  passed  through  our

OK  THE  TRAIN  OF  IDEAS.  209

consciousness,  with  less  distinctness  or  elevation,  when  in
fact  it  entered  with  the  unvarying  distinctness  common  to
all  alike,  but  called  up  too  few  accessory  ideas  to  be  able
to  maintain  itself  for  any  length  of  time  and  exert  any
influence  on  the  direction  of  our  thoughts.

Thus  we,  after  all,  return  to  the  affirmation  that  the  power
with  which  the  various  ideas  contend  against  one  another,
does  not  depend  on  a  particular  degree  of  strength,  at  which
each  originally  stood,  or  which,  as  it  now  increases,  now
diminishes,  it  reaches  at  any  moment  for  any  reason.  What
we  have  been  accustomed  to  think  of  as  the  strength  of
ideas  consists  not  in  a  gradationally  determinable  intensity
of  knowledge  about  them,  but  in  an  extensively  measurable
completeness  of  their  necessary  content,  and  in  the  fluctuating
store  of  countless  elements  that  associate  themselves  with
the  essential  content  of  eacli  one.  Perhaps,  however,  more
accurate  investigation  may  still  discover  some  fact  that  we
have  hitherto  overlooked ;  but  before  setting  about  such  a
search,  we  must  briefly  notice  the  other  element  usually
referred  to  in  discussions  on  the  course  of  ideas — the  mutual
contrast  of  the  several  impressions.

So  long  as  we  thus  take  note  of  present  external  impres
sions,  we  see  our  consciousness  open  to  the  greatest  possible
variety  of  sensations.  Our  eye  distinguishes  at  a  glance
numberless  points  of  colour,  and  when  these  different
impressions  seem  to  disturb  one  another,  we  have  reason  to
account  for  this  result,  not  by  a  reciprocal  action  of  the
already  formed  ideas  of  colour,  but  by  disturbances  caused
to  one  another  by  the  bodily  stimulations  in  the  elements
of  the  sense-organ,  before  their  final  action  gives  rise  to
sensation  in  the  soul.  Least  of  all  may  we  suppose  that  at
some  earlier  stage  of  life  points  of  colours  yielded  to  the
eye  and  tones  to  the  ear  only  an  undiscriminated  mixture,
from  which  growing  attention  selected  the  several  elements.
For  attention  would  have  neither  a  motive  nor  a  rule  for  its
selection,  did  not  the  impression,  with  some  distinctness,  pre
sent  different  constituents,  between  which  it  can  deepen  and

VOL.  I.  o

210  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

sharpen  the  boundary  lines,  though  it  cannot  draw  them  where
they  are  not  first  indicated.  Unquestionably,  therefore,  con
sciousness  neither  is  too  limited  for  a  multitude  of  sensa
tions,  nor  has  it  any  tendency  to  blend  heterogeneous  ideas
that  have  once  been  formed  into  anything  intermediate.
Now  this  repeatedly-mentioned  characteristic  does  indeed
make  us  distrustful  of  the  conjecture  that  the  contrast  in
content  of  ideas  determines  the  force  with  which  they
seek  to  expel  one  another  from  consciousness ;  but  yet  it
does  not  make  this  influence  so  impossible  as  to  free  us
from  the  necessity  of  consulting  experience.  ISTow  our  self-
observation  is  not  in  this  point  very  distinct ;  nevertheless,
it  seems  by  no  means  to  favour  the  above  conjecture.  It
is  always  very  difficult  to  grasp  together  two  unconnected
ideas ;  so  far,  however,  as  it  can  be  done,  we  do  not  find
it  more  difficult  to  have  simultaneous  ideas  of  white  and
black  than  of  red  and  orange,  or  that  the  effort  to  think
sweet  and  sour  at  once  is  greater  than  the  effort  to  com
bine  two  similar  sweet  tastes.  On  the  contrary,  it  appears
to  us  as  if  the  extremest  contrasts  possible  for  the  con
tent  of  presentations  were  thought  together  with  greater
ease  than  differences  separated  from  each  other  by  a  de
finitely  measurable  interval.  The  ideas  of  light  and
darkness,  of  great  and  small,  of  positive  and  negative,  and
numberless  others  we  find  so  connected  in  consciousness
that  the  one  is  not  thought  without  the  other,  and  if  it  is
impossible  for  us  to  apprehend  these  opposites  simul
taneously  as  marks  of  one  and  the  same,  there  is,  on  the
other  hand,  no  difficulty  in  distributing  them  among  dif
ferent  objects,  and  this  is  quite  sufficient  here,  where  the
question  concerns  not  the  compatibility  of  properties  in
things,  but  the  possibility  of  combining  the  ideas  of  them  in
our  consciousness.  If  ideas  actually  displaced  one  another
in  proportion  to  the  contrasts  in  their  content,  so  that
the  dissimilar  deprived  each  other  of  distinctness  more  than
the  similar,  the  strange  result  would  follow,  that  our  dis
criminative  observation  must  apprehend  small  differences

OF  THE  TRAIN  OP  IDEAS.  211

more  distinctly  than  great  ones.  But,  on  the  contrary,  all
perfecting  of  our  thoughts  depends  entirely  on  consciousness
remaining  quite  unaffected  by  the  content  of  ideas,  and  on  its
being  neither  resisted  nor  helped  in  its  operations  by  the  rela
tions  between  the  given  manifold,  so  that  it  may  impartially
take  in  these  relations.  We  may  indeed  allow  that  by  the
various  connections  between  the  content  of  ideas,  feelings

O

are  awakened  within  us  which  determine  the  measure  of  the
attention  that  we  bestow  on  one  of  them  rather  than  on
another;  but  apart  from  these  effects,  which  serve  another
purpose  of  mental  life,  we  think  we  may  hazard  the  asser
tion  that  the  mutual  obscuration  or  displacement  of  ideas  is
wholly  unaffected  by  the  degree  of  contrast  between  them  in
content.  This  conclusion  may  be  questioned  as  being  con
trary  to  the  universally  necessary  proposition,  that  contra
dictory  states  in  one  and  the  same  being  must  annihilate  one
another.  Hut,  however  it  may  stand  with  the  validity  of  this
proposition,  the  experiences  already  referred  to  teach  that  the
energies  by  which  we  conceive  opposite  contents,  are  either
not  contradictory  opposites,  or  at  least  are  not  so  in  such  a
sense  as  to  make  their  contrast,  though  perhaps  actual,  the
ground  of  u  counter-action.  Here,  too,  we  learn  how  absolutely
different  are  mental  processes  and  physical  events,  and  how
misleading  is  the  precipitate  application  of  principles  that
in  physical  science  are  indisputably  valid,  because  there  the
points  of  their  application  are  exactly  known,  whereas  their
validity  in  the  sphere  of  mental  life — while  perhaps  here
too  universal — is  in  the  meantime  useless  to  us,  seeing  that
we  have  before  us  not  the  original  processes  to  which  alone
they  can  refer,  but  results  removed  from  these  by  many
intermediate  links.

§  4.  Not  one  of  our  questions  is  yet  answered.  We  have
found  no  cogent  reason  for  accepting  it  as  demonstrated,
that  consciousness  cannot  apprehend  more  than  a  limited
number  of  ideas.  And,  when  we  assumed  this  as  a  fact,
we  saw  neither  in  the  notion  of  a  difference  of  strength  in
ideas  nor  in  that  of  opposition  between  them  as  to  con-

212  BOOK  IT. CIIAPTEli  III.

tent  a  means  of  accounting  for  the  degree  of  power  which
they  severally  display,  and  with  which  they  contribute  to
determine  the  course  of  the  train  of  thought.  Once  more
we  must  try,  in  the  now  diminished  list  of  possible  conjec
tures,  to  find  one  more  adequate.

Now,  that  narrowness  of  consciousness  which  formed  our
first  subject  of  inquiry,  is  not  really  a  fact  as  regards  the
sensations  produced  by  impressions  from  without.  All  our
senses  can  be  simultaneously  in  action,  and  receive  a  bound
less  variety  of  single  stimulations,  each  of  which,  so  long  as
intermediate  bodily  effects  do  not  hinder  its  transmission
to  the  soul,  is  apprehended  by  an  act  of  consciousness.  It
may  indeed  be  maintained  that  of  so  many  impressions  the
greater  number  are  taken  up  but  obscurely  and  indistinctly ;
yet  the  possibility  of  subsequently  recalling  their  content,  or
even  their  indistinctness,  proves  that  they  really  have  been  in
consciousness,  though  from  lack  either  of  a  preponderant  sense-
impression  or  of  a  specially  significant  character,  they  could
not  expel  the  others  and  assert  themselves  in  the  train  of
thought  with  determinative  power.  It  seems  quite  different
when,  without  being  under  the  constraint  of  present  sense-
stimulations,  we  seek  to  repeat  in  memory  an  absent  or  past
manifold.  Here  the  parts  of  what  was  seen  and  heard  simul
taneously,  in  the  actual  sensation,  reappear  almost  entirely  in
succession ;  and  the  thoughts  which  less  immediately  repro
duce  sense-impressions,  form  within  us  a  perpetually  flowing
narrow  and  shallow  current,  that,  while  it  turns  abruptly
from  one  idea  to  another,  and  with  rapid  changes  runs  over
many  things,  yet  seems  almost  wholly  to  have  lost  the
power  of  embracing  at  once  a,  countless  plurality,  like  the
glance  of  the  eye.  It  would  thus  appear  that  the  constraint
laid  upon  us  by  the  stimuli  pressing  in  from  the  outer  world
only  enlarged  consciousness,  while,  left  to  itself  in  remem
brance,  it  can  hardly  grasp  several  ideas  together,  but  only
various  ideas  successively.  Nevertheless,  to  maintain  the
latter  in  thoroughgoing  strictness  would  be  to  go  too  far.
For  although  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  decide  by  direct

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  IDEAS.  213

observation  whether  several  ideas  can  be  at  once  present  in
consciousness,  and  whether  we  are  not  rather  deceived  by
the  rapidity  of  their  succession,  we  are  yet  forced  by  the
fact  that  we  can  make  comparisons,  to  suppose  simultaneity
possible.  For  in  comparing  we  not  only  pass  from  the
idea  of  one  of  the  things  compared  to  that  of  the  other,
but,  to  make  the  comparison  complete,  we  must  further
apprehend  both,  and  the  mode  of  the  transition  between
them,  in  one  indivisible  act  of  consciousness.  In  seeking  to
convey  a  comparison,  we  are  compelled  by  the  nature  of
language  to  make  the  names  of  its  two  terms,  and  the
indication  of  their  mutual  relation,  follow  each  other  in  time,
and  this  almost  cheats  us  into  the  belief  that  there  is  the
same  sequence  in  the  thought  which  we  wish  to  express;
but,  at  the  same  time,  we  reckon  upon  our  words  causing  in
the  consciousness  of  the  person  whom  we  address  not  three
separate  ideas,  but  the  one  idea  of  a  relation  between  two
others.  Although,  lastly,  in  our  familiarity  with  the  use
of  speech,  we  put  even  our  silent  train  of  thought  into
the  form  of  a  mental  colloquy,  yet  evidently,  even  here,
the  sequence  in  time  of  the  words  that  express  our  ideas,
is  but  a  rendering  of  the  relations  of  their  content  that
we  previously  apprehended  as  obtaining  between  them,  and
this  habit  of  mental  speech  really  retards  the  passage  of
thought,  by  breaking  up  into  a  sequence  what  was  originally
simultaneous.

Now  if  these  acts  of  Relating  Knowledge  guarantee  the
simultaneity  of  a  plurality  of  ideas,  they  seem  at  the  same
time  to  inform  us  of  the  conditions  under  which  it  takes
place.  Only  for  an  unconnected  throng  lias  consciousness  no
room  ;  it  is  not  too  narrow  for  a  complex  total,  whose  parts
we  think  as  divided,  arranged,  and  connected  by  relations.
We  fail  to  apprehend  at  once  two  impressions  with  no  bond
of  mutual  relationship;  consciousness  needs  to  discern  the  path
by  which  it  has  to  travel  from  the  one  to  the  other ;  it  com
passes  the  greater  number  more  easily  with  this  discernment
than  the  smaller  without  it.  Its  power  of  apprehension  is

214  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

therefore  capable  of  progressive  improvement.  Memory  the
more  easily  repeats  compound  images  of  sense  the  more  we
have  already  exercised  ourselves  in  perception,  not  merely  in
passively  giving  ourselves  up  to  the  impression  of  them,  but
in  making  ourselves  familiar  with  the  relations  of  their  parts.
The  simultaneous  notes  of  a  piece  of  music  are  as  such
heard  by  every  one,  but  they  will  scarcely  be  remembered
by  him  to  whom  they  are  but  an  unconnected  multitude ;
the  musically  trained  ear  takes  them  in  from  the  first  as  a
complex  whole,  to  whose  internal  structure  the  preceding
course  of  the  melody  led  up.  Every  image  in  space  impresses
itself  more  firmly  on  our  memory,  when  we  are  able  to
analyze  its  impression  on  our  senses  by  means  of  a  descrip
tion.  If  we  say  of  one  part  of  a  building  that  it  rests  upon
another,  supports  a  third,  is  inclined  to  a  fourth  at  a  definite
angle,  we  meanwhile  increase  the  number  of  ideas  to  be
kept  in  mind ;  but  in  this  verbal  expression  by  proposi
tions  the  motionless  co-existence  of  the  parts  is  transformed
into  a  series  of  reciprocal  actions,  apparently  taking  place
between  them,  and  binding  them  together  more  distinctly
than  our  unanalyzed  perception.  The  more  highly  the  mind
becomes  cultivated,  the  more  skilful  it  becomes  in  detecting
connecting  links  between  remote  thoughts,  the  more  capacious
does  consciousness  become  even  for  ideas  bound  to  one
another,  not  by  forms  of  space  and  time,  but  by  ties  of
inherent  relationship.

8  5.  While  in  sensation  consciousness  appeared  to  us
accessible  to  an  indefinite  multitude  of  passive  states  through
the  power  of  the  external  stimuli  that  imperiously  demand  its
attention,  this  memory-knowledge  exhibits  itself  rather  as  a
relating  energy  exerted  by  the  mind.  So  long  as  we  dealt
with  consciousness  as  a  space  within  which  ideas  rise  and
fall  by  their  own  force,  we  were  unable  to  account  for  its
circumscribed  extent,  and  the  multitude  of  simultaneous  states
could  not  seem  to  us  impossible;  we  naturally  feel  bound  to
assume,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  soul's  unity  excludes  a
simultaneous  throng  of  unconnected  acts,  and  that  it  includes

OF  THE  TKAIX  OF  IDEAS.  215

only  what  it  can  grasp  in  the  unity  of  a  single  act.  Thus
the  view,  according  to  which  presentation  brings  the  impres
sions  into  prominence  as  a  moving  Inner  Sense,  would  seem
more  consonant  with  the  limitation  of  consciousness,  for  which
we  are  seeking  to  account.  As  yet,  however,  it  offers  no
demonstration  of  the  laws  according  to  which  this  fluctuating
light  of  combining  attention  chooses  its  course.  It  cannot  go
groping  its  way  indefinitely  out  into  the  void,  but,  when  it
seems  actively  to  grasp  its  objects,  its  activity  consists  only
in  the  selection  displayed  in  taking  some  and  leaving  others
of  the  many  impressions  that  throng  in  upon  it.

We  here  allude  to  familiar  facts.  That  a  newly-produced
impression  revives  the  forgotten  idea  of  a  previous  and  similar
one,  or  recalls  it  to  consciousness,  is  the  simplest  of  the
universal  laws  that  regulate  the  course  of  memory.  But  yet
this  resuscitation  is  of  importance  to  our  inner  life  only  in  su
far  as  it  not  only  recalls  what  had  been  forgotten,  but  at  the
same  time  brings  about  a  consciousness  of  its  identity  with
thu  new  impression.  Hence  new  and  old  must  not  wholly
coincide,  but  must  be  recognised  as  two  different  recurrences
of  the  same  idea,  and  this  is  possible  only  if  the  two  are  dis
tinguishable  by  accessory  characteristics  attached  to  them.
The  advantage  of  the  immediate  reproduction  depends,  there
fore,  on  the  possibility  that  the  resuscitated  idea  will  also
bring  back  into  consciousness  the  others  with  which  it  was
previously  associated,  even  should  these  consist  in  nothing
more  than  the  obscure  feeling  of  the  general  state  of  mind  in
which  it  was  previously  apprehended,  and  which  differed  from
the  mood  accompanying  the  new  impression.  We  usually
denote  by  the  name  of  Association,  that  cohesion  of  ideas
which  we  must  regard  as  continued  during  their  unconscious
condition,  in  order  to  understand  their  reappearing  together
at  the  moment  of  resuscitation.  Any  attempt  would  be
fruitless  to  gain  by  intuition  an  idea  of  the  character  and
fashion  of  this  cohesion ;  observable  only  in  its  results,  it  is
itself  beyond  the  range  of  observation,  and  there  is  nothing
analogous  to  it  in  the  sphere  of  physical  phenomena.  HP.-

216  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  IIL

framing,  therefore,  from  inquiring  what  are  the  ties  by  which
these  associations  of  ideas  are  made  lasting,  we  must  confine
our  aim  to  that  of  laying  down  the  conditions  under  which
they  occur  in  a  manner  otherwise  incomprehensible.

Now,  to  all  associations  of  ideas  may  be  applied  the  general
.statement,  that  the  soul  does  not  chemically  transform  the  sum
of  its  contemporaneous  states  into  a  uniform  compound  state,
but  mechanically  combines  them  as  parts  into  a  coherent  whole,
and  that  in  like  manner  it  forms  the  series  of  its  changes,
evolving  in  time  into  a  melody  in  which  those  phrases  cohere
together  most  firmly  which  are  in  immediate  juxtaposition.
Accordingly  all  Reproduction  rests  on  the  impossibility  of
the  resuscitated  impression  reappearing  alone,  without  trying
to  bring  with  it  the  whole  of  which  it  previously  formed
a  part,  and  of  that  whole  specially  the  other  single  part
to  which  it  was  most  closely  attached.  Under  this  common
formula  may  be  placed  the  various  cases  usually  treated  as
distinct.  It  comprehends  not  only  as  primary  the  associa
tions  of  ideas  which  the  order  of  our  inquiries  has  first  set
before  us,  but  also  the  numerous  similar  combinations  of
feelings,  of  volitions,  of  ideas  and  feelings,  or  feelings  and
volitions,  whose  co-determining  influence  must  not  be  over
looked  in  a  complete  representation  even  of  the  train  of  ideas
taken  by  itself.  We  find  further  embraced  by  it  the  associa
tion  by  which  the  images  of  particular  parts  of  extended
forms  recall  one  another  and  the  whole.  For  the  parts  of
any  form  in  space  may  be  surveyed  simultaneously,  or  may  be
taken  in  in  a  series  of  ocular  movements  by  which,  the  eye
runs  over  them.  Further,  any  other  more  internal  connection
by  which  we  had  on  any  previous  occasion  bound  up  some
manifold  into  the  whole  of  a  thought,  is  in  like  manner  intel
ligible  to  us  only  in  a  momentary  act  of  ideation,  or  in  an
unbroken  series  of  such  acts  following  one  another  in  time.
Lastly,  one  impression  often  recalls  to  us  another  which  is
similar,  but  with  which  it  was  never  previously  presented
simultaneously  in  perception ;  but  this  very  frequent  process
requires  no  special  explanation.  It  rests  partly  on  the

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  IDR.VS.  217

immediate  resuscitation  of  like  by  like;  the  prior  idea  of  what
is  common  to  the  two  impressions  seeks  to  return,  and  by
indirect  reproduction  brings  with  itself  the  particular  traits  in
virtue  of  which  the  old  only  resembles  the  new,  is  not  identical
with  it.  Simple  ideas  whose  similarity  consists  in  an  equally
simple  indefinable  affinity  of  content,  call  forth  one  another
with  little  force;  a  colour  reminds  us  but  little  of  other  colours;
a  note  hardly  of  the  variety  of  the  scale ;  each  reproduces
much  more  vividly  the  whole  as  a  part  of  which  it  before
appeared — the  colour,  the  shape  of  the  flower  that  showed  it
— the  notes,  the  air  that  began  with  them.  A  word,  as  a  series
of  tones,  does  indeed  remind  us  of  another  like  it  in  struc
ture,  so  that  we  confu.se  the  two ;  but  it  reminds  us  still  more
forcibly  of  the  image  of  the  thing  along  with  which  it  formed
a  compound  whole.  In  complex  ideas,  the  mode  in  which  the
manifold  content  is  held  together  almost  always  preponderates
in  our  remembrance  over  the  impression  directly  produced  by
the  peculiar  character  of  the  parts ;  the  child's  eye  recognises
the  same  shape  of  letter,  without  hesitating  at  the  difference
of  colouring.  Those  images,  therefore,  recall  each  other  most
vividly  whose  constituent  parts — perhaps  exceedingly  diverse
— arc  grouped  in  the  same  order  or  arranged  according  to
the  same  plan.  The  direction  taken  by  the  advancing  mental
growth  by  degrees  gives  one  of  these  modes  of  reproduction
an  advantage  over  the  others ;  the  more  frequently  our  atten
tion  has  been  directed  to  identical  and  similar  forms  of  con
nection  of  the  manifold,  the  more  readily  does  it  overlook  the
differences  appearing  even  in  these,  and  seize  the  more  general
resemblances.  The  attention  becomes  accustomed  to  appre
hend  even  internal  and  imperceptible  connections,  and  to  it  in
memory  things  related  logically  and  by  general  principles  have
a  stronger  mutual  aflinity  than  things  naturally  strange  to  one
another,  which  only  the  accident  of  their  being  simultaneously
perceived  brought  together  in  consciousness.  Thus  the
strength  of  memory  for  the  order  in  which  the  incidents  of
life  follow  one  another  not  unfrequently  declines,  while  its
fidelity  for  the  general  relations  founded  in  the  nature  of

218  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  III.

things  increases.  But  it  must  suffice  to  have  touched  on  these
relations,  whose  abundant  variety  it  would  be  impossible  here
to  exhaust.

Thus  through  the  mechanism  of  association  a  number
of  possible  paths  are  opened  to  the  train  of  thought  into
which  it  can  strike,  and  between  which  it  must  choose.
Now,  as  each  of  the  ideas  present  is  trying  to  brin^  back
all  the  others  with  which  throughout  life  it  has  successively
been  bound  up,  the  decision  as  to  what,  out  of  all  this  abund
ance,  is  at  any  moment  first  to  return  to  consciousness,  will
depend  on  a  convergence  of  different  conditions.  The  greater
the  number  of  resembling  points  common  to  a  forgotten  idea
with  the  one  now  in  the  ascendant,  the  more  easily  will  it  be
revived  by  the  latter,  for  the  more  numerous  are  the  singlo
threads  forming  the  bond  that  unites  them.  At  the  same*
time,  however,  their  efficacious  affinity  will  not  consist  solely
in  their  resemblance  as  to  content ;  even  without  such  agree
ment,  an  idea  may,  in  many  indirect  ways,  be  more  or  less
closely  connected  with  the  purport  of  a  train  of  thought  now
going  on,  with  which  previous  reflection  has  associated  it  as  an
essential  related  point,  as  a  constituent,  as  an  example,  or  as
a  concomitant.  Nay,  an  indefinite  mood  of  feeling  will  make
two  groups  of  ideas  to  which  its  presence  lent  a  common
colouring,  appear,  in  spite  of  difference  of  content,  more  akin
to  each  other  than  to  others  more  of  the  same  stamp.  In  the
place  of  an  abiding  contrast  between  ideas,  decisive  of  the
force  with  which  they  repel  or  revive  one  another,  we  have
therefore  to  put  a  degree  of  affinity  determined  anew  each
moment,  and  altering,  as  does  the  contrast  of  two  colours  with
a  change  in  their  background.  No  less  fluctuating  is  the
other  condition  determining  the  direction  of  the  train  of
thought,  the  degree  of  interest  pertaining  to  each  idea,  which
constitutes  the  strength  with  which  it  seeks  to  make  itself  pro
minent  in  consciousness.  No  subsequent  moment  brings
back  the  same  total  sum  of  ideas,  feelings,  and  efforts,  and
the  same  state  of  body,  in  connection  with  which  the  impres
sion  formerly  reached  its  maximum  of  interest.  It  accordingly

OF  THE  TKAIN  OF  IDEAS.  210

contributes  to  determine  the  further  course  of  thought,  not  at
its  old  rate,  but  at  the  newly-fixed  value  to  which  it  was  able
to  rise,  after  it  had  entered,  with  that  which  it  had  before,
into  this  new  conflict  with  new  relations.

Under  these  conditions  a  train  of  ideas  developes  into
the  fluctuating  and  changeful  scene  with  which  we  are  all
familiar,  and  whose  apparently  wanton  play  often  fills  us  with
amazement,  because  we  never  can  catch  sight  of  its  moving
springs.  For  the  complete  reason  for  the  character  of  each
future  moment  lies  exclusively  in  the  total  condition  of  our
soul  during  the  present  one,  but  of  this  state  self-scrutiny
never  shows  us  more  than  a  few  fragments  ;  we  do  indeed
become  aware  of  the  order  of  sequence  of  our  past  ideas,  but
we  are  never  in  a  position  to  analyze  at  once  the  peculiarities
of  our  bodily  state,  of  our  frame  of  mind,  of  our  volitions,
and  lastly,  of  the  special  mutual  relations  into  which  all  these
elements  are  woven  together.  And  yet  even  the  least  and
most  trivial  item  of  our  train  of  ideas  depends  on  nothing
fcl.se  than  the  sum  of  all  these  conditions  taken  together;  for
it  does  not  t«ke  place  in  an  otherwise  empty  consciousness,
but  in  the  whole  full  living  soul,  that  is  always  active  at
the  same  time  in  those  different  directions,  and  cannot  be
active  again  in  this  special  way  without — thanks  to  the
unity  of  its  being  — having  those  also  recalled  in  its  process
of  thouglL

CHAPTER IV.

THE  FORMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.

delations  between  Individual  Ideas  as  Objects  of  New  Ideas — Change  of
Knowledge,  and  Knowledge  of  Change — Innate  Ideas — Apprehension  of
the  World  in  Space  and  Time  by  Means  of  Sense — Apprehension  of  the
World  in  Thought  by  the  Understanding  —  Concept,  Judgment,  and
Syllogism — The  EiFort  of  Reason  after  Unifying  Comprehension.

§  1.  "TTT^E  only  take  in  any  discourse  if  our  memory  retains
the  earlier  words  while  we  are  hearing  those
which  follow.  And  not  only  this  ;  the  order  of  the  succession
in  which  the  several  words  are  uttered  must  somehow  be
efficiently  retained  in  our  consciousness  till  the  close  of  the
discourse  ;  for  without  this  order  in  time  the  speaker  could
not  fully  indicate  the  internal  connection  of  the  conceived
whole  which  he  desires  to  communicate  to  us,  and  the  listener
must  not  forget  the  order  in  time  till  he  has  taken  in  the
meaning  of  that  whole.

Here  we  find  two  different  operations.  I  shall  speak  first
of  that  one  which  in  somewhat  fuller  detail  is  one  of  the
most  familiar  of  phaenomena :  the  capacity  of  recalling,  even
after  a  considerable  interval,  a  series  of  impressions,  a  story,  an
air,  or  a  speech,  with  its  constituent  parts  in  the  same  order
of  succession  in  which  they  were  previously  apprehended  by
us.  Evidently  this  methodical  repetition  would  be  impossible,
equally  impossible  also  the  original  intelligent  apprehension
of  the  whole,  did  the  images  of  earlier  impressions  surviving
in  memory  blend  with  those  of  subsequent  ones  into  one  mass;
some  systematic  arrangement  must  from  the  first  have  been
established  among  them,  must  have  sorted  and  combined  them
on  a  definite  plan.  Only  on  this  condition  is  it  possible  for
the  listener  to  connect  a  meaning  with  the  plurality  of

THE  FORMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  221

successively  heard  words,  and  for  this  plurality  not  to  return
in  memory  in  a  formless  rush,  but  to  unfold  itself  before  con
sciousness  in  successive  moments  in  the  order  of  its  original
apprehension.

Psychologists  have  attempted  to  explain  more  fully  the
nature  of  this  arrangement,  and  have  taught  that,  when  a
series  of  sense-stimuli  act  on  us  in  successive  moments,  the
first  meets  with  an  opposing  reaction  on  the  part  of  the  ideas
which  it  is  sure  to  find  already  in  consciousness  ;  thus  the
intensity  of  the  impression  created  by  it  must  inevitably  have
undergone  diminution  by  the  time  when  the  second  stimulus
comes  to  be  apprehended.  The  impression  of  this  second  now
combines  not  with  the  original  impression  of  the  first  in  tho
series,  but  only  with  its  faint  residuum,  for  that  residuum  alone
it  finds  still  existing  in  consciousness.  But  this  combination
is  subject  to  the  same  opposing  influence,  and  both  units  will
have  undergone  a  fresh  diminution  by  the  time  the  third
stimulus  presents  itself  for  apprehension.  This  third,  there
fore,  unites  neither  with  the  first  nor  with  the  second  singly,
least  of  all  with  both  equally  closely  ;  it  can  attach  itself
only  to  what  it  finds  still  in  consciousness,  namely,  to  the
combination  of  a  second  residuum  of  the  first  with  a  first  re
siduum  of  the  second  impression.  Continuing  this  speculation,
we  should  therefore  find  that  each  later  impression  associates
itself  with  a  group  which  is  the  same  to  no  other,  and  in
which  each  preceding  member  of  the  series  is  represented  by
a  residuum  so  much  the  fainter  as  the  series  is  longer,  and  it
lies  nearer  the  commencement.  The  same  gradations  reappear
in  the  recollected  series.  The  initial  member,  when  the  idea
has  by  some  means  been  renewed  in  consciousness,  does  not
at  once  and  with  equal  force  call  up  all  the  other  members  ;
only  when  it  has  itself  been  reduced  to  that  first  residuum
with  which,  in  the  original  apprehension,  the  second  member
combined,  does  it  recall  the  second  to  consciousness;  the  third
member  emerges  only  when,  in  spite  of  the  resistance  made  to
this  process  by  the  other  contents  of  consciousness,  the  resus
citation  of  the  second  has  been  effected,  and  the  combination

222  LOOK  II. CHAl'TEU  IV.

of  the  first  two  has  been  reduced  to  the  residuum  to  which
alone  the  third  member  could  attacli  itself.

Were  the  object  in  view  merely  to  account  for  the  order  in
which  memory  repeats the links of  the  apprehended  series,
simpler considerations  would  suffice. If  once a  number  of
impressions  reach  the  soul  in successive  moments of  time,
those  will  most closely  or  exclusively  cohere together  which
follow  one  another  immediately,  without  any  intervening  link.
For  in  whatever  may  consist  the  rationale  and  nature  of  the
connection  of  ideas  to  which  we  apply  the  name  Association,
and  whatever  may  further  constitute  the  gradations  in  the
closeness of  that  connection  :  at  all  events  an  intermediate
link  has  the  best  right  to  union  with  each  of  the two  links
between  which  it  stands,  by  its  position  dividing  them  from
each  other. If,  therefore,  the  soul  repeats  in  order  of  time  the
perceptions  that  formerly  reached  it  in  the  same,  the  course
of  recollection  from  the  first  to  the  third  link  can  only  lead
through  the  second,  and  it  is  not  the  following  of  this  course  but
any  deviation  from  it  that  would  require  special  explanation.
But  that  memory  does  repeat  in  temporal  succession  impres
sions  first  perceived  as  a  series  in  time  is  not  equally  clear.
The  successiveness  of  perception  was  the  means  and  the  ground
uf  binding  together  the  several  impressions  in  relationships  of
graduated  closeness  ;  but,  if  between  the  moment  of  completed
perception  and  that  of  remembrance  the  whole  series  remains
forgotten,  it  retains  in  simultaneous  co-existence  the  arrange
ment of all  its constituent parts which it  thus acquired.
Why  does  not  memory  now  at  once  recall  the  whole,  as  a
co-existent  complexus,  whose  parts  are  connected  together  only
with  gradations  of  closeness  ? To  this  inquiry  the  advocates
of  the  theory  to  which  we  have  referred sought  to  give  an
answer. In  the  mutual  resistance  of  ideas  and  in  the  effort
by  which, in face of such resistance,  a forgotten idea  is
recalled  to  consciousness,  they  beheld  processes  that  in  them
selves  require  time  in  order  to  attain  their  end  ;  only  succes
sively,  when  at  particular  points  of  time  particular  degrees  of
clearness  have been  won  back  for the  ideas,  do  the  efficient

THE  FOKMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  223

causes  begin  to  act  that  successively  bring  back  the  links  of
the  original  chain  of  perception  united  with  the  residual
clearness  pertaining  to  them.

But  of  more  importance  for  us  is  the  second  operation,
which  we  undertook  above  to  show  present  both  in  the
original  intelligent  apprehension  of  a  spoken  discourse  and  in
the  recollection  of  its  tenor.  It  was  not  enough  for  under
standing  that  the  words  were  heard  one  after  another  ;  the
earlier  ones  had  to  be  retained  along  with  those  subsequent ;
neither  does  the  remembrance  of  a  series  mean  the  recalling
of  one  link  at  each  moment,  so  that  before  and  after  it  there
is  nothing  in  consciousness ;  before  this  link  are  sinking  the
vanishing  images  of  the  curlier,  after  it  are  already  rising  the
advancing  images  of  the  later  impressions.  But  understanding
involves  more  ;.  it  is  not  enough  that  these  systematic  and
graduated  relations  exist  between  the  several  ideas,  or  that
their  images  in  memory  pass  in  consciousness  in  regular
succession.  Were  there  nothing  else,  the  soul  would  be  hut
a  stage,  on  which  a  connection  of  ideas  or  a  change  of
knowledge  presented  itself ;  but  an  idea  of  this  connec
tion  or  a  knowledge  of  this  change  could  arise  only  in  an
observer  capable  of  more  than  merely  having  one  state  follow
another  within  him,  capable,  in  a  second  and  higher  con
sciousness,  of  comprehending  and  judging  of  the  facts
presented,  and  of  the  relations  obtaining  between  the  simul
taneous  or  successive  ideas.

Not  that  we  really  need  this  other  spectator ;  for  the,
essence  of  soul  is  to  be  able  to  observe  both  other  and
self.  But  we  think  we  have  reason  to  dwell  on  this  its
peculiar  faculty,  in  express  contrast  to  the  mechanism  of
the  reciprocal  actions  between  its  immediate  presentations.
We  certainly  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  error  is  not  with
out  mischievous  consequences,  when  we  think  we  can
understand  this  knowledge  of  change  as  a  self-evident
corollary  hardly  requiring  mention,  from  the  notion  of  the
soul  as  a  thinking  being  and  from  the  unity  of  its  sub
stance.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  empty  notion  of  that

224  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  IV.

unity  may  indeed  suggest  to  us  the  indefinite  requirement
of  some  pervading  connection  between  all  the  states  into
which  this  single  being  could  pass ;  but  what  form  this
connection  must  have  we  could  not  guess ;  the  soul  would
seem  already  to  respond  to  so  vague  an  obligation  by  those
chains  of  association  and  reproduction  that  actually  bring  its
ideas  into  mutual  relation.  It  would  not,  however,  be  sufficient
to  attempt  to  rest  the  necessity  of  the  comprehensive  know
ledge  of  change  of  knowledge  on  the  assertion  that  the
soul's  singular  being  is  at  the  same  time  a  thinking  being.
There  is  certainly  probability,  though  not  certainty  in  the
thought,  that  the  soul  actually  exerts  the  faculty  of  ideation,
wherein  its  distinctive  character  consists,  on  every  occasion
fitted  to  call  forth  its  exercise ;  thus  it  is  in  itself  probable
that  even  the  relationships  into  which  its  several  ideas  have
entered,  become  to  it  new  stimuli  to  which  it  responds  by
an  act  of  ideation.  And  as  experience  teaches  us  that  what
we  have  found  reason  to  expect  does  actually  happen,  it
becomes  of  course  a  plausible  conjecture,  that  all  knowledge
of  the  connections  of  ideas  and  their  successive  changes
proceeds,  as  a  self-evident  consequence,  from  the  fact  itself
of  those  connections  and  that  change.

If,  in  opposition  to  this  plausible  conjecture,  we  deem  it
necessary  to  separate  and  distinguish  comprehensive  and  com
parative  consciousness  as  a  new  manifestation  of  psychic
energy,  we  desire  by  this  separation  to  avoid  an  inference  that
appears  to  us  erroneous.  From  analyzing  an  external  sense-
stimulus,  and  without  questioning  experience,  we  cannot
a  priori  decide  whether  the  sensation  will  be  one  cf  tone
or  of  colour.  But.  if  we  compare  two  similar  stimuli,  of
which  we  know  from  experience  that,  on  account  of  their
form,  both  are  heard  as  tones,  and  if  we  may  assume  that
the  process  involved  in  hearing  is  identical  whether  there
be  one  stimulus  or  two  stimuli  producing  simultaneously  an
impression,  we  may  suppose  it  possible  to  calculate  the  result
of  the  co-operation  of  both  tones  as  an.  effect  of  their  reciprocal
action.  This  attempt  would,  on  the  other  hand,  be  in  vain,

THE  FORMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  225

if  every  variation  in  the  number  and  proportion  of  tones  that
simultaneously  besiege  the  activity  of  hearing  determined
it  to  an  alteration  of  the  laws  according  to  which  it  reacts  on
each  one  severally.  "What  it  actually  heard,  then,  in  each  of
these  cases  could  not  be  guessed  from  a  mere  calculation  of
the  impressions  severally  made  by  the  tones,  and  from  the
reciprocal  actions  arising  between  these  impressions  :  we
should  still  have  to  ask  how  this  whole  sum  of  facts  affects
the  auditory  energy,  and  what  new  and  peculiar  reactions  it
occasions  in  it.

In  a  former  passage  (p.  182)  I  set  forth  the  general
considerations  that  lead  us  to  distinguish  from  the  simple
ideas  that  we  took  to  be  the  soul's  primary  reactions  on  stimu
lations  directly  proceeding  from  the  outer  world,  those  mental
energies  of  a  higher  order  which  are  called  forth,  as  secondary
reactions,  by  the  relationships  arising  between  the  simpler
individual  acts  of  the  soul.  These  relationships  seemed  to  us
to  act  ever  anew  as  stimuli  of  a  higher  order  on  the  soul's
whole  nature,  and  to  incite  to  expression  capabilities  within  it,
whose  exercise  the  simpler  stimuli  of  the  first  order  did  not
call  forth.  These  new  reactions  did  not  appear  to  us  to  be
a  priori  dt-ducible  from  the  consideration  of  these  occasioning
causes  ;  they  might  take  place  in  forms  not  to  be  explained
by  the  nature  of  the  conditions  that  called  them  forth  but
explicable  only  by  the  peculiar  susceptibility  of  the  soul,  that
expresses  itself  in  these  products  which  are  in  part  its  own.
We  proceed  to  apply  these  considerations  to  the  case  in  point.
Were  we  seeking  merely  to  understand  the  knowledge  of
the  change  of  knowledge  as  a  simple  apprehension  of  the
relations  between  ideas,  without  anything  new  being  added
to  them  in  apprehension,  so  detailed  a  discussion  would  be
superfluous.  JJut  this  comprehensive  knowledge  assumes
forms  that  do  not  seem  to  us  to  be  implied  in  the  facts  to
be  comprehended,  and  these  forms  are  not  simple  products
of  certain  processes  in  the  train  of  ideas,  so  that  they  must
with  intelligible  necessity  appear  wherever  these  processes
take  place ;  we  regard  them  as  dependent  on  a  new  phase

VOL.  i.  p

226'  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  IV.

in  tlio  soul's  nature,  that  has  not  yet  "been  dwelt  on,  and
that  requires  particular  attention,  even  though  it  be  an  invari
ably  present  attribute  of  every  soul,  only  one  not  as  yet  taken
notice  of  in  our  description.

§  2.  Much  used  to  be  said  in  former  times  of  Innate  Ideas
pertaining  to  the  human  mind  prior  to  any  experience,
and  forming  an  integral  part  of  its  being.  "Without  always
accurately  examining  the  nature  of  the  marks  by  which  this
pre-temporal  origin  was  to  be  proved,  a  pretty  wide  extent  was
given  to  this  originally-possessed  knowledge ;  and  in  order  that
all  which  is  of  most  vital  interest  to  civilised  mankind — the
belief  in  God,  in  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  in  the  Freedom
of  the  Will — might  be  made  more  secure,  it  was  included  in
the  treasury  of  truths  yielded  to  us  not  by  delusive  and  imper
fect  experience,  but  by  the  eternal  and  unchanging  nature  of
our  mental  being.  Our  national  philosophy  in  its  first  rise  set
bounds  to  the  arbitrariness  of  such  views  by  the  doctrine,  that
the  human  mind  does  indeed  possess  a  number  of  innate
Ideas,  not,  however,  such  as  reveal  any  fact  or  special  charac
teristic  of  the  system  of  the  universe,  but  only  such  as
express  the  universal  principles  of  judgment  according  to
which  our  thought  must  apprehend  and  elaborate  every
future  possible  datum  of  perception.  All  the  matter  of
our  thoughts  comes  to  us  directly  or  indirectly  from  ex
perience  ;  but  that  is  not  the  case  with  the  rules  by  which,
connecting,  comparing,  judging,  and  inferring,  we  unite  and
divide  the  matter,  and  pass  from  one  thought  to  another.
The  source  of  these  rules  is  not  to  be  sought  without  us ;  the
feeling  of  necessary  and  inevitable  validity,  with  which  they
impose  themselves  on  our  consciousness,  is,  on  the  contrary,  a
guarantee  that  they  have  their  origin  in  that  from  which  we
can  never  separate  ourselves,  namely,  in  the  peculiar  nature  of
our  mental  being.  Provided  with  these  modes  of  apprehension,
we  face  the  manifold  throng  of  impressions  occasioned  in  us
by  the  outer  world ;  not  till  we  apply  them  does  the  actual
sum  of  internal  states  become  to  us  knowledge.  Thus  we
supply  as  innate  the  intuitive  forms  of  Space  and  Time  to

THE  FOI5MS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  227

tjio*e  impressions,  whose  mutual  relations  are  henceforth
transformed  for  us  into  the  succession  and  contiguity  of
the  phenomenal  world  of  sense  ;  thus  we  pass  on  to  the
observation  of  our  data  with  the  inevitable  assumption,
that  all  reality  must  rest  on  the  foundation  of  enduring
sul  (stances  to  which  the  variable  attributes  are  attached  a?
dependent  and  accessory;  further,  with  the  certainty  that
every  event  i.s  bound  by  a  causal  connection  as  an  effect
to  its  antecedents.  It  is  the  application  of  these  inborn
beliefs  that  transforms  our  apprehension  of  objects  into  the
knowledge  of  a  universal  whole  made  such  by  internal
organization.

Much  in  these  views,  which  still  to  a  large  extent  guide
the  course  of  our  scientific  thought,  will  have  to  be  otherwise
conceived  within  our  science  itself.  The  inappropriate  name
of  Innate  Ideas  must  not  mislead  us  to  consider  the  principles
of  our  knowledge  or  the  concepts  by  which  they  are  commonly
for  brevity's  sake  referred  to — the  ideas  of  Space,  of  Time,  of
Thing,  of  Cause,  and  the  others  of  perhaps  equal  moment
associated  with  them  —  as  an  original  conscious  possession
of  the  mind.  Xo  more  than  the  spark  as  spark  is  already
present  in  the  ilint,  before  the  steel  calls  it  forth,  do  these
concepts  hover  complete  before  consciousness  previously  to
all  the  impressions  of  experience,  and  afford  it  in  its  solitude
the  entertainment  which  we  might  find  in  contemplating  an
instrument  before  the  time  when  it  can  be  used.  Even  in
our  later  life  matured  by  experience  they  seldom  claim  our
attention  in  this  shape ;  we  have  only  the  unconscious
habit  of  acting  and  proceeding  in  our  learning  according  to
them  ;  deliberate  reflection  is  required  to  make  these  ideas  the
subject  of  our  thought,  though  they  have  long  unnoticed  been
the  guiding  springs  of  our  judgments.  Consequently,  they
are  innate  in  no  other  sense  than  this,  that  in  the  original
nature  of  the  mind  there  is  a  tendency  constraining  it  at  the
suggestion  of  experience  to  develop  these  modes  of  concep
tion,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  not  conveyed
complete  by  the  matter  alone  of  experience,  to  be  merely

228  BOOK  II. CILYPTKK  IV.

passively  received,  this  special  nature  being  required  for
the  mind  to  be  impelled  by  the  impressions  of  experience
to  form  them  of  itself.

Thus  understood,  the  general  correctness  of  this  view  can
scarcely  be  held  to  be  disproved  by  the  manifold  attempts
to  show  that  all  these  principles  of  thought  are  derived
exclusively  from  the  mechanism  of  immediate  cognition.
Language,  with  its  terms  Cause,  Origin,  Dependence,  and
Connection  of  Reason  and  Consequent,  reminds  us,  to  be
sure,  of  the  several  facts  and  forms  of  experience  on
occasion  of  which  we  most  readily  became  aware  of  the
inherent  relationships  that  the  original  nature  of  our  reason
presupposes  in  complex  objects.  But  more  accurate  reflec
tion  will  always  bring  us  back  to  the  belief,  that  all  those
observations  did  nothing  more  than  afford  the  mind  an
opportunity  of  recalling  an  innate  truth,  and  that  of  them
selves  they  could  not  have  imparted  to  us  universal  principles
on  which  to  judge  all  things.  However  nicely  adjusted  may
be  the  relations  between  our  ideas,  their  internal  arrange
ment  would  not  of  itself  give  rise  to  the  thought  of  a  necessary
connection  between  them,  did  not  the  nature  of  the  mind
itself  make  the  demand  for  such.  The  most  exact  acquaint
ance  with  the  mechanical  actions  and  reactions  between  the
several  ideas  will  never  bring  us  to  understand  the  manner
in  which  the  most  general  assumptions  in  regard  to  the  con
nection  of  all  things  come  into  our  mind,  if  we  do  not
recognise  in  the  mind  a  tendency  to  form  them  which
we  must  include  in  our  conception  of  its  original  nature.
What  constitutes  the  real  unity  of  the  mind,  by  which  it
is  distinguished  as  mind  from  the  unity  of  every  other
being,  is  that  it  not  merely  compresses  its  various  states
into  a  mechanism  of  reciprocal  action,  but  further  strives,
by  means  of  the  relating  activity  which  it  puts  forth  in  the
modes  of  cognition,  to  interpret  the  complexus  of  impressions
as  an  orderly  whole,  and  to  transform  it  into  the  image  of  a
world  in  whose  internal  connection  it  beholds  the  reflex  of  its
own  unity.

THE  FORMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE,  229

§  3.  In  reviewing  the  several  operations  in  which  the
task  of  this  uniting  and  connecting  knowledge  is  by  degrees
discharged,  we  have  first  of  all  to  take  note  once  more  of  that
unity  of  the  soul  which  means  nothing  more  than  the  identity  of
the  perceiving  subject,  in  which  are  collected  impressions  from
various  parts  of  the  external  world  and  from  various  periods  of
time.  It  forms  the  prime  requisite  for  every  act  of  relating
that  is  afterwards  to  become  possible,  but  it  does  not  suftice  to
give  rise  to  such  acts.  Xow  our  contemplation  did  not  stop
at  the  barren  idea  of  the  soul's  substantial  unity  ;  experience
taught  us  laws  of  action  distinctive  of  the  internal  states  of
this  mental  being  and  of  their  mental  iniluences;  we  saw  how
the  mechanism  of  association  and  reproduction  combined
certain  impressions  more  closely  than  others,  and  how  a
degree  of  system  was  introduced  into  the  motley  multitude
of  retained  impressions,  which  gathered  together  the  similar
and  separated  the  dissimilar.  Yet  even  here,  all  these  laws
of  the  train  of  ideas  by  their  operation  created  only  relations
between  the  several  acts  of  the  cognitive  activity,  created
objects  of  an  intuition  that  might  afterwards  come;  they  did
not  show  the  scrutinizing  glance  that  apprehends  and  inter
prets  that  order.  It  is  in  a  third  performance  that  we
first  meet  with  this  glance  of  the  mental  eye,  in  the  intui
tions  of  Time  and  Space,  into  which  the  mind's  uniting  and
relating  action  translates,  as  into  a  new  language  of  its  own,
the  mutual  relations  of  impressions.

It  may  indeed  seem  as  if  every  series  of  impressions
taking  place  in  time  by  the  mere  fact  of  taking  place  must
appear  to  us  as  a  succession  in  time;  and  in  like  manner  that
the  arrangement  of  objects  in  space  would  require  only  to  be
perceived,  without  the  given  content  being  altered  by,  or  the
forms  in  which  it  is  to  appear  being  evolved  from,  any  special
energy  of  the  mind.  On  the  contrary,  just  in  so  far  as  a
series  of  impressions  goes  on  in  time  within  us,  it  is  never  in
our  consciousness  as  a  whole,  not  even  present  as  a  complex  us
arranged  in  time ;  we  become  aware  of  its  course  and  of  the
systematic  character  of  its  course  only  when  we  gather  together

230  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  IV.

in  one  undivided  act  of  knowledge  past  and  present  members
of  the  series,  and  survey  all  their  mutual  relationships  at  once.
If,  therefore,  our  internal  states  flow  on  actually  in  order  of
time — against  which  natural  supposition  we  will  not  here
bring  forward  objections  hard  to  be  dealt  with — these  actual
time-relations  of  our  impressions  are  yet  only  conditions  that
compel  the  soul  by  a  new  and  peculiar  reaction  to  educe  from
itself  the  intuition  of  time,  and  that  at  the  same  time  enable
it  to  assign  to  each  several  impression  its  appropriate  place
in  this  intuited  time.

What  seems  to  us  here  difficult  becomes  plainer  in  the
other  example — space.  For  wre  are  not  likely  to  attribute
extension  in  space,  size,  and  situation  to  the  impressions  of
things  in  ourselves  ;  however  great  may  be  the  presented
content,  the  idea  of  it  does  not  extend  to  equal  spatial
dimensions  in  our  soul.  Whether,  therefore,  the  outside
world  does  or  does  not  possess  that  spatial  reality  in  which
we  think  we  see  it,  at  any  rate  the  impressions  conveyed
..from  it  to  us  co-exist  in  our  mind  out  of  space,  like  simul
taneous  musical  notes,  and  the  mutual  relations  between
them  are  not  those  of  position,  direction,  and  extent,  but  may
be  compared  to  the  graduated  affinities  that  divide  tones
from  one  another  by  intervals  not  of  space,  and  connect  them
together.  Out  of  this  world  of  spaceless  impressions  the
soul  fashions  the  perception  of  the  world  of  space,  not
because  the  external  is  in  space,  but  because  space  is  a
word  of  its  peculiar  phraseology,  into  which  it  translates
the  spaceless  stimulations  received  from  the  external.  And
just  as  we,  accustomed  to  the  language  of  sense-perception,
re-translate  the  harmonic  relationships  of  tones  into  the  space
symbols  of  high  and  low,  of  ascending  and  descending  through
intervals,  so  the  soul,  under  the  guidance  of  the  original
supersensible  relations  of  impressions,  proceeds  to  assign  to
every  impression  its  position  in  respect  to  every  other  in  the
space-world  of  thought  created  by  it,  Thus  both  space  and
time,  the  relations  of  impressions  in  both  space  and  time,  are
not  something  found  and  picked  up  all  ready  on  its  path  by

THE  FORMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  2-°»l

our  cognitive  energy,  but  are  evolved  from  itself.  Whether
we  were  right  in  saying  that  it  translates  the  relationships  of
impressions  and  of  external  objects  into  a  new  language
peculiar  to  itself,  may  for  the  present  remain  undecided.
Perhaps  the  outer  world  is  in  itself  one  of  space ;  perhaps
events  really  take  place  in  time  ;  in  that  case  our  con
sciousness,  while  speaking  its  own  language,  at  the  same
time  lighted  on  that  which  is  the  language  of  things  ;
but  its  enercry  was  not  on  that  account  either  different  or
less  its  own.  For  even  those  of  us  who  use  the  same
language  and  the  same  thought,  do  not  inspire  one  another
directly  with  the  full  import  of  our  thoughts ;  we  first  of
all  hour  only  the  intrinsically  meaningless  sound  of  the
uttered  words,  and  have  by  our  own  energy  to  reproduce  from
it  the  same  idea — at  one  time  of  a  concrete  object,  at  another
of  an  abstract  relation,  and  on  a  third  occasion  of  an  event.

It  is  through  an  unconscious  activity  of  our  mind  that
the  spatial  picture  of  a  surrounding  world  comes  into  being
in  this  manner,  as  well  as  the  perception  of  a  llux  in  time  of
events  without  us  and  within ;  never  do  those  original  rela
tions  of  impressions,  of  whose  gradations  these  forms  are  to  us
the  embodiment,  become  in  their  own  true  form  objects  of  our
consciousness  ;  never  do  we  watch  our  own  energy  at  work  in
building  up  that  world  of  space  and  time,  which  on  the  con
trary  always  seems  as  if  presented  to  us  complete,  and  allows
us  without  any  trouble  on  our  own  part  to  look  into  its
multiplicity.  But  yet  in  other  ways  this  conception  of  tin-
world  of  sense  everywhere  shows  traces  of  a  relating  know
ledge  that  has  dealt  with  its  several  parts.  For  it  is  never
actually  limited  to  the  presentation  of  a  contiguity  in  space
and  a  succession  771  time ;  even  this  sense-image  of  the  world
is  throughout  pervaded  by  thoughts  of  a  graduated  internal
dependence,  without  which  its  perceived  order  would  be  to  us
unintelligible.  Xot  merely  like  a  mirror  does  consciousness
render  back  the  shape  of  the  external  ;  bringing  single  parts
together  into  smaller  wholes,  and  shutting  them  off  by  bound
ary  lines  from  their  environment,  it  introduces  lines  that  are

232  BOOK  IT. CIIAPTKR  IV.

not  in  the  picture  as  given,  but  start  from  the  assumption  of
an  unequal  internal  coherence  that  sometimes  binds  together
the  comparatively  remote  more  closely  than  the  adjacent.
The  new  arrangement  of  import  and  meaning  into  which  we
throw  the  objects  perceived  by  sense,  we  make  partly  under
the  direction  of  the  natural  mechanism  of  our  associations  of
ideas,  but  that  alone  does  not  enable  us  to  complete  the
work.  By  retaining  previous  impressions  and  bringing  them
up  again,  when  the  new  impression  though  altered  recalls  them
by  particular  features  still  preserved,  it  by  degrees  collects
materials  for  a  connected  experience,  which  can,  however,  be
realized  only  by  the  aggressive  activity  of  thinking.

§  4.  External  perception  brings  to  our  consciousness  in  rela
tions  of  space  and  time  much  that  is  held  together  by  no
common  meaning,  but  owes  the  temporary  coherence  of  its  alien
constituents  merely  to  some  special  accident.  Memory  retain??
faithfully  and  impartially  what  it  received  from  perception ;
recalls  the  unconnected  with  no  less  accuracy  than  the  essen  •
tially  related,  and  throws  our  train  of  ideas,  attached  to  single
impressions  by  inopportune  associations,  out  of  the  constant
direction  that  it  might  take  through  the  sequence  of  thoughts
springing  out  of  one  another.  But  the  mind  is  not  content
to  have  connections  of  ideas  imposed  on  it  by  the  mechanism
of  perception  and  memory ;  as  an  abiding  critical  energy,
Thinking  seeks  to  test  all  of  these  by  the  grounds  of  right
that  determine  connection  and  show  the  consistency  of
the  co-existent.  Thus  it  separates  from  each  other  the  im
pressions  that  without  any  internal  cohesion  were  together
present  in  the  soul,  and  renews  while  confirming  the  com
bination  of  those  which,  from  the  kindred  nature  of  their  con
tent,  have  a  right  to  be  permanently  associated.  In  all  this  it
is  directed  and  aided  by  that  very  mechanical  course  of  ideas
which  it  is  correcting ;  for  this  of  itself,  contradicting  or  con
firming  earlier  perceptions  by  fresh  ones,  introduces  its  own
improvement  by  a  gradual  sifting  process,  in  the  course  of
which  incongruous  elements  are  divided  and  those  which  are
allied  are  brought  together.  Nevertheless  the  train  of  ideas

THE  FORMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  233

alone  is  not  Thinking,  and  does  not  by  itself  discharge  the
offices  which  we  require  of  the  latter.

Oft-repeated  similar  ideas  are  not  only  retained  in  their
whole  peculiarity,  but  along  with  them  are  formed  at  the
same  time  more  general  and  indefinite  images,  in  which  the
points  of  resemblance  between  individuals  are  collected  and
their  differences  effaced.  But  the  mere  presence  of  these
images — products  of  the  mechanical  course  of  ideas — is  not
equivalent  to  the  possession  of  Concepts,  in  whose  form
Thinking  refers  the  manifold  content  to  its  corresponding
Universal.  For  in  the  latter  is  always  implied  the  subsidiary
thought  of  a  determining  rule,  by  which  the  several  charac
teristics  of  the  universal  appear  not  only  as  an  actual  com
bination  repeated  in  many  singulars,  but  as  a  coherent  whole,
secured  in  their  connection  by  the  indivisible  meaning  of  that
of  which  they  arc  the  image.  It  matters  little  how  advanced
is  our  knowledge  of  the  basis  and  significance  of  this  coher
ence,  our  conception  is  sufficiently  sundered  from  the  mere  image
itself  if  the  coherence  is  felt  by  us,  and  if  wo  convert  the
simple  aggregate  of  united  marks  which  the  course  of  ideas  in
itself  presents  into  the  thought  of  a  whole.  This  conversion
is  performed  perpetually  by  even  the  most  unpractised
thinker,  when  he  uses  a  name  ;  still  more,  when  he  puts
the  article  before  the  name  and  designates  the  perceived
object  as  A  snmdhiny,  he  has  vigorously  and  unmistakeably
enough  performed  this  combination  of  the  associated  traits
of  the  image  into  the  thought  of  an  inherently  indivisible
whole.

In  the  course  of  perception  we  often  find  two  impressions
united,  which  are  separated  by  a  rapidly  supervening  new  sen
sation,  but  whose  previous  union  is  restored  by  a  third  sensation.
We  had  no  reason  to  separate  what  were  joined  together  in
the  first  perception,  we  accepted  them  simply  as  bound  to  one
another;  the  last-repeated  perception  of  the  combination,  on
the  other  hand,  is  opposed  by  a  remembrance  of  its  since
observed  dissolution  ;  the  two  impressions  no  longer  cleave
together  in  the  innocent  fashion  of  our  lirst  perception  of

234  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  IV.

thorn,  but  are  kept  asunder  "by  the  thought  of  their  possible
separation.  Of  the  tree  first  seen  with  blossoms  or  leaves  we
preserve  a  single  image  all  whose  parts  cohere  in  harmonious
closeness ;  this  image  is  disturbed  by  a  subsequent  perception
of  the  tree  as  leafless,  and,  even  when  given  to  us  afresh  by
actual  perception,  it  is  converted  for  us  into  an  idea  of
the  abiding  form  of  the  trunk,  to  which  the  leaves  are
attached  as  changeable,  perishable  parts.  Such  separations
and  combinations  of  ideas  are  what  we  in  thinking  express  in
the  form  of  the  Judgment ;  only  in  the  judgment  we  say  more
than  is  contained  in  these.  When  we  say  of  the  tree,  It  is
green,  we  apprehend  it  under  the  form  of  a  substantial  tiling
to  which  colour  is  variably  and  dependency  attached  in  that
manner  in  which  all  properties  belong  to  their  subjects.  This
implied  relationship  between  thing  and  property  is  the  source
whence  we  derive  the  peculiar  grouping  of  our  ideas  that
divides  no  less  than  it  binds  together  those  which  are  mutu
ally  associated  ;  in  the  nature  of  the  inherent  relationship
between  the  substance  and  its  attributes  lies  the  necessity
that  here  too  exerts  its  constraining  power  in  this  particular
way  on  the  content  of  ideas.  So  in  like  manner  when  our
perception  of  the  motion  with  which  a  body  approaches  us  is
followed  by  the  pain  of  the  blow.  In  our  memory  the  two
impressions  will  be  associated,  but  the  judgment  that  the  body
struck  us,  is  more  than  a  mere  repetition  of  the  fact  that  the
two  impressions  were  wont  to  come  one  after  another  within
us.  When  we  indicate  the  body  as  the  efficient  cause,  the
blow  as  the  effect,  we  justify  the  grouping  together  of  the
ideas  by  referring  it  to  an  inherent  ground  of  connection,  to
the  causal  nexus  whose  universal  sway  over  events  is  one
of  the  primitive  assumptions  of  the  mind  in  regard  to  the
relations  of  things  in  general.

From  the  frequent  repetition  of  experience  of  one  event
following  another  it  becomes  at  last  a  habit  of  memory  to
expect  the  one  when  the  other  presents  itself.  Such  expec
tations,  hopes,  or  fears  as  to  the  future,  simple  products  of
the  mechanical  course  of  ideas,  sway  us  all  in  daily  life,

HIE  FORMS  OF  1UBLATING  KNOWLEDGE.  235

and  unquestionably  a  large  proportion  of  our  actions  is
governed  by  these  immediate  combinations  of  ideas,  without
further  consideration  of  their  origin,  just  as  we  are  in  the
habit  of  supposing  in  the  soul  of  animals,  to  which  we
rightly  or  wrongly  attribute  the  mechanism  alone,  without
the  higher  energy  of  thinking.  In  fact,  those  expecta
tions  are  pretty  much  as  serviceable  to  the  animal  for  the
practical  ends  of  its  life  as  could  be  a  rational  repetition
of  the  same  content  in  the  form  of  a  Syllogism.  Never
theless  the  syllogism  involves  a  wholly  different  intellectual
exertion  from  the  instinctive  expectation.  Making  use  of
the  renewed  perception  as  the  starting-point  of  an  antici
pation,  \ve  in  the  syllogism  justify  the  combination  of  the
expected  with  the  perceived  by  the  thought  of  a  universal
law  in  virtue  of  which  the  two  cohere.  Thus  here  too  either
we  derive  the  fact  c-f  association  from  a  source  that,  as  in
volved  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,  makes  it  necessary,  or
we  convince  ourselves  that  no  essential  inherent  relation  binds
the  two  terms  together,  and  that  the  expectation  is  one  of  the
many  illusions  created  by  the  mechanism  of  the  course  of
ideas,  inasmuch  as  it  groups  the  various  impressions  not
according  to  the  affinities  of  their  content,  but  according  to
the  accidental  circumstance  of  their  simultaneous  entrance
into  our  consciousness.

Now,  our  sense-apprehension  of  things  is  already  every
where  permeated  with  the  results  of  this  sifting,  critical
energy  of  mind ;  throughout  it  is  not  merely  sentient,  but
also  intelligent.  Nowhere  do  phenomena  hover  before  us  as
simple  images,  we  think  we  see  in  them  the  things  by  whose
unity  and  substantiality  they,  as  properties,  are  combined
into  a  connected  whole  ;  never  in  our  observation  of  an  event
does  the  consequent  state  merely  take  for  us  the  place  of
the  antecedent,  at  most  accompanied  in  our  consciousness  by
the  remembrance  of  the  latter, — but  we  seem  to  ourselves  to
observe  the  causal  connection  that  unites  the  two  with  the
firmness  of  an  inherent  bond ;  finally,  when;  larger  groups  of
events  succeed  one  another,  tho  constraint  of  a  pervading

236  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  IV.

order  assigning  to  each  reason  its  consequent,  to  each  cause
the  kind  and  amount  of  its  effect,  seems  to  us  conspicuous
in  their  evolution.  At  the  same  time,  this  unceasing  effort  of
the  understanding  to  comprehend  the  world  of  sense-perception
as  an  inherently  connected  whole,  itself  attains  its  satisfaction
only  with  the  aid  of  experience.  We  ascribe  phenomena  to
beings  that  appear,  events  to  causes,  and  laws  to  the  connection
of  things;  but  we  often  make  mistakes  when  we  further  attempt
to  assign  to  a  particular  phenomenon  its  special  being,  to  a  de
finite  event  its  peculiar  cause,  to  a  given  series  its  pertinent  law.
Only  inasmuch  as  we  are  set  free  from  the  accidental  associa
tions  of  ideas  formed  through  single  perceptions  by  a  happy
variety  of  observations  and  a  steady  attention  to  their  distinc
tions  and  resemblances,  do  we  gradually  become  cognizant  of
the  more  general  and  essential  connections,  and  our  conception
of  things  ever  more  and  more  adequately  complies  with  the
demand  of  the  understanding  to  have  the  presuppositions,
which  it  of  necessity  makes  in  regard  to  the  general  connec
tion  of  things,  shown  to  hold  good  in  the  heterogeneous
materials  of  the  actual  world.  But  the  history  of  this  gradual
development  does  not  belong  to  the  circle  of  subjects  which
this  first  survey -of  our  mental  life  is  meant  to  embrace.  As
it  is  merely  an  investigation  of  the  means  by  the  use  of  which
a  beginning  may  be  made  in  the  process  of  human  culture,  wre
must  be  content  with  having  showed  how  far  that  culture  is
from  being  contained  ready-made  within  us,  and  how  even
our  innate  capabilities  can  discharge  their  office  only  because
their  vigour  increases  by  use,  every  acquisition  in  knowledge
enhancing  the  mind's  power  to  extend  it.

§  5.  A  widely  prevalent  theory  finds  in  the  human  mind,
beyond  Sentience  that  perceives  and  Understanding  that
relates,  a  still  higher  cognitive  energy — the  activity  of  Reason,
that,  aiming  at  unity  in  our  conception  of  things,  seeks  to
complete  experience.  Questionable  as  it  may  seem  to  place
the  reason  as  a  new  and  higher  faculty  above  the  under
standing,  with  whose  habitudes  its  peculiar  requirements  seem
in  fact  to  be  in  conflict,  this  new  name  really  denotes  a  new

THE  FORMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  237

and  peculiar  form  of  relating  thought,  too  important  in  the
actual  lite  of  mind  not  to  be  touched  on  here,  before  we
proceed  further  to  investigate  its  origin.

In  each  single  case  of  experience  the  understanding  sets
to  work,  in  conformity  with  the  laws  of  connection  that  it
presupposes  as  universally  valid  necessities,  to  search  for  the
nearest  complementary  part,  which  perception  implies  and
requires.  For  it  seeks  to  refer  each  several  display  of  pro
perties  to  a  being  making  it,  lo  connect  each  several  event
with  a  cause  that  produced  it,  and  with  ellects  to  which  it
will  itself  give  rise,  and  to  find  for  each  group  of  facts  the  law
by  which  it  is  governed.  Thus  advancing  from  point  to  point,
so  far  as  driven  by  the  occasions  of  experience,  it  merely
binds  together  particular  point  with  point ;  it  does  not  set
to  itself  the  question,  What  general  scheme  of  the  universe
and  its  relations  would  finally  be  readied,  if  these  rules  of
judgment  were  applied  to  all  actual  and  conceivable  cases
of  perception  as  often  in  succession  as  the  nature  of  each
would  seem  to  require  ?  The  understanding  does  not  concern
itself  as  to  how  the  ascending  series  of  causes  required
anew  by  each  cause  of  a  single  event  will  terminate  ;  in  what
sort  of  combination  the  countless  threads  of  orderly  connec
tion,  which  its  keen  vision  traces  as  they  run  along  side  by
side,  may  at  last  be  interwoven  together ;  finally,  on  what  kind
of  unconditioned  existence  depend  the  multitudinous  con
ditioned  actual  forms  of  existence,  whose  mutual  relations,
as  soon  as  they  exist,  go  on  in  obedience  to  its  laws.

We  may  seem  to  make  a  mock  division  of  labour  when,
having  asserted  that  the  understanding  does  not  put  these
questions  to  itself,  we  now  add  that  in  the  answering  of
them  reason  finds  its  office.  Unquestionably  both  are  akin
in  their  efforts  after  comprehension  of  the  manifold,  but  the
idea  by  which  reason  is  therein  guided  —  that  the  sum  of
reality  can  exist  only  as  a  perfect  unity  and  totality — is  not
the  same  principle  as  that  by  which  the  understanding
investigates  the  kind  of  connection  between  every  two  several
parts,  without  making  any  aflirmatiou  as  to  the  form  that

238  LOOK  II. CHAPTER  IV.

all  comLiucd  will  assume.  As  the  stylo  of  architecture
which  we  select  for  a  building  determines  the  way  in  which
every  part  of  it  is  to  be  combined  with  every  other,  but
leaves  wholly  undefined  the  iinal  form  of  the  structure,  the
plan  of  which,  on  the  contrary,  is  prescribed  by  the  end  it
has  to  serve :  so  the  principles  of  the  understanding  ex
hibit  to  us  the  style  of  the  world's  construction,  but  not  the
form  of  the  outlines  of  its  completed  whole.  We  are  far
from  maintaining  that  reason  solves  this  problem,  and  do  not
even  feel  that  we  can  congratulate  the  understanding  on
the  full  accomplishment  of  its  humbler  task.  The  latter  is
often  deceived,  by  the  habits  of  a  limited  experience,  as  to  the
meaning  of  the  universal  laws  that,  it  believes,  regulate  the
connection  of  things ;  chained  to  the  examples  of  pheno
mena  presented  within  a  sphere  of  experience  that  for  any
finite  mind  is  but  limited,  we  too  often  take  the  particular
form  assumed  in  special  cases  by  the  orderly  connection  of
things,  for  the  pure  and  universal  necessity  that  we  thought
to  find  reigning  throughout.  Thus  we  fall  into  many  per
plexities  concerning  the  true  import  and  the  limits  of
validity  of  the  principles  that  for  long  we  applied  to  a
customary  sphere  of  experience  with  the  fullest  assurance  of
their  necessity  and  immediate  clearness.

The  more  these  difficulties  weigh  upon  us,  the  less  must
reason  limit  the  conception  of  the  universal  whole,  of  which
the  details  have  been  but  imperfectly  communicated  to  it ;  it
can  only  lay  down  quite  general  requirements,  compliance
with  which  it  demands  of  all  who  hazard  this  undertaking,
and,  under  the  pressure  of  the  conflicting  interests  with
which  our  desires  and  cravings  complicate  the  actual  state
of  the  facts,  it  will  itself  not  seldom  fail  to  understand  what
it  has  to  demand.  These  efforts  of  reason,  as  they  appear  in
the  immediate  life  of  mind,  will  need  the  aid  of  science  to
make  their  own  ends  clear  even  more  than  the  surveys  of
things  made  by  the  understanding,  and  still  less  than  the
latter  are  they  capable  of  attaining  their  end  simply  as
a  natural  tendency  of  mind,  without  the  discipline  of  a

THE  FOKMS  OF  RELATING  KNOWLEDGE.  230

definitely  directed  training.  Lut  in  the  course  which  they
take,  there  are  nevertheless  signs  of  a  peculiar  action  of
mind  deserving  of  attention,  the  source  of  which  we  believe
is  to  be  found  not  in  the  soul-nature  as  solely  ideating  or
relating,  but  in  another  feature  of  its  being,  to  which  we
now  IUJ.IL

CHAPTER V.

Or  THE  FEELINGS,  OF  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  OF  THE  WILL.

Origin  of  the  Feelings — Their  Forms  and  their  Connection  with  Knowledge-
Reason's  Determinations  of  Worth — Self-Consciousness  ;  the  Empiric  Ego
and  the  Pure  Ego — Impulses  and  E (Forts — Will  and  Freedom  of  Will —
( Vmcludiiig  Remark.

§  1.  AS  the  colour  of  a  picture  heightens  and  increases
-*-•*-  the  effect  of  its  drawing,  so  do  Feelings  of  the
most  various  kinds  pervade  all  the  manifold  events  of  idea-
tional  life  which  we  have  till  now  heen  describing.  We  have
already  convinced  ourselves  that  we  cannot  trace  the  origin
of  feelings  immediately  to  the  complexities  of  ideas  which
give  occasion  for  their  appearance.  If  it  was  an  original
peculiarity  of  mind  not  only  to  undergo  changes,  Lut  to
apprehend  them  as  presented  in  thought,  it  no  less  originally
belongs  to  it,  not  merely  to  present  them  to  itself,  but  also
to  become  aware  of  their  value  for  itself  in  terms  of  pain  and
pleasure,  as  they  sometimes  stimulate  it  in  harmony  with  its
own  nature,  sometimes  claim  from  it  modes  and  combinations
of  states  contrary  to  the  natural  course  of  its  activity.  For
pleasure  finally  reduces  itself  to  this,  that  to  the  mind  destined
not  for  repose  but  for  development,  stimulations  are  conveyed
which,  harmonizing  with  the  direction,  the  conditions,  or  the
form  of  its  vital  evolution,  not  merely  protect  it  from  attack,
but  promote  its  own  striving.  And  just  as  the  soul,  as  a
changeable  and  active  being,  in  pleasure  becomes  conscious  of
this  exercise  of  its  power  as  of  an  enhanced  value  in  its
existence,  so  is  it  endowed  with  the  capacity,  not  of  either
merely  submitting  to,  or  perishing  from,  the  disturbances  that
would  divert  it  from  its  own  path,  but,  in  pain,  of  feeling
them  as  what  they  are,  as  disturbances  of  its  permanent

240

OF  THi:  FEELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 241

course,  and  of  dividing  them  from  the  natural  development
of  its  being.

It  is  we  investigators  assuredly  who  in  the  first  place  give
to  ourselves  this  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  feelings ;
we  carry  out  the  comparison  of  the  impression  with  the  con
ditions  imposed  on  the  life  of  the  soul  by  its  own  nature;
we  believe  that  we  have  in  the  painful  a  conflict  between  the
excitement  produced  and  the  requirements  of  these  conditions  ;
in  the  pleasurable,  their  harmony.  The  soul  that  feels  does
not  always  make  this  comparison,  and  never  makes  it  at  the
very  moment  of  feeling.  No  more  than  it  is  conscious  ot
the  bodily  processes  by  means  of  which  sensation  is  produced,
does  it  anticipate  before  the  rise  of  feeling  the  conflict  or
harmony  of  the  impressions  with  the  conditions  of  its  life,
and,  according  to  the  result  of  this  comparison,  associate  with
it  pain  or  pleasure.  Unacquainted  with  those  conditions,  as
unacquainted  with  the  processes  in  the  organs  of  sense,  it
could  not  itself  carry  out  this  comparison;  and  as  only  the
final  result  of  the  processes  giving  rise  to  the  sensation,  viz.
the  sensation  itself,  appears  in  consciousness,  so  do  the  feelings
ri.^e  within  us  without  revealing  the  internal  motion  of  the  soul
whence  they  spring.  l>ut  once  there  they  must  be  accounted
for  as  we  have  done,  and  unsophisticated  consciousness  never
doubts  that  pleasure  has  its  roots  in  some  unknown  favour
ing  influence  that  has  been  shed  on  our  life,  pain  in  some
disturbance  of  it.  Lastly,  as  growing  experience  corrects
our  associations  of  ideas,  so  does  it  also  more  exactly  define
this  inference.  The  momentary  help  which  we  gain  from  an
impression  is  no  guarantee  of  the  salutary  character  of  tho
after-effects  which  it  brings  to  bear  on  our  whole  life,  and
the  single  advantage  gained  for  us  by  one  property  of  a
stimulus  does  not  prevent  the  influences  proceeding  from  the
others  from  being  hurtful.  Feeling  is  in  the  right,  even
if  it  is  pleased  with  the  sweet  taste  of  a  poison,  and  finds
the  antidote  bitter ;  for  in  the  former  there  is  a  momentary
harmony  between  the  impression  and  the  energy  of  the  nerve,
and  in  the  pain  of  the  latter  an  antagonistic  disturbance  of

VOL.  L

242  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

our  prevailing  state.  Experience  does  not  retract  these
judgments,  it  merely  gives  a  warning  not  to  rely  on  them
exclusively,  and  teaches  us  to  judge  of  the  total  value  of  an
impression  only  when  we  have  struck  the  balance  of  the
total  sum  of  its  consequences,  and  of  the  helps  or  hindrances
attached  to  them.

§  2.  Various  are  the  forms  under  which  feelings  present
themselves  alike  in  the  sentient  and  in  the  intellectual  part
of  our  nature.  Sometimes  they  appear  associated  with  a
particular  impression  whose  matter  and  form  are  besides
apprehended  by  means  of  a  distinct  idea,  sometimes  they
diffuse  themselves,  without  any  clear  intimation  as  to  their
origin,  as  moods  over  the  mind,  like  illuminations  proceeding
from  a  hidden  source  of  light  by  countless  reflections  of  the
rays.  Associated  with  many  sorts  of  bodily  states,  by  which
they  are  caused,  or  which  they  themselves  cause,  attended
now  by  a  numerous,  now  by  a  scanty  train  of  remembrances,
each  several  part  of  which  is  seeking  to  revive  the  interest
peculiarly  annexed  to  its  content,  crossed  finally  by  many
efforts  either  clearly  conscious  of  their  aim  or  vaguely
groping  after  it,  the  mind's  moods  assume  a  multitude  of
finely  shaded  forms,  far  removed  from  the  dull  comparability
of  a  mere  variation  in  degree  of  general  pain  or  pleasure.
The  advance  of  culture,  too,  by  enlarging  the  capacity  of
consciousness  to  embrace  manifold  ideas,  increases  also  the
intricacy  of  these  cross-currents  of  feeling,  and  produces  that
boundless  variety  of  emotional  stirrings  which  even  art  not
always,  and  the  more  imperfect  means  of  scientific  analysis
never,  can  succeed  in  representing.

Without  at  present  entering  on  this  labyrinth,  through
which  the  consideration  of  human  culture  will  afterwards
compel  us  to  thread  our  way,  we  may  mention  three  directions
in  which  feeling  acts  on  the  connection  of  our  intellectual
life  as  a  most  momentous  force.  We  must  above  all  wean
ourselves  from  the  habit  of  looking  on  the  feelings  as
subsidiary  events  that  sometimes  occur  in  the  succession
of  our  internal  states,  while  the  latter  for  the  most  part

Or  Till!  FEELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 243

consist  of  an  indifferent  series  of  painless  and  pleasureless
changes.  Save  one  of  complete  repose,  we  can  conceive  no
state  not  either  in  harmony  with  the  conditions  of  psychic
development  or  somehow  contrary  to  them.  Whatever  stimu
lations,  then,  the  soul  may  undergo,  from  each  one  we  must
expect  an  impression  of  pain  or  pleasure,  and  more  accurate
self-scrutiny,  so  far  as  it  can  recognise  the  washed-out  colours
of  the.se  impressions,  confirms  our  conjecture,  unable  as  it  is
to  find  any  manifestation  of  our  mental  activity  not  accom
panied  by  some  feeling.  The  colours  are  indeed  washed-
out  in  the  matured  mind,  in  contrast  to  the  preponderant
interest  which  we  bestow  on  particular  ends  of  our  personal
endeavours,  and  deliberate  attention  is  needed  to  detect  them,
just  as  microscopic  examination  is  necessary  to  trace  the  regular
formation  of  invisible  objects,  which  the  unassisted  eye  is  wont
carelessly  to  overlook.  To  each  simple  sensation,  each  colour,
each  tone,  corresponds  originally  a  special  degree  of  pain  or
pleasure  ;  but,  accustomed  as  we  are  to  note  these  impressions
only  in  their  significance  as  marks  of  objects,  whose  import
and  notion  are  of  consequence  to  us,  we  observe  the  worth
of  these  simple  objects  only  when  we  throw  ourselves  with
concentrated  attention  into  their  content.  Kvcry  form  of
composition  of  the  manifold  produces  in  us,  along  with  a
perception,  a  slight  impression  of  its  agreement  with  the
usages  of  our  own  development,  and  it  is  these  often  obscure
feelings  that  give  to  each  several  object  its  special  com
plexion  for  each  several  temperament,  so  that,  with  tin-
same  complement  of  properties  for  all,  it  yet  seems  to
each  of  us  different.  Even  the  simplest  and  apparently
driest  notions  are  never  quite  destitute  of  this  attendant
feeling  ;  wo  cannot  grasp  the  conception  of  unity  without
experiencing  a  pleasant  satisfaction  that  is  part  of  its  con
tent,  or  that  of  antagonism  without  participating  in  the  pain
of  conflictive  opposition ;  we  cannot  observe  in  things  or
evolve  within  ourselves  such  conceptions  as  rest,  motion,
equilibrium,  without  throwing  ourselves  into  them  with  all
our  living  strength,  and  having  a  feeling  of  tlio  kind  and

244  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

degree  of  resistance  or  assistance  which  they  might  bring
to  bear  on  us.  A  considerable  part  of  our  higher  human
culture  is  the  result  of  this  pervading  presence  of  feelings ;
it  is  the  basis  of  imagination,  whence  spring  works  of  art,
and  which  makes  us  capable  of  entering  into  natural  beauty ;
for  productive  and  reproductive  power  consists  in  nothing
else  than  the  delicacy  of  apprehension  by  which  the  mind
is  able  to  clothe  the  world  of  'values  in  the  world  of  forms,
or  to  become  instinctively  aware  of  the  happiness  concealed
under  the  enveloping  form.

But  feeling  further  contains  the  principle  of  that  peculiar
and  highest  activity  which  we  encountered  in  the  sphere  of
intelligence,  namely,  of  that  reason  which  requires  of  the  actual
sum  of  things  conformity  with  forms  of  existence  in  which
alone  it  finds  a  guarantee  of  the  value  of  the  actual.  If  we
are  equally  unwilling  to  attribute  to  the  universe  either  the
(initude  of  a  fixed  quantity  or  absolute  infinity,  if  we  require
that  its  conception  be  that  of  a  whole  and  an  essentially
complete  unit,  and  at  the  same  time  that  it  should  compre
hend  all  individuals,  we  follow  in  this  and  other  require
ments  no  longer  the  mere  inclination  of  an  uninterested
understanding  to  which  an  object  would  be  unthinkable
without  these  conditions,  but  the  inspirations  of  a  reason
appreciative  of  worth,  that  rejects  even  the  thinkable  so
long  as  it  is  only  thinkable  and  does  not  besides  by  the
inherent  excellence  of  its  content  win  recognition  of  its
worth  in  the  world.  Hence  to  the  understanding  by  itself
much  would  seem  possible  and  correspondent  to  the  laws
of  its  procedure,  which  reason  will  deride  on  account  of  its
inherent  incredibility ;  it  may  claim  much  else  that  the
understanding  fails  to  apprehend  in  its  peculiar  forms  of
thought.  If  we  examine  our  theory  of  the  universe,  as  it
has  been  matured  in  the  course  of  the  culture  which  we  have
acquired,  not  only  through  the  reasonings  of  science,  but  also
through  the  experience  of  life,  we  shall  find  it  to  a  large
extent  determined  no  less  by  these  often  secretly  co-operating
requirements  of  our  reason,  than  by  the  obvious  principles  of

OF  THE  FEELINGS,  SELF  CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL 245

our  understanding.  The  scientific  energy  of  understanding
wearies  itself  with  working  at  the  problems  set  before  us —
the  difficulties  raised  by  the  alteration  of  things,  the  variety  of
their  properties,  the  vitality  and  freedom  of  all  development ;
and,  even  though  its  labour  is  not  in  vain,  it  yet  is  unable  to
vindicate  the  notions  of  living  freedom  and  activity  so  clearly
as  to  give  binding  authority  to  men's  unquenchable  trust  in
the  future.  The  human  spirit  is  endowed  with  the  happy
inconsistency  of  being  able  unsuspectingly  to  follow  two  lines
of  thought  at  once,  without  being  aware  of  the  contradiction
in  which  they  will  sooner  or  later  clash  together.  Thus  iu
the  path  of  ordinary  experience  we  unhesitatingly  adopt  the
modes  of  procedure  of  the  understanding,  by  which  we  are
always  sure  to  be  able  systematically  to  connect  particular
with  particular,  and  by  means  of  which  we  might  be  equally
assured — did  we  but  take  note  of  it — that  we  should  never
attain  to  that  conception  of  the  universal  whole,  which  during
all  these  efforts  our  reason  is  holding  fast  or  seeking  to  gain.

Xot  always,  of  course,  do  the  events  of  life  leave  us  in
this  state  of  obliviscence ;  in  the  life  of  the  individual  as  in
that  of  the  race  we  see  how  at  certain  critical  moments  there
inevitably  springs  up  a  consciousness  of  the  great  chasm  that
yawns  between  our  scientific  experience  in  the  finite  sphere
and  our  belief  as  to  the  matter  and  form  of  the  eternal.  But
neither  of  this  conllict  in  the  individual  mind  nor  of  the  more
impressive  forms  which  it  has  assumed  in  the  history  of
culture  and  speculation,  must  we  in  this  preliminary  survey
forestall  our  future  description.  Whatever  has  been  the
linal  decision,  in  actual  life — in  which  the  evidence  of  our
thoughts  is  different  and  differently  distributed  from  what
it  is  within  the  boundaries  of  science — these  varying  judg
ments  have  never  been  able  to  shake  the  belief  that,  in  its
feeling  for  the  value  of  things  and  their  relations,  our  reason
possesses  as  genuine  a  revelation  as,  in  the  principles  of  logical
investigation,  it  has  an  indispensable  instrument  of  experience.
Jiut,  at  the  same  time,  a  review  of  those  judgments  would
teach  us  that  no  source  of  revelation  is  less  clear  than  this,

246  BOOK  II. CIIAITEU  V.

iione  so  much  needs  a  firmer  basis  as  this,  which  has  no  other
foundation  for  its  affirmations  as  to  the  necessary  form  of  the
world  than  the  feeling  of  the  value  which  it  finds  in  it,  and
which  it  thinks  it  would  fail  to  find  in  others  that  arc  con
ceivable.  Numberless  circumstances  may  here  deceive  us ;
numberless  habits  of  thinking  and  perceiving,  formed  imper
ceptibly  and  proceeding  from  individual  peculiarities,  from  the
level  of  culture  of  the  age,  or  from  the  limitation  of  our
personal  experience,  may  mislead  us  to  seek  obstinately  in  a
single  fixed  form,  or  blindly  and  incorrectly  in  a  wholly  wrong
direction,  that  which  we  would  be  justified  in  requiring  in  a
general  way.  While,  therefore,  these  higher  views  of  things,  as
men  choose  to  call  them,  will  continue  to  be  the  animating  and
quickening  breath  of  all  human  efforts,  they  will  yet  always
confirm  the  affinity  between  the  worth-determining  reason  and
the  artistic  imagination;  in  what  they  have  produced,  the  feel
ing  of  poetic  justice  invariably  fills  the  place  of  insight  into
the  grounds  of  certainty.  These  views  form  an  intellectual
treasure  which  is  invaluable,  but  for  which  it  is  not  easy  to
find  a  common  standard  of  value,  and  science  must  perhaps
be  content  if  it  succeed  in  demonstrating  that  the  clear  and
irrefragable  principles  of  the  understanding  are  nothing  else
than  the  explicable  parts  of  that  treasure  elaborated  so  as  to
be  ready  for  use — not  attached  to  it  as  something  extraneous,
but  proceeding  from  itself,  as  the  only  methods  by  which
we  can,  from  our  human  point  of  view,  succeed  in  realizing
the  special  tendency  and  aim  of  reason — to  bring  the  actual
world  into  the  unity  of  a  harmonious  whole.

Xow,  if  these  attempts  of  our  mind  to  explain  the  world  of
values  by  the  world  of  forms  correspond  to  the  conceptive
energy  of  imagination  seeking  to  create  the  actual  anew  from
its  own  beauty  as  from  a  working  power,  then  Practical  Reason
stands  on  a  line  with  artistic  production  of  beauty.  Different
ages  have  striven  after  different  ideals  of  art ;  but  however
fantastic  might  be  the  form  in  which  an  unrefined  imagination
thought  to  have  attained  the  expression  of  the  highest,  all  recog
nised  as  their  ideal  that  which  they  reverenced.  Scarcely  less

OF  IMF.  FEELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 247

diverse  have  been  at  different  periods  and  stages  ui'  culture  the
Moral  Ideals  of  the  Practical  Reason;  but,  whatever  might  be
their  content,  it  was  felt  as  a  duty  to  realize  it  in  action,  and
the  moral  principles  of  each  age  were  always  sanctioned  by
the  soul  otherwise  than  were  the  truths  of  cognition ;  they  too
were  dictates  of  an  appreciative  feeling.  A  culture  that  from
many  various  quarters  has  taken  in  enlightenment  as  to  man's
position  in  the  universe,  the  measure  and  conditions  of  his
powers,  and  the  abundance  of  realizable  good,  may  fancy  it  has
risen  above  this  point  of  view,  according  to  which  the  con
sciousness  of  our  moral  obligations  flows  from  a  Moral  Sense.
To  us,  of  course,  the  matter  of  the  fundamental  moral  precepts
appears  so  clear  that  we  suppose  their  inherent  necessity  must
be  self-evident,  just  as  the  simplest  cognitive  principles  have,
at  least  as  regards  their  unconscious  practice,  been  self-evident
to  all  peoples.  Nevertheless,  the  experience  of  life  teaches
us  how  much  variety,  even  though  within  narrower  limits,
there  is  in  the  substance  of  what  individuals,  with  equal  con
viction  and  fervour,  accept  as  the  binding  rule  of  their  action.
And  a  more  extended  survey  would,  on  a  comparison  of
diil'erent  nations  and  civilisations,  reach  hardly  any  other
result  than  this,  that  everywhere  dispositions  and  actions  are
among  the  objects  of  worth-determining  reason,  but  that  this
reason,  in  the  recognition  of  its  ideal  in  definite  modes  of
action,  is  liable  to  illusions  similar  to  those  in  which  attempts
at  a  higher  knowledge  of  things  often  end.  Even  the  world
of  ethical  convictions  is  a  result  of  culture ;  we  have  to  put
together,  in  the  great  picture  of  humanity  to  which  these  con
siderations  serve  as  an  introduction,  the  significant  indications
that,  but  for  the  numerous  influences  of  culture,  morality  could
not  have  come  into  being ;  but  here  we  have  occasion  only  to
mention  that  neither  did  it  come  into  being  through  culture
alone,  but  that  it  has  its  roots  in  the  essential  constitution  of
mind.  Far  from  simply  rising,  as  an  attendant  accessory,  out
of  the  exercise  of  ideational  activity,  morality,  on  the  contrary,
rests  on  this  basis  of  feeling,  which  much  more  than  cognition
is  peculiarly  significant  of  the  true  nature  of  mind,  while  its

248  DOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

influence,  as  we  have  seen,  extends  most  unmistakeably  to  the
exertions  of  our  cognitive  intelligence.

§  3.  But  we  promised  to  trace  the  workings  of  feeling  in
three  directions,  and  the  assertion  just  made  reminds  us  of  the
second  of  these  series  of  mental  phsenomena,  which  we  cannot
understand  without  giving  them  a  basis  of  feeling,  though
they  are  most  commonly  treated  as  facts  purely  of  the  cogni
tive  life.  I  mean  Self -consciousness,  in  which  we  distinguish
ourselves  as  Ego  from  the  Non-cyo  of  the  rest  of  the  world,
and  refer  our  manifold  inner  states  to  this  Ego,  as  the  cohesive
centre  of  afferent  and  efferent  actions.

To  earlier  thinkers  it  often  appeared  as  if  self-conscious
ness  formed  the  essential  and  inborn  characteristic,  without
which  mind  itself  would  be  unthinkable,  or  by  whose  presence
it  is  at  least  distinguished  from  the  selfless  soul  of  the  lower
animals.  This  opinion  has  been  gradually  given  up,  and  we
Lave  become  accustomed  to  look  on  self-consciousness  as  the
result  of  a  long  course  of  training,  whether  we  consider  effort
for  its  attainment  to  be  the  motive  power  in  all  mental  de
velopment,  or  whether  we  hope  to  see  the  consciousness  of  the
Ego  spring  from  the  mechanism  of  the  train  of  ideas  as  one
among  several  secondary  products.  The  nature  of  the  thing
seems  to  require  us  to  take  another  path,  midway  between
these  conceptions.  Certainly  no  one  can  seriously  hold  self-
consciousness  to  be  an  inborn  endowment  of  the  mind  in  such
a,  sense  that  from  the  first  we  see  distinctly  mirrored  before
us  what  we  ourselves  are.  Even  with  all  the  aid  of  the  training
of  life  and  of  the  attention  of  deliberate  reflection,  we  never
attain  to  this  perfect  knowledge,  whose  exhaustive  detail  would
render  superfluous  all  further  questions  as  to  the  peculiar
nature  of  our  being.  Our  consciousness  never  presents  to  us
this  image  as  found ;  we  are  merely  directed  to  a  more  or  less
obscure  point,  in  which  lies  our  Ego,  of  which  we  are  in  search.
But  that  we  can  seek  it,  that  what  we  know  so  imperfectly
we  yet  always  discriminate  with  the  utmost  decision  from  the
outer  world,  this  impulse  we  cannot  understand  without  con
ceiving  it  as  independent  of  the  circumstances  that  condition

OF  THE  FKF.LINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 249

the  advancing  perfection  of  our  knowledge  about  ourselves.
How  then  do  we  come  to  divide  the  multiplex  objects  of  thought
into  these  two  parts — the  one  E<jo,  and,  lacing  it,  the  inex
haustible  fulness  of  all  else?  Our  distinction  of  ourself  from
things  does  not  resemble  that  which  we  make  between  two
other  objects ;  on  the  contrary,  the  contrast  between  ourselves
and  what  is  not  ourselves  manifests  itself  as  unconditioned  in
meaning  and  extent,  and  not  to  be  compared  with  any  other.

Very  naturally  so,  it  will  be  said :  have  we  not  here  a
special,  nay,  absolutely  the  only  case  in  which  that  which
thinks  this  relation  of  contrast  is  itself  one  of  its  terms  ?  This
coincidence  of  thinker  and  thought,  the  essential  characteristic
of  what  we  call  the  Ego,  must  justify  the  special  prominence
which  we  give  to  this  distinction.  JUit,  examined  more
closely,  this  circum>taiice  is  found  to  throw  very  little  light
on  the  enigma  of  the  peculiar  interest  which  we  take  in  this
distinction,  and  which  has  very  little  in  common  with  that
awakened  by  the  peculiarity  of  a  rare  phenomenon.  The
significance  of  self-consciousness  lies  not  in  the  coincidence  of
thinker  and  thought;  for  this  is  characteristic,  not  of  our  Ego
alone,  but  of  the  universal  nature  of  every  Ego,  from  which  we
properly  distinguish  our  own — how  ?  To  be  sure  by  its  being
the  thinker  of  our  own  thoughts.  Uut  what  do  we  mean  when
we  call  any  thoughts  our  own  ?  There  must  evidently  be  an
immediate  certainty  as  to  what  is  ours,  and  it  cannot  How
for  us  out  of  the  general  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  Ego,  from
which  to  distinguish  our  own  case  is  the  essential  oflice  of
our  self-consciousness.  And  now  it  will  be  easily  under
stood  how  little  an  ever-growing  fulness  of  insight  into  the
nature  of  our  soul  would  fill  up  the  chasm  we  find  here.
For,  even  if  we  could  correctly  and  accurately  enumerate  the
peculiar  characteristics  that  distinguish  our  soul  from  others,
we  should  still  have  no  reason  to  take  the  idea  so  acquired
for  more  than  the  indifferent  representation  of  a  being  some
where  existent,  and  as  completely  distinct  from  any  second  as
any  third  is  from  any  fourth.  If,  furlhcr,  it  did  not  escape  our
notice  that  the  being  so  clearly  seen  through  in  the  light  of

250  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

perfect  knowledge  was  the  very  same  as  that  which  at  tiiia
moment  completed  its  intuition  of  itself,  we  would  indeed
have  given,  in  this  actually  accomplished  self-reflection,  the
last  characteristic  crowning  touch  to  the  picture  of  that  heing,
but  we  would  still  he  far  from  having  reached  anything  so
significant  as  what  in  actual  life  we  know  and  possess  as  self-
consciousness.  This  perfect  knowledge  would  indeed  imply
that  our  own  heing  had  become  to  us  clearly  objective, —
objective  in  such  a  sense,  however,  that  our  own  self  would
appear  to  us  but  one  among  many  objects;  the  intimacy  with
which  in  our  actual  self-consciousness  we  feel  the  infinite
worth  of  this  return  upon  ourselves  would  still  remain
unknown  and  unintelligible.  Like  all  values  given  to  objects
of  thought,  this  too  is  apprehended  only  by  means  of  feelings
of  pain  and  pleasure.  Not  as  thought,  but  as  felt  in  its
immediate  value  for  us  does  the  identity  of  the  thinker  and
the  thought  form  the  foundation  of  our  self-consciousness,  and
once  for  all  lift  the  distinction  between  us  and  the  world
beyond  all  comparison  with  the  differences  by  which  it  dis
criminates  between  one  object  and  another.

To  this  end  simple  feelings  of  souse  are  adequate  no  less
than  those  more  elaborate  intellectual  ones  by  which  highly
developed  minds  bring  home  to  themselves  the  worth  and
peculiar  merit  of  their  personality.  Whether  the  soul's  idea
of  itself  be  full  or  scanty,  the  image  which  it  delineates
a  likeness  or  a  caricature :  that  makes  no  difference  to  the
vividness  and  force  with  which  the  matter  of  this  image  is
felt  as  different  from  all  else.  The  crushed  worm  writhing  in
pain  undoubtedly  distinguishes  its  own  suffering  from  the  rest
of  the  world,  though  it  can  understand  neither  its  own  Ego  nor
the  nature  of  the  external  world.  But  the  consummate  intel
ligence  of  an  angel,  did  it  lack  that  feeling,  would  indeed  be
capable  of  keen  insight  into  the  hidden  essence  of  the  soul  and
of  things,  and  in  full  light  would  observe  the  phenomena  of  its
own  self-reflection,  but  it  would  never  learn  why  it  should  attach
any  greater  value  to  the  distinction  between  itself  and  the  rest
of  the  world  than  to  the  numerous  differences  between  things  in

OF  THE  FEELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 251

general  that  presented  themselves  to  its  notice.  Thus  self-con-
.•;ciousness  is  to  us  but  as  the  interpretation  of  a  sense  of  self,
whose  prior  and  original  force  is  not  directly  increased  by  thu
advance  of  our  knowledge;  only  the  fulness  and  clearness  of  the
representation  that  we  make  of  our  own  being  keeps  pace  with
our  progress  in  culture.  There  is,  of  course,  an  equal  increase
also  in  the  sum  of  the  thoughts  that  bring  external  objects
into  relation  with  our  efforts  and  volitions;  the  content  of  our
Ego  not  only  becomes  clearer,  but  it  extends  over  an  enlarging
circumference ;  thus,  too,  the  vividness  of  the  sense  of  self
indirectly  increases,  inasmuch  as  the  matured  soul  becomes
capable  of  innumerable  relationships,  that  to  it  are  helps  or
hindrances  to  its  own  being,  while  to  the  undeveloped  mind
they  seem  merely  indifferent  relations  between  external  things.
§  4.  The  delineation  of  the  course  of  this  growth  we  must
also  defer  till  we  cume  to  discuss  the  relations  of  human  life
by  which  it  is  conditioned,  only  in  a  few  words  alluding  to
some  points  of  it  which  will  bring  us  to  the  last  subject  of
our  survey.  It  is  easy  to  understand  how  at  first  the  image
of  our  own  body  must  hold  a  prominent  place  in  our  thoughts.
As  the  instrument  of  all  perceptions  and  all  movements,  it  is
entwined  with  every  manifestation  of  our  life,  and  every
remembrance  of  an  impression,  an  action,  a  pain,  or  an  enjoy
ment  recalls  its  image  also,  and  accustoms  us  to  discern  directly
the  activity  of  our  being  in  the  moving  and  moveable  bodily
form.  But  just  as  simple  are  the  experiences  from  which  we
soon  gain  the  conviction  that  the  vitality  in  it  is  not  itself,
that  we  have  to  seek  in  it  indeed,  but  not  extending  into  its
visible  form,  a  moving  force,  the  common  cause  at  once  of  its
own  liability  to  change  and  of  the  living  transformations  of
the  inner  world  within  which  our  ideas,  feelings,  and  voli
tions  jostle  one  another.  This  imperfect  conception  doubtless
contents  most  men,  more  apt  to  look  beyond  the  idea  of
the  body  than  intent  on  any  other  definite  point.  Science
seeks  indeed  to  fill  up  this  gap  by  efforts  to  grasp  the
obscure  being  of  which  it  is  in  search  in  the  form  of  a
thing,  a  supersensible  force,  or  an  immaterial  substance;  but

252  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

these  attempts  lie  beyond  the  sphere  of  natural  and  un
constrained  thought,  and,  as  directed  towards  establishing
the  universal  nature  of  the  soul,  they  do  not  tend  to  en
lighten  the  individual  as  to  the  distinctive  nature  of  his
own  Ego.  Hence  ordinary  consciousness  is  little  disposed  to
indulge  in  such  brooding  reflection  ;  it  prefers  to  enjoy  its
individuality,  knowing  full  well  how  to  distinguish  itself  from
every  other  Ego  by  recollection  of  its  bodily  appearance,  of
the  story  of  its  life,  of  its  joys  and  sorrows,  achievements  and
hopes,  in  general  of  its  peculiar  position  in  the  world.

But  it  also  learns  by  experience  how  the  world  offers  it
resistance,  how  little  it  can  next  moment  become  what  last
moment  it  meant  to  become  ;  it  finds  its  knowledge  and  its
power  dependent  on  the  accidents  of  its  course  of  culture ;  its
whole  individuality,  so  far  as  under  its  own  observation,  seems
at  the  mercy  of  circumstances  alien  from  itself.  Thus  we
come  to  set  in  contrast  to  the  sharply  delineated  image  of  the
empiric  E<jo  another,  in  which  we  think  we  collect  the  per
manent  characteristics  that  form  the  true  content  of  our  being,
and  are  independent  of  the  particular  modifications  which
have  been  caused  by  external  influences.  As,  in  considering
-anything,  we  separate  the  accidental  form  which  it  owes  to
extraneous  action  from  the  unchanging  properties  that  qualify
it  to  assume  its  present  form  (as  under  other  circumstances
they  would  cause  it  to  appear  under  quite  different  forms),  so
we  no\v  seek  our  true  Ego  in  the  permanent  habits  and
peculiarities  of  our  mental  action,  which  would  always  have
remained  the  same,  even  had  the  external  conditions  of  their
development  been  wholly  diverse.  Accordingly,  we  do  not
believe  that  what  we  know,  what  we  have  done  and  suffered,
exhausts  our  Ego ;  but  taking  the  manifold  results  of  this
development  only  as  one  of  the  many  ways  in  which  it  was
possible  to  unfold  our  nature,  we  find  ourselves,  on  the  con
trary,  in  the  general  mood  of  our  feelings,  in  the  temperament
which  in  us  is  not  quite  the  same  as  in  any  one  else,  in  our
whole  mode  and  habit  of  being,  whether  lively  or  dull,  in  our
peculiar  manner  of  dealing  with  the  body  of  our  knowledge.

OF  THV,  FI  ELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  Till:  WILL. 253

All  this,  we  fancy,  would  have  been  quite  the  same,  what
ever  course  of  development  had  been  allotted  to  us  by
desliny ;  and  if  we  readily  si-t  down  to  the  peculiar  merit
of  our  nature  all  fair  and  admirable  culture  which  our
actual  situation  has  enabled  us  to  acquire,  we  yet  do  not
doubt  that  everything  perverse  and  blameablo  is  to  be
ascribed  to  the  hindrance  of  circumstances  alone.  The
empiric  Ego  appears  to  us  like  the  foliage  of  a  tree,  whose
degree  of  fulness  and  beauty  depends  on  the  influences  of
the  year ;  even  if  it  be  stripped  off,  the  vegetative  force
remains  in  the  trunk  unaltered,  and  justifies  the  hope  of
better  results  under  more  favourable  conditions.  Thus,  by
this  (esthetic  picture  of  our  abiding  disposition,  we  are  chiefly
used  to  make  our  personality  distinct  to  ourselves,  and
certainly  we  thereby  attain  to  a  truer  and  more  speaking
likeness  of  our  nature  than  is  supplied  by  the  heterogeneous
multitude  of  our  actual  remembrances,  which  include  too
much  of  the  past  and  accidental  and  too  little  of  the
future.  But  after  all,  we  soon  come  to  perceive  that  even
this  idea  does  not  afford  what,  in  the  highest  meaning  of
the  word,  we  are  seeking  as  our  true  Ego.

For  in  only  too  great  a  degree  do  we  find  our  temperament,
our  prevailing  frame  of  mind,  the  peculiar  direction  and  the
liveliness  of  our  imagination,  lastly,  the  conspicuous  capacities
that  seemed  at  first  to  form  the  endowment  of  our  purely
individual  personality,  dependent  on  our  bodily  constitution
and  its  changes  ;  nay,  as  inherited  predisposition,  much  of  it
is  but  the  result  of  a  course  of  Nature  that  long  prior  to  our
own  existence  had  already  irrevocably  fixed  certain  tendencies
of  our  coming  life.  And  even  if  we  were  not  thus  indebted
to  the  chain  of  physical  effects,  if,  on  the  contrary,  our  soul
had  been  in  its  essence  moulded  apart  from  it,  still  even  then
its  original  capabilities  would  appear  as  something  given,  as
an  endowment  from  the  creative  power  from  which  our
temporal  existence  sprang,  and  where  we  expected  to  grasp
a  self  of  our  own,  we  would  find  something  established  by
an  outside  power,  not  our  own,  in  the  sense  in  which  we

25-1-  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

possess  what  we  have  won  by  our  own  exertions  and  spon
taneous  energy.  Thus  is  formed  the  longing  to  transcend  the
content  of  our  Ego,  and  in  a  pure,  as  yet  undetermined,  and
self-moulding  impulse  to  seek  the  true  and  fundamental
essence  of  our  personality ;  in  this  we  seem  to  ourselves
to  he  really  only  what  we  have  made  ourselves.  We  will
not  track  the  strange  contradictions  into  which,  in  scientific
inquiry,  this  course  of  thought  must  necessarily  lead  ;  the
more  natural  instinct  of  the  unprejudiced  mind  is  open  to
conviction  here,  and  does  not  require  that  all  not  done  by  our
selves  should  be  excluded  from  our  being.  Confessing,  what
it  cannot  deny,  that  without  any  choice  of  ours  the  extent  of
our  possible  development  is  unalterably  fixed  by  external
circumstances  by  the  peculiarities  of  the  race  to  whicli  we
belong,  by  the  bodily  constitution  with  which  we  enter  life,
by  the  age  in  which  we  are  born,  lastly,  by  the  general  laws
of  mental  life,  which  are  alike  for  all,  it  is  content  with
requiring  that  amidst  all  this  necessary  order  there  be  at  least
one  point  of  freedom,  whence  our  energy  may  mould  this
material  of  existence  offered  to  us  into  a  possession  for  our
selves  alone.  Conditioned  in  all  else,  in  the  forms  of  our
knowledge,  in  the  course  of  our  ideas  and  feelings,  we  will
be  free  at  least  in  willing  and  acting.

§  5.  We  have  already  expressed  the  conviction  that,  besides
Ideation  and  Feeling,  Volition  contains  a  peculiar  element  of
mental  activity,  not  derived  from  these  two,  though  dependent
on  them  as  the  occasions  of  its  appearance.  Now,  however,
when  we  come  more  closely  to  consider  this  new  mode  of
psychic  activity,  we  must  premise  the  acknowledgment  that,
among  the  various  phenomena  which  under  various  names  are
either  directly  ranked  with  it  or  attached  to  it  as  of  kin,  there
are  many  in  which  we  can  recognise  only  special  forms  of
ideation  and  feeling.  We  are  unquestionably  too  lavish  of  the
names  volition  and  effort,  and  denote  by  them  many  processes
to  which  the  soul  is  related  not  as  an  acting  being  but  only
as  an  observing  consciousness ;  movements  of  ideas  and  feel
ings  that  merely  take  place  in  us  on  various  occasions  supplied

OF  THE  FEELINGS,  SELF-CON.SCIOUSNESS,  AND  THK  WILL. 2oo

by  the  general  psychic  mechanism,  and  arc  noted  l>y  us  as
taking  place,  we  erroneously  take  for  energies  put  forth
by  our  decided  Will  or  by  some  less  definite  eflbrt  of
our  Ego.

If  we  examine  the  manifold  Impulses  of  sense,  we  shall
always  find  as  their  peculiar  nucleus  a  feeling  that  in  pain  or
pleasure  discloses  to  us  the  value  of  a  bodily  state  perhaps
not  rising  to  conscious  clearness.  Only  because  we  have  had
experience,  which  the  mechanism  of  remembrance  brings  again
before  us,  so  that  the  ideas  of  the  motions  or  of  the  objects
that  have  previously  prolonged  pleasure  or  shortened  pain  arc
now  again  in  consciousness,  does  the  feeling  pass  into  a
movement  directed  towards  the  restoration  of  these  favourable
circumstances.  Our  will,  however,  does  not  immediately
manifest  itself,  but  wholly  without  volition  and  with  mechani
cal  sequence,  feeling  itself  and  the  ideas  associated  with  it  at
once  start  the  bodily  movements  serving  to  that  end,  and
what  we  call  impulse  is  not  a  volition  by  which  we  guide  the
body,  but  a  perception  of  its  passive  state  and  of  the  move
ments  arising  involuntarily  within  it,  by  which  the  other
energies  of  our  consciousness  are  brought  into  corresponding
exercise.  Impulse,  accordingly,  is  nothing  but  the  apprehen
sion  of  being  impelled;  and  if  any  volition  mingles  with  it,
it  is  simply  the  volition  not  to  resist  but  to  give  way  to  the
natural  current  of  these  inner  changes.

But  we  cannot  confine  this  consideration  to  sense-impulses;
the  greater  part  of  what  in  daily  life  we  call  our  actions  aiv
performed  quite  in  the  same  way.  Ideas  start  up  in  us
according  to  universal  laws,  and  to  these  become  attached  in
part  directly,  in  part  through  the  intervention  of  various
feelings,  all  sorts  of  images  of  bodily  movements,  which  hover
before  our  consciousness  sometimes  as  means  of  reaching  an
external  object,  sometimes  as  alleviations  of  a  present  pain.
Very  rarely  is  a  real  volition  produced  by  this  pressure  of
internal  stimuli  ;  the  train  of  ideas  in  general  passes  spon
taneously  into  external  movement,  and  a  great  number  even
of  complex  actions  take  place  in  this  involuntary  fashion.

256  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

and  that  even  though  the  series  of  intermediate  links,  through
which  they  are  connected  with  the  original  moving  force,
be  not  fully  unrolled  in  consciousness.  There  is  no  reason
why  these  processes  should  be  distinguished  by  a  different
name  from  the  actions  which  we  find  occurring  in  every
composite  organism  with  like  variety  of  form  and  like
mechanical  necessity  of  sequence  ;  and  in  fact  we  are  usually
disposed  to  deny  volition  proper  to  the  lower  animals,  whose
manifestations  we  suppose  to  have  no  other  source  than  this.
We  are  convinced  that  we  meet  with  an  act  of  will  only
where  the  impulses  urging  to  action  are  apprehended  in
distinct  consciousness,  where,  moreover,  the  decision  whether
they  shall  be  followed  or  not  is  deliberated  upon  and  is  left
to  be  determined  by  free  choice  of  the  mind,  which  is  unswayed
by  these  pressing  motives,  and  not  by  the  force  of  these
motives  themselves.  So  intimate  is  the  connection  between
the  notion  of  Freedom  and  that  of  Volition ;  for  in  this
decision  concerning  a  given  matter  of  fact  consists  the  true
efficacy  of  Will.  On  the  other  hand,  Will  can  have  no
content  other  than  that  supplied  by  the  involuntary  How
of  ideas  and  feelings,  and,  not  being  itself  an  outwardly
directed  effort,  moulding  and  creative,  must  be  content  with
unrestricted  freedom  of  choice  between  the  objects  thus  put
within  its  reach.

Xow,  were  it  impossible  to  conceive  this  freedom  or  to
justify  its  acceptance  as  a  fact,  would  we  have  any  further
occasion  to  retain  the  name  of  Will  ?  However  much  mental
life  may  surpass  Nature  in  the  peculiar  complexity  of  its  pro
cesses,  its  connection  would  then  seem  in  no  wise  essentially
to  differ  from  the  complete  and  blind  necessity  of  an  un
broken  chain  of  mechanism.  Neverthless,  we  do  not  think
that  even  on  this  supposition  volition  could  be  dismissed
as  a  peculiar  element  from  the  scries  of  manifestations  of
psychic  energy,  though  its  position  would  be  a  startling  one.
When  men  coin  a  special  name  for  simple  processes,  not  com
posed  of  a  plurality  of  ideas,  but,  on  the  contrary,  binding
pluralities  for  the  first  time  into  a  whole,  they  may  often

OF  THE  FEELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 257

make  mistaken  applications  of  it,  and  fail  rightly  to  define
the  phenomena  in  which  they  believe  the  process  occurs  ;
but  they  will  scarcely  invent  something  having  nowhere  any
actual  existence.  For,  after  all,  our  thought  can  only  have  for
its  matter  wli.it  we  have  somehow  experienced ;  and  as  we  do
not  devise  anything  wholly  new,  we  can  hardly  err  other
wise  than  in  the  combination  and  application  of  the  simple
elements  afforded  by  our  inner  experience.  Accordingly,
nothing  else  than  pedantic  prejudice,  it  would  seem,  can
attempt  to  derive  the  nature  of  volition  from  mere  cognition,
and  to  vindicate  the  assertion  that  the  proposition  I  will
is  tantamount  to  the  clear  and  confident  consciousness  of
/  shall.  Perhaps  the  mere  assurance  that  I  shall  act  may
be  tantamount  to  the  knowing  of  my  volition,  but  then
the  notion  of  acting  must  include  the  peculiar  element  of
approval,  permission,  or  intention,  that  makes  the  will  such,
and  that  is  absent  in  the  simple  anticipation  of  the  future
occurrence  of  an  effect  proceeding  from  us.  It  is  vain,  there
fore,  to  deny  the  reality  of  volition,  as  vain  as  it  would  be  to
endeavour  by  lengthy  explanations  to  make  plain  its  simple
nature,  which  is  only  to  be  known  directly  through  experi
ence.  The  approval  through  which  our  will  adopts  as  its
own  the  resolution  offered  to  it  by  the  pressing  motives  of
the  train  of  ideas,  or  the  disapproval  with  which  it  rejects  it,
would  be  conceivable  even  if  neither  possessed  the  slightest
power  of  interfering,  for  determination  and  alteration,  witli
the  course  of  mental  events.  Just  as  external  circumstances
drive  men  to  modes  of  acting  absolutely  alien  or  even  repug
nant  to  their  disposition,  so  even  in  thought  separate  moments
might  form  themselves  into  a  chain  of  unbroken  necessity,
and  unceasingly  compel  actions  followed  at  the  veiy  moment
by  the  impotent  remorse  of  conscience.

This  idea,  startling  as  it  may  at  first  appear,  is  yet  not
so  far  removed  from  thoughts  with  which  we  are  familiar  in
life.  It  may  almost  be  said  to  be  only  scientific  investiga
tion  that  is  apt  to  confound  unlimited  freedom  of  volition
with  exhaustless  capability  of  performance  ;  our  experience

VOL.  I.  B

258  BOOK  II. CHAPTER  V.

of  life,  on  the  other  hand,  warns  us  of  our  weakness  in  con
flict  with  the  mighty  power  of  involuntary  impulses,  and  we
believe  a  higher  aid  to  be  needed  in  order  that  we  may  over
come  it.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  error  to  require  of  the  will  more
than  volition,  and  the  difficulties  usually  thrown  in  the  way  of
the  conviction  of  its  freedom  proceed  mostly,  though  even  in
that  case  not  irresistibly,  from  that  prejudice.  How  often
have  fears  of  a  destruction  of  all  actual  order  been  expressed
as  the  result  of  free  resolve  on  the  part  of  an  animated
being,  if  it  were  not  found  possible  to  bring  it  into  connec
tion  with  the  rest  of  Nature  as  a  necessarily  conditioned
effect.  This  was  to  forget  within  how  narrow  limits  the
power  of  a  finite  creature  would  be  confined  even  if  its
will  not  only  were  free,  but  also  had  the  bodily  organization
absolutely  at  its  disposal  as  the  instrumentality  of  its
resolutions.  It  was  to  forget  that  every  effect,  however
free  and  arbitrary  may  have  been  its  motive,  as  soon  as  it
happens  as  an  effect,  takes  its  place  once  more  in  the  circle
of  calculable  events  subject  to  universal  laws,  and  that  no
freedom  is  allowed  wider  room  for  exercise  than  falls
to  it  by  right  in  the  undisturbed  order  of  things.  Finally,
to  indulge  the  fear  that  nevertheless  the  processes  intro
duced  by  the  animated  will  at  its  choice  into  the  actual  course
of  Nature  might,  as  they  gradually  accumulated,  diffuse
themselves  in  opposition  to  the  plan  of  Nature,  was  further  to
overlook  the  fact  that  even  the  uninterrupted  and  uufree
sequence  of  all  states  in  psychic  life  would  not  lessen  this
danger.  For  where  is  the  guarantee  that  in  every  individual
mind,  feelings,  ideas,  and  efforts  would  always  be  mingled
together  and  act  on  one  another  in  so  happy  a  form  and
degree  that  they  must  always  end  in  a  practical  decision  in
harmony  with  the  true  import  of  the  course  of  Nature  ?  Do
we  not  as  we  actually  are,  free  or  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact
interfere — to  disturb  or  destroy — with  the  Nature  around  us,
leaving  behind  many  distinct  traces  of  our  wayward  energy,
while  yet  we  cannot  on  a  large  scale  shake  the  order  of
things  ?  And  if  we  hold  now  that  an  arbitrary  and  free  will

OF  Till:  FEELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 259

directs  our  actions,  would  we,  from  considering  the  limits  of
our  power,  have  occasion  to  dread  a  much  more  extensive
disturbance  of  the  order  of  the  outer  world  ?  No  more  than
does  the  Nature  around  us  would  our  own  nature  lose  all
internal  connection,  as  is  so  commonly  thought,  by  coming
into  the  possession  of  unlimited  freedom  of  resolution.  For
it  would  still  be  only  the  resolves  that  we  left  free  ;  the
unity  and  stability  of  our  personal  consciousness  would  rest
on  the  broad  and  secure  foundation  of  the  innate  sense  of
our  existence,  of  our  idiosyncrasies,  of  the  sum  of  impressions
received,  of  the  memory  of  past  experience,  of  the  abiding
mood,  of  the  perpetually  efficient  and  universal  laws  of  our
train  of  ideas,  for  over  these  elements  of  our  mental  life
that  freedom  would  have  no  power.  On  the  other  hand,  the
amount  of  changeableness  that  we  would  still  retain,  through
the  arbitrariness  of  our  resolves,  would  accommodate  itself
to  the  capacity  of  development  which  we  must  desire,  more
easily  than  to  the  change  which  we  must  shun.

]>ut  does  not  the  universal  Law  of  Causality,  that  for
every  effect  will  have  a  sufficient  cause,  finally  bar  the  way
again.st  any  doctrine  of  freedom,  and  inexorably  convert  the
connection  of  the  universe  into  an  endless  chain  of  blind
effects  ?  \Ve  should  have  thought  that  the  more  distinctly
this  conversion  were  required  as  the  logical  consequence  of
the  above,  conception  of  the  causal  connection,  the  more  dis
tinctly  apparent  was  also  the  incorrectness  of  the  conception
itself.  So  immovably  firm  is  the  conviction  of  our  reason,
that  the  sum  of  all  actuality  cannot  present  the  absurdity  of
a  blind  and  necessary  vortex  of  events,  in  which  there  is  no
room  for  freedom,  that  no  other  task  is  left  for  the  rest  of
knowledge  than  to  bring  the  apparent  contradiction  of  our
experience  into  harmony  with  this  conviction  as  the  first
certain  point.  We  do  not  deny  that  this  problem  of  science
is  still  far  from  the  happy  solution  that  we  desire  for  it,
and,  without  here  entering  on  investigations  difficult  to  make
and  doubtful  in  their  result,  we  may  subject  certain  points
of  the  common  conviction  to  renewed  examination.

260  BOOK  II. CIIAl'TEl;  V.

If  tlie  causal  law  rightfully  requires  a  cause  for  every
effect,  it  is  our  fault,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  see  in  every
event  an  effect,  or  regard  the  discovered  cause  as  itself
invariably  the  effect  of  another  cause.  The  indefinitely  pro
longed  series  in  which  we  here  involve  ourselves,  ought  to
turn  our  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  proposition  in  the
premises  affirms  less  than  it  seems  to  do.  If  we  maintain
that  all  substance  is  indestructible,  we  say  what  is  true,  pro
vided  we  have  included  the  attribute  of  indestructibility  in
the  notion  of  substance  ;  but  we  do  not  make  any  directly
valid  statement ;  for  the  very  question  before  us  is  whether
there  are  substances  in  this  sense,  and  whether  we  are
constrained  by  experience  —  which  beyond  doubt  bids  us
add  in  thought  to  every  group  of  properties  and  develop
ments  a  subject  as  their  base  —  further  to  conceive  this
subject  itself  as  a  so  constituted  substance.  In  like  manner,
all  that  we  think  and  designate  as  an  effect  undoubtedly
requires  its  cause,  but  it  is  a  question  whether  we  are
entitled  to  consider  every  event  that  happens  as  in  this
sense  an  effect.  The  very  infinitude  of  the  series  of  causes
is  a  proof  that  wre  are  not,  for  it  necessarily  leads  to  the
recognition  of  a  primitive  being  and  a  primitive  motion.
What  constitutes  the  absolute  authority  of  the  causal  law
is  not  that  every  part  of  the  finite  sum  of  things  actual  must
in  the.  finite  sphere  be  produced  by  fixed  causes,  according  to
universal  laws,  but  that  each  constituent  once  introduced  into
this  actual  course  continues  to  act  according  to  these  laws.
We  commonly  speak  only  of  every  effect  having  its  cause,
but  we  should  on  the  contrary  lay  stress  chiefly  on  the  other
form  of  the  proposition — every  cause  infallibly  has  its  effect.
The  meaning  of  causality  consists  not  indeed  exclusively,  but
(it  seems  to  me)  in  its  more  essential  part,  in  its  securing
to  every  element  of  the  actual  world,  springing  from  no
matter  what  source,  means  of  acting  energetically  on  the
other  constituents  of  the  world  to  which  it  now  belongs,
at  the  same  time  preventing  it  from  acting  within  that
world  otherwise  than  in  harmony  with  the  universal  laws

OF  THE  FEELINGS,  SELF- CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 2G1

regulating  all  that  takes  place  in  it.  Thus  the  world  would
be  like  a  vortex  swelled  by  new  waves  from  all  sides,  which
it  docs  not  itself  attract  or  produce,  but  which,  once  within
it,  are  forced  to  take  part  in  its  motion.  We  have  another
example  of  the  same  process  in  the  relation  of  our  own  soul
to  the  bodily  organs  ;  the  soul  evolves  from  itself  resolutions,
starting-points  for  future  movements  ;  none  of  them  needs  to
be  determined  by  and  founded  on  phenomena  in  the  bodily
life  on  which  it  reacts  ;  but  each,  at  the  moment  of  its
passing  into  that  life,  subordinates  itself  to  the  peculiar  laws
of  the  latter,  and  generates  so  much  or  so  little  motion  and
force  as  these  permit  of — motion  too  in  the  direction  which
they  prescribe  and  in  no  other.  The  universal  course  of
things  may  at  every  moment  have  innumerable  beginnings
whose  origin  lies  outside  of  it,  but  can  have  none  not
necessarily  continued  within  it.  Where  such  beginnings
are  to  be  found  we  cannot  beforehand  say  with  certainty  ;
but  if  experience  convinces  us  that  every  event  of  external
Xiiture  is  at  the  same  time  an  effect  having  its  cause  in  pre
ceding  facts,  it  still  remains  possible  that  the  cycle  of  inner
mental  life  does  not  consist  throughout  of  a  rigid  mechanism
working  necessarily,  but  that  along  witli  unlimited  freedom
of  will  it  also  possesses  a  limited  power  of  absolute  com
mencement.

§  G.  In  now  bringing  to  an  end  this  sketch,  in  which,  far
from  meaning  to  exhaust  the  fulness  of  mental  life,  we  have
sought  merely  to  indicate  the  main  outlines  of  its  internal  con
nection,  we  would  fain  dwell  on  one  point  as  the  chief  result  of
our  considerations — namely,  the  conviction  we  have  gained
of  the  pervading  difference  separating  the  constitution  of  the
inner  life  from  the  peculiar  course  of  external  Xature.  Not
only  are  its  elements  different  from  those  of  Nature, — con
sciousness,  feeling,  and  will  having  no  resemblance  to  the  states
which  observation  either  shows  us  or  compels  us  to  infer  in
material  bodies  ;  but  further,  the  modes  of  energy,  those  mani
festations  of  a  power  to  combine  the  manifold  according  to
relations,  with  whose  value  we  have  become  acquainted,  have

262  BOOK  II. CIIArTER  Y.

in  them  nothing  analogous  to  the  reciprocal  actions  which  we
can  trace  going  on  between  the  former.  However  much  we
may  have  become  used,  from  the  much  higher  point  to  which
the  physical  sciences  have  been  cultivated,  to  look  on  their
fundamental  conceptions  as  universally  applicable  means  of
investigation,  we  must  nevertheless  acknowledge  that  we
have  here  entered  on  a  new  and  wholly  different  sphere,
whose  peculiar  nature  requires  us  to  accustom  ourselves  to
new  and  special  points  of  view.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to
suppose  this  demand  to  be  made  in  opposition  merely  to
Materialism,  which,  denying  as  it  does  the  independent  nature
of  the  mental  being,  must  also  in  consistency  decline  the
obligation  to  seek  new  modes  of  considering  a  subject  which
it  does  not  recognise  to  be  new ;  the  tendency  with  which  we
find  fault  extends  far  more  widely,  even  among  those  who,
like  us,  base  their  views  on  the  independent  origin  of  spirit.
We  are  so  used  in  Nature  to  indirect  effects  and  to  their
being  explained  by  the  consideration  of  single  constituents,  so
used  to  find  momentous  differences  in  properties  traced  back
to  trifling  alterations  in  the  amount  and  mode  of  combination
of  homogeneous  elements,  that  ftt  last  we  lose  all  understand
ing  of  anything  immediate,  and  unconsciously  become  possessed
by  a  passion  for  construing  everything,  assigning  to  every
thing  a  complicated  machinery  as  the  means  of  its  origination
and  operation.  We  would  then  fain  assert  that  even  within
us  there  is  nothing  but  an  exterior  concatenation  of  events,
resembling  the  communication  of  movement  by  which,  in  the
outer  world,  we  see  one  element  come  into  collision  with
another  ;  and  all  else  that  we  find  within  —  consciousness,
feeling,  and  effort — we  would  be  almost  tempted  to  regard  as
only  a  kind  of  accidental  reflection  in  us  of  that  real  action,
unless  indeed  we  see  that  there  must  be  something  for
which  and  in  which  this  reflection  arises.  That  something
there  is  ;  every  several  expression  of  our  consciousness,  every
stirring  of  our  feelings,  every  dawning  resolution,  calls  aloud
that  processes,  not  to  be  measured  by  the  standard  of
physical  notions,  do  indeed  take  place,  with  unconquerable  and

OF  THE  FEELINGS,  SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS,  AND  THE  WILL. 263

undeniable  reality.  So  long  as  we  have  this  experience,
Materialism  may  prolong  its  existence  and  celebrate  its
triumphs  within  the  schools,  where  so  many  ideas  estranged
from  life  find  shelter,  but  its  own  professors  will  belie  their  false
creed  in  their  living  action.  For  they  will  all  continue  to
love  and  hate,  to  hope  and  fear,  to  dream  and  study,  and
they  will  in  vain  seek  to  persuade  us  that  this  varied  exercise
of  mental  energies,  which  even  deliberate  denial  of  the  super
sensible  cannot  destroy,  is  a  product  of  their  bodily  organiza
tion,  or  that  the  love  of  truth  exhibited  by  some,  the  sensitive
vanity  betrayed  by  others,  lias  its  origin  in  their  cerebral
fibres.  Among  all  the  errors  of  the  human  mind  it  has
always  seemed  to  me  the  strangest  that  it  could  come  to
doubt  its  own  existence,  of  which  alone  it  has  direct  experi
ence,  or  to  take  it  at  second  hand  as  the  product  of  an
external  Xature  which  we  know  only  indirectly,  onlv  by
means  of  the  knowledge  of  the  very  mind  to  which  we  would
fain  deny  exi^tuiic'd.

130  OK III.

LIFE.

CHAPTER  I.

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.

Different  Stages  of  Apprehension  of  the  World  ;  True  and  Derivative  Stand
points—The  Universal  Bond  between  Mind  and  Matter — Possibility  and
Incxplieableness  of  Reciprocal  Action  between  the  Homogeneous  and  the
Heterogeneous  —  How  Sensations  arise  —  Guidance  of  Movements — Influ
ence  of  the  Soul  on  Bodily  Form.

§  1.  rill IK  study  of  mental  life  has  led  us  into  paths  far
JL  removed  from  those  along  which  the  explanation
of  natural  phenomena  is  wont  to  move.  But  the  greater  the
peculiarity  of  psychic  life — so  great  that  it  requires  the  most
thoughtless  familiarity  with  the  forms  of  the  material  world
to  find  conceivable  the  idea  that  that  life  originated  in  the
reciprocal  action  of  material  substances — the  more  forcibly
do  there  now  press  forward  the  laboriously  held  back  questions
in  regard  to  the  possibility  of  the  mutual  influence  which  we
everywhere  find  the  two  so  sharply  separated  spheres  of  action
exercising  on  one  another.  How  great  and  weighty  is  the
moulding  power  over  the  amount  and  direction  of  the
intellectual  activity  exerted  in  each  individual  by  changes
of  bodily  temperament,  everyday  experience  is  sufficient  to
convince  us,  without  further  discussion  being  needful ;  that
experience,  I  mean,  which  still  remains  after  we  have  made
allowance  for  the  thoughtless  exaggeration  with  which  many
thinkers  in  our  day — as  if  they  had  lost  all  remembrance  ot
self-control  and  self-denial — assure  us  that  they  can  find  in
the  energies  of  mental  life  nothing  else  than  an  exact  repeti
tion  of  physical  processes.  How  much,  on  the  other  hand,
all  higher  culture  depends  on  the  countless  reciprocal  actions
(all  ultimately  performed  by  means  of  corporeal  needs  and
activities)  going  on  between  us  and  the  outer  world,  and

267

2G8  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

how  powerfully  environing  Nature,  now  through  slight
encouragement,  now  through  capricious  refusal,  encourages
or  hinders  new  developments  of  our  powers  :  of  this  every
age  has  furnished  convincing  examples,  yet  this  dependence
has  come  home  most  clearly  and  strongly  to  the  thought
of  the  present  age.  Whether  this  puts  us  on  the  whole
in  a  better  position  than  former  generations,  whether  this
conscious  utilizing  of  the  outer  world  for  the  advance
of  the  general  wellbeing  to  an  extent  that  can  only  be
called  grand,  will  leave  intact  a  feeling  for  the  noble  ends
for  which  all  this  externality  of  culture  is  recommended  as
means,  we  must  leave  it  to  the  future  to  determine  ;  as
yet  certainly  the  hurry  of  this  advance  has  not  been  able
to  stifle  the  interest  in  the  serious  problems  ever  meeting
us  anew  in  regard  to  the  connection  in  the  universe
between  the  spiritual  order  and  the  course  of  Nature,  and
in  miniature  as  to  the  mode  in  which  our  individual  soul
is  related  to  its  corporeal  envelope.

But  the  more  manifold  the  interests  by  which  our  outer
life  is  stirred — and  we  have  to  collect  ourselves  from  their
tumult  ere  resuming  consideration  of  these  problems — the
more  diverse  are  also  the  cravings  after  enlightenment  and
the  tacit  expectations  with  which  we  set  about  its  investi
gation,  and  the  more  numerous  the  secret  germs  of  miscon
ception  threatening  later,  with  increasing  force,  to  perplex
our  efforts  with  the  contradictory  insistence  of  their  claims.
It  will  be  hard  for  any  theory  to  satisfy  all  these  demands
of  the  mind,  uncertain  of  themselves  as  they  so  often  are ;
hardest  when,  without  separating  the  problems,  an  attempt
is  made  to  attain  at  once  all  the  various  ends  that  can  be
proposed  for  any  scientific  discussion.

For  our  wishes  may  be  directed  either  towards  the  com
prehension  of  phamomena  and  the  entering  into  their  essential
meaning,  or  towards  such  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  their
external  modes  of  connection  as  shall  enable  us  to  calculate
the  effect  exercised  by  each  one  on  every  other ;  but  the
complete  fusion  into  indivisible  unity  of  the  two  lines  of

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  2G9

our  inquiry  seems  to  be  forbidden  by  more  than  one  im
perfection  of  human  nature.  To  go  back  to  the  ultimate
and  deepest  elements  in  the  being  of  things,  and  to  explain
everything  that  perplexes  us  in  phenomena  from  the  supreme
laws  of  action  in  the  universe  and  from  the  rational
nature  of  the  design  that  combines  particular  events  into
the  order  of  a  significant  whole  :  this  ideal  task  wo  wish
neither  to  depreciate  in  the  eyes  of  those  enthusiastic
aspirants  who  with  undamped  ardour  are  ever  anew  resum
ing  it,  nor  are  we  willing  to  concede  to  those  who  turn
from  it  with  contempt  that  it  is  of  less  importance  than
it  is.  Nevertheless  we  must  acknowledge  that  this  absorp
tion  in  the  highest  has  seldom  been  the  source  of  an
accurate  knowledge  of  the  lower  ;  while  it  yielded  the  mind
the  peculiar  satisfaction  of  .secure  repose  in  the  universal
source  of  things,  it  did  not  at  the  same  time  heighten  the
acute  agility  with  whirl i  the  intellect  (constrained  to  make
itself  familiar  with  the  connection  of  the  iinite  world
in  order  to  fulfil  the  requirements  of  practical  life)  has  so
great  an  interest  in  searching  out  how  the  individual  proceeds
from  the  individual.  "Where  speculative  problems  come  to
have  also  practical  end>,  where  what  we  aim  at  is  not
merely  to  understand  and  admire  the  sequence  of  events,  but
to  be  able  to  interfere  with  and  direct  it,  there  insight  into
the  ultimate  and  universal  reasons  of  things  falls  in  value
below  acquaintance  with  the  immediate  rules  of  the  special
department  in  which  we  may  have  to  act.  Xow  it  is  easy
to  pass  from  the  study  of  the  particular  to  that  of  the  uni
versal  and  higher  that  spreads  above  it,  but  it  is  more  diflicult
for  us  to  find  the  way  back  from  the  indefiniteness  of  the  uni
versal  into  all  the  complicated  details  of  the  concrete  which
it  is  our  business  to  master.  We  do  not  therefore  see  this
patli  taken  by  the  sciences  to  which  we  as  yet  owe  the  most
abiding  and  fruitful  extensions  of  knowledge  ;  they  do  not
start  from  the  points  which  even  subsequent  and  deliberate
reflection  would  have  to  allow  to  be  the  deepest  certain  foun
dations  of  all  reasoning,  the  inherent  and  essential  truth  of

270  BOOK  III. CIIAFIEli  I.

things.  They  rather  leave  much  undetermined,  many  open
questions,  above  all  the  final  vindication  of  the  principles
which  they  borrow  from  the  careful  analysis  of  experience  as
supports  for  the  further  advance  of  their  explanations,  which
are  well  accredited,  though  obscure  in  their  origin  ;  ever  bent
on  achieving  a  secure  and  extended  dominion  over  the  concrete,
they  may  seem  to  contemplative  minds  to  have  less  head,
but  certainly  they  hnvtj  better  hands  and  feet,  than  the
upholders  of  higher  views  of  things,  who  come  towards
them  from  the  other  side,  generally  with  impracticable
claims,  always  very  lavish  of  requirements,  yet  themselves
yielding  nothing.  We  perhaps  sometimes  succeed,  with  due
attention  to  all  the  conditions  of  a  physical  event,  in  finding
a  formula  that  completely  states  the  law  by  which  it  is
regulated ;  but  the  equation  thus  obtained  wo  perhaps
cannot  solve,  and  the  truth  which  we  possess  in  it  remains
a  useless  locked-up  treasure.  In  such  cases  science  is  con
tent  to  stop  short,  and,  leaving  out  of  its  investigation
some  of  the  conditions  influencing  the  causation  of  the  pheno
menon  only  slightly,  but  mainly  causing  the  complication  of
the  formula,  to  draw  from  the  simplified  and  now  explicable
equation  inferences  that  are  only  proximately  correct,  but,
because  they  can  be  obtained,  more  useful  than  absolutely  correct
ones  that  cannot  be  had.  In  like  manner,  we  may  perhaps
attain  to  a  credible  explanation  in  regard  to  the  highest  ends
of  the  universe ;  but  past  attempts  have  made  us  familiar
with  the  disappointing  result  of  finding  that  from  these  sub
lime  problems  we  can  get  very  little  light  on  the  complex
course  of  events  by  which  Nature  works  them  out,  and  yet  the
practical  inducements  to  our  inquiries  lie  mostly  in  this  field,
the  laws  governing  which  do  not  refuse  to  disclose  themselves
to  a  less  ambitious  train  of  thought.

Now  to  this  natural  preference  for  things  that  are  attain
able  there  is  in  our  case  added  a  further  consideration,  which
persuades  us  to  divide  the  problem  lying  before  us.  The
further  we  go  from  the  facts  given,  in  order  by  a  generalizing
comparison  to  find  the  fundamental  axioms  that  will  again

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  271

lead  us  back  to  them,  the  more  numerous  must  the  possible
sources  of  error  become ;  their  number  increases  with  that
of  the  intermediate  links  of  the  reasoning  by  which  we
connect  the  data  with  the  ultimate  generalization  of  which
we  are  in  search.  Hence,  by  nothing  but  by  a  fatal  con
fidence  in  its  own  infallibility  can  science  be  led  so  far  astray
as  to  attach  its  knowledge  of  complex  series  of  phenomena
by  preference  to  the  fewest  possible  axioms,  or  to  the
slender  thread  of  a  single  principle,  which  causes  the  whole  to
fall  if  it  gives  way.  Its  labour  will  be  more  wisely  directed
if,  instead  of  raising  its  structure  on  the  sharp  e<lge  of  a
single  fundamental  view,  and  performing  the  marvellous  feat
of  achieving  the  greatest  possible  instability  by  the  most
recondite  means,  it  looks  out  for  the  broadest  basis  on  which
to  build,  and,  first  of  all,  starting  modestly,  traces  the  given
fuels  to  the  proximate  grounds  of  explanation  required  by
their  distinctly  recognisable  peculiarities.  It  will  reserve
to  Uriel f  the  right  of  making  these  preliminary  results  matter
of  a  more  advanced  inquiry ;  but,  remembering  how  at  this
elevation  .sharpness  of  outline  in  the  subjects  of  our  scrutiny,
and  withal  trustworthiness  in  our  judgment  gradually
diminish,  it  will  at  once  allow  the  possibility,  and  lessen  the
mischievousness  of  error.  For  it  will  be  open  to  science  to  quit
again  those  higher  spheres  which,  with  its  insuflicient  means,
it  believed  it  had  already  conquered,  and  to  retreat  to  that
lower  but  secure  vantage-point,  whence  the  view,  though
nut  the  loftiest  possible,  still  remains  that  of  truth  and
reality.

1'inally,  even  if  we  believed  we  could  unerringly  tread  tin*
path  to  the  highest  summit,  we  would  yet  have  reasons  for
seldom  entering  on  it.  For,  in  order  to  reach  the  highest
point,  we  would  be  compelled  to  renounce  many  of  those
ways  of  looking  at  things  on  whose  application  depend  all
clearness  and  vividness  in  our  daily  intercourse  with  tho
world.  Now,  as  surely  as  we  must  resolutely  carry  out  this
renunciation  of  the  correctness  of  the  illusion  with  which
we  have  become  so  familiar,  so  surely  must  we,  on  our

272  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

return  from  the  most  elevated  point  of  view  to  the  level  of
the  surrounding  finite  world,  resume  once  more  the  language
of  illusion.  We  gain  clearness  and  insight  not  by  giving  up
in  every  case  the  wonted  forms  of  human  conception,  to  put
in  their  stead  the  language  of  a  higher  truth,  but  by  once  for
all  going  back  to  the  source  of  things,  and  thence  making
ourselves  acquainted  with  the  limits  within  which  we  may
without  error  apply  these  wonted  forms  of  conception  as
handy  instruments  of  knowledge,  as  proximate  and  manage
able  abbreviations  of  the  true  statement.  To  carry  directly
into  special  and  single  investigations  the  highest  principles —
those  of  all  ultimate  determination — can  lead  to  no  advan
tage,  only  to  the  mischief  of  a  disquieting  lack  of  clearness  ;
no  one  can  at  one  moment  keep  in  view  the  whole  series  of
further  conditions,  and  yet  it  is  only  by  means  of  these  that
the  highest  principles  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  case  in
point.  Though  astronomy  has  established  the  fact  that  the
sun  stands  still  and  the  earth  moves,  yet  in  our  daily  speech
we  avoid  the  absurdity  of  making  a  cumbrous  statement  of  the
real  state  of  things,  instead  of  speaking  of  the  sun's  rising
and  setting ;  though  the  greater  or  less  power  of  bodies  to
resume  their  altered  form  depends  on  the  forces  by  which
the  infinitesimal  particles  act  on  each  other,  we  do  not  on
every  occasion  pause  to  calculate  these,  but  rejoice  to  possess
in  the  notion  of  elasticity  and  in  its  laws  as  discovered  by
experience,  means  at  hand  for  a  more  convenient  mode  of
expression  ;  lastly,  though  eveiy  change  by  which  our  food
is  made  more  tempting  to  the  appetite  undoubtedly  depends
on  universal  chemical  laws,  we  do  not  wait  until  these  are
discovered, — nay,  even  then  gastronomy  will  probably  prefer,
as  guarantees  of  success,  the  maxims  of  experience  to  the
precepts  of  science.  The  scant  inclination  hitherto  shown
by  the  higher  inquirers  to  convert  the  treasure  of  their
perhaps  inestimable  results  into  the  current  small  coin  of
thoughts  that  can  be  retained  in  memory,  and  useful  abbrevia
tions,  has  not  only  cut  them  off  from  general  sympathy,  but
contributed  to  their  own  want  of  clearness.  It  is  no  perfect

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  273

state  of  society  in  which  the  decision  of  every  trifling
question,  directions  for  the  management  of  the  most  petty
affairs,  must  be  given  by  the  supreme  tribunal ;  and  as  there
a  smoothly  working  mechanism  of  administration  is  subor
dinated  to  the  powers  of  legislation  and  government,  so  too
science  needs  a  gradation  of  points  of  view,  and,  while  it
must  be  possible  to  refer  unsatisfactory  decisions  from  the
lower  to  the  higher  for  farther  explanation,  seekers  after  law
must  not  in  every  case  be  compelled  to  travel  the  long  road
that  leads  to  the  ultimate  ground  of  things.

§  2.  No  question  is  to  be  more  confidently  expected
than  the  general  one  concerning  the  bond  between  body
and  soul  ;  it  is  commonly  the  first  put  in  this  branch  of
inquiry,  and  to  it  from  later  stages  men  return,  as  with  a
long-drawn  breath,  when,  dissatisfied  with  all  more  restricted
modes  of  expression,  they  think  to  sum  up  in  it  the
whole  difficulty  of  the  subject.  And  yet  hardly  anything
can  be  more  prejudicial  than  the  misunderstanding  involved
in  this  conception  of  the  question.  For  what  else  is  a
bond  than  a  means  of  externally  connecting  two  things
which  do  not  of  themselves  cohere,  and,  from  having  no
inherent  relation  to  one  another,  are  not  disposed  to  exert
any  reciprocal  action  ?  And,  supposing  we  had  been  able
to  discover  this  universal — nay,  this  single — bond  between
body  and  soul,  what  craving  would  we  have  really
satisfied  ?  None  of  the  numberless  reactions  which  we
see  going  on  between  the  two  would  be  in  form  and
character  one  whit  more  intelligible  with  this  external
collocation  than  without  it ;  nay,  even  the  possibility  of  any
mutual  influence  we  should  still  have  to  try  and  under
stand  from  the  nature  of  the  things  bound,  by  a  fresh  course
of  inquiry,  since  we  should  fail  to  do  so  from  the  indefinite
idea  of  the  bond.  Besides,  by  what  new  means  of  cohesion
are  the  constituents  of  every  bond  themselves  held  together,
so  that  they  an;  able  to  unite  other  things?  However  i'ai
into  detail  we  may  carry  the  resource  of  a  constantly  renewed
cement,  we  shall  in  the  end  have  to  confess  that  the  ultimate

VOL.  i.  s

274  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

elements  are  not  rendered  capable  of  reciprocal  action  by
any  pre-existing  bond,  but  that  the  reciprocal  action  is  itself
what  holds  them  together,  and  fits  them  to  bind  together  other
things,  the  mutual  affinities  of  which  are  too  weak  to  unite
them  in  the  face  of  opposing  obstacles.

But, nevertheless,  does  not  the  demand  to  exhibit  this  common
bond  mean  the  justifiable  requirement  of  a  condition  that
must  first  be  there  before  the  reciprocal  action  can  be  realized?
Does  not  the  vessel  containing  two  chemical  substances  act
as  a  bond  to  force  them  into  mutual  contact,  and  thereby
give  them  an  opportunity  of  exerting  the  influences,  the  pre
cise  nature  and  amount  of  which  are  of  course  determined  by
their  own  mutual  affinities  ?  Certainly  the  elements  whose
reciprocal  relations  have  not  sufficient  force  to  make  them
seek  one  another,  need  a  guiding  hand  to  bring  them  together;
but  after  they  are  together,  they  are  kept  so  neither  by  the
hand  nor  by  the  vessel,  but  by  their  own  reciprocal  action,
and  often  with  a  force  greater  than  could  have  been  imparted
by  any  external  bond.  And  so — to  drop  the  simile — it  is  a
question  deserving  attention  in  what  manner  body  and  soul
were  united  in  the  first  formation  of  life ;  but  we  cannot
seek  a  permanent  bond  between  body  and  soul  different  from
the  vital  reciprocal  action  of  both,  in  the  fully-formed  and
self-maintaining  life — the  explanation  of  which  is  of  neces
sity  our  primary  object,  as  only  from  the  knowledge  of  its
constitution  can  we  form  conjectures  as  to  its  origin.  This
would  be  an  idea  alike  superfluous  and  contemptible  —  as
superfluous  as  it  would  be  to  insist  on  regarding  the  bond
of  friendship  between  two  individuals  as  a  particular  and
visible  tie,  while  it  is  the  friendship  itself  that  forms
the  bond ;  contemptible,  because  this  would  indeed  be
to  link  soul  and  body  together  in  wholly  external
fashion,  without  regard  to  the  fact  that  not  by  one  form
less  bond,  but  by  a  fine-spun  tissue  of  numberless
relations,  are  both  most  admirably  fitted  to  work  on  each
other's  states  and  needs.  For  each  action  and  re-action
passing  between  them  is  a  fibre  of  that  which  forms  their

TIIE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  275

mutual  bond,  and  the  scorn  so  often  cast  on  the  view  of
human  nature  as  composed  of  soul  and  body,  on  account
of  its  deriving  our  being  from  the  addition  of  two  constituent
pails,  is  a  mere  mistaken  transference  of  this  miserable  idea
of  one  universal  bond  to  the  unlimited  variety  of  organized
reciprocal  action.  Let  us  then  set  aside  this  vain  theory,
alike  as  in  its  coarser  form  it  seeks  some  material  cement,
perhaps  of  the  nature  of  an  ethereal  matter,  that  may  make
body  and  soul  adhere,  and  as  in  more  refined,  yet  not  more
trustworthy  shape,  it  makes  the  soul  itself  the  intermediate
link  between  body  and  mind,  and  thereby  but  adds  to  the
number  of  elements  which  it  would  fain  join  into  one.

§  3.  I  Jut  are  not  these  reciprocal  actions  themselves  most
incomprehensible,  or  is  there  any  means  of  forming  an  idea
how  impressions  pass  from  the  body  to  the  soul  and  are
sent  back  from  the  latter  ?  In  this  question  also  lurks  much
misunderstanding,  in  fact  it  is  but  a  new  form  of  expression
for  the  false  idea  underlying  the  last.  This  reciprocal  action
is  certainly  inexplicable,  but  it  is  not  among  those  processes
whose  reality  we  may  doubt  on  account  of  their  incxplic-
ability,  because  they  ought  to  be  explained  by  laws  known  to
us ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  itself  the  notion  of  that  simple  and
primitive  procedure  to  which  all  explanation  of  composite
occurrences  takes  us  back,  and  which  now,  by  a  confusion  of
ideas,  we  would  fain  rest  upon  its  own  results.  Or  do  we  in
that  question  seek  something  other  than  a  minute  and  vivid
description  of  the  arms  which  the  soul  aggressively  extends
into  the  body,  of  the  material  organs  by  which  the  body  con
veys  to  it  impressions  made  upon  itself,  in  short,  of  the  whole
machinery  by  which — here  as  in  other  cases  of  reciprocal
action  which  we  think  we  know  more  accurately — the  com
munication  of  influence  from  the  one  side  to  the  other  takes
place  ?

On  impartial  self-scrutiny,  wo  cannot  deny  that  in  our
speculations  as  to  the  universe,  curiosity  very  often  usurps
the  place  of  genuine  desire  of  knowledge,  and  that  the  ample
satisfaction  afforded  to  the  one  by  the  entertaining  variety  of

276  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

a  succession  of  images  but  too  often  makes  us  forget  how
wholly  unquenched  is  the  other.  We  are  apt  to  estimate
the  thoroughness  of  our  insight  according  to  the  number  of
details  which  in  any  investigation  we  have  mastered  ;  the
more  internal  mechanism,  the  more  intricacy  our  analyzing
study  finds  in  any  object,  the  more  completely  do  we  believe
ourselves  to  understand  its  nature  and  manner  of  working.
We  do  not  reflect  that  this  multitude  of  connected  parts  but
increases  the  extent  of  that  which  we  have  to  explain,  and
that  every  new  link  shown  to  intervene  between  the  first  cause
and  the  last  effect,  instead  of  solving,  only  renders  more  com
plicated  the  enigma,  how  reciprocal  action  is  possible  between
different  elements.  If  we  have  studied  the  details  of  a
machine,  whose  mode  of  working  was  to  us  at  first  wholly
inexplicable,  and  seen  where  each  wheel  works  into  the  other,
and  transfers  its  own  movements  in  fixed  directions  to  other
parts,  we  think  we  have  solved  all  problems.  And  yet  we
have  not  gained  the  slightest  knowledge  of  the  manner  or
of  the  internal  processes  by  which  the  working  forces  here
produce  their  result ;  we  have  merely  analyzed  the  great  and
hidden  mystery  of  the  whole  machine  into  those  separate
mysteries  of  the  simple  operations  of  Nature,  in  respect  of
which  we  have  once  for  all  made  up  our  minds  to  consider
them  clear,  though  all  closer  scrutiny  shows  them  to  be
wrapped  in  the  darkness  of  complete  incomprehensibility.

For  all  mechanical  working  presupposes  the  transferability
of  motion  and  the  solid  construction  and  connection  of  the
masses  from  one  to  another  of  which  motion  is  to  be  conveyed.
Now,  which  of  these  two  conditions  do  we  understand  ?  Can
we  state  what  takes  place  when  motion  is  transferred,  and
what  is  the  commencement  of  the  process  by  which  the
impelling  body  sets  the  other  in  motion  by  impact  or  pressure,
and  communicates  to  it  a  portion  of  its  own  velocity  ?  Or
is  it  clear  to  us  how  and  why  the  single  parts  of  a  driving-
wheel  so  adhere  together  that  the  blow  given  to  one  compels
the  others  to  move  along  with  it,  and  to  produce  the  circular
rotation  round  an  axis  which  is  again  applied  to  bring  about

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 277

new  and  useful  results  ?  "We  shall  perhaps  refer  to  the
operation  of  attractive  forces  by  which  particles  are  bound
into  a  whole.  But  wherein  consists  this  action  of  reciprocal
attraction,  and  how  is  it  brought  about  ?  How  do  these  forces
make  the  first  advance  beyond  the  limits  of  the  body  to
which  they  belong,  to  exert  over  another  and  a  foreign
body  such  a  power  that  it  must  yield  to  their  attraction  ?
We  are  not  afraid  of  hearing  once  more  of  a  bond  that  holds
together  sun  and  planets ;  the  question  that  would  imme
diately  arise,  how  this  bond  is  supposed  to  be  now  shortened,
now  lengthened,  will  be  evaded  by  the  frank  confession  that
we  are  here  in  presence  of  one  of  the  simple  actions,  by  com
pounding  which  we  may  indeed  elucidate  the  character  of
complex  effects,  but  which  themselves  are  made  no  more
intelligible  than  before  by  the  supposition  of  additional  acces
sory  mechanism.  Even  as  we  know  what  we  mean  when
we  say  that  anything  is,  but  never  shall  thoroughly  learn  how
existence  is  brought  about,  so  we  know  what  we  mean  when  we
L-peak  of  working,  but  never  shall  be  able  to  say  how  working
comes  to  pass.  Science  need  not  hope  to  do  more  than
accurately  to  search  out  the  conditions  under  which  this
uncomprehended  and  incomprehensible  working  originates ;
and  however  great  and  important  may  be  its  achievements
in  the  disentangling  and  analyzing  of  complicated  connections,
when  it  has  reached  the  simple  reciprocal  actions,  to  a  com
bination  of  which  it  reduces  every  manifold,  it  will  invariably
have  to  confess  that  the  proper  act  of  working  in  all  con
ceivable  cases  of  its  occurrence  remains  to  us  alike  inexplicable.
But  this  will  be  allowed  only  to  be  again  forgotten  as  soon
as  the  special  problem  of  the  reciprocal  action  between  body
and  soul  is  proposed.  Though  it  needs  but  little  study  of
physical  science  to  teach  us,  that  in  fact  all  forms  of  action
and  reaction  between  substance  and  substance  are  equally
obscure,  it  has  yet  become  a  habit  hardly  to  be  overcome  to
look  upon  the  mutual  influence  of  body  and  soul  as  a  par
ticular  and  exceptional  case,  in  which  unfortunately,  and
contrary  to  our  expectations,  that  will  not  become  cleai

278  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

which  in  every  example  of  merely  physical  action  is  perfectly
intelligible.  How  little  this  latter  is  the  case,  we  have
already  pointed  out ;  nevertheless  the  complaint  will  still  go
on,  for  in  the  case  in  question  the  impression  of  obscurity
is  heightened  by  the  entire  dissimilarity  of  the  members
that  have  to  act  on  one  another.  We  have  on  the  one
side  the  material  constituents  of  the  body,  on  the  other
the  immaterial  nature  of  the  soul.  How  is  it  possible
that  the  impact  and  pressure  of  masses,  or  their  chemical
attraction,  apparently  the  only  means  of  working  which
they  have,  can  make  any  impression  on  the  soul,  which,
like  an  unsubstantial  shadow,  offers  them  no  point  of  con
tact  ?  How,  on  the  other  hand,  can  the  soul's  command,  a
command  without  any  power  of  propulsion  for  its  realiza
tion,  move  masses,  that  would  only  obey  a  palpable  impetus  ?
We  can  only  conceive  homogeneous  things  acting  on  each
other.  But  on  closer  examination,  it  appears  that  this
demand  for  homogeneity  also  springs  from  the  error  of
supposing  that  propulsion,  pressure,  attraction,  and  repul
sion  or  chemical  affinity,  are  explaining  conditions  of  reciprocal
action,  instead  of  mere  forms  in  which  in  an  inexplicable
manner  the  action  takes  place.  The  complete  homogeneity
of  two  balls  does  not  in  itself  make  the  communication  of
their  motion  in  impact  more  intelligible  ;  it  only  has  for  our
perception  the  advantage  that  we  can  with  equal  distinctness
image  to  ourselves  the  two  reciprocally  acting  elements,  and
see  the  motion  in  space  by  which  they  approach  one  another ;
i.e.,  it  enables  us  to  form  an  image  of  what  is  there  before
any  reciprocal  action  takes  place,  but  it  does  not  throw  any
light  on  how  it  comes  to  take  place.  Now,  in  the  present
case,  of  course,  we  are  wholly  denied  the  advantage  ot
being  able  to  form  such  an  image.  We  should  be  consoled
if  we  could  see  the  soul  facing  matter,  ready  for  the  leap
by  which  it  is  to  make  its  inroad  on  the  latter's  domain,
or  extending  itself  so  as  to  receive  the  latter's  blow  ;  we
would  then  have  obtained  the  image  which  we  so  much
desire,  but  we  would  not  be  one  whit  nearer  comprehen-

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  279

sion  of  the  process.  Perhaps  the  subsequent  course  of
our  investigation  will  bring  us  to  a  point  of  view  at  which
the  heterogeneity  of  the  immaterial  soul  and  of  palpable
matter  will  have  disappeared  ;  but  even  should  it  not
disappear,  it  does  not — strictly  speaking — magnify  the  difli-
culty.  For  the  act  of  working,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  in
itself  palpable  to  the  senses,  can  require  no  other  homogeneity
uf  the  reciprocally  acting  members  than  such  as  is  amply
given  in  the  fact  that  the  soul,  as  a  real  substance  capable  of
acting  and  being  acted  on,  stands  over  against  the  material
atoms,  which  on  their  side  we  regard  as  positive  centres  of
exeunt  and  ineunt  actions.  Any  demand  for  still  closer
similarity  would  only  proceed  from  the  error  of  looking  ou
the  act  of  working  as  a  transference  of  perfected  states  from
one  element  to  another,  which  must  insist  on  the  similarity
or  homogeneity  of  both,  that  the  exeunt  state  may  at  its
entrance  into  a  fresh  element  iind  a  home  alike  in  size  and
form  to  that  which  it  has  quitted.

Lastly,  we  must  add,  there  are  not  reciprocal  actions  in
general,  even  as  there  was  no  connection  in  general.  Every
action  is  particular  and  fixed  in  form  and  amount,  and  we
have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  infinite  variety  of  effects
proceeds  exclusively  from  different  modes  of  combining  and
utilizing  one  and  the  same  kind  of  working.  If  this  is
so,  what  light  would  be  thrown  on  phenomena  by  our  having
somehow  explained  the  general  possibility  of  reciprocal  action
between  body  and  soul,  if  we  yet  could  not  thence  draw  the
reason  why,  under  different  circumstances,  sometimes  one,
sometimes  another,  particular  kind  of  action  must  take  place
between  the  two  ?  It  must  therefore  be  idle,  in  the  interest
of  science,  to  pursue  further  this  very  abstract  inquiry.  Science
has  to  acknowledge  and  assume  that  the  manner  in  which
working  is  in  general  possible  is  equally  inconceivable  in  all
cases  and  in  every  department  of  phenomena;  and  that  the
true  and  fruitful  field  of  investigation  lies  in  searching  under
what  definite  and  definable  conditions  equally  definite  and
definable  actions  universally  and  regularly  occur.  While

280  BOOK  in. CHAPTER  I.

giving  up  the  attempt  to  discover  bow  and  by  what  means
effects  are  produced  by  their  causes,  it  will  direct  its  atten
tion  to  the  other  and  more  useful  question — what  effects
proceed  from  what  causes.  Leaving  it  to  the  universal  and
regular  necessity  of  Nature,  whose  requirements  meet  with  no
resistance  needing  special  means  for  its  removal,  to  take  care
of  the  bringing  about  of  phenomena,  it  will  find  in  this
problem  an  equally  rich  and  fruitful  subject  of  inquiry,  such
as  astronomy  possesses  in  the  notion  of  universal  attraction,
of  whose  effectuation  it  knows  nothing,  but  from  which,  by
observation  of  the  manifold  circumstances  under  which  its
incomprehensible  working  may  take  place,  it  is  able  to  explain
•a  multitude  of  most  complex  phenomena.

This  theory  is  rightly  designated  by  the  name  of  Occa
sionalism,  but  it  is  wrong  to  give  this  name  as  one  of
reproach.  It  is  thus  that  we  designate  a  doctrine  on
which  all  that  we  naturally  regard  as  the  productive  cause
of  an  effect  is  merely  the  occasion  on  which  —  how  we
know  not  —  this  effect  appears.  Now  we  would  fain  bring
home  the  thought  that  our  knowledge  of  Nature  is  at
best  but  an  accurate  study  of  the  occasions  on  which — by
means  of  a  mechanism  whose  inner  moving  springs  we  do
not  understand — phenomena  are  manifested,  each  attached
by  universal  laws  to  an  occasion  belonging  exclusively  to
itself,  and  each  with  an  equally  constant  regularity  changing
with  a  change  in  that  occasion.  Our  position  is  not  one
outside  the  sphere  of  physical  conceptions,  when  we  regard
the  reciprocal  action  between  soul  and  body  from  this  point
of  view — we  merely  consistently  extend  to  this  new  relation
the  usages  of  physical  science.  Nay,  the  clear  apprehension
that  even  our  knowledge  concerning  physical  events  is  not
essentially  more  profound,  will  allow  us  again  to  apply  without
fear  of  error  those  intuitions  of  daily  experience  whose  absence
in  this  inquiry  we  before  regretted.

Why,  indeed,  should  we  shun  speaking  of  the  impact  and
pressure  of  masses  on  the  soul,  of  their  mutual  attraction  and
repulsion,  if  these  terms,  though  explaining  nothing,  yet  serve

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  281

to  convey  our  conceptions  of  the  relation  in  question  in  a
short,  convenient,  and  easily  apprehended  form  ?  "What  we
primarily  in  daily  life  understand  by  these  words,  is  the
external  forms  assumed  by  the  reciprocal  working  of  large
and  compound  bodies.  Here  the  bodies  seem  to  us  to  work
through  propulsion,  through  pressure.  But  if  we  go  back  to
the  simple  atoms  forming  the  structure  of  these  bodies,  we
meet,  as  it  were  inside  the  sphere  of  physical  intuitions,
with  the  idea  of  great  intervals,  by  which,  even  in  the
densest  mass,  the  infinitesimal  particles  are  separated,  and
whose  amount  can,  indeed,  by  the  application  of  various
forces  be  diminished,  but  never  be  annihilated  to  such
an  extent  that  the  atoms  should  touch  one  another.  In
that  case  the  impact  of  two  atoms  would  have  to  be
differently  conceived.  Before  contact  took  place,  the
approach  of  the  one  would  awaken  or  increase  in  the
other  a  repelling  force,  and  the  effect  that  would  follow,  and
that  formerly  appeared  to  us  to  proceed  from  the  material
it-bound  of  the  collision,  as  a  means  of  its  accomplishment,
would,  in  fact,  result  from  a  mutual  influence  of  the  elements,
for  whose  realization  we  are  utterly  unable  to  point  to  any
farther  machinery.  The  phenomenon  of  collision  would  be
merely  the  result  of  an  internal  direct  understanding  of  things
among  themselves,  in  virtue  of  which  they  make  their  states
act  on  one  another  according  to  universal  laws.  Why  then
should  not  an  atom  of  the  nervous  system  equally  be  able  to
exert  impact  and  pressure  on  the  soul,  or  the  soul  on  it,  seeing
that  closer  scrutiny  discovers  ordinary  impact  and  pressure  to
be  not  a  means  to  the  effect,  but  only  the  perceptible  form;
of  a  far  more  subtle  process  between  the  elements  ?

§  4.  But  without  attaching  too  much  importance  to  the
recover}-  of  these  terms,  we  will  rather  make  clear  the
first  general  effect  which  our  view  has  on  the  treatment
of  the  several  questions.  We  have  just  spoken  of  the
.strange  prejudice  according  to  which  the  process  of  working
is  the  transference  of  the  complete  states  of  one  element
to  another.  How  little,  on  such  an  assumption,  the  variety

282  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

of  results  can  be  explained  which  are  produced  by  one
stimulus  in  different  objects  on  which  it  acts,  we  need
say  no  more  to  prove ;  if  its  action  consisted  merely  in  the
radiation  of  a  perfected  state,  received  as  such  by  the
objects,  the  response  to  it  could  also  be  nothing  else  than
an  echo  of  absolutely  identical  sound  in  as  many  voices  as
there  were  objects  susceptible  to  the  impression.  lor  sup
posing  that  from  the  acting  point  but  one  motion  extends,
corresponding  to  it  and  its  condition,  the  result  which  that
will  produce  must  evidently  be  different,  according  to  the
difference  of  the  beings  whom  it  reaches.  The  view  to  which
we  have  resolved  to  adhere  does  not  expose  us  to  this  error;
on  the  contrary,  it  leads  us  directly  to  regard  every  external
influence  that  passes  from  any  one  element  to  any  other  as
an  exciting  stimulus,  that  does  not  transfer  to  the  second  an
already  existing  and  foreign  state,  but  only  awakens  in  it
what  already  existed  potentially  in  its  own  nature.  The
wooden  notes  of  the  musical  instrument  do  not  themselves
contain  the  tones  which  when  struck  they  draw  forth  from  the
chords,  it  is  only  the  tension  of  the  latter  that  by  means  of
this  propulsion  can  pass  into  tone-producing  vibrations.  In
like  manner  all  bodily  impressions  are  for  the  soul  but  strokes,
drawing  forth  from  its  own  nature  the  internal  phenomena
of  sensation,  that  never  can  be  communicated  to  it  from
without.  For  even  if  it  were  not  the  motion  of  the  notes,
but  a  veritable  wave  of  sound,  that  brought  the  tone  from  the
chord,  yet  that  could  only  reproduce  the  tone  by  its  own  tension,
no  matter  whether  what  set  it  in  vibration  were  a  process
similar  or  dissimilar  to  that  wave.  The  case  would  not  be
different  if  we  chose  anyhow  to  look  on  sensation  as  a  state
already  existing  in  the  nerves ;  it  would  still  have  to  originate
afresh  in  the  soul  through  some  excitation  conveyed  to  it  by
the  sensory  nerve,  and  it  could  never  arise  through  external
impressions,  were  its  own  nature  not  in  itself  capable  of
evolving  this  peculiar  form  of  internal  action.  Accordingly,
every  theory  that  takes  for  granted  that  what  is  to  be  mani-
i'ested  in  the  soul  already  exists  outside  of  it,  is  yet  forced  to

Till:  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  283

come  back  to  this  conception,  and  to  view  the  external  as  merely
an  occasion,  and  the  inner  event,  on  the  other  hand,  as  pro
ceeding  from  the  nature  of  that  in  which  it  takes  place.  The
necessity  of  this  fresh  origination  can  as  little  be  avoided  by  this
assumption,  as  that  of  reproductive  spontaneous  activity  in  any
mind,  if  the  knowledge  of  a  truth  or  the  glow  of  a  feeling  is
to  pass  from  another  to  it.  Hence,  however  various  be  the
modes  in  which  the  influences  of  the  corporeal  life  determine
the  development  of  the  mental,  they  yet  convey  neither  con
sciousness  in  general  nor  any  particular  sensation  or  thought
to  the  soul  ready-made,  as  the  already  gained  result  of  bodily
processes ;  these  influences  are  all  simply  signals  for  the  soul  to
evolve  definite  internal  states  from  its  own  essential  nature,
and  according  to  unalterable  laws;  but  the  delicate  organiza
tion  that  makes  it  possible  for  the  body  to  transmit  these
signals  in  a  definite  grouping  and  sequence,  answering  to  the
actual  relations  of  tilings,  also  guides  the  soul  to  an  alterna
tion  and  association  of  its  sensations,  in  which  it  attains
all  the  truth  possible  through  the  mere  apprehension  of
given  facts  without  reflective  elaboration  of  their  internal
connection.

Now,  us  the  whole  world  of  sensation  is  an  internal
development,  not  brought  in  from  without,  but  merely
awakened  in  the  unity  of  the  thinking  being  by  the
multitude  of  extraneous  impressions,  so  also  are  the  various
corporeal  movements  taking  place  at  the  bidding  of  the
soul  an  evolution  of  effective  relations,  grounded  in  the
bodily  organization,  called  forth  indeed  by  the  soul's  internal
states,  but  not  transferred  by  it  ready-made  to  the  organs
of  the  bod}'.  Of  the  external  stimuli  that  produce  a  sensa
tion,  our  immediate  consciousness  knows  neither  their  nature
nor  the  means  by  which  the  impression  on  us  is  effected  ;
only  science  after  efforts  long  fruitless  has  made  fully  clear
the  peculiarities  of  the  waves  of  light  and  sound  to  which
we  owe  tones  and  colours.  Yet  even  here,  of  the  processes
initiated  in  our  nervous  system  by  these  stimuli,  which  are
the  immediate  causes  of  our  sensation,  we  know  nothing

284  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

and  hitherto  not  even  physiological  investigation  has  made  us
acquainted  with  them  ;  nothing  comes  into  our  conscious
ness  but  the  close  of  all  these  processes, — the  sensation  of
tone  or  colour  itself.  Little  does  the  soul  understand  the
history  of  the  evolution  of  its  ideas;  it  does  not  create
them  with  a  free  and  elective  energy,  conscious  of  what  it
does,  but  under  the  constraint  of  a  universal  and  binding  law
of  Nature  it  is  compelled,  as  a  being  constituted  as  it  is,  to
respond  to  one  impression  with  this,  to  another  with  that
particular  sensation.  Just  as  little  does  the  soul  know  and
understand  of  the  reality,  the  situation,  the  connection,  and
the  efficiency  of  the  organs  by  means  of  which  it  executes  its
movements  ;  it  soon,  indeed,  becomes  familiar  with  the  ex
ternal  form  of  the  moveable  members,  but  not  immediately,
and  then  only  with  the  aid  of  science,  and  after  all
imperfectly,  does  it  learn  the  internal  arrangement  of  the
muscles  and  nerves  by  which  they  are  moved.  Not  this
imperfect  knowledge  qualifies  it  for  action ;  it  does  not
itself,  by  a  review  of  the  available  means,  by  choice,  and
by  special  direction,  select  the  muscles  needful  for  the
execution  of  a  movement.  Even  had  it  found  these  it
would  yet  stand  helpless,  not  knowing  how  to  convey  to
these  organs  the  sufficient  amount  of  impetus ;  science  itself
is  not  yet  free  from  doubt  as  to  what  form  of  process  it  is
by  which  the  motor  nerve  communicates  its  stimulation
to  the  muscles.  Here,  too,  the  soul  must  confide  in  that
connection  which  throughout  the  course  of  Nature  has
bound  state  to  state  according  to  unalterable  laws,  and  which
without  its  co-operation  links  even  the  internal  energies  of
which  its  nature  is  capable  with  bodily  changes.  As  soon  as
the  image  of  a  definite  movement  arises  in  our  consciousness,
combined  with  the  wish  that  it  should  take  place,  we  have
tha  internal  state  to  which  this  all-pervading  reign  of  natural
law  has  attached  as  a  necessary  result  the  appearance  of
that  definite  movement,  and  when  this  preliminary  con
dition  of  its  occurrence  is  present,  it  takes  place  forthwith,
without  our  co-operation,  without  our  help,  even  without  any

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  285

insight  on  our  part  into  the  action  of  the  mechanism  which
the  course  of  Nature  has  put  at  our  disposal.

It  is  not  always,  either,  that  movements  proceed  from
our  will ;  they  take  place  as  the  expression  of  passionate
excitement  in  our  features  and  in  all  parts  of  our  bodies,
frequently  without,  nay  against  volition ;  they  take  place
in  forms  whose  meaning  or  use  for  the  expression  or
relief  of  this  mental  excitement  we  do  not  understand ;
we  weep  and  laugh  without  knowing  why  the  one  should
necessarily  be  an  expression  of  joy,  the  other  of  grief;  the
fluctuation  of  our  emotions  is  betrayed  in  a  thousand  varia
tions  of  our  breathing,  and  we  cannot  explain  either  by
what  means  or  to  what  end  these  corporeal  agitations
associate  themselves  with  those  which  we  feel  within.
Evidently  in  this  way  many  psychic  states,  not  only  voluntary
resolutions  but  also  non-voluntary  feelings  and  ideas,  have
been  made  by  the  all-embracing  course  of  Nature  determining
starting-points — starting-points  which  the  soul,  at  least  in
part,  spontaneously  evolves  from  its  own  inner  being,  but
which,  after  they  have  been  evolved,  call  forth  their  corre
spondent  movement  with  the  blind  certainty  of  mechanism,
without  our  ordering  and  guiding  co-operation,  nay,  without
our  knowledge  of  the  possibility  of  such  a  process.

We  deceive  ourselves,  therefore,  when  with  a  favourite
simile  we  compare  the  body  to  a  ship — the  soul  to  its  steers
man.  For  the  latter  knows,  or  at  least  may  know,  the  con
struction  of  that  which  he  directs  ;  he  sees  before  him  the
way  along  which  he  has  to  guide  it,  and,  each  moment  com
paring  the  direction  in  which  it  is  moving  with  the  path
which  it  ought  to  take,  he  can  not  only  calculate  the  amount
of  alteration  required,  but  sees  before  him  the  mechanical
handles  of  the  rudder  with  which  to  effect  it,  and  his  own
arms  that  can  turn  the  handles.  Far  from  possessing
'this  comparatively  perfect  insight  into  the  working  of  the
machine,  the  soul,  on  the  contrary,  is  like  a  subordinate
workman,  who  knows  indeed  how  to  turn  one  end  of  a  winch
or  to  put  on  coals,  but  understands  nothing  whatever  of  the

286  I500K  III. CHAPTER  I.

internal  transference  of  movements  by  means  of  which  a
completed  product  is  turned  out  at  the  other  end  of  the
machinery.  Or— to  keep  to  the  other  simile — the  relation
between  soul  and  body  resembles  not  that  between  steers
man  and  ship,  but  of  course  that  between  the  steersman's
soul  and  his  body  ;  the  steersman  discharges  his  task  only
because  he  has  at  his  disposal  as  means  for  the  intelligible
motions  which  he  has  to  communicate  to  his  instrument,  the
uncomprehended  mobility  of  his  own  arms.  Thus  the  simile  is
superficially  illusory,  because  it  is  only  tacitly  that  it  contains
that  which  is  uncomprehended  in  the  comparison.

Few  will  be  inclined  unreservedly  to  adopt  this  view.
We  have  become  too  much  accustomed  to  look  on  the  soul
as  an  arbitrarily  ruling  and  swaying  power,  whose  command
the  body  has  to  obey.  We  think  we  are  aware,  in  the  swing
imparted  to  the  arm,  of  the  direct  flowing  of  our  will  into
the  organs  as  it  sets  them  in  motion ;  and  is  this  impulse  not
sufficient  ?  Must  a  universal  necessity  of  Nature  make  a
present  to  the  will  of  the  submission  of  the  members  ?
Well,  even  so  it  is  :  in  the  swing  of  the  arm  we  are  aware
of  anything  rather  than  of  the  transference  of  energy  ;  what  we
feel  is  nothing  else  than  the  change  which,  in  consequence
of  a  previous  stimulation,  the  muscles  undergo  during  con
traction,  and  of  which  a  perception,  resembling  fatigue  and
passing  into  it,  returns  to  our  consciousness.  Our  view
does  not  threaten  the  living  energy  of  the  will,  or  even  the
fact  of  its  power  over  the  limbs ;  but  it  establishes  beyond
doubt  that  the  will  is  nothing  else  than  living  volition,  and  is
not  also  accomplishment ;  as  little  as  our  will  directly  extends
beyond  the  limits  of  our  body  and  by  its  own  efficiency
produces  changes  in  the  distant  outer  world,  so  little  does
it  in  itself  extend  to  more  in  our  personality  than  the  soul ;
if,  nevertheless,  it  exerts  a  power  over  the  body,  which  Nature
has  associated  with  it  as  its  instrument,  it  is  because  the
same  necessity  of  Nature  has  ordained  that  its  behests,  in
themselves  powerless,  be  followed  by  an  obedience  of  the
masses  under  the  regulation  of  law.

THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.  287

Thus — to  return  to  whence  we  started — the  variety  of
our  movements  is  a  development  of  the  purposive  relations
of  our  corporeal  organization,  not  devised,  not  watched  in
detail  and  set  to  work  by  the  soul,  but  only  blindly  initiated
by  it.  The  soul  may  indeed,  inasmuch  as  it  originates  in
itself  a  series  of  inner  states  such  as  Nature  has  made  tlu
starting-points  of  movements,  also  call  forth  a  series  of  the
latter  in  an  order  and  purposive  grouping  for  which  in
itself  the  arrangement  of  the  organism  contains  no  sufficient
ground ;  and  yet  its  dominion  over  the  body  does  not  in  this
respect  exceed  an  infinitely  varied  utilization  and  complica
tion  of  elementary  movements,  not  one  of  which  can  it  devise
or  comprehend.  It  purposively  combines  purposive  elements,
as  language  makes  of  its  vowels  and  consonants  a  countless
multitude  of  words  and  euphonies ;  but  as  in  the  ease  of
language  and  its  sounds,  so  the  soul  finds  ready  to  its  hand
the  simple  purposive  movements,  easily  initiated  by  an
inner  state  which  it  can  call  up,  but,  as  otherwise  concerns
their  origination  and  performance,  independent  of  it  and  to
it  wholly  dark.

§  5.  Already,  when  we  examined  the  theories  in  regard
to  the  ground  of  the  purposive  formation  of  the  living  body
which  have  successively  been  put  forward,  we  mentioned  that
view  on  which  its  harmony  is  only  referable  to  the  active
co-operation  of  an  intellectual  being.  We  then  saw  that
this  theory,  seeking  by  the  aid  of  the  soul  to  withdraw  the
development  of  the  body  from  the  sphere  of  mechanical
procedure,  failed  of  its  end.  For  that  which  alone  makes
the  soul  more  than  blind  mechanism  —  rational  reflection,
and  the  voluntary  choice  of  means  and  ends — could  not,  by
all  we  learn  from  experience,  be  viewed  as  co-operating  in
the  gradual  building  up  of  the  corporeal  form.  The  forms  of
the  body  are  finally  fixed  or  prepared  at  a  period  prior  to  the
unfolding  of  these  mental  activities  ;  the  soul,  therefore,  could
only  so  far  itself  contribute  to  the  establishment  of  the
bodily  life,  as,  along  with  other  elements,  it  was  woven  into
the  tissue  of  mechanical  actions,  from  whose  harmonious

BOOK  III. CHAPTER  I.

energy  came  forth  with  blind  necessity  the  predetermined
form  of  the  organism.

This  needful  rejection  of  a  false  conception  of  the  mode
in  which  the  soul  takes  part  in  the  construction  of  the
body,  need  not  prevent  us  from  holding  such  participation
to  be  in  itself  great  and  important.  The  soul,  by  reason  of
its  more  significant  nature,  must  always  have  a  place  ot
vantage  among  the  other  elements,  and  even  although  its
co-operation  were  confined  to  necessary  reactions,  to  which
it  is  at  every  moment  constrained  by  its  relations  to  the
other  elements,  yet  the  very  depth  of  its  own  nature  might
qualify  it  for  thus  sending  forth  from  itself  influences,  whose
value  for  the  progress  of  the  organization  should  exceed  that
of  all  other  constituents.  !N"ow,  when  we  see  how  even
within  the  limits  of  our  observation  the  impulse  of  the  will
serves  to  contract  the  muscular  fibres,  how  thus  a  change  in
psychic  states  is  evidently  followed  by  a  change  in  the  local
relations  of  infinitesimal  particles  of  the  body,  we  cannot  in
general  question  the  possibility  that  at  an  earlier  period  of
growth,  when  the  elements  of  the  body  had  not  yet  assumed
the  fixed  structure  and  position  which  they  have  in  its
maturity,  the  inner  workings  of  the  soul  may  exert  a  con
siderable  influence  on  the  still  undefined  relative  situation  of
the  particles,  and  consequently  on  the  development  of  the
form.  Of  course  the  starting-point  of  this  influence  cannot
be  the  conscious  representation  of  the  motion  of  parts  of
whose  very  existence  and  uses  the  soul  at  this  stage  can  have
learned  nothing  ;  but  as  even  in  the  adult  we  see  emotions
involuntarily  exert  their  moulding  power  on  particular  parts,
and  in  mimetic  movements  alter  the  local  relations  of  these
already  fixed  elements,  so  doubtless  a  similar  influence  on  the
primary  establishment  of  particular  relations  of  form  may
be  exercised,  in  conformity  with  their  qualitative  nature,  by
the  inchoate  emotions,  still  unconnected  with  any  definite
reactions,  that  agitate  the  undeveloped  soul  of  the  growing
organism.

But, after  all, we must confess  that all this is  merely

THE  CONNECTION*  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOITL.  289

possible,  or  at  any  rate,  if  even  in  our  opinion  the  soul
must  to  some  extent  take  part  in  the  reciprocal  actions
whence  its  body  originates,  we  are  yet  not  enabled  by  the
analogies  of  experience  to  estimate  the  actual  extent  of  such
participation.  In  the  full-grown  body  the  power  of  the  soul
over  the  moulding  of  the  form  is  very  slight,  and,  even  so  far
as  it  extends,  seems  to  be  exerted  only  indirectly,  by  altera
tions  in  some  particular  groups  of  muscles  or  operations
—  such  as  the  heart-beat,  respiration,  and  digestion  —  over
which  emotional  fluctuation  or  the  habitual  practice  of  certain
movements  has  a  more  or  less  immediate  influence.  The
workings  of  the  soul  thus  extend  mostly  over  the  whole
body,  and  affect  rather  its  bearing  than  its  form.  While  we
willingly  allow  that  the  ennoblement  of  the  mental  life  in
the  end  ennobles  also  the  bodily  form,  that  its  degradation
tends  to  the  deterioration  of  the  latter,  we  are  inclined  to
limit  to  this  the  influence  of  the  soul.  That  influence  does,
in  a  certain  measure,  develop  beauty  and  ugliness  of  form  by
slight  alterations  in  the  stamp  of  already  fixed  proportions ;
but  that  to  a  preponderant  extent  the  primary  formation  of
the  organism  is  due  to  the  soul's  moulding  power,  is  a  poetic
imagination  cherished  by  many  who  overlook  the  numerous
examples  of  deficient  agreement  between  mental  dispositions
and  corporeal  structure.

VOL. i.

CHAPTEE IT.

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.

Meaning  of  the  Question — Limited  Sphere  of  the  Soul's  Operation— Structure
of  the  Brain — The  "Way  in  which  Movements  arise — Conditions  of  Space
Perception — Significance  of  the  Unbranched  Nerve-Fibres — Omnipresence
of  the  Soul  in  the  Body.

§  1.  TX  the  notion  of  the  soul  with  which  we  have
•*•  hitherto  been  dealing  —  that  of  an  indivisible
being  whose  nature  is  capable  of  developing  ideas,  feelings,
and  efforts — there  is  nothing  that  suggests  space  and  space-
relations.  But  the  counter-actions  which  the  soul  is  found  to
exert  on  the  mass  of  the  body  naturally  give  rise  to  the
desire  to  be  able  to  represent  not  merely  in  general  the  possi
bility  and  nature  of  this  mutual  influence,  but  also  the
respective  position  of  both  parties  to  the  relation,  with  that
local  distinctness  which  everywhere  attends  our  observation
of  Nature,  not  indeed  explaining  things  themselves,  but  un
questionably  giving  clearness  to  our  ideas  about  them.  "We
shall  be  questioned  as  to  the  scat  of  the  soul.

The  meaning  of  the  question  is  simple  enough ;  if  we  leave
it  an  open  question  whether  it  is  possible  to  ascribe  to  the
indivisible  being  of  any  real  existence  any  kind  of  extension
in  space  in  the  sense  in  which  we  believe  it  to  be  attribut
able  to  material  substances,  there  need  be  no  divergence
of  opinion  as  to  the  possibility  of  even  unextended  existence
having  a  position  in  space.  Its  place  will  be  at  the  point
whither  all  impressions  from  without  must  be  transmitted,
and  whence  in  return  come  the  impulses  by  which  it  sets  in
motion  directly  its  own  environment,  indirectly  through  that
the  more  extended  world.  This  point  in  space  is  the  place
at  which  we  must  penetrate  the  spaceless  realm  of  genuine

290

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  291

existence,  in  order  to  find  passive  and  active  being ;  and  in
this  sense  every  theory  nmst  search  out  a  seat  for  the  soul,
even  if  it  deny  to  it  the  extension  of  a  space-occupying  form,
in  addition  to  place.

Our  notions,  however,  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  things
nn  one  another  leave  several  possibilities  with  respect  to
appearance  in  space.  We  can  conceive  a  being  not  merely
in  some  relation  to  all  the  rest  of  the  universe,  but  to  evert/
part  of  it  in  an  equally  close  and  yradationless  relation.  It
would,  in  such  case,  not  merely  act  and  be  acted  on  directly
by  some  few  things,  as  a  means  of  indirectly  controlling
others,  but  stand  with  all  at  once  in  that  vital  relation  which
involves  immediate  action  by  the  states  of  the  one  on  those
of  the  other.  If  situations  and  places  are  the  expression  of
the  closeness  or  looseness  of  these  internal  connections,  this
being  would  not  have  a  limited  seat  in  space,  but,  as
internally  alike  near  to  all  parts  of  the  universe,  would  seem
externally  to  be  omnipresent.  So  we  conceive  the  existence
of  God.  He,  the  Creator  of  the  whole,  is  alike  nigh  to  all —
even  to  apparently  forsaken — points  of  the  creation  ;  His
power  has  no  way  to  travel  in  order  to  reach  the  point  at
which  it  is  to  act,  and  the  states  of  things  do  not  need  to
seek  Him  in  order  to  commit  themselves  to  His  Providence,
by  which  they  are  everywhere  alike  closely  encompassed.
Yet  we  do  not  so  conceive  this  omnipresence  as  to  attribute
to  the  Divine  Being  the  infinite  extent  itself  that  is  under
His  sway ;  rightly  avoiding  such  material  conceptions,  we
think  of  Him  as  the  immaterial,  formless  Energy,  to  which
this  infinity  is  nothing,  neither  a  barrier  to  its  immediate
presence,  nor  an  attribute  adding  anything  to  the  fulness  of  its
being.

Physical  science  has  accustomed  us  to  a  second  conceiv
able  case  —  that  of  beings  that  reciprocate  action  directly
with  all  others  similar  to  tlumselves  but  in  different  dcyrccs
of  relationship  with  different  individual*.  Thus  the  attractive
force  of  every  gravitating  particle  extends  directly  to  every
other  even  to  an  infinite  distance;  but  the  amount  of  the

292  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IT.

force  diminishes  with  increasing  distance.  Those  molecular
forces,  too,  the  effect  of  \vhich  becomes  imperceptible  at  the
smallest  sensible  interval  between  the  reciprocally  acting
elements,  \ve  yet  suppose  to  extend  ad  infinitum  with  rapidly
accelerated  diminution ;  at  even  the  most  trifling  distance
its  amount  may  approach  the  vanishing-point,  but  there  can
be  no  fixed  distance  at  which  it  is  absolutely  annihilated.
Various  conceptions  may  be  formed  of  the  relation  to  space
of  things  thus  acting.  They  may  be  said  to  be  omnipresent
in  space,  for  in  fact  their  efficiency  needs  no  continuous
medium  in  order  to  reach  any  point  in  space.  In  con
sideration  of  the  gradational  character  of  their  efficacy,
they  may  equally  well  have  ascribed  to  them  a  circum
scribed  locality  of  punctual  magnitude.  They  will  then
seem  to  be  in  the  place  at  whose  circumference  they  exhibit
their  maximum  force ;  on  the  other  hand,  they  will  seem
only  to  control  with  lessening  power  the  rest  of  infinite
space,  without  existing  in  it.  This  twofold  possibility  shows
that  only  an  illusory  interest  attaches  to  the  question,
whether  in  the  case  of  such  action  the  extension  of  that
which  acts  is  finite  or  infinite ;  magnitude  in  space  forms  no
part  of  its  attributes.  We  did  not  conceive  of  God  as  equal
in  magnitude  to  the  universe  which  lie  governs ;  so  also  we
conceive  these  working  substances  as  neither  infinitely  small,
like  the  geometrical  points  whence  their  energy  proceeds,  nor
infinitely  great,  like  the  worlds  over  which  it  extends.
They  themselves  are  what  they  are — supersensible  beings ;
nothing  more  can  be  said  about  them  than  that,  in  accord
ance  with  the  part  which  they  have  in  the  whole  of  the
universe,  within  the  region  of  phenomena  in  space,  their
force  must  seem  to  proceed  from  a  fixed  place,  and  at  a
constant  rate  of  diminution  to  arrive  at  distant  places.

A  third  conjecture  may  be  hazarded,  according  to  which  a
thing  would  act  directly  and  unvaryingly  over  a  faced  extent
of  space,  but  be  only  indirectly  in  reciprocal  action  with  all
tka.t  lay  beyond  its  limits.  This  conjecture  would  however
have  to  avoid  a  false  assumption.  There  is  no  conceivable

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THK  SOUL.  29l>

ground  for  supposing  that  in  empty  space  the  force  of  a  being
should  extend  only  over  a  globular  space  of  fixed  diameter,
and  beyond  that  limit  should  cease.  If  any  one  distance
has  above  another  the  advantage  of  possessing  this  limiting
power,  this  can  be  due  only  to  the  fact  that  space  is
filled  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  empty  beyond.  Besides,  a
force  must  not  be  conceived  as  something  always  pro
ceeding  from  the  working  element,  even  when  there  is  no
second  element  on  which  it  can  act ;  it  comes  into  being
at  even'  moment  of  the  action  between  the  two  elements,
whose  qualitative  nature  renders  it  inevitable  that  they
shall  act  the  one  upon  the  other.  Hence  it  will  everywhere
extend  so  far  in  space  as  it  meets  with  elements  whose
internal  affinities  impose  on  them  this  necessity  of  working,
and  hence  we  can  never  say  that,  on  account  of  too  great
distance  in  space,  an  element  escapes  from  the  sway  of  a  force
which  otherwise,  in  virtue  of  its  nature,  it  would  be  bound  to
obey.  In  other  words,  there  can  be.  no  force  whose  eilicacy
originally  extends  over  ti  Unite  region  in  space,  and  further
also  over  all  that  this  contains  ;  but  in  an  element  such  a
force  is  quite  conceivable  as  is  limited  to  a  certain  species  or
certain  circle  of  other  elements,  and  indifferently  passes
by  all  those  which  do  not  belong  to  that  species  or  that  circle.
I  would  once  more  emphatically  repeat  an  assertion  under
lying  all  that  has  gone  before  :  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to
convert  the  oft-heard  proposition,  A  tliiny  ads  only  wlwre,  if.
is,  into  the  other,  It  is  where  it  act*.  It  is  a  downright
error  to  believe  that  there  is  any  meaning  in  saying  that  a
thing  is  in  a  place,  and  consequently  acquires  capability  for  a
particular  direction  and  extension  of  its  action.  Even  the
most  ordinary  everyday  reflection  fixes  the  situation  of  a
thing  only  by  reference  to  its  actions  ;  a  body  is  there,  whence
come  the  rays  of  light  which  it  sends  out  in  various  directions  :
it  is  there,  where  it  meets  with  resisting  pressure  the  hand
that  seeks  to  move  it;  lastly,  it  is  there,  where  it  acts  on
other  bodies,  attracting,  holding,  or  repelling  them.  Further,
this  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  all  these  actions  were  only

294-  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

subjective  grounds  leading  us  to  knowledge  of  the  body's
existence  in  its  place,  while  that  existence  itself  has  a  signi
ficance  independent  of  the  effects  that  make  it  perceptible.
On  the  contrary,  we  can  neither  say  nor  understand  why  a
thing  that  does  not  act  should  be  said  with  any  better  reason
to  exist  in  one  place  rather  than  in  any  other,  or  how  the
state  of  a  thing  simply  existing  without  any  efficacy  in  a
particular  place  could  be  distinguished  from  that  in  which  it
would  be,  did  it  occupy  any  other  place.

This  being  taken  for  granted,  we  are  in  a  position  to  state
the  conceptions  which  we  can  form  of  the  alleged  third
case.  If  a  being  is  where  it  acts,  but  if  in  its  acting  it
is  determined  exclusively  by  the  internal  relations  existing
between  it  and  other  elements,  and  not  by  empty  space
with  its  places  and  distances,  we  may  further  add  :  it  is
wherever  it  acts,  and  its  place  is  large  or  small,  continuous  or
discontinuous,  according  to  the  distribution  in  space  of  those
other  elements  with  which  it  stands  in  this  direct  reciproca
tion  of  action.  Whatever  be  the  place  of  an  acting  being,
and  whatever  its  form,  it  is  never  a  property  of  the  being
itself ;  the  latter  does  not  become  large  or  small,  as  the
place  increases  or  diminishes,  nor  extended,  because  it  has
extension,  nor  multiple  and  divisible,  if  it  is  severed  into
a  plurality.  Let  us,  in  order  to  make  the  subject  more
distinct,  suppose  that  an  active  element  a  has  reciprocal
action  with  all  the  elements  of  the  species  b,  and  that  this
reciprocal  action  is  independent  of  the  distances  between
the  individuals  b  in  the  world,  then  a  would  have  as  many
places  in  space  as  there  are  elements  b  dispersed  through
out  infinite  space  ;  a  would  exist  as  much  in  any  one  of
these  places  as  in  any  other,  without  the  unity  and  in
divisibility  of  its  being  suffering  on  this  account  any  pre
judice.  This  conception  is  none  the  less  possible  that  we
are  not  aware  of  any  case  of  it  in  the  actual  order  of  the
universe.  If  we  further  suppose  that  a  directly  reciprocates
action  with  a  certain  number  of  elements  b,  homogeneous
or  heterogeneous,  the  place  of  a  will  always  be  where  one

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  295

of  these  elements  is.  Let  us  imagine  them  all  assembled
on  the  surface  of  a  ball,  and  the  metaphysical  place  of  a  will
be  this  curved  surface,  in  each  one  of  its  points  that  is
occupied  by  one  of  the  real  elements  b.  We  would  not  strictly
be  entitled  to  hold,  but  we  might  indulge  ourselves  in  the
imagination,  that  a  is  in  the  centre  of  the  globe  and  thence
exerts  a  force  whose  sphere  of  action  is  fixed  and  limited  by
the  finite  diameter  of  the  globe  ;  by  this  form  of  statement
we  would  set  more  clearly  before  ourselves  the  permanent
indivisible  unity  of  a,  but  would  not  make  that  more  certain
than  it  would  in  any  case  be.  Lastly,  we  might  imagine  that
the  elements  I,  with  which  a  directly  reciprocates  action,  are
dispersed  throughout  space,  and  that  in  the  intervals  between
them  are  situated  other  elements  of  the  species  c,  to  which  as
nature  brings  it  into  no  effective  relation  ;  then  a  would  have
a  discontinuous  place  in  space  embracing  many  points,  or
would  simultaneously  exist  at  many  points ;  and  now,  on
account  of  points  being  interpolated  at  which  a  is  not,  it
would  be  more  difficult  for  our  imagination  to  grasp  the
conception  of  «'s  unity,  while  yet  in  the  real  relations  of  the
things  no  greater  difficulty  would  be  involved.

§  2.  If  now  we  apply  these  general  considerations  to  the
particular  case  in  hand,  we  find  that  only  the  happy  believers  m
the  revelations  of  clairvoyantes  insist  on  extending  the  direct
and  perceptible  sphere  of  the  soul's  power  to  infinity ;  the
experience  of  waking  life  has  never  doubted  that  in  the  main
the  contour  of  the  body  marks  the  limits  within  which  the
soul  itself  is  active  and  is  acted  on  by  external  states.  We
are  aware  only  of  what  affects  the  body,  we  move  it  alone  ;
through  its  instrumentality  the  outer  world  acts  on  us,  and
we  act  on  it.  Hut  oft-repeated  observations  have  taught  us
just  as  certainly  that  the  scene  of  the  direct  reciprocal  action
of  soul  and  body  is  not  co-extensive  with  the  body.  The
soul  has  no  concern  with  any  corporeal  state  that  cannot
excite  some  part  of  the  nervous  system,  the  body  no  concern
with  any  mental  movement,  which  is  prevented  from  passing
out  of  that  svstem  into  the  obedient  orirans  of  the  liuibs.

296  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

Thus  the  great  mass  of  the  body  appears — in  contrast  to  the
soul's  proper  seat,  the  nervous  tissues — as  a  department  of  the
outer  world  which  it  sways  only  indirectly.  Even  here  in
the  nervous  system,  moreover,  observation  shows  a  distinction
between  conducting  parts,  through  which  the  transmission
backwards  and  forwards  of  stimulation  takes  place,  and  other
more  essential  parts  in  which  the  reciprocal  action  itself  is
accomplished.  If  a  sensory  nerve  is  severed  by  a  simple  cut
in  its  passage  to  the  brain,  the  impressions  still  received  from
without  by  its  extremity  at  the  surface  of  the  body,  are  lost
to  the  soul  ;  if  by  a  similar  cut  a  motor  nerve  is  severed,  the
volitional  influence  of  the  soul  no  longer  passes  into  the  limbs,
with  whose  muscles  the  severed  nerve  communicated.  The
soul  therefore  does  not  reciprocate  action  directly  with  every
part  of  the  nervous  system  ;  it  can  be  only  the  excitations  of
the  central  organs  by  which  it  is  really  moved,  and  which,  on
the  other  hand,  it  calls  forth  by  its  own  power  ;  the  whole
system  of  nervous  transmission  is  but  a  means  of  conveying
to  this  smaller  sphere  of  veritable  action  and  reaction  external
impressions,  which  in  themselves  cannot  reach  the  soul,  and
of  transmitting  its  volitions,  in  themselves  powerless,  to  the
limbs  by  which  they  are  to  be  carried  out.  The  further
course  of  such  observations,  as  made  artificially  and  in  cases  of
disease,  still  farther  restricts  the  mental  area ;  it  shows  that  a
severance  of  brain  from  spine  destroys  the  susceptibility  of
consciousness  for  the  impressions  received  by  the  latter  organ,
and  in  like  manner  the  soul's  control  over  the  limbs  to  which
it  sends  out  nerves.

No  doubt  decapitated  trunks,  especially  of  cold-blooded
animals,  still  in  obedience  to  external  stimulation  execute
movements,  the  purposive  harmony  of  which  many  have
thought  cannot  depend  on  merely  physical  causes.  But  even
these  movements  take  place  only  so  long  as  the  spine  and  its
connection  with  the  limbs  to  be  moved  remain  uninjured ;  at
most,  therefore,  they  would  prove  that  the  soul's  immediate
influence,  or  its  seat,  is  not  limited  to  the  brain,  but  further
extends  to  this  other  part  of  the  central  organs.  But  it  is  an

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  297

unquestionable  fact  that  by  interruption  of  the  communication
between  spine  and  brain  the  movements  of  the  parts
dependent  exclusively  on  the  former  are  withdrawn  not  only
from  the  dominion  of  will  but  from  consciousness ;  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  not  certain  that  the  movements  of  decapi
tated  trunks  depend  directly — or  if  indirectly,  in  what  manner
they  depend — on  psychic  conditions.  Let  us  therefore  defer
till  later  the  consideration  of  these  phenomena,  and  for  the
present  hold  by  the  propositions  that  without  independent
evidence  impressions  which  our  consciousness  does  not  receive
are  not  to  be  regarded  as  psychic  states,  actions  are  not
to  be  regarded  as  psychic  activities  which  we  neither  will
nor  are  aware  of  while  they  arc  going  on.  This  is,  of  course,
to  assume  that  the  seat  of  the  soul  is  limited  to  the  brain.
Here  finally  we  have  grounds  for  discriminating  different
parts  with  different  psychic  values;  but  the  greater,  nay  in
surmountable,  difficulties  of  the  investigation  make  it  here  no
longer  possible  accurately  to  discriminate  between  the  peculiar
organs  of  the  soul  and  the  surrounding  apparatus  of  afferent
and  efferent  organs.  As  the  result  of  these  reflections,  we  find
that  the  first  of  the  above  indicated  conceptions  is  not  applic
able  to  the  relation  between  soul  and  body  :  the  soul  is  not
omnipresent  in  its  body,  as  we  conceive  God  to  be  in  the
universe ;  it  is  in  direct  reciprocal  action  only  with  the
brain  ;  there  accordingly  it  has  its  seat,  in  the  sense  which
the  word  ought  to  have.

Xow  let  us  see  whether  the  second  conception  is  fitted  to
enable  us  more  precisely  to  fix  the  place  of  the  soul.  Accord
ing  to  it,  the  soul  would,  from  a  single  point  at  which  its
activity  had  reached  its  maximum,  extend  its  influence  directly
over  all,  but  with  diminished  force  over  the  more  distant
parts  of  the  body.  Supposing  this  diminution  to  take,  place
rapidly  indeed,  yet  with  so  moderate  an  acceleration  that  its
effects  were  still  perceptible  at  a  sensible  distance  from  the
maximum  point,  there  is  no  actual  phenomenon  that  favours
such  a  supposition.  The  afferent  operations  of  the  sensory,
the  efferent  activity  of  the  motor,  nerves  always  cease  how-

208  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

ever  near  to  the  central  organs  their  connection  with  these
is  severed,  and  no  trace  is  ever  to  be  found  of  any  direct
action  of  the  soul  extending  outwards  even  so  far  as  to  pass
over  the  trifling  interval  created  by  a  fine  cut  between  two
immediately  adjacent  elements  of  a  nerve.  The  second  con
ception  would  thus  be  applicable  here  only  in  the  particular
form  in  which  exclusively  we  apply  it  to  the  greater  part  of
the  ordinary  relations  of  the  body;  with  so  extraordinary
rapidity  must  distance  from  the  point  of  maximum  action
diminish  the  action  itself,  that  at  a  sensible  interval  it  would
no  longer  be  perceptible.  Just  as  a  body  does  not  reflect  the
rays  of  light,  and  is  not  set  in  motion  by  impact,  until  in
both  cases  it  has  been  touched  in  its  place,  so  the  soul  would
exchange  action  with  those  elements  alone  whose  effects
approximated  within  an  imperceptibly  small  interval  to  the
point  of  its  maximum  action,  a  point  which  on  this  account
it  would  be  allowable  to  speak  of  as  the  only  place  of  the
soul's  direct  efficacy,  as  its  exclusive  seat.

Xow  this  is  the  conception  that  for  long  has  been  elaborated
with  special  preference.  It  was  favoured  on  the  whole  by
the  structure  of  the  nervous  system.  The  course  of  the
sensory  nerves  is  obviously  designed  so  as  to  convey  impres
sions  to  a  place  in  the  brain  where  they  may  come  into
reciprocal  action  with  the  soul,  while  the  motor  nerves  transmit
excitations — which  there  only  the  will  directly  communicates
to  material  masses — to  the  muscles  withdrawn  by  distance  in
space  from  the  immediate  influence  of  its  impulse.  It  was
hoped  that  a  continuation  of  the  same  structure  would  be
found  in  the  brain  itself,  a  culminating  point  of  the  whole
nervous  system  into  which  all  the  afferent  filaments  ran,
and  from  which  all  the  efferent  channels  of  energy  diverged.
Such  a  point  all  would  have  been  completely  satisfied  to
recognise  as  the  soul's  seat.  But  as  yet  anatomy  has  not  been
able  to  find  any  such  point,  and  there  is  no  hope  of  its  doing
so  hereafter.  The  fibres  stretch  alongside  one  another,  cross,
and  are  intertwined ;  but  they  do  not  merge  together  into  a
single  culminating  part,  nor  even  take  a  common  final  course

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  200

so  as  to  approach  any  such  point.  Xot  even  in  the  system
of  the  ganglionic  cells — roundish  vesicles  that  in  great  num
bers  surround  the  fibrous  medulla  in  the  fibres,  and  are
scattered  between  its  rows — are  there  any  signs  of  centraliza
tion.  They  are  connected  together  by  delicate  commissural
filaments ;  but  we  know  not  whether  this  connection  extends
throughout,  or  indeed  what  is  the  general  office  of  the
gauglionic  cells  in  regard  to  the  reception,  excitation,  and
transformation  of  the  stimulations  taking  place  in  the  fibrous
medulla.

Any  one,  however,  cherishing  the  hope  that  more  minute
observation  would  find  some  such  limited  seat  of  the  soul,
could  not  but  acknowledge  that  it  has  been  sought  for  in  a
wrong  shape.  Slender  us  is  a  single  nerve-fibre,  a  point  of
common  intersection  for  all  could  not  be  an  indivisible  point,
must  be  a  cubic  space  with  a  diameter  of  quite  appreciable
magnitude.  This  space  must  be  under  the  soul's  direct
control ;  within  it  we  would  not  expect  to  find  isolated
nerve-filaments  continued  ;  their  isolation  could  only  serve  to
bring  the  physical  processes  taking  place  in  them,  without
any  intermingling,  into  the  soul's  sphere  of  action.  When
they  have  arrived  there,  their  farther  separation  is  unnecessary- ;
for  in  the  soul  itself  there  are  no  partition-walls  dividing
different  impressions,  and  it  must  be  capable  of  holding  their
multitudinous  variety,  without  confusion,  in  the  unity  of  its
being.  This  cubic  space,  the  seat  of  the  soul,  would  then
have  to  be  conceived  either  as  filled  up  with  a  parenchyma
without  fibres  and  somehow  homogeneous,  throughout  which
nerve-stirnulations  are  propagated  in  all  directions,  or  as  a
cavity  along  whose  sides,  and  within  the  distance  to  which
the  soul's  immediate  efficiency  extends,  all  the  nerve-fibres —
or  a  sufficient  select  number  of  them — require  to  pass
though  not  to  terminate.  The  last-mentioned  conception  has
in  fact  frequently  been  adopted,  and  the  soul  located  in  the
fourth  ventricle,  without,  however,  the  needful  confirmation
from  anatomical  facts.

I  bring  forward  these  possibilities — to  which  many  others

300  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

might  be  added — partly  from  a  conviction  of  the  value  of
elaborating  any  view  into  perfect  clearness,  partly  from  another
conviction,  that  anatomy  is  not  yet  in  a  position  to  pass  ail
absolutely  decisive  judgment  on  them.  In  itself  none  of  these
conjectures  is  of  any  great  value ;  it  soon  appears  that  each
of  them,  even  if  correct  in  point  of  fact,  yet  in  respect  of  its
meaning  must  be  resolved  into  the  third  of  the  conceptions
referred  to  above.  For  what  would  be  the  ultimate  meaning
of  the  statement,  that  the  soul  is  contained  within  a  limited
space,  and  consequently  acts  on  and  is  acted  on  by  that
alone  which  is  in  contact  with  this  space  ?  The  soul  cannot
prefer  one  particular  empty  space  to  another  empty  space,  as
finding  in  the  former  a  more  suitable  place  than  in  the  latter  ;
its  having  a  fixed  place  means,  as  we  have  seen,  no  more  than
that  its  nature  compels  it  to  reciprocate  action  directly  only
with  such  real  elements  as  are  in  that  place.  The  taking
place  of  such  reciprocal  action  it  is  that  properly  constitutes
that  space  the  soul's  seat,  and  if,  as  we  may  unhesitatingly
assume,  there  are  many  elements  with  which  the  soul  stands
in  this  mutual  relation,  then  its  place  is  no  less  manifold.
Not  because  compelled  to  do  so  by  the  nature  of  the  soul,
but  simply  from  an  easily  understood  craving  for  something
which  it  can  grasp,  our  imagination  still  goes  on  seeking
for  these  many  places  a  geometrical  centre  of  their  distribu
tion,  and  would  fain  find  in  it  the  soul's  peculiar  seat ;  but
it  could  not  say  in  what  closer  relation  the  soul  stands  to  it
than  to  those  places  in  which  it  acts.  Therefore,  whether  the
many  places  of  efficacy  approach  in  the  brain  more  nearly
to  each  other  without  enclosing  other  places  of  inefficacy,
whether  they  thus  form  a  seat  of  the  soul  that  presents  itself
to  our  imagination  as  one,  or  whether  they  remain  a  scattered
plurality  of  points — all  this  is  an  anatomical  inquiry  in  regard
to  the  arrangement  of  the  reciprocally  acting  elements,  which
it  may  be  left  to  experience  to  answer.  Whatever  the  answer
may  prove  to  be,  it  cannot  alter  the  general  conceptions  at
which  we  have  arrived.

I conclude by referring to another conjecture  —  that,

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  301

namely,  of  a  mobile  soul,  whose  seat  varies  within  the  central
organs.  It  appears  to  me  to  have  little  value.  In  order
that  the  soul  should  be  able  to  move  to  the  particular  point
ut  which  there  is  an  arriving  stimulation  to  be  received,  it
must  already  have  been  informed  of  the  quarter  whence  the
stimulation  is  to  be  expected.  Thus,  in  order  to  be  deter
mined  to  this  movement  towards  the  just  now  stimulated
nerve-fibre  and  towards  no  other,  it  would  need  to  have  some
how  been  from  a  distance  influenced  by  its  states  without  being
affected  by  the  states  of  the  others  in  which  a  stimulation  is
not  now  arising.  The  soul's  motion  consequently  could  serve
not  as  an  instrumentality  for  initiating  a  reciprocal  action
with  the  stimulated  element,  but  only  as  a  subsidiary  means
of  confirming  an  action  already  going  on.  It  would  be  still
harder  to  see  how  the  soul  would  set  about  making  its  way  to
the  motor  element,  to  which  it  has  first  itself  to  communicate
excitation.

v}  3.  A  diiliculty  that  must  already  have  made  itself  felt
constrains  us  still  further  to  modify — in  a  way,  however,  that
will  prove  to  be  not  without  value — the  views  which  we
have  reached.  That  the  soul  should  directly  reciprocate
action  with  a  limited  number  of  nervous  elements,  and  with
no  others,  remains  improbable  so  long  as  we  cannot  find  in  the
nature  of  these  favoured  elements  anything  different  from  the
nature  of  the  others  with  which  the  soul  stands  in  no  such
relation.  Xo\v,  it  is  a  view  that  no  doubt  has  been  main
tained  by  not  a  few  physiologists,  that  the  functions  of  the
nervous  centres  are  essentially  different  from  those  of  the
nerves,  and  also  from  the  energies  of  those  parts  of  the  brain
that  may  be  regarded  as  prolongations  of  the  nerves  carried
into  the  cavity  of  the  skull.  This  hypothesis  involves  the
assumption  of  a  specially  privileged  nature  of  the  elements
that  minister  to  these  higher  functions,  though  anatomical
observation  affords  no  direct  evidence  in  support  of  such  a
conclusion.  I  hit  however  it  may  be  as  to  this,  on  more
general  grounds  the  usual  assumption  seems  to  us  inadequate,
that  all  necessity  and  capability  of  reciprocal  action  between

302  BOOK  III. CIIAI'TKU  II.

two  elements  results  from  a  definite  relation  between  them  in
what  we  call  their  nature  or  the  qualitative  content  of  their
being.  What  the  one  element  undergoes  from  the  other  will
depend,  not  only  on  what  that  other  is  permanently,  but  also
on  its  present  temporary  state ;  perhaps  even  such  a  relation
of  efficiency  as  that  one  element  is  compelled  to  reciprocate
action  with  another,  does  not  always  hold  between  the  abiding
natures,  but  only  momentarily  between  particular  states  of  the
two.  Or,  if  both  are  linked  together  in  this  way  for  all  time
and  all  states,  then  the  ground  of  their  connection  is  not
what  they  both  are,  but  that,  in  virtue  of  what  they  are,  they
can  be  in  states  which,  by  the  meaning  and  plan  of  the  cosmos,
are  bound  together  as  antecedent  cause  and  consequent  excita
tion.  I  do  not  intend  to  pursue  this  thought  into  its  meta
physical  connections,  preferring  to  give  it  distinct  expression
in  a  closer  treatment  of  our  special  subject.  The  soul  will  not
stand  in  exclusive  and  unremitting  reciprocal  action  with  a
particular  class  of  nerve-elements  and  all  states  whatever  of
these  elements ;  but,  as  it  will  at  first  be  susceptible  only  to
certain  kinds  of  action,  it  will  limit  its  efficiency  and  its  sus
ceptibility  to  that  group  and  number  of  nerve-elements,  because
in  those  alone  is  that  action  realized.  It  still  remains  un
certain  whether  it  is  the  peculiar  nature  of  these  elements,  or
simply  a  favourable  position  among  others,  that  makes  them
the  exclusive  theatre  of  this  action.  In  the  latter  case  no
specific  difference  between  the  elements  of  the  central  organs
and  those  of  the  nerves  would  be  necessary ;  peculiarity  of
structure  would  make  the  central  organs  the  exclusive  seat  of
the  soul,  because  it  alone  would  render  possible  the  processes
for  which  the  soul  possesses  UK:  sympathetic  susceptibility
referred  to.

I  have  still  to  show  that  the  view  now  set  forth  does  nut
owe  its  origin  entirely  to  speculations  on  the  seat  of  the  soul ;
that,  on  the  contrary,  independently  of  these,  it  reappears  in
the  consideration  of  psychical  phenomena  which,  at  first  sight,
seem  by  no  means  compatible  with  it.

One of  the most commonly  current conceptions of  the

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  TIIE  SOUL.  303

origin  of  voluntary  movements  is  that  the  commencements  of
the  motor  nerves  lie  spread  out  beside  one  another  in  the  brain,
like  the  notes  of  a  pianoforte.  But  even  if  these  notes  are  there,
the  soul  is  incapable  of  playing  on  them.  It  is  ignorant  of
the  relative  situation  of  these  notes,  it  knows  not  that  this
and  not  another  note  corresponds  to  the  particular  movement
which  it  intends  to  make — in  this  unlike  the  pianist,  who  has
learned  to  connect  the  note  on  the  instrument  which  he  sees
with  the  written  note.  And  even  did  it  know  all  this,  of
what  avail  would  it  be  ?  How  would  it  set  about  transferring
its  energy  to  one  note  rather  than  to  another  ?  This  the  per
former  can  do  only  through  the  still  unexplained  tractability  of
his  fingers,  which  fall  where  his  will  directs ;  and  he  could  not
do  it  if  he  had  first  by  his  own  insight  to  effect  the  transfer
ence  of  his  definite  volition  to  the  nerve-fibres  corresponding
to  it.  The  soul,  as  we  have  seen,  can  do  nothing  else  than
produce  or  endure  a  state  in  itself,  to  which  Nature,  without
its  assistance,  has  attached  the  initiation  of  a  corporeal  change.
This  state  is  to  be  distinguished  from  others  only  by  what  it
is  qualitatively  ;  and  on  its  quality  must  depend  not  only  the
kind  and  amount,  but  also  the  place  of  the  action  attached  to
it  by  nature.  Neither  pleasure  nor  pain  implies  any  know
ledge  of  particular  nerves  and  muscles,  any  impulse  to  move
them ;  but  they  are  heterogeneous  disturbances  of  the  mind,
and  on  account  of  this  inherent  distinction  the  one  is
followed  by  laughter,  the  other  by  tears.  Neither  con
sciously  nor  unconsciously  has  the  soul  here  sent  forth  its
influence  in  one  direction  from  pleasure,  in  another  from  pain  ;
but  without  any  interference  on  its  part,  the  two  several  kinds
of  stimulation  have  been  answered  by  two  several  movements,
i.e.  the  one  by  an  action  in  certain  muscles,  the  other  by  an
action  partly  in  different  muscles.

Has  the  soul,  then,  we  shall  bo  asked,  to  proclaim  its  states
at  random,  and  to  wait  till  what  is  required  comes  to  pass
simply  through  the  varying  tone  of  its  utterances,  without  itself
commanding  what  is  to  happen  ?  No  doubt  this  demand,
which  we  must  in  all  seriousness  make  of  the  imagination,  is

304  BOOK  III. CIIAFIEK  II.

unusual  enough  ;  yet  it  will  prove  to  be  one  that  is  not  im
practicable.  Of  the  countless  waves  of  sound  that  traverse
the  atmosphere,  each  one  doubtless  produces  some  disturbance
in  any  stretched  lamina  of  metal,  any  window-pane,  that  it
happens  to  strike ;  but  only  one  will  make  the  lamina  sound
simultaneously,  namely,  that  one  whose  vibrations  the  lamina
is  by  its  structure  and  tension  fitted  to  repeat.  When  out
of  a  lluid  compound  of  different  substances  one  has  to  be
extracted,  we  merely  apply  the  proper  means  for  its  precipita
tion,  without  having  to  give  it  a  particular  direction,  and
thereby  to  follow  the  dispersed  particles  of  the  substance  to
be  extracted  ;  diffused  as  it  is  through  the  whole  of  the  fluid,  of
itself  it  keeps  aloof  as  it  passes  by,  from  all  the  particles  with
which  it  has  no  affinity,  and  with  perfect  accuracy  every
where  detects  the  particles  with  which  it  can  combine  to  form
a  precipitate.  After  this  one  has  been  precipitated,  another
ingredient  will  be  extracted  from  the  same  solution  by  a
second  reagent,  always  by  those  substances,  which  from  their
qualities  are  related,  coming  into  reciprocal  action  and  attracting
one  another  at  short  intervals,  never  by  a  particular  direction
being  inherent  in  any  one  from  the  first,  and  the  result  being
variously  moulded  according  to  the  nature  of  what  it  meets  in
this  direction.  Did  all  the  motor  nerve-extremities  in  fact
lie  arranged  like  notes  before  the  soul,  its  influence  on  them
could  be  no  other  than  it  is.  It  \vould  not  in  any  case  impart
an  impetus  in  a  fixed  direction,  which  would  have  to  excite
this  movement,  and  not  any  other,  because  in  that  direction
it  came  into  contact  with  one  nerve-extremity,  and  not  with
another ;  on  the  contrary,  for  each  intended  movement  it  can
produce  only  one  special  qualitative  state,  one  tone  of  definite
pitch,  (to  return  to  our  simile)  and  the  direction  in  space
taken  by  the  soul's  influence,  and  only  by  an  illusory  appearance
inherent  in  it  from  the  first,  will  depend  solely  on  the  elective
affinity  prevailing  between  this  state  and  the  peculiar  capacity
for  work  of  a  particular  nerve-commencement.

These  relations  are  made  most  clear  and  simple  by  a  refer
ence to mimetic movements. The feelings crossing one

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  305

another  in  our  moods  appear  embodied  in  infinitely  delicate
gradations  and  compositions  in  the  expression  of  the  coun
tenance.  Scarcely  any  one  will  be  disposed  to  attribute  this
inexhaustibly  characteristic  play  of  slight  movements  and
contractions  to  a  conscious  or  unconscious  activity  of  the  soul,
seeking  out  a  great  number  of  nerve-commencements  in  order
to  communicate  to  each  of  them  an  excitation  corresponding
to  the  elements  of  pain  and  pleasure  which  are  here  mingled.
Does  the  soul  itself  know  why  tears  suit  pain  better  than
pleasure,  and  laughter  the  latter  better  than  the  former  ?  Un
questionably  it  has  here  neither  sought  nor  found  ;  as,  on  the
contrary,  each  several  phase  of  feeling,  as  a  psychic  disturb
ance,  finds  its  way  to  fixed  organs  for  its  expression,  because
these  alone  share  in  the  excitation  of  this  disturbance,  so  also
the  blending  of  feelings  of  itself  makes  its  complicated  way
*o  the  parts  in  which  it  has  to  find  its  corporeal  echo.  Hut
this  procedure  is  not  confined  to  this  one  class  of  movements.
Every  other  movement  which  we  voluntarily  execute  has
as  its  true,  generative  starting-point  a  conception  of  that
peculiar  modification  of  the  organic  sensations  which  former
experience  has  taught  us  is  connected  with  the  movement  that
is  taking  place.  We  bend  our  arm,  not  by  giving  a  particular:
impetus  to  eacli  of  its  several  nerves,  but  by  renewing  i:'.,
ourselves  the  image  of  the  feeling  which  we  experienced  in  ;.
particular  position  of  the  arm,  or  doubling  of  the  skin,  or
degree  of  tension  of  the  muscles ;  on  the  other  hand,  we  find
ourselves  unskilful  in  imitating  a  movement,  when  we  see  it
distinctly,  but  cannot  at  the  moment  realize  the  special  sensa
tion  by  which  its  performance  would  be  accompanied.

It  would  be  vain  here  to  attempt  to  convey  a  more  detailed
and  vivid  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  these  mental  states
are  propagated  over  the  bodily  organs,  and  in  some  special
ones  awaken  an  answering  echo.  We  must  rather  beg  that
if,  as  we  hope,  the  comparisons  employed  have  made  our
thought  clearer,  these  comparisons  themselves  may  again  !»••
forgotten.  For  only  the  general  proposition,  that  every  excit
ing  action  of  the  soul  on  the  body  starts  from  a  mental  htak-

VOL.  I.  U

306  BOOK  III. CHATTER  II.

of  fixed  quality,  and  therefore  takes  a  local  course  towards  a
particular  organ,  can  we  hold  to  be  necessarily  and  impera
tively  valid ;  we  are  unable  to  accept  any  further  explication
or  illustration  of  this  process.  For  general  considerations,
such  as  are  here  competent,  will  never  so  completely  and
exactly  detect  the  needs  of  the  soul  in  its  intercourse  with
the  body  as  to  enable  us  beforehand  to  state  the  actual
arrangements,  from  our  insight  into  what  would  be  to  the
purpose.  Usually  it  is  the  discovery  of  facts  as  they  are  that
enables  us  &  posteriori  to  discern  their  indwelling  purposive-
ness  and  directs  our  attention  to  necessities  which  appear  to
us  urgent  and  imperative  after  we  have  become  acquainted
with  them  through  the  provisions  for  their  satisfaction,  but  of
-which  beforehand  we  had  not  the  faintest  prevision.

§  4.  A  counterpart  to  the  preceding  discussion  is  occa
sioned  by  the  office  of  consciousness  not  merely  to  apprehend
a  great  multitude  of  sensations  in  their  qualitative  content,
but  further  to  combine  them  together  in  fixed  spatial  order.
This  operation  would  seem  necessarily  to  imply  that  the  several
impressions  are  transmitted  to  the  soul  in  the  same  relative
situation  in  which  they  reached  the  body,  and  that  at  the  seat
of  the  former  the  isolated  nerve-fibres,  each  one  of  whicli
conveys  but  a  single  impression,  terminate  in  the  same
regular  co-ordination  in  which,  in  the  organ  of  sense,  they
receive  the  stimulations  as  they  come.  But  closer  examina
tion  will  soon  show  that  this  hypothesis  would  not  serve  really
to  explain  our  space-perceptions.

Must  we  first  of  all  expressly  state,  or  may  we  take  this
as  acknowledged,  that  extended  images,  resembling  their
ectypes,  and  covering  them,  are  not  detached  from  objects
in  order  to  enter  the  soul  ?  and  that,  even  did  this  actually
happen,  the  presence  of  these  images  in  the  soul  would  as
little  explain  their  becoming  perceptible  as  the  previous
existence  of  the  objects  outside  the  soul  ?  Must  we  add
that  even  what  we  call  an  image  of  the  object  in  our  eye  is
nothing  more  than  the  fact  that  on  the  nerve-extremities
lying  side  by  side  in  our  organ  of  sense,  variously-coloured

OF  TIIE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  307

rays  of  light  fall  in  the  same  order  in  which  these  rays
proceed  from  the  objects  themselves  ?  Lastly,  that  this  fact
of  a  regular  co-ordination  of  various  stimulations  in  various

O

nerve-fibres  is  after  all  not  the  perception  of  the  process,
but  only  the  process  itself  that  is  to  be  perceived,  the  possi
bility  of  which  coming  into  consciousness  with  its  inherent
order  undisturbed,  forms  the  very  subject  of  our  inquiry?
We  will  assume  that  at  least  this  is  allowed.  Now  whether,
as  seems  to  some  probable,  this  ocular  image  is  transmitted
without  injury  to  its  outline,  through  the  optic  nerves  to  the
soul's  seat  in  the  brain,  or  whether,  as  others  find  more  easily
conceivable,  the  soul  itself  is  immediately  present  in  both
eyes  :  in  either  case,  in  what  way  can  the  fixed  situation  of
the  variously  stimulated  nerve-extremities,  consequently  the
relative  situation  of  the  impressions,  become  to  it  an  object
of  consciousness  ?  And  to  make  an  extreme  concession — were
the  soul  itself  an  extended  being,  filling  with  its  presence
the  circumference  of  the  eyes  and  the  surface  of  the  skin
so  that  ever}'  coloured  point  falling  on  the  retina,  every
pressure  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  at  the  same  time  touched
a  locally-defined  point  of  the  soul ;  how  even  then  would  it
bcctune  aware  that  the  stimulus  had  come  into  contact  now
with  one  point  of  its  own  extension,  and  not  another,  and  then
witli  that  point  and  not  this  ?

Tf  we  will  not  assume  an  immediate,  complete,  and
inexplicable  knowledge  by  the  soul  of  its  own  compass,  or
of  the  form  of  the  body,  we  must  allow  that  some  time  the
moment  must  come  at  which  the  situation  in  space  of  the
points  of  the  image  to  be  perceived — however  long  and  care
fully  it  may  have  been  held  fast  by  the  organ  of  sense — will
yet  wholly  disappear  on  passing  into  consciousness,  in  order
to  receive  there  a  fresli  birth,  and  to  reappear,  not  as  situation
in  space,  but  as  perception  of  the  same.  The  necessity  of
this  concession  does  not  at  all  depend  on  the  conception  whirh
we  form  of  the  soul  as  occupying  space  or  not,  but  solely  on
the  notion  of  the  consciousness  that  we  ascribe  to  it  what
ever  may  be  its  nature.  Even  should  the  soul  be  diffused

308  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

in  space,  and  permeate  the  body  as  a  subtle  exhalation  to  its
last  extremities :  its  knowing  and  perceiving  would  yet  always
be  an  intensive  energy  which  we  cannot  conceive  diffused  as
a  material  substance.  In  consciousness  all  those  partition- walls
cease  which  in  the  corporeal  organ  of  sense  divided  the  several
impressions  from  one  another ;  not  even  that  variety  of  local
situation  can  any  longer  appear,  by  which  we  may  suppose  the
impressions  made  on  the  extended  substance  of  the  soul  to
have  been  still  discriminated ;  the  unity  of  consciousness,
devoid  of  all  reference  to  space,  remains  susceptible  only  to
the  qualitative  differences  of  stimulations,  and  all  the  coloured
points  in  the  eye,  the  pressed  points  of  the  irritated  skin,
must  primarily  coexist  in  it  with  as  little  relation  to  space
as  the  simultaneous  and  yet  distinguishable  tones  of  a
harmony.

If  the  soul  is  to  rearrange  this  manifold  impression  into
a  distinct  perception  of  space,  two  things  are  needful.  First,
it  must  possess  in  the  constitution  of  its  nature  at  once  a
compulsion,  a  capacity,  and  an  impulse  to  form  concep
tions  of  space,  and  to  move  the  manifold  content  of  its
sensation  in  this  kind  of  combining  together  and  drawing
asunder.  Philosophy  may  perhaps  succeed  in  finding  a  higher
reason  why  the  soul — at  least  the  human  soul — must  evolve
from  itself  this  form  of  perception,  perhaps  too  it  may  not ;
we  at  all  events  assume  this  capacity  as  an  acknowledged
fact,  and  the  object  of  our  examination  is  not  to  explain
itself,  but  only  its  possible  application.  For,  before  this
application  can  be  made,  before  the  soul,  within  the  general
intuition  of  space  which  with  perfect  impartiality  it  brings
to  bear  alike  on  all  possible  content  of  perception,  is  able  to
assign  its  particular  place  to  each  several  impression,  there
is  evidently  required  an  impetus  proceeding  from  the
impressions  themselves  that  have  to  be  arranged,  and  deter
mining  their  relative  collocation  in  space.  It  is  the
satisfaction  of  this  second  necessity  alone  that  forms  the
subject  of  our  present  inquiry ;  to  this  exclusively  refers
the  conviction  which  we  have  already  expressed,  that  the

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  309

constraining  reason  why  the  soul  assigns  to  every  impression
its  particular  place  in  the  space  which  it  perceives,  does  not
consist  in  the  situation  of  the  impression  in  the  organ  of
sense,  for  these  space-relations  of  the  material  of  impression
cannot  pass  into  consciousness  as  they  are,  as  belonging  to
space ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  that  reason  can  lie  only  in  a
qualitative  property  of  some  kind  which  the  impression
acquires  (in  addition  to  its  other  qualities)  in  virtue  of  the
peculiar  nature  of  the  place  at  which  it  comes  into  contact
with  the  body.  To  such  distinctions  alone  is  consciousness
alive,  and  they  act  as  marks  or  as  local  signs,  under  whose
guidance  it  proceeds  in  spreading  out  the  impressions  into  an
image  occupying  space — placing  side  by  side  those  whose
local  signs  are  intimately  allied  parts  of  a  graduated  series,
setting  down  at  fixed  intervals  others  whose  marks  present
greater  difference.

In  the  absence  of  these  marks  the  impression  would  be
perceptible  as  to  its  content,  but  could  not  be  localized  iu
a  particular  place.  Cannot  any  colour  successively  appeal
at  any  point  whatever  in  our  field  of  vision,  any  pressure
stronger  or  weaker  act  on  any  part  of  the  surface  of  the
body  ?  Hence,  from  its  immediate  content — that  it  is  of
such  or  such  a  colour,  that  it  possesses  a  'definite  degree
of  force — no  impression  can  require  a  particular  place  in
our  intuition  of  space.  But  along  with  this  content,  and
nowise  disturbing  it,  there  must  in  every  stimulation  be  a
subsidiary  determination,  which  answers  exclusively  to  the
point  at  which  the  stimulus  met  the  susceptible  surface  of
the  organ  of  sense,  and  would  be  different  had  the  same
stimulus  come  into  contact  with  another  point  in  the  organ.
Each  several  localizable  impression  conveyed  to  the  soul  con
sists  therefore  in  a  iixed  association  of  two  elements:  of  these
the  one  is  that  physical  process  which  compels  consciousness
to  generate  a  particular  quality  of  sensation,  to  see  a  certain
colour,  to  feel  a  particular  degree  of  heat ;  the  other  is  the  special
subsidiary  process,  the  same  for  the  content  of  all  kinds  of  sen
sations,  but  different  for  each  several  place  of  commencement.

310  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

An  impression  therefore  is  not,  as  if  consciously,  referred
back  by  the  soul  to  this  its  starting-point,  because  it  arose
at  some  particular  spot,  but  simply  because  it  has  retained
this  qualitative  mark  of  its  situation  in  respect  of  others.

We  shall  find  how  this  relation  corresponds  with  the
results  at  which  we  formerly  arrived  in  regard  to  the  origin
of  movements.  As  in  that  case  the  soul  did  not  send  forth
identical  impulses  in  particular  directions  of  space,  but
generated  qualitative  internal  states,  which  it  had  to  leave
to  themselves  to  find  a  direction  in  accordance  with  their
peculiar  character,  so  here  it  does  not  mark  out  the  places
of  stimuli  merely  as  such,  but  requires  internal  differences
as  the  condition  of  their  separation  in  space,  and  measure-
able  amounts  of  these  differences,  that  they  may  be  severally
referred  to  particular  parts  of  space.  This  arrangement  we
look  on  as  the  necessary  foundation  of  all  our  conceptions
of  space,  through  whichever  of  our  senses  we  may  receive
them ;  but  we  must  leave  it  to  the  more  special  investiga
tions  of  physiological  psychology  to  indicate  in  what  form
these  general  requirements  are  in  each  several  case  fulfilled.

§  5.  So  long  as  the  opinion  is  maintained  that  the  space
relations  of  impressions  pass  as  such  into  the  soul,  it  must  of
course,  in  the  interest  of  the  soul,  be  further  held  that  each
impression  is  conveyed  to  it  by  a  distinct  fibre,  and  that  the
fibres  reach  the  seat  of  the  soul  with  their  relative  situation
wholly  undisturbed.  The  consideration  usually  comes  too
late,  that  with  all  this  nothing  has  been  achieved ;  for  the
mere  fact  that  the  one  impression  arrives  by  this  path,
the  other  by  that,  would  not  serve  to  explain  the  soul's
intuitions  of  space,  unless  it  could  either  with  a  new  eye
and  a  new  unexplained  power  of  perception  see  the  course
of  both  paths,  and  measure  the  angle  between  them,  or
else  blindly  discern  whence  the  stimulus  comes.  The  first
it  cannot  do,  the  second  it  could  do  only  if  the  stimulus
brought  in  or  along  with  its  content  a  perceptible  sign  of
its  origin,  and  thus  this  opinion  would  in  the  end  return
to  the  conception  of  local  signs  from  which  we  set  out.  If,

OF  THE  SEAT  OP  TUB  SOUL.  311

on  the  contrary,  the  calculation  of  the  origin  of  impressions
does  not  depend  on  the  direction  in  which  they  approach
the  soul,  but  on  the  qualitative  subsidiary  impression  which
they  have  retained  as  a  reminder  of  their  starting-place,  it
is  no  longer  required  by  any  psychic  interest  that  in  the
interval  between  the  organ  of  sense  and  the  soul,  their
relative  situation  should  be  preserved,  and  each  of  them  con
veyed  to  the  latter  along  a  special  channel.  If  we  wish
to  place  a  library  in  new  shelves  in  the  same  arrangement
which  it  had  in  the  old  ones,  we  do  not  trouble  ourselves  to
preserve  the  arrangement  during  removal,  nay,  we  more  likely
disturb  it,  sometimes  putting  together  volumes  that,  without
harming  each  other,  can  be  conveniently  packed  together,  and
in  the  new  place  we  can  leave  it  to  a  stranger  to  restore  the
old  arrangement  according  to  the  label  attached  to  each
volume,  which  indicates  its  place.  Just  in  the  same  way
may  we  suppose  that  during  the  passage  of  nerve-impres
sions  into  consciousness,  their  order  in  space  is  deranged,
and  there  is  no  reason  why  this  should  not  take  place  even
previously  within  the  nerves.  Tor  all  that  signifies  is  that
each  impression  be  kept  apart  from  others  till  it  has  received
its  local  label ;  after  that,  no  further  separation  is  needed  for
the  service  of  the  soul.  So  a  number  of  letters  are  put
up  together,  and  at  the  place  of  destination  it  can  at  once
be  seen,  from  the  imprinted  mark,  whence  they  come,  in
whatever  manner  they  may  have  been  conveyed.  The
necessity  for  separation  could  continue  only  if  the  nature  of
nervous  processes  did  not  render  it  possible  for  different
impressions,  with  their  local  marks,  to  be  simultaneously
transmitted  through  the  same  fibre  without  disturbance  to
each  other.

It  is  possible  that  the  latter  case  does  actually  occur,
and  indeed  this  is  a  quite  usual  mode  of  explaining  the
isolated  course  of  the  primitive  nerve-fibres,  which  do  not
blend  with  others  and  are  without  division  of  their  simple  tube.
But  the  explanation  of  anatomical  facts  is  sometimes  rather  a
traditional  custom  than  a  demonstrated  truth.  Natural  ab  it

312  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

is  to  suppose  that  the  isolation  of  the  fibres  is  instrumental  to
a  separate  transmission  of  impressions,  we  yet  find  it  in  cases
where  it  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  such  an  end  is  to  be
served.  A  muscle,  whose  whole  mass  is  designed  normally
to  contract,  yet  receives  several  nerve-filaments,  and  they
also  run  without  blending  to  the  spinal  marrow,  though  no
case  ever  seems  to  occur  in  which  it  would  be  favourable  to
the  intended  function  that  the  excitation  of  each  one  should
be  propagated  separately  from  that  of  the  others.  The
olfactory  nerve,  like  all  the  other  nerves  of  sense,  divides  into
a  great  number  of  fine  filaments,  and  yet  it  is  hardly  designed
or  fitted  to  receive  a  corresponding  number  of  smells  simul
taneously  and  without  mingling  of  their  peculiar  qualities.
The  same  holds  good  of  the  gustatory  nerves,  whose  perception
of  different  impressions  is  never  so  distinct  as  to  make  it
worth  while  to  provide  for  it  by  a  multitude  of  separate
channels.  From  such  facts  I  do  not  think  that  any  other
conclusion  can  be  drawn  than  this,  that  the  employment  of  the
isolated  nerve-fibres,  whose  diameter  fluctuates  very  slightly,
is  necessary  for  the  organism  for  a  very  general  reason.
'Perhaps  the  physical  process  on  which  the  energy  of  the  nerve
is  dependent — whatever  may  be  its  nature — can  be  developed
only  in  filaments  of  a  fixed  thickness  and  limited  transverse
section.  If  we  add  the  further  supposition,  that  the  magni
tude  of  this  process  within  one  of  these  cylindrical  elements
can  likewise  be  but  limited,  it  will  follow  necessarily  that
it  is  only  by  means  of  a  larger  number  of  fibres  conveying  the
same  impression  that  its  force  can  be  brought  up  to  the  amount
required  to  make  it  further  serviceable  for  the  ends  of  life.
The  same  arrangement  we  also  find  outside  the  nervous  system
in  the  muscular  tissue,  whose  splitting  asunder  into  an  extra
ordinary  number  of  the  most  delicate  filaments  would  seem  pur
poseless,  except  on  the  supposition  that  here  too  only  cylinders
of  such  slenderness  are  capable  of  contraction,  so  that  the
requisite  power  of  mechanical  work  has  to  be  supplied  by  the
great  number  of  united  fibres.  The  universal  employment  of
the  cell-form  in  the  structure  of  the  plant  is  a  similar  fact ;

OF  THE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  313

it,  too,  indicates  that  the  peculiar  class  of  chemical  processes
required  by  vegetable  life  is  possible  only  in  minute  bodies,
containing  a  half-fluid  sap-ball  of  small  diameter  that  with  its
whole  bulk  lies  within  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  molecular  force
exerted  on  it  by  the  tough  cuticular  envelope.  Be  this,  how
ever,  as  it  may,  we  can  at  any  rate  affirm  that  the  formation
of  prolonged  and  unrainified  fibres  is  a  very  general  habit  of
the  organic  impulse  of  growth.  But  after  having,  for  what
ever  reason,  been  once  adopted  as  one  of  its  permanent  modes
of  procedure,  it  can  of  course  also  be  advantageously  employed
for  the  isolation  of  particular  paths  of  stimulation,  where  for
some  special  purpose  this  is  needed,  without  in  all  cases
exclusively  ministering  to  that  end.

§  6.  In  the  last  place,  I  would  fain  emphatically  defend
the  attention  which  we  have  so  long  bestowed  on  this  whole
problem  against  the  depreciation  of  those  holding  opposite
opinions,  who  regard  the  discussion  as  altogether  superfluous.
We  cannot  think  it  superfluous  to  indulge  a  curiosity  which,
however  often  it  may  be  stilled,  drowned  by  loud  words,  yet
is  certain  to  revive  in  every  mind,  and  without  a  distinct
answer  to  which,  the  conception  that  we  form  of  the  reciprocal
relation  of  body  and  soul,  deprived  of  its  most  natural  point
of  attachment,  will  float  unsupported  in  the  air.  Our  answer
itself  may,  but  the  attempt  to  give  one  cannot,  deserve  censure
and  opposition.  It  will  reap  these  abundantly  and  in  diverse
forms  from  those  who  conceive  the  soul  as  diffused  with  like
omnipresent  efficacy  throughout  the  whole  body,  receiving  at
every  point  impressions  as  they  come,  and  dispensing  the
excitations  corresponding  to  its  purposes.  If,  however,  the
worth  of  a  conception  may  be  measured  by  its  conformity  with
observed  facts,  I  do  not  think  we  need  dread  the  attack  of
this  assailant.  Even  if  it  does  not  necessarily  postulate  that
key-stone  of  the  whole  nervous  arch,  which  anatomy  has  not
been  able  to  find,  it  has,  on  the  other  hand,  never  yet  been
able  satisfactorily  to  prove  what  is  its  need  of  the  nervous
system,  which  observation  does  find :  it  has  not  succeeded  in
showing  how  this  everywhere  diffused  soul  comes  to  refer  its

314  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  II.

several  impressions  to  particular  points  of  space,  and  to  sketch
for  itself  a  representation  of  the  body  through  which  it  is
diffused ;  finally,  it  has  never  been  able  to  set  aside  the  con
trary  evidence  of  experience,  teaching  that  only  after  they
have  been  transmitted  to  the  central  organs  do  the  bodily
stimulations  exist  for  consciousness,  and  that  only  after  they
have  been  conveyed  in  the  opposite  direction  do  the  mental
impulses  exist  for  the  body,  far  more  at  war  with  observed
facts  than  supported  by  them,  this  view  only  seeks  to  set  up
a  preconceived  opinion  of  the  necessary  unity  of  the  body  and
the  soul,  and,  in  its  persuasion  of  the  superior  value  of  its
conception,  seldom  deigns  to  employ  any  other  weapons  than
those  of  ridicule  against  the  theory  which  we  have  been
defending.  So — they  will  retort  upon  us — our  personality
consists  of  body  and  soul  as  two  separate  component  parts  ?
And  at  a  single  point  the  soul,  like  a  human  judge,  sits  on  a
high  throne,  listening  to  witnesses  on  either  side  as  they
inform  it  of  what  has  taken  place  in  its  body,  and  what  it
has  been  unable  itself  directly  to  learn  ?  The  reader  can
easily  further  imagine  these  objections,  but  he  will  at  the  same
time  remark  that  imagination  has  been  at  work  in  them ;  for
we  have  given  no  real  occasion  for  the  So.  Of  course  we  do
not  hold  our  personality  to  be  made  up  of  body  and  soul,  but
wherever  we  may  seek  our  true  being  (in  the  strict  sense
of  the  word)  we  are  aware  of  finding  it  nowhere  but  in
the  soul;  and  we  have  never  looked  on  the  body  as  more
than  the  most  intimate  piece  of  the  outer  world,  given  by  a
higher  power  to  be  more  truly  our  own  property  than  any
thing  external  can  ever  be  made  by  our  own  labour.  And
after  all,  what  shall  we  find  incongruous  in  a  seat  of  the  soul,
if  we  quietly  set  aside  the  high  throne  and  the  whole  genre
picture  of  a  judicial  cause, — additions  due  only  to  the  liberal
fancy  of  our  opponents  ?  Since,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  our  soul
does  not  omnisciently  perceive  phenomena  or  omnipotently
produce  effects  at  a  distance,  what  do  we  lose  by  honestly
confessing  this  fact,  and  confining  the  circle  of  direct  reciprocal
action  between  body  and  soul  to  one  single  part  of  the  central

OF  T1IE  SEAT  OF  THE  SOUL.  315

organs  ?  If  the  soul  becomes  aware  of  the  slightest  tremblings
of  the  body  by  their  direct  transmission  to  itself,  and  accom
panies  them  with  the  subtlest  variations  of  sensation  and
emotion ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  bodily  mechanism  turns
into  expressive  motion  every  fleeting  excitation  communicated
by  the  soul  to  one  of  its  points — what  do  we  really  lose  ?
And  what  wrould  we  really  gain  by  the  opposite  conviction
that  the  soul  itself  is  bent  in  the  bent  forefinger  with  which
we  beckon  to  some  one,  or  clenched  in  the  clenched  fist  with
we  afterwards  knock  him  down.  ?

CHAPTER  III.

FORMS  OF  THE  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL.

Organ  of  the  Soul — Organ  of  Space-Perception — Corporeal  Basis  of  the  Feelings —
Higher  Intelligence,  Moral  and  ^Esthetic  Judgment—Organ  of  Memory —
Sleep  and  Unconsciousness — Influence  of  Bodily  States  upon  the  Train  of
Ideas— Central  Organ  of  Movement — Reflex  Movements— Acquired  Forms
of  Reaction — Divisibility  of  the  Soul — Phrenology— Obstruction  to  the
Mind  caused  by  its  Union  with  the  Body.

§  1.  "VITIIEN"  we  seek  to  escape  from  the  pretensions  of
Materialism,  and  yet  cannot  deny  the  patent
fact  that  the  possibility  of  mental  functions  being  exercised
depends  to  a  great  degree  on  the  connection  of  the  brain  being
perfect  and  its  structure  uninjured,  we  are  in  the  habit  of
betaking  ourselves  to  the  expedient  of  regarding  this  essential
part  of  the  body  as  merely  the  organ  of  the  soul.  This
continues,  we  say,  to  exist  of  itself  as  a  supersensible,  simple
being,  provided  with  capacities  with  which  we  are  familiar  ;
only  in  order  to  exercise  these,  it  requires  the  instruments
which  the  organization  offers  to  it  all  ready  in  the  structure
of  the  brain.

I  have  already  repeatedly  expressed  my  conviction  that
our  knowledge  of  mental  life  will  make  no  progress  so  long
as  we  think  that  we  have  gained  any  result  of  importance
in  so  thoughtless  a  conception  as  this  of  the  soul's  organs.
It  does  not  surpass  even  Materialism  in  clearness.  For,  apart
from  the  general  inconceivability — how  it  can  succeed  in
linking  mental  actions  with  corporeal  masses — Materialism  is
clear  at  least  in  this,  that  it  terms  the  brain  the  agent,  think
ing  and  sensation,  feeling  and  willing,  the  direct  operations  of
that  agent.  This  simple  relation  we  understand ;  what,  on
the  other  hand,  may  be  the  meaning  of  the  soul  feeling,

31C

FOKMS  OF  UECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 317

thinking,  or  willing,  not  itself,  but  through  the  brain,  evi
dently  requires  explanation ;  for  every  such  through  is  to  a
scientifically  trained  understanding  an  enigma  which  it  must
have  solved,  while  the  enthusiasts  for  higher  views  of  things
almost  always  think  the  solution  of  all  enigmas  lies  in  the
very  obscurity  of  such  instrumental  relationships.  When  an
instrument  is  mentioned,  we  must  always  inquire  by  what
deficiency  in  inherent  force  that  which  is  said  to  make  use
of  it  is  driven  to  do  so  ;  further,  by  virtue  of  what  endowments
this  auxiliary  can  so  compensate  the  deficiencies  of  the  force
which  it  serves,  that  this  becomes  equal  to  the  accomplishment
of  what  otherwise  it  would  be  unable  to  perform  ;  lastly,  in
what  manner  the  employing  force  will  be  able  to  obtain
mastery  over  the  instrument  and  to  apply  it  usefully  for  its
designed  ends.  These  questions  have  seldom  been  put,  and,
when  we  survey  the  great  number  of  organs  of  presentation,
thinking,  and  willing,  which  have  often  been  spoken  of,  though
not  described  in  detail,  we  cannot  doubt  that  among  them
there  are  many  that  are  supposed  to  do  for  the  soul  what  it
needs  no  outside  help  to  do,  many  others  that  could  not  do  what
they  are  called  in  to  execute,  finally,  many  as  regards  which
jne  does  not  understand  how  their — perhaps  in  itself  useful-
arrangement  could  ever  come  to  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of
the  soul.

The  comparatively  inconsiderable  degree  of  study  hitherto
devoted  to  making  clear  what  we  are  properly  entitled
to  expect  and  require  of  the  body  in  the  way  of  support
and  assistance  in  the  soul's  discharge  of  its  functions,
has  always  made  it  especially  difficult  to  give  a  correct
explanation  of  the  central  organs.  Nor  are  we  likely  soon  to
be  able  to  remove  this  hindrance  in  the  way  of  a  fruitful
investigation.  For,  though  we  can  readily  discriminate  what
need  be  looked  on  only  as  innate  psychic  activity,  and  to  seek
for  an  organ  of  which  would  be  folly,  it  is  but  rarely  thr.t
we  can  bring  into  view  the  whole  circle  of  little  aids  that
are  necessary  in  order  that  a  capability  should  be  exercised
in  harmony  with  the  outer  world,  of  which  the  soul  is

:318  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  Hi.

cognizant  only  by  means  of  bodily  organs.  Thus  there  may
indirectly  be  bodily  organs  for  operations  that,  in  respect  of
their  essential  character,  neither  need  nor  are  capable  of
receiving  corporeal  assistance.  Hence,  from  our  acquaintance
with  psychic  life,  we  can  but  very  imperfectly  determine
beforehand  what  instruments  the  organization  must  put  at  its
service.  Yet,  even  after  the  many  and  various  attempts  made
from  the  most  opposite  quarters  to  explain  the  actual  structure,
we  still  feel  the  fascination  of  this  undertaking,  on  account
not  so  much  of  the  information  that  we  expect  it  to  yield
concerning  the  functions  of  the  several  parts  of  the  brain,  as
of  the  occasion  offered  by  it  of  reviewing  the  exceedingly
diverse  forms  of  the  mutual  influence  of  body  and  soul.

§  2.  It  can  scarcely  be  needful  for  me  to  speak  again  more
fully  of  sensation,  the  first  stage  of  mental  life.  The  body
seems  to  do  nothing  more  for  it  than  to  receive  the  impres
sions  from  without,  and  so  bring  them  into  closer  contiguity
to  the  soul's  sphere  of  action  in  a  form  favourable  to  easy
and  exact  transmission.  Whatever  may  be  the  physical
processes  that  take  place  in  the  nerves  of  sense,  their  trans
formation  into  the  sensations  of  colour,  tone,  or  smell  cannot
be  made  more  comprehensible  by  the  interpolation  of  a  new
organ  between  them  and  the  soul.  For  the  operations  of
such  an  organ  could  at  most  result  in  the  conversion  of  one
form  of  nervous  stimulation  into  another,  and  could  not  lessen
the  chasm  that  would  still  remain  between  physical  movements
as  such  and  the  sensations  themselves  as  states  of  con
sciousness.  Just  as  little  do  those  manifestations  of  relating
knowledge  which  are  limited  to  a  comparison  of  the  data  of
sensation,  need,  or  could  they  make  use  of,  corporeal  ministra
tion.  In  order  to  judge  of  the  greater  or  less  affinity  of  two
colours  or  tones,  or  of  the  different  strength  of  impressions,
consciousness  requires  nothing  but  the  elements  themselves
that  it  has  to  compare,  and  besides  them  that  faculty  of
relating  activity  which,  of  all  mental  operations,  we  have
found  to  be  least  attributable  to  physical  agencies.  Provided,
therefore,  no  other  additional  offices  had  to  be  discharged,

FORMS  OF  iCKCirROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  CODY  AND  SOUL. 319

we  would  Lave  no  occasion  to  expect  a  central  organ  of
sentience,  on  whose  preliminary  elaboration  of  impressions
the  soul  should  be  dependent  in  its  own  estimation  of  them ;
it  would  require  only  channels  of  communication,  which
should  convey  to  it  the  several  stimuli,  and  render  it  capable
of  developing  its  sensations  in  a  series  corresponding  to  the
variations  in  the  actual  state  of  the  outer  world.  But,  besides
these  simpler  ones,  two  offices  may  be  distinguished — the
arrangement  in  space  of  the  impressions  of  sense  as  perceived
by  us,  and  the  apprehension  of  the  values  of  feeling  with
reference  partly  to  single  feelings,  partly  to  particular  com
binations  of  several.  In  both  these  operations  the  soul
requires  corporeal  assistance.

We  have  seen  what  supposition  is  necessarily  implied  in
the  possibility  of  an  intuition  of  space ;  every  several
impression,  every  colour-point  of  the  retina,  every  feeling  of
contact  in  the  skin,  lias  to  be  supplemented  by  a  special
accessory  impression,  which,  without  altering  the  content  of
the  sensation,  merely  indicates,  as  a  local  sign,  its  place  of
origin.  To  this  necessary  requirement  we  now  add  a  conjec
ture  as  to  the  form  in  which  we  believe  it  is  met,  at  least  as
regards  the  sense  of  sight.  Only  a  very  small  spot  in  the
middle  of  the  retina  affords  us  completely  distinct  percep
tions  ;  all  objects,  whose  images  fall  outside  of  this  spot,
on  the  side  parts  of  the  retina,  are  indistinctly  seen.  But
every  tolerably  strong  image  by  which  one  of  these  less-
favoured  parts  is  affected,  involuntarily  calls  forth  a  move
ment  of  the  eye,  through  which  we  turn  a  full  look  on  it,
and  so  transfer  the  impression  produced  by  it  to  the  spot
of  most  distinct  vision.  Now,  according  to  its  particular
position,  for  each  one  of  these  side  points  of  the  retina  is
required  a  peculiar  amount  and  direction  of  movement  of  the
eye,  in  order  that  the  spot  of  most  distinct  vision  may  be
exposed  as  a  receptive  surface  to  the  rays  that  previously
converged  in  it  to  form  a  less  distinct  image.  The  fulfilment
of  this  requirement  presupposes  that  each  of  the  several
fibres,  whose  extremities  receive  the  impressions  of  light  in

320  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  111.

the  retina,  can  transfer  its  stimulations,  in  a  manner  and
degree  peculiar  to  itself,  to  the  various  motor  filaments,  on
whose  variously  graduated  co-operation  the  extent  and  direc
tion  of  the  ocular  movements  depend.

Now  if  we  permit  ourselves  to  conjecture  that  such  a
reciprocal  action  between  the  sensory  and  motor  nerves  of
the  eyes  has  been  used  as  the  foundation  of  the  space-
intuitions,  such  a  manifold  and  complicated  intertwining  of
the  filaments  of  both  kinds  as  we  must  presuppose  for  such
an  end  would  be  the  very  type  of  a  centred  organ  of
space  -  perception.  Each  several  stimulated  point  of  the
retina  would  then,  in  consequence  of  the  peculiar  way  in
which  the  fibre  proceeding  from  it  is  connected  with  the
motor  fibres,  produce  in  that  organ  an  impulse  to  motion
exclusively  its  own,  from  which  the  soul,  even  if  no  actual
movement  of  the  eye  follows,  can  receive  an  impression  of
some  sort.  Finally,  this  impression — which  need  not  neces
sarily  even  be  a  process  apprehended  by  consciousness,  but
may  be  one  of  those  unconscious  states  which,  notwithstanding,
powerfully  influence  the  soul — this  impression  would  be  the
local  sign,  according  to  which  the  soul  assigns  to  the  colour-
point  connected  with  it  its  position  in  respect  of  all  the
other  colour-points,  i.e.  its  fixed  place  in  the  field  of  vision.
We  must  leave  it  to  the  minute  researches  of  physiological
psychology  both  to  remove  the  numerous  difficulties  of  detail
involved  in  this  complicated  connection,  and  to  prove  that  in
fact  a  system  of  such  impulses  to  movement  would  present
all  the  delicacy  and  multiplicity  of  gradation  and  affinity
between  the  individual  local  signs,  presupposed  in  the
accuracy  of  our  visual  spatial  perceptions.  Our  object  here
could  be  no  other  than  by  this  theory  (which,  with  all  its
probability,  rests  not  on  fact  but  on  conjecture)  to  illustrate
the  conception  that,  in  this  or  in  some  other  not  essentially
different  manner,  we  have  to  form  as  to  the  origin  of  our
intuition  of  space.  Whatever  other  particular  form  of  con
ception  may  finally  be  preferred,  the  necessity  of  supposing
a  preparatory  central  organ  for  this  operation  of  our  mental

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 321

energy  will  not  be  done  away  with  ;  and  we  have  no  hesita
tion  in  acknowledging  that  we  believe  a  considerable  part
of  the  bulk  of  the  brain  to  be  designed  exclusively  for  this
end.

§  3.  We  find  the  feelings  of  pain  and  pleasure  that  partly
accompany  single  sensations,  and  partly  spring  from  the
comparing  and  combining  of  several,  fluctuate  too  notably
according  to  the  bodily  state,  to  care  to  seek  their  origin
exclusively  in  the  soul's  appreciative  energy.  In  very  many
cases,  of  course,  morbid  affections  alter  not  only  the  feeling,
but  also  the  content  of  the  sensation  with  which  it  is
associated  ;  it  is  not  the  same  taste  that  is  repulsive  to  the
invalid,  pleasant  to  the  person  in  health  ;  and  in  such  cases
we  may  conjecture  that  the  soul  always  judges  as  to  the
impression  actually  conveyed  to  it  by  the  nerve  of  sense
according  to  unvarying  laws  of  its  own  nature,  without
requiring  the  authoritative  intervention  of  a  bodily  organ.
But  frequently,  also,  the  content  of  perception  remains  un
altered,  and  yet  the  amount  and  nature  of  the  feeling
awakened  by  it  varies.  No  doubt  here  too  the  strength
of  the  interest  which  we  take  in  it  is  sometimes  increased,
sometimes  lessened,  by  the  general  character  of  the  actual
frame  of  mind,  which  may  have  had  a  purely  mental  origin,
and  on  such  grounds  alone  probably  do  we  feel  the  same
harmonies  of  tones,  the  same  combinations  of  colours,  some
times  more  and  sometimes  less  congenial  to  us.  Nevertheless,
alike  as  to  the  intensity  and  the  phase  of  our  feelings,  there
remains  a  variability  in  our  being  affected  that  in  all  proba
bility  can  be  accounted  for  only  on  the  supposition  that  the
harmony  or  discord  between  the  stimulations  of  the  nerves
and  the  conditions  of  our  life  is  measured  by  a  particular
after-effect  that  takes  place,  without  always  duly  corresponding
to  the  disturbance  or  furtherance  actually  experienced.

In  persons  under  ather  or  chloroform,  consciousness  does
not  always  cease  with  feeling ;  at  first  it  is  sometimes  possible
for  them  to  take  note,  with  tolerable  accuracy,  of  the  several
processes  of  a  surgical  operation  which  they  are  undergoing,

VOL.  I.  X

322  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

though  they  do  not  feel  the  pain  of  it.  In  other  affections  of
the  nervous  system  also,  we  are  made  anxious  by  the  peculiar
want  of  tone  of  our  impressions,  which  are  apprehended
with  perfect  distinctness,  and  yet  hardly  seem  to  be  our  own
states,  so  little  are  they  attended  by  that  feeling  of  being
affected  which  in  healthy  life  belongs  to  each  of  our  sensa
tions.  Now  here  it  seems  as  if  the  transmission  of  the
external  stimuli  were  uninterrupted  up  to  the  point  where,
by  reciprocal  action  with  the  soul,  they  are  converted  into
conscious,  indifferent  perceptions,  but  as  if  at  the  same  time
they  were  hindered  in  their  propagation  to  another  point,
where  they  had  to  awaken  that  peculiar  resonance  whose
reaction  in  the  soul  first  excites  the  attendant  feeling.  The
facts,  however,  as  yet  offered  by  experience  do  not  allow  of
even  accurate  research  finally  deciding  the  question  whether
in  this  sense  we  really  have  to  assume  a  peculiar  central
organ  of  feeling,  or  whether  some  other  form  of  co-operation
on  the  part  of  the  body  would  not  equally  account  for  the
phenomena.

But  an  investigation  as  to  the  limits  within  which  in
general  the  feelings  require  this  co-operation  would  not  be
without  interest.  Does  our  pleasure  in  consonant  chords
rest  solely  on  a  comparison  of  the  actual  sensations  of  sound,
so  that  the  soul  itself,  bereft  of  a  body,  would  still  continue
to  find  the  same  chords  beautiful,  supposing  it  possible  for
impressions  still  to  be  conveyed  to  it  ?  Or  is  the  soul  in
this  pleasure  only  aware  of  the  favourable  effect  incidentally
exerted  by  this  precise  combination  of  tones,  on  some  other
part  of  its  bodily  organization,  so  that  its  enjoyment  springs,
not  from  the  peculiar  inherent  affinities  of  the  group  of  tones,
but  solely  from  a  concomitant  advantage,  and  would  con
sequently  be  impossible,  if  along  with  the  corporeal  frame
work  the  exclusive  conditions  of  the  soul  being  pleased  were
to  disappear  ?  These  questions  cannot  be  answered  at  present,
and  failing  an  answer  to  them  (the  value  of  which  for  our
conception  of  the  mental  life  in  general  is  sufficiently  shown
by  this  single  example)  we  must  meanwhile  be  content  with

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 323

the  conviction  that  the  warmth  and  intensity  of  our  feelings,
and  along  with  that  the  whole  mould  of  our  emotional  life,
is  at  any  rate  in  great  measure  dependent  on  the  influence
of  the  corporeal  organization.

§  4.  By  the  accurate  transmission  of  external  impressions,
by  the  liveliness  of  the  feelings  that  associate  themselves  with
each  several  sensation  and  its  combinations  with  others,  by  all
these  operations  the  bodily  organs  pave  the  way  for  those
higher  energies  by  which  the  mind  forms  the  cognitive  results
of  reason  and  understanding  into  the  total  of  an  orderly  con
ception  of  the  universe.  But  this  working  up  of  the  materials
on  which  the  soul  is  to  exert  the  energies  of  its  relating
knowledge  seems  to  be  the  only  contribution  that  the  corporeal
operations  can  make  to  these  higher  functions  of  psychic  life  ;
their  actual  performance  is  left  to  the  mind's  peculiar  activity.
When  organs  of  undtrstandiny  or  of  reason,  instruments  of
thinking  and  judging,  are  spoken  of,  we  confess  that  we  have
no  idea  either  what  end  such  theories  can  serve,  or  what
advantage  there  could  be  for  the  higher  intellectual  life  in  all
this  apparatus  of  instalments.  None  of  those  relating  energies
from  whose  inexhaustibly  varied  repetition  all  our  knowledge
is  derived,  can  be  in  the  smallest  degree  promoted  by  the  co
operation  of  a  corporeal  force  ;  but  the  practicability  of  each  will
depend  on  the  related  points  which  it  has  to  compare,  which
form  the  material  of  its  elaboration,  being  duly  and  accurately
supplied  to  it  by  the  senses,  consequently  on  its  being  assisted
l»y  the  bodily  processes.  Thus  (what  has  never  been  denied)
the  perfection  of  mental  life  is  indirectly  connected  by  myriad
roots  with  the  soil  of  the  bodily  existence  ;  but  the  soil  does
not,  besides  the  general  nutrition  which  it  affords,  send
upwards  a  special  organ  of  which  the  plant  must  make  use  if
it  is  to  flourish.

Turning,  further,  our  attention  to  the  ethical  judgment  of
actions,  we  readily  allow  that  this  too  is  indirectly  very  largely
influenced  by  the  accuracy  with  which  we  apprehend  facts
through  our  senses,  and  the  vividness  with  which,  according
to  our  permanent  temperament  or  momentary  state  of  body,

324  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

other  ideas  more  or  less  circumspectly  or  confusedly  gather
round  these  facts,  and  feelings  of  their  value  are  developed.
Nevertheless,  no  stimulation  of  a  bodily  organ  of  the  soul  can
co-operate  in  the  essential  point — the  passing  of  the  moral
judgment  itself;  to  the  nerves  we  can  at  most  look  for  tin-
source  of  the  pleasant  or  unpleasant  value  in  point  of  feeling  of
the  action  in  question  as  regards  the  personal  life  of  the  person
judging,  in  no  wise  for  that  of  the  estimation  of  its  moral  good
ness  or  evil,  with  which  no  personal  pain  or  pleasure  mingles.
While,  therefore,  we  cannot  deny  that  our  moral  judgment
is  to  but  too  great  a  degree  actually  swayed  and  confused  by
the  influence  of  bodily  activities,  we  have  yet  110  reason  to
press  on  it  the  dangerous  assistance  of  a  special  bodily  organ.
In  like  manner,  the  impression  made  on  us  by  beautiful
objects  may,  to  a  great  extent,  be  the  result  of  an  agreeable
and  harmonious  excitation  of  our  nerves.  But  he  who  sees
in  the  aesthetic  feeling,  along  with  an  undoubted  share  of  the
sense  of  personal  wellbeing,  an  independent  reverence  for
and  appreciation  of  the  beautiful,  will  be  constrained  to
ascribe  this  additional  element  exclusively  to  the  soul.  The
shudder  in  presence  of  the  sublime,  and  the  laughter  over
comical  incidents,  are  unquestionably  both  produced,  not  by  a
transference  of  the  physical  excitations  of  our  eyes  to  the
nerves  of  the  skin  or  the  diaphragm,  but  by  what  is  seen
being  taken  up  into  a  world  of  thought,  and  estimated  at  the
value  belonging  to  it  in  the  rational  connection  of  things.
The  mechanism  of  our  life  has  annexed  this  corporeal  expres
sion  to  the  mood  of  mind  hence  evolved,  but  the  bodily
expression  would  never  of  itself,  without  the  understanding  of
what  it  presents,  give  rise  to  the  mood.  However  great  and
complex,  then,  may  be  the  co-operation  of  the  bodily  functions
in  the  higher  life  of  the  mind,  it  consists  certainly  not  in  the
latter  being  furnished  with  special  instruments  for  its  most
peculiar  operations,  but  only  in  the  unrestricted  action  of  a
number  of  preparatory  organs  being  required  for  the  realization
of  many  indirectly  necessary  prerequisites  of  these  operations.
§  5.  Among  these  prerequisites  are  not  merely  the  trans-

FOIIMS  OF  KECIITvOCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 325

mission  of  momentary  impressions,  but  also  the  retention  of
past  impressions,  their  reappearance  in  consciousness,  that
whole  rotation  of  ideas  through  whose  connection  our  life
receives  unity  and  our  actions  achieve  definite  ends.  While*
we  have  just  been  trying  to  conceive  the  higher  energies  of
mind  as  independent  of  the  body,  they  would  relapse  into  a
dependent  position,  if  the  maintenance  of  this  groundwork
i'rora  which  they  arise  were  left  to  the  physical  reactions  of
the  organism.  According  as  an  organ  of  memory  more  or  less
faithfully  and  permanently  preserved  the  results  of  the
previous  life,  the  more  easy  and  elastic  were  the  passage  of
the  nervous  tremors  by  which  the  copies  of  past  impressions
preserved  in  the  brain  resuscitate  one  another,  so  much  the
purer  and  fuller,  or  the  more  obscured  and  poor,  would  be  at
each  moment  our  consciousness  of  the  connection  of  our  life,
our  duties,  and  our  hopes.  Or  rather,  there  would  be  no
such  connection  at  all,  but  moment  by  moment  the  soul  would
exhibit  the  thought,  the  feeling,  or  the  volition  prescribed  by
the  bodily  stimulation  just  then  newly  awaking  ;  destitute  of
any  power  even  within  itself  to  approximate  the  past  to  the
present,  it  could  not  keep  steadily  before  itself,  through  the
smallest  space  of  time,  a  single  thought  whose  significance
became  complete  only  through  a  succession  of  several  ideas.
There  is  no  doubt  that  our  train  of  thought  does  to  a  great
extent  depend  indirectly  on  the  constant  influence  of  bodily
processes ;  nevertheless,  the  doctrine  of  a  special  organ  of
memory,  even  as  a  mere  means  of  support  to  the  soul's  own
power  of  remembrance,  is  exposed  to  greater  difficulties  than
is  commonly  thought  The  objection  that  the  cerebral  mass,
which  is  not  unalterable,  but  undergoes  slow  renovation,
could  not,  without  confusion,  retain  for  future  use  the  im
pressed  copies  of  countless  impressions,  is  met  plausibly  but
not  convincingly  by  reference  to  the  countless  undulatory
movements  of  sound  and  of  coloured  light  that  can  simul
taneously  traverse  the  same  atmospheric  space  without  mutual
disturbance.

When  we have  been  for  a  short  time  looking  steadily  at

326  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

the  sun,  we  retain  a  sharply-outlined  circular  after-image  of
it  even  if  we  close  our  eyes  ;  for  during  the  whole  of  the
short  time  that  the  look  lasted,  the  rays  fell  on  the  same
contiguous  points  of  the  retina ;  the  effect  continues  to  thrill
in  the  same  circle  of  adjacent  nerve-fibres,  and  thus  the
relative  situation  of  the  stimulated  parts  preserves  for  us  the
round  figure  and  the  size  of  the  image.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
we  see  the  figure  of  some  one  approaching,  every  step  nearer
he  comes,  the  image  on  our  retina  assumes  larger  dimensions ;
hardly  one  point  of  the  whole  figure  answers  at  any  one
moment  to  the  same  spot  of  the  eye  as  at  the  moment  before ;
rflot  one  after-image,  but  numberless  images  all  different  one  from
,  another  would  remain,  if  our  nervous  organs  really  fixed  every
momentary  impression  in  permanent  traces.  Nor  would  we
gain  anything  by  supposing  that  a  considerable  number  of  these
fleeting  stimulations  joined  to  form  a  permanent  after-image  ;
for  what  distinct  image  could  proceed  from  an  agglomeration  of
many  images  resembling  one  another  in  their  characteristics,  but
jn  their  size  so  dissimilar  that  the  edges  of  each  one  projected
over  another,  and  they  all,  consequently,  covered  one  another
with  different  points  of  their  outline  ?  If  we  have  observed
how  entirely  under  the  same  circumstances  the  different  over
lapping  coloured  spectra  of  the  prism  blend  into  a  uniform
grey,  we  shall  assuredly  find  it  impossible  to  suppose  that  the
visual  perceptions  generate  in  this  manner  abiding  impressions,
-that,  like  the  after-images,  retain  the  shape  and  colour  of  seen
objects.  And  yet  we  have  hitherto  assumed  that  these  figures
are  invariable  in  their  outlines.  But  we  see  the  same  person
perhaps  in  a  thousand  different  attitudes  and  motions  of  the
limbs  ;  which  one  of  the  numberless  images  that  he  has  thus
cast  on  our  eye  will  the  brain  retain  ?  Or  are  we  to  suppose
that  they  are  all  retained  ?  If  we  should  perchance  make  up
our  minds  to  this,  at  what  price  should  we  have  after  all
purchased  this  corporeal  fixing  of  impressions  ?  At  no  less  a
price  than  the  admission  that,  seeing  the  smallness  of  the
brain  does  not  allow  us  to  assume  that  each  of  these  countless
images  has  a  special  particle  in  which  it  inheres,  each  several

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 327

simple  atom  must  be  capable  of  containing  in  itself,  without
any  mutual  disturbance,  an  infinite  number  of  different  im
pressions.  The  same  atom  that  in  the  image  of  a  tree
represents  a  green  point,  must  in  that  of  a  flower  represent
a  red  one,  in  that  of  the  sky  a  blue  one,  in  that  of  each
several  human  figure  one  of  a  different  colour ;  and,  without
knowing  how  it  is  to  take  place,  we  must  further  suppose  that
the  resuscitation  of  any  one  of  these  impressions  in  one  of
these  atoms  always  calls  forth  in  another  that  particular
impression  which,  along  with  the  former,  goes  to  form  a
coherent  image.

Such  a  theory  would  simply  contain  many  repetitions  of
the  same  supposition  that  we  make  once.  If  every  several
atom  of  the  cerebral  mass  is  capable  of  retaining  without
confusion  numberless  impressions,  why  should  the  soul
alone,  like  the  atom  a  simple  being,  be  incapable  of  doing  so  ?
Why  should  it  alone  not  possess  the  faculty  of  memory  and
recollection  in  itself  without  the  aid  of  a  corporeal  organ,
when  we  have  to  concede  that  faculty  directly  and  without
the  mediation  of  a  new  instrument  to  ever}"  part  of  the
assumed  organ  ?  Nay,  we  must  in  fact  make  the  contrary
assertion  that  the  retention  and  reproduction  of  impressions  is
possible,  not  to  a  number  of  co-operant  cerebral  particles,  but
exclusively  to  the  soul's  undivided  unity.  For  even  the
images  of  sense-perceptions  preserved  in  memory  are  not  in
the  strict  sense  images,  not  likenesses  unvarying  in  their  size
and  the  number  and  position  of  their  parts  ;  on  the  contrary,
the  soul  retains  only  the  general  outline,  the  design,  the  idea
of  the  internal  connection  of  many  marks,  and  thence,  at  the
several  moments  of  recollection,  educes  the  particular  images :
nor  does  it  always  bring  back  the  image  of  a  position,  attitude,
or  movement  of  the  figure,  which  on  a  previous  occasion  it
perceived,  and  of  which  it  might  have  retained  a  fixed  im
pression,  but,  anticipating  experience,  it  beholds  familial-
figures  witli  their  outlines  distorted  in  a  way  that  never  has
been  actually  witnessed.  ]>ut  this  retention  not  FO  much  of
the  various  constituents  themselves  as  of  the  rule  of  their

328  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

composition,  is  an  action  of  relating  knowledge,  an  operation
of  the  soul ;  to  admit  an  organ  of  memory  would  only  lead
to  our  having  to  attribute  a  memory  to  the  soul,  and  also  to
regard  the  several  atoms  of  the  brain  as  souls  whose  power  of
remembrance  assists  ours.  And  throughout  this  discussion
we  have  wholly  kept  out  of  view  those  indirectly  produced
and  more  general  conceptions  which  are  not  images  of  an
object,  but  expressions  of  internal  relations ;  any  attempt  to
account  for  their  retention  by  corporeal  copies  would  only
confirm  the  necessity  of  including  memory  among  the  opera
tions  derived  immediately  from  the  soul's  peculiar  nature.

But  do  numerous  and  daily  recurring  experiences  riot  show
that  this  attempt — to  prove  from  the  notion  of  ideation  and
recollection  the  impossibility  of  their  having  a  corporeal  origin
— has  reached  an  incorrect  result  ?  Have  we  not  sufficient
evidence  of  such  an  origin  in  ordinary  sleep,  in  unconscious
ness,  and  in  the  constantly  recurring  derangements  of  memory
in  disease  ?  Do  not  all  these  phenomena  show  that  the  above
mental  operations  can  be  performed  only  so  long  as  their
organs  are  uninjured  ?  Plausible  as  is  this  reasoning,  it  is
nevertheless  ill-grounded,  and  opposed  by  another  interpreta
tion  of  the  facts.

When  in  a  highly  complex  system  of  elements  the  dis
turbance  of  one  part  puts  a  stop  to  a  particular  operation,  it
may  be  that  this  operation  depended  on  that  part  as  its
exclusive  efficient  cause,  and  now  ceases  because  that  which
brought  it  about  has  ceased  to  act ;  but  it  is  no  less  possible
that  it  was  in  no  wise  dependent  for  its  production  on  the  dis
turbed  part,  but  is  only  hindered  by  the  disturbance  of  this  as
by  a  positive  obstacle.  We  are  of  course  primarily  disposed
by  our  general  view  of  the  nature  of  consciousness  in  favour
of  the  latter  explanation  ;  for  it  would  seem  quite  incompre
hensible  that  a  corporeal  organ  should  be  able  to  communicate
to  the  soul  the  capacity  of  consciousness,  if  it  did  not  in
herently  possess  it.  But,  moreover,  the  results  of  observation
in  part  distinctly  favour  our  conception  and  nowhere  decidedly
oppose  it.  To  account  for  ordinary  sleep  by  exhaustion  o^

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 329

the  central  organs  thus  become  unfit  for  further  generation  of
consciousness,  must  seem  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  to
any  one  that  remembers  how  quickly  in  healthy  bodies — nay,
where  the  habit  has  been  formed,  how  immediately — slumber
may  succeed  the  most  vigorous  exercise  of  all  the  mental
powers,  and  how  far  from  being  really  exhausted  when  it  is
accidentally  interrupted,  these  powers  or  the  force  of  the
central  organs  underlying  them  are  found  to  be.  Much  easier
is  it  to  suppose  that  the  gradually  increasing  feeling  of  exhaus
tion  acts  as  a  stimulus  that  by  its  unpleasant  enervating  effect
lakes  away  delight  and  interest  in  the  continuance  of  the
train  of  thought  ;  and  in  like  manner  a  person  awaking  from
profound  sleep  gives  the  impression  not  so  much  of  one  whose
powers  are  being  restored,  as  of  one  who  is  gradually  being
set  free  from  obstacles.  When  very  severe  bodily  suffering
causes  sudden  loss  of  consciousness,  we  may  think  that  wo
can  attribute  this  to  the  rapid  enfeeblement  of  an  organ
causing  the  intermission  of  its  operation,  consciousness  ;  when
a  swoon  is  the  consequence  of  the  mind  being  suddenly
affected  by  calamity,  I  see  no  reason  why  this  inward  tumult
of  the  soul  should  not  be  viewed  as  an  obstacle  making  the
continuance  of  consciousness  for  the  moment  impossible,  and
at  the  same  time  putting  a  stop  to  the  wonted  subjection  of
the  corporeal  energies  to  the  soul's  dominion.  If  we  may
here  look  on  the  mental  pain  as  an  antagonistic  stimulus
preventing  the  (always  existent)  capacity  of  consciousness
from  expressing  itself,  why  should  not  the  bodily  pain  of  the
former  case  have  the  same  effect  ?  This,  too,  is  not  merely  the
bodily  disturbance  from  which  it  proceeds,  but  as  feeling  it
is  a  state  of  consciousness,  and  a  state  too  of  which  we  know
from  personal  observation  how  much  even  in  its  lesser  degrees
it  interferes  with  the  carrying  on  of  steady  thought  by  the
overpowering  impression  and  the  relaxation  of  interest  in  any
thing  else  which  it  creates.  Lastly,  we  must  add  that  it  is  by
no  means  necessary  that  all  the  influences — though  they  may
be  very  powerful — exerted  by  the  body  on  the  soul  should
be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  cause  distinctly  conscious  perceptions

330  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

and  feelings  ;  on  the  contrary,  as  in  sensation  bodily  stimula
tions  call  forth  an  expression  of  consciousness,  they  may
equally  well  have  the  opposite  effect,  and  consciousness  may
suddenly  vanish  under  an  impression  that  either  remains  quite
latent  or  else  is  felt  by  departing  sense  only  under  the  form
of  vague,  unusual,  indescribable  feelings.

We  cannot  see  that  the  various  kinds  of  unconsciousness
require  any  other  explanation  than  this  :  consciousness  need
not  be  generated  by  an  organ,  the  injuring  of  which  causes  it
to  cease  ;  but,  as  an  inborn  capacity  of  the  soul,  it  may  be
opposed  by  impressions  from  innumerable  quarters  that  un
favourably  affect  the  soul's  inward  condition.  Much  greater
obscurity  hangs  about  those  half-lapses  of  memory  which
make  it  impossible  to  recall  certain  parts  of  the  past  experi
ence,  and  of  which  we  possess  (along  with  many  evidently
falsified  accounts  from  former  times)  many  indubitable
examples  taken  from  everyday  experience.  We  do  not  with
hold  the  acknowledgment  that  here  much  remains  un
explained,  and  in  particular  cases  will  always  remain  so  ;  but
these  facts  do  not  impress  us  as  being  in  favour  of  a  specially
corporeal  origin  of  memory.

Looking  only  at  the  course  of  thought  during  our  healthy
condition,  we  must  confess  that  the  moving  springs  that  brought
one  idea  back  to  consciousness  and  the  reasons  why  another
was  so  long  out  of  consciousness,  are  often  wholly  unknown
to  us  ;  we  dimly  conjecture  that  the  succession  of  our  thoughts
is  not  merely  guided  by  the  association  of  the  ideas  with  one
another,  which,  by  observation,  we  can  track  pretty  distinctly,
but  is  to  a  great  extent  determined  by  those  other  much  vaguer
associations  that  at  every  moment  are  being  formed  between
our  actual  sphere  of  thought  and  the  simultaneous  general
sense  of  our  bodily  and  mental  mood.  Disease  and  advancing
age  gradually  or  suddenly  alter  this  vital  feeling  ;  hence  age
no  longer  finds  itself  at  home  in  many  of  the  spheres  of
thought  of  youth  ;  for,  even  if  it  to  some  extent  reproduces
the  matter  of  the  conceptions,  there  is  now  wanting  the
lost  temperament  that  is  needed  to  carry  it  further  ;  in  like

FORMS  OF  RECIFUOCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 331

manner  the  convalescent  cannot  throw  himself  back  into
the  dreams  of  his  illness,  for  in  getting  rid  of  the  morbid
feeling  he  has  lost  the  key  to  the  gateway  admitting  to
them  ;  thus,  finally,  in  a  renewed  attack  of  illness  the
former  wild  dreams  return  in  consequence  of  their  cause —
disturbance  of  the  general  sense — being  again  in  action  ;  thus
we  find  ourselves  occasionally  in  life,  especially  when  stirred
to  the  depths  of  our  being  by  strong  mental  agitation,
suddenly  surprised  by  long-absent  dreams,  by  recollections
and  moods  to  which  we  can  hardly  assign  any  definite
place  in  the  history  of  our  life.

Those  remarkable  disturbances  of  memory  which  are  pro
duced  by  disease  or  injuries,  seem  to  me  to  present  no
enigmas  essentially  different  from  those  involved  in  the  acci
dents  that  occur  in  a  state  of  comparative  health  ;  in  all  cases
what  has  to  be  done  is  to  show  from  what  direction  an
antagonistic  pressure  is  exerted  on  the  bond  through  which  in
health  the  impressions  of  the  moment  would  bring  back  the
remembrances  associated  with  them.  We  can  scarcely  hope
to  succeed  in  showing  this  fully  in  any  single  case  ;  least  of
all  need  we  attempt  to  do  so  with  the  numerous  stories
current,  in  which  we  too  often  and  too  unmistakeably  meet
with  all  sorts  of  mistakes  and  omissions  caused  by  the  pre
judice  of  the  observer  or  his  inattention  to  details  that  seemed
to  him  unimportant.  In  many  such  accounts  we  find  loss  of
memory  inferred  from  impaired  power  of  verbal  expression.
But  with  this  phenomenon  we  enter  a  department  quite
distinct  from  the  former,  in  which  the  soul  no  longer  is  self-
contained,  but  seeks  to  use  corporeal  means  of  utterance.
Control  over  organs  of  voice  and  language  is  assuredly  possible
only  through  a  central  organ,  in  which  the  motor  nerves  are
so  arranged  and  intertwined  that  the  sound-idea  hovering  in
consciousness  can  simultaneously  stimulate  the  fibres  co
operating  in  its  utterance.  If  the  conjectures  are  allowable
that  we  have  already  hazarded  in  regard  to  the  production  of
movements,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  many  morbid  affec
tions  of  this  central  organ  may  prevent  the  correct  trans-

332  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  HI.

mission  of  the  stimulation.  The  patient  would  then,  while
clearly  conscious  of  the  sound  which  he  wishes  to  make,  be
yet  compelled  to  utter  another  one,  or  be  incapable  of  any
utterance  whatever.  We  have,  however,  in  respect  of  all
movements  alike,  equally  with  those  involved  in  speech,
reason  to  presuppose  a  co-ordinating  central  organ,  and  it  is
time  now  to  state  our  views  in  regard  to  the  production  of
bodily  movements  in  general.

§  6.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  soul  is  not  directly
cognizant  of  the  means  of  motion — muscles  and  nerves — nor
of  the  manner  in  which  they  may  be  made  use  of — the  nature
of  the  propelling  force  to  be  communicated  to  the  nerves
or  the  contractility  of  the  muscles.  It  can  do  nothing  more
than  bring  about  certain  states  in  itself,  in  the  expectation
that  the  connection  of  the  organism  will  attach  to  these  the
initiation  of  a  particular  movement.  It  does  not  itself  carry
out  the  operation,  but  in  a  manner  to  it  unknown  the  vital
mechanism  executes  its  commands.  But  at  least  it  must  be
able  to  give  these  commands,  it  must  not  only  find  in  itself
a  reason  for  willing  a  particular  movement,  but  also  be  able
to  produce  the  inner  state  whence  the  latter  springs.  Now,
were  the  soul  contained  in  a  body  that  never  moved  spon
taneously,  whence  would  it  get  the  ideas  that  it  was  moveable,
that  movements  were  of  use,  that  this  movement  can  be
produced  by  one  inner  state,  that  by  another,  of  the  soul's
individual  being  ?  Evidently  it  is  not  only  necessary  that
the  body  should  move  of  itself,  in  obedience  to  its  own
stimuli,  in  order  that  the  soul  may  take  note  of  its  capacity
of  change,  and  learn  what  impression  motions  make  on  itself,
but  no  less  necessary  that  the  external  stimulus  should  of
itself  with  mechanical  certainty  excite  in  the  body  such
movements  as,  under  the  actual  circumstances,  are  adapted  to
protect  life,  to  adjust  a  disturbance,  or  to  satisfy  a  craving.
The  soul,  ignorant  of  all  these  relations,  could  not  make  a
correct  guess,  and,  were  not  at  all  events  a  hint  given,  even
experience  would  either  never  teach  it  to  act  purposively,  at
any  rate  not  before  a  long  series  of  mishaps  had  undermined  the

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 333

constitution  of  the  organism.  For  certainly  the  latter  would
have  small  chance  of  preservation  if  the  soul's  sagacity  had  at
each  moment  to  discover  and  apply  the  means  of  escape  from
impending  disturbances  ;  the  sole  condition  of  safety  is  that
at  least  to  a  certain  extent  the  action  required  should  flow  as
a  necessary  consequence  from  the  impression  of  the  circum
stances  themselves.

While  incapable  of  devising,  the  soul  will,  on  the  other
hand,  be  quite  capable  of  improving  this  mechanism ;  after
having  observed  what  movement,  with  what  favourable  result,
and  what  direct  impression  on  itself  follows  any  stimulus,  it
will  not  require  subsequently  to  wait  for  the  actual  experience
of  the  stimulus.  Its  image  recollected  or  perceived  at  a
distance,  nay,  even  an  image  not  of  it,  but  of  a  similar  stimulus,
will  awaken  in  the  soul  the  idea  of  the  impression,  and  with
it  also  an  involuntary  impulse  to  the  reproduction  of  the
movement.  If  at  first,  then,  the  soul  looked  on  merely  as
an  idle  spectator  at  the  purposive  actions  by  which  the
organic  mechanism  protects  the  security  of  its  seat,  it  is
afterwards  obliged  for  them  to  the  mechanism,  seeing  that
it  now  applies  its  manifold  powers — of  retaining  in  remem
brance  what  is  past,  of  anticipating  the  future  from  analogy,
of  detecting  similarity  under  superficial  difference,  of  im
proving  upon  involuntary  actions  by  reference  to  the  end
aimed  at — to  bringing  to  refinement  and  perfection  that
chain  of  communication  between  stimuli  and  reactions  which,
though  skilfully  constructed,  does  not  at  first  correspond  to
all  the  needs  of  life.  The  slowness  with  which  the  young
human  being  gains  control  over  his  limbs,  taken  in  connection
with  the  stamp  of  completeness  and  individuality  impressed
on  that  control  to  which  in  the  course  of  his  development
he  may  attain,  shows  how  important  here  is  the  co-operative
and  ennobling  influence  of  the  soul :  while  the  exceedingly
short  space  of  time  usually  required  by  the  new-born
animal  in  order  to  become  expert  in  the  class  of  movements
of  its  species,  and  the  often  comical  uniformity  with  which
the  young  creatures  exhibit  the  peculiarities  of  these  move-

334  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

ments  without  any  individual  distinctions,  prove  that  here,
on  the  contrary,  a  close  and  regular  connection  is  at  an  early
period  established  between  the  impressions  of  the  general  sense
and  the  movements  in  question.

If  we  observe  the  aimless,  sportive  movements  of  young
animals  and  of  children,  we  must  be  struck  by  the  fact  how
rarely — nay,  hardly  ever  without  special  illness — single,  un
connected,  meaningless  convulsive  starts  or  thrills  occur
among  them.  And  yet  one  might  have  expected  such  from
the  numberless  throng  of  casual  impressions  by  which  at
every  moment  of  their  course  the  motor  nerves  and  the
muscles  are  liable  to  be  affected.  But  they  do  not  appear ;
on  the  contrary,  even  the  most  hesitating  and  awkward  move
ments  that  fall  under  our  observation,  already  show  traces  of
the  simultaneous  and  purposive  action  of  connected  groups
of  muscles.  We  may  lay  it  down  as  a  fact  attested  03^
observation,  that  in  the  young  organism  it  is  difficult  for
accidental  stimuli  of  whatever  kind  to  excite  isolated  and
unconnected  fragments  of  motion,  whereas  it  is  easy  to  call
forth  coherent  groups  of  movements.  The  former  might  per
haps  take  place,  but  the  latter  is  not  conceivable  without  a
central  organ,  in  which  the  single  motor  nerve-filaments  are
so  arranged  together  and  interwined  that  a  single  stimulus
affecting  a  particular  point  at  once  excites  a  number  of  fibres
to  accordant  movement.  The  brain  and  even  the  spinal  cord
have  alike  doubtless  among  other  offices  that  of  such  a
central  organ,  and  though  we  would  hardly  undertake
definitely  to  describe  its  structure  d  priori,  merely  from  the
requirements  of  life,  we  can  yet  conjecture  one  at  least  of  its
characteristics  with  sufficient  probability,  namely,  the  constant
entwinement  of  afferent  sensory  fibres  in  the  tissue  of  the
motor  fibres.

The  primary  function  of  a  motor  central  organ  would  be
to  carry  into  execution  the  movements  of  the  body  in  general,
which  are  rendered  possible,  according  to  the  respective  cha
racters  of  different  species,  by  the  structure  of  the  limbs.
For  this  it  would  be  sufficient  that  some  internal  stimulus —

FORMS  OF  KECirROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 335

were  it  only  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood — should  alternately
or  continuously  excite  the  elements  of  the  central  organ  ;  we
would  then  see  the  elements  of  all  movement — walking,
swimming,  flying,  and  the  like — take  place  with  mechanical
certainty  and  regularity.  But  the  animal  is  endowed  with
all  these  capabilities  of  movement  that  it  may  use  them  in  a
resisting  world,  and  it  must  be  possible  to  vary  them  in  the
utmost  detail  in  accordance  with  the  varying  external  circum
stances  under  which  they  are  to  be  practised.  Now,  if  the
office  of  special  sensory  fibres  is  exclusively  to  receive  and  to
convey  impressions  of  the  varying  condition  of  the  several
parts,  we  must  expect  to  find  in  the  central  organ  sensory
and  motor  fibres  in  contact  with  one  another  at  a  number  of
points.  Any  slight  want  of  balance  in  the  body  will  then
produce  (by  the  new  impression  which  it  transmits  through  the
former  to  the  latter)  a  reaction  fitted  to  restore  equilibrium,
and  any  obstacle  will  cause  at  least  the  beginning  of  a  pur
posive  avoidance.  The  same  connection  we  shall  further  find
made  use  of  where  an  unusual  stimulus  coming  from  without
calls  for  a  particular  movement,  partly  of  defence,  partly  of
utilization  of  its  impression.  Here,  too,  we  may  suppose  it
to  be  the  arrangement  best  fitted  to  secure  life,  that,  without
waiting  for  the  soul's  deliberate  planning,  the  stimulus  imme
diately  suts  free  the  purposive  reaction  witli  mechanical
necessity.  We  observe  numerous  movements  of  this  kind  in
our  own  bodies,  such  as  convulsive  fits  of  coughing,  sneezing,
vomiting,  by  which,  without  our  being  aware  of  the  modus
opem/uli,  pernicious  stimuli  are  removed ;  and  such  have  been
observed  in  the  trunks  of  decapitated  animals,  i.e.  under
circumstances  that  make  it  most  natural  to  assume  that  the
soul  has  no  share  in  them.

Now,  so  long  as  these  movements  do  not  otherwise  belie
their  mechauicul  origin — i.e.  so  long  as  they  do  not  appear
without  external  or  traceable  internal  physical  excitation,  and
(without  respect  to  those  outward  circumstances  which  cannot
make  themselves  felt  by  means  of  physical  impressions)  are
always  alike  when  produced  by  the  same  kind  of  stimulus — so

33 G  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

long  any  amount  of  purposive  variety  in  their  combination
would  in  fact  form  no  reason  for  inferring  secret  co-operation
on  the  part  of  the  soul.  But  much  else  may  render  that
inference  plausible,  without  actually  making  it  valid.  It  is
not  improbable — nay,  on  the  contrary,  the  probabilities  are  in
favour  of  the  supposition — that  not  merely  the  place  but  also
the  kind  of  the  exciting  stimulus  helps  to  determine  the  form
assumed  by  the  movement  excited.  Little  attention  has
hitherto  been  paid  to  this  point ;  psychologists  have  been
content  to  note  the  fact  that,  for  example,  in  a  decapitated
frog  the  irritation  of  a  particular  spot  in  the  head  is  followed
by  a  movement  of  the  leg  in  that  direction,  and  this  has
given  rise  to  the  idea  that  the  sensory  nerve  of  a  particular
point  in  the  head  transfers  its  stimulations,  of  whatever  kind
they  may  be,  always  in  the  same  manner  to  motor  nerves,  and
that  consequently  an  identical  movement  always  follows.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  (what  is  possible)  that
the  transference  takes  places  differently,  i.e.  varies  alike  in
amount  and  in  the  motor  nerves  to  which  it  passes,  when
the  stimulation  to  be  conveyed  is  different,  this  would
introduce  into  these  reflex  movements,  as  they  are  usually
designated,  the  appearance  of  a  deliberate  choice,  without
the  soul  having  really  any  part  in  them.

To  this  extent  the  harmony  of  the  movements  would
depend  on  the  purposive  nature  of  the  permanent  forma
tion  of  the  central  organ.  But  the  familiar  phainomena  of
practice  and  habit,  the  experience  that  movements  the
performance  of  which  was  at  first  attended  with  great
difficulty  may  become  like  second  nature  to  us,  afford
convincing  evidence  that  the  primary  formation  of  organs
can  in  the  course  of  life  be  developed  to  still  greater
degrees  of  efficiency.  For  from  noticing  how  frequently
particular  traits  of  acquired  grace  and  refinement  of  bear
ing  and  movement  are  transmitted  by  inheritance,  we  may
conclude  that  habits  are  not  formed  without  causing  and
leaving  behind  particular  physical  changes  in  the  corporeal
organs.  Many  purposive  reactions  that  in  themselves  were

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 337

not  attached  by  the  permanent  plan  of  the  organism  to  a
particular  external  irritation,  can  be  made  to  follow  it  by
this  superinduced  tendency  of  the  nervous  system  ;  then  the
organ  develops  an  intelligence  of  action  which  did  not  originally
belong  to  it,  and  is  not  the  immediate  act  of  an  indwelling
soul,  but  only  the  acquired  physical  habit  which  it  owes  to
its  former  intercourse  with  the  soul.  For  it  could  not,  of
course,  learn  these  forms  of  reaction  by  itself,  the  intervening
activity  of  the  soul  must  have  annexed  the  reaction  to  the
irritation  of  the  organ  ;  but  what  the  corporeal  organization
could  not  devise  it  can  retain,  after  continued  repetition  has,
by  means  of  material  traces  left  behind,  set  the  stamp  of  ;i
physical  necessity  on  the  connection  between  the  impression
made  and  the  consequent  change.  Although,  then,  we  find  the
trunk  of  decapitated  frogs  sometimes  respond  to  external
irritation  by  a  kind  of  movement  that  seems  not  to  lie
sufficiently  accounted  fur  by  the  physical  impression  actually
communicated  at  the  moment  to  the  nervous  system,  it  is
nevertheless  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  trunk  contains
a  fragment  of  the  soul,  whose  deliberation  supplied  the  per
ceived  stimulus  with  the  intermediate  links  required  for  tht
adequate  establishment  of  the  purposive  movement,

Whatever  may  be  the  observed  facts,  we  cannot  permit  of
their  being  explained  by  this  hypothesis,  as  its  inherent
impossibility  seems  to  us  evident.  We  may  with  some
shadow  of  intelligibility  speak  of  a  divisible  soul,  if  we  art
thinking  merely  of  the  still  undeveloped  predisposition  to
mental  life,  which  seems  to  pervade  the  body  like  a  honu/-
geneous  whole  ;  but  if  the  divided  subject  be  supposed  to  lie
the  already  developed  consciousness  with  its  remembrances
and  experiences,  and  the  dexterities  and  knowledge  acquired
by  means  of  these,  we  could  hardly  have  so  much  as  any  clear
idea  of  what  it  is  we  were  asking.  And  yet  only  a  divisibility
of  the  latter  kind  would  account  for  the  phenomena  ;  for  the,
capacity  of  acting  in  accordance  with  circumstances  would
be  secured  for  the  headless  trunk  not  a  whit  more  easily
by  means  of  an  intelligence  possessing  no  experience  than

VOL.  i.

338  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

of  a  purely  physical  mechanism  as  first  formed.  These
observations  seem  to  yield  a  choice  between  only  two  views.
Either  we  must  regard  the  purposive  character  of  such
movements  as  are  frequently  performed  by  headless  trunks  of
cold-blooded  animals  as  the  result  of  intelligence,  but  of  an
intelligence  not  now  present  in  the  animal,  but  belonging  to
that  one  soul  with  whose  seat  the  trunk  was  formerly  in
connection,  and  from  whose  deliberations  proceed  habits  of
purposive  action  in  its  central  organ,  that  continue  even  after
all  connection  between  it  and  the  soul  has  been  done  away
with.  Or  if,  yielding  (mistakenly,  as  it  appears  to  me)  to
the  impression  of  complete  vitality  created  no  doubt  by  these
movements,  we  conclude  that  they  must  be  accounted  for  not
by  any  echo,  but  by  the  direct  presence  of  intelligence,  there
is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from  admitting  in  the  spinal  cord  a
plurality  of  individual  beings  of  the  nature  of  souls,  each  of
which  might  have  an  intelligence  for  itself.  During  life  the
one  soul,  which  we  call  that  of  the  animal,  would  by  its
more  favourable  position  or  the  greater  energy  of  its  nature
control  all  the  other  partial  souls,  and,  in  virtue  of  their
mutual  connection  with  one  another,  all  would  participate
in  the  experiences  of  the  whole  animal,  and  draw  from
them  advantage.  The  decapitated  animal  having  lost  the
influence  of  its  chief  soul,  the  souls  of  the  parts  could  still
manifest  themselves  according  to  the  nature  of  the  stimuli
affecting  their  part  of  the  body,  and  the  former  experiences,
which  each  unquestionably  could  have  only  in  connection
with  the  head  and  its  organs  of  sense,  but  which,  when  once
possessed,  are  retained  in  memory,  would  now  enable  them
to  adapt  their  action  to  external  circumstances.

§  7.  In  the  admission  of  this  central  organ  for  the
regulation  of  movements,  we  think  we  have  come  to  the
end  of  the  immediate  helps  that  must  be  required  from  the
bodily  structure  for  the  soul's  operations.  They  are  all
directed  towards  rendering  possible,  on  the  one  hand,  the
combination  of  external  impressions  into  a  spatial  arrange
ment  of  perception ;  on  the  other,  the  development  of  inner

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 330

states  to  a  purposive  connection  of  spatial  movements.  On
the  contrary,  all  the  large  amount  of  labour  by  which  the
intelligence  systematizes  the  matter  of  sense  -  impressions
into  a  single  rational  conception  of  things,  we  have  had  to
leave  exclusively  to  the  unbodied  energy  of  the  soul.  The
tasks  which  we  impose  on  the  brain  will  seem,  then,  much
simpler  than  the  manifold  functions  that  phrenologists  require
of  it  in  their  search  for,  and  alleged  discovery  of,  special
organs  for  many  of  the  most  complex  manifestations  of
mind.  However  unsafe  these  efforts  may  be,  the  unpre
judiced  observer  cannot  dismiss  them  as  groundless,  and
they  are  not  liable  to  every  charge  brought  against  them.
Without  doubt,  it  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  all  souls
in  themselves  of  one  kind,  owe  their  individual  character  to
the  special  development  of  their  corporeal  organs ;  on  tin-
contrary,  there  is  no  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  belief  that
each  OHM  is  by  an  originally  peculiar  character  determined
to  a  uniqui*  development  of  the  general  capacities  which  it
shares  with  all  others  as  the  common  foundation  of  mental
life.  If,  however,  we  hesitate  to  set  down  any  part  what
ever  of  predetermination  to  the  peculiar  character  and  indi
viduality  of  the  corporeal  frame,  we  forget  that  all  such
efforts  to  divorce  mental  life  from  bodily  conditions  are
Jnade  fruitless  by  other  indisputable  facts.  We  have  not
chosen  or  bestowed  on  ourselves,  our  sex,  or  our  people,  or
the  time  of  cur  birth,  or  the  social  circumstances  of  our
life — neither  our  poverty  nor  the  advantages  of  our  wealth  ;
so  long  as  wo  see  such  relations  often  bring  to  naught  the
hope  of  mental  development,  we  have  little  reason  to  dispute
very  vehemently  the  dependence  of  the  mind  on  its  body.
While  Materialism  offers  no  prospect  of  a  higher  nnd  more
satisfactory  view  of  things,  the  assertion  of  an  independent
soul  does  not  solve  the  dark  and  depressing  riddles  so  often
brought  before  us  by  the  course  of  the  world  and  the  destinies
of  life.

I.ut the admission of special organs, distributed over
different  tracts  of  the brain, for particular higher mental

340  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  III.

faculties,  has  after  all  little  probability  on  its  side.  "We
could  neither  form  any  idea  of  the  kind  of  advantage
offered  by  it,  nor  would  we  find  that  it  promotes  the  mutual
action  and  reaction  constantly  going  on  between  all  the
psychic  energies  ;  lastly,  even  if  we  gave  up  the  search  for
explanation,  the  mere  collecting  of  facts  in  proof  of  a  connec
tion  between  a  particular  cerebral  formation  and  particular
intellectual  operations,  would  be  found  to  be  attended  with
extraordinary  difficulties.  It  would  presuppose  in  the
inquirer  that  complete  and  penetrating  knowledge  of  human
nature  that  would  at  once  not  only  detect  all  the  hidden
tendencies  of  an  individual  character,  but  also  unravel  the
far  more  secret  tissue  of  antecedents  from  which  they
flowed  as  finished  results.  For  unquestionably  the  form  in
which  a  man's  complete  character  appears  to  an  observer,
has  been  moulded  not  only  by  the  innate  disposition,  but
also  by  the  succession  and  peculiar  character  of  the  external
circumstances  in  which  it  was  formed.  It  need  hardly  be
mentioned  how  difficult  must  be  the  redistribution  of  the
observed  characteristics  to  these  various  causes,  and  how
much  risk  there  is  of  interpreting  as  direct  results  of  ?,
corporeal  organization  effects  of  education,  of  way  of  life,
and  of  disease.  It  might  be  easier  for  unprejudiced  observa
tion  (though  at  most  in  the  case  of  such  capabilities  as  may
readily  be  shown  to  be  present,  as  are  frequently  transmitted
by  inheritance,  and  hardly  to  any  perceptible  degree  to  be
supplied  by  practice)  to  establish  a  relation  of  some  sort
between  these  and  particular  developments  of  the  brain  and
its  bony  case.  Thus  sense  of  locality  and  of  colour,  musical
genius,  perhaps  a  turn  for  mathematics  in  general,  and
ingenious  manual  dexterity,  may  be  found  to  have  corporeal
foundations,  while  as  regards  the  subtler  peculiarities  of
mental  individuality  we  entertain  hardly  any  such  expectation.
And  yet  even  these  may  be  largely  under  the  influence
of  the  bodily  life,  though  otherwise  than  by  the  assignment
of  a  special  organ  to  each  one.  The  immense  differences  in
the  amount  and  peculiar  character  of  mental  development

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 341

presented  by  mankind  more  than  by  any  other  species  of
animals,  seem  mostly  to  be  derived  from  distinctions  in  a
universal  psychic  nature,  closely  related  to  what  we  are  in
the  habit  of  calling  temperament.  In  all  individuals  mental
capacities  have  an  insignificant  germ,  and,  rapid  as  is  their
growth  in  some  cases,  they  are  yet  invariably  developed  by
means  of  the  registration  and  summation  of  individual  acts,
each  of  which  becomes  a  means  for  the  performance  of  a  sub
sequent  greater  one.  The  transition  from  one  to  another  is
effected — with  greater  or  less  rapidity — not  only  by  the
keenness  of  the  original  impression  of  the  perceptions,  but
still  more  by  the  liveliness  of  the  feelings  thereto  attached,
by  the  activity  of  the  organic  life  and  the  mobility  of  the
general  sense  that  11  actuates  with  its  changes,  by  variety  of
moods  and  abundance  of  internal  excitations  suggesting
certain  series  of  thoughts  and  breaking  off  others ;  on  all
these  influences  doubtless  are  dependent  not  only  the
rapidity  or  tardiness  of  the  general  mental  development,  but
also  many  abiding  peculiarities  of  the  direction  followed  by
its  course.  The  instrumentality  of  these  influences  of  the
body  is  in  great  part  not  particular  organs,  but  its  general
structure ;  varying  degrees  of  constitutional  vigour  form  a
peculiarly  coloured  background  to  the  mind's  action,  and,  con
firmed  as  this  is  by  the  experience  of  disease,  we  must  allow
to  the  chemical  composition  of  the  blood,  by  whose  stimu
lative  force  nervous  activity  is  excited,  a  considerable  influence
on  the  amount  and  direction  of  intellectual  energy.

Yet  in  another  respect  the  formation  of  the  central  organs
may  have  a  bearing  also  on  this.  It  is  chiefly  the  cerebral
hemispheres  that  in  the  ascending  scale  of  animal  life  we
find  increasing  in  bulk  as  the  mental  development  of  the
species  becomes  greater,  and  a  consensus  of  experience  leaves
hardly  any  doubt  that  in  man,  in  whom  they  are  most  fully
developed,  the  amount  of  intellectual  life  depends  on  their
structure  being  more  or  less  complete.  But  these  parts  of
the  brain  do  not  look  like  a  row  of  single  severally  complete
organs,  composed  of  a  great  number  of  fibres  with  inter-

342  BOOK  III. CIIAPTEIi  III.

polated  ganglionic  cells;  they  possess  a  far  more  uniform  and
monotonous  structure  than  the  internal  and  lower  parts  which
assume  very  peculiar  forms,  above  and  around  which  they
are  arched  as  a  thick  membranous  case  marked  deeply  with
very  many  furrows.  It  is  not  a  demonstrable  fact,  but  may
be  taken  as  a  credible  conjecture,  that  these  more  definitely
shaped  regions  of  the  brain  comprise  the  organs  of  mental
life,  which  we  have  already  found  it  necessary  to  admit,  and
which  are  characterized  by  an  unvarying  and  peculiar  form
of  working ;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  external  mass  of  the
hemispheres  forms  an  apparatus  of  general  use,  designed  in
part  as  the  means  of  reproduction  for  the  nervous  force
that  acts  in  the  organs,  in  part  to  regulate  their  capacity  of
stimulation,  in  part,  lastly,  as  we  hinted  when  considering
the  feelings,  to  afford  a  kind  of  resonance  by  which  there
may  be  communicated  to  the  matter  of  perception  a  certain
amount  of  feeling,  and  to  the  growing  volitional  impetus  a
particular  strength  of  motive  power.  Only  in  this  sense
of  an  indirect  and  yet  very  powerful  influence  on  the
mental  life,  would  we  concede  to  these  parts  of  the  brain
the  name  of  an  organ  of  intelligence,  of  emotion,  or  of  volition.
We  have  thus  delineated  the  various  forms  in  which  the
body  exhibits  itself  as  a  means  of  promoting  and  assisting
mental  development.  In  the  researches  of  physical  science
this  side  of  the  matter  is  wont  to  be  exclusively  presented ;
but  religious  considerations  usually  lead  to  the  other  being
brought  forward ;  they  beget  in  us  a  tendency  to  look  on  the
body  as  to  some  extent  a  barrier  hindering  the  soul's  free
development.  There  is  nothing  against  the  possibility  of
this  new  view;  as  we  find  that  in  disease  unusual  fluctua
tions  of  the  bodily  life  clog  the  mind's  activity,  so  also  the
abiding  healthy  connection  between  the  two  may  have  a
retarding  effect  on  the  inward  development.  Experience,
however,  has  but  a  poor  array  of  facts  pointing  in  this
direction,  and  in  cases  of  bodily  illness  that  somewhat  relax
the  bond  between  the  two  natures,  we  never  find  a  new  and
unexpected  burst  of  psychic  life  occur.  This  assertion  is  not

FORMS  OF  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. 343

weakened  by  an  appeal  to  the  marvels  of  somnambulism  and
clairvoyance.  After  attention  has  been  so  often  aroused  and
disappointed  by  these  phenomena,  after  there  has  been  so
much  clairvoyance  without  the  slightest  permanent  advantage
for  the  progress  of  mankind :  after  these  experiences,  it
might  be  supposed  that  interest  in  all  this  had  also  become
clairvoyant  and  had  recognised  it  for  what  it  is,  viz.  pecu
liarly  intensified  morbid  processes,  the  like  of  which  in  less
intensity  are  offered  by  daily  experience.  Even  ordinary
intoxication  shows  us  that  one-sided  animation  of  conscious
ness  that  is  devoid  of  any  clear  and  comprehensive  survey
of  its  content  and  of  the  external  environment,  while  there
appear  all  sorts  of  impulses  to  pathetic  rhythmical  gesture
— ami  delight,  and  al»ng  with  it  dexterity,  in  daring  experi
ments,  all  of  which  is  prevented  in  the  sober  man  partly  by
the  inferior  liveliness  of  his  nervous  actions  and  the  lower
tone  of  his  general  sense,  partly  by  a  decorous  regard  to
propriety  and  the  usages  of  life.  In  like  manner,  a  particu
larly  exciting  train  of  thought  that  flows  on  in  sleep
may  be  then  more  easily  carried  out,  while  the  numberless
distracting  impressions  of  the  outer  world  are  absent,  and
the  somnambulist  in  his  half-waking  consciousness  may  finish
the  solution  of  a  problem  that  awake  he  failed  to  work  out.
But,  at  the  same  time,  we  do  not  forget  that  it  is  properly
the  powers,  the  knowledge,  in  short,  the  whole  acquisition  of
waking  life  that  made  this  achievement  possible  for  the
sleeper.  As  the  consciousness  of  danger  declines,  the  bold
ness  of  the  adventurer  increases ;  as  regard  to  surroundings
ceases,  the  experimenter's  audacity  waxes;  and  as  all  disturbing
influences  are  warded  off,  inner  concentration  and  harmonious
energy  advance,  without  anything  really  new  and  unexpected
taking  the  place  of  the  familiar.  Thus  the  human  life  which
is  the  subject  of  our  observation,  is  throughout  bound  to
reciprocal  action  with  the  body,  but  the  greater  beauty  of
development  to  which  the  soul,  freed  from  this  bond,  may
rise,  we  shrill  not  prematurely  guess  at,  before  the  bond  has
been  torn  asunder.

CHAPTEE IV.

LIFE  IN  MATTEL;.

The  Constant  Illusion  of  Sense — Impossibility  of  Things  being  copied  in  our
Perception — The  Special  and  Higher  Worth  of  Sense — The  Inner  Activity
of  Things — Matter  the  Manifestation  of  something  Supersensnous — Con
cerning  the  Possibility  of  Extended  Beings — Animation  of  the  \vhole  World
— Contrast  between  Body  and  Soul  not  retracted — Justification  of  Plurality
as  against  Unity.

§  1.  TTOW  many  objections  may  silently  have  attended
-*—•-  every  step  of  our  statement !  And  these  not  such
alone  as  found  occasions  of  dissent  in  the  several  difficulties  of
the  questions  which  we  have  hurried  through,  and  as  may  be
answered,  not  by  us,  but  by  more  extended  scientific  research ;
nay  more,  we  must  expect  a  thoroughgoing  revolt  of  the
heart  against  the  coldness  of  a  theory  that  transforms  all  the
beauty  and  animation  of  forms  into  a  rigid  physico-psychical
mechanism.  We  have  had  to  direct  many  attacks  against  the
creative,  self-determined  development  of  corporeal  life,  against
the  permeation  of  the  body  by  the  mind,  against  the  truth  of
sensation  and  the  spontaneity  of  movement  ;  in  fact,  we  have
made  questionable  all  the  characteristics  that  contain  for  naive
feeling  the  essence  of  all  the  poetry  of  life.  We  cannot
therefore  wonder  at  the  steadfastness  with  which  the  advocates
of  an  emotional  view  will  refuse  to  accept  as  a  higher  con
ception  of  things  the  most  convincing  statements  on  our  side ;
the  more  necessary,  therefore,  is  the  attempt  to  prove  the
harmlessness  of  our  theory,  which,  where  it  compels  us  to
sacrifice  opinions  in  which  we  seem  to  surrender  a  part  of
ourselves,  yet  by  what  it  gives  in  exchange  makes  it  possible
fur  us  to  regain  our  lost  content.

Naive  consciousness  always  takes  sensation  to  be  the  per-

LIFE  IN'  MATTE  P.  345

ception  of  a  complete,  externally-existing,  real  thing.  It
believes  that  the  world  lies  around  us  illuminated  by  its  own
ladiance,  and  outside  of  us  tones  and  odours  cross  and  meet
one  another  in  the  immeasurable  space  that  plays  in  the
colours  belonging  to  things.  Our  senses  sometimes  cloee
themselves  against  this  continual  abundance,  and  confine  us  t<>
the  course  of  our  inner  life  ;  sometimes  they  open  like  doors
to  the  arriving  stimulus,  to  receive  it  as  it  is  in  all  its  grace
or  ugliness.  No  doubt  disturbs  the  assurance  of  this  belief,
and  even  the  illusions  of  the  senses,  insignificant  in  com
parison  with  the  preponderance  of  consentient  experience,  do
not  shake  the  assurance  that  we  here  everywhere  look  into  an
actual  world  that  dues  nut  cease  to  be  as  it  appears  to  us  even
when  our  attention  is  not  turned  to  it.  The  brightness  of  the
stars  seen  by  the  night-watcher  will,  he  hopes,  continue  to
shine  over  him  in  slumber  ;  tunes  and  perfumes,  unheard  and
un.sinelt,  will  be  fragrant  and  harmonious  afterwards  as  before  ;
nothing  of  the  sensible  world  will  perish  save  the  accidental
perception  of  it  which  consciousness  formerly  possessed.  And
this  full  confidence  in  the  reality  of  sense-perception  not  only
is  harmless,  but  a  deep  need  urges  men  to  ardent  resistance
of  any  attempt  to  deprive  it  of  the  full  reality  of  its  phe
nomena.  It  must  continue  to  be  the  inherent  sweetness  of
the  objects  that  comes  to  us  in  sweet  tastes  and  fragrant
odours,  the  very  soul  of  things  that  speaks  to  us  in  sound  ;
the  splendour  of  colour  would  grow  pale  to  us  if  we  could  not
look  on  its  radiance  as  the  revelation  of  another  being  that,
though  strange  to  us,  becomes  so  transparent  to  us  that  we
can  become  sympathetically  absorbed  into  and  united  with  its
nature.  The  best  part  of  the  significance  of  the  things  of
sense  would  be  lost  if  this  lucid  reality  of  the  objects  of
sensation  were  taken  from  us ;  the  same  lon<rin<:  that  in

O O

higher  stages  of  mental  life  seeks  completion  in  another,  here
in  sensation  seeks  to  preserve  the  dreamy  enjoyment  of  being
completely  permeated  by  what  is  alien.  And  not  only  must
what  relates  to  sense  somehow  cleave  to  things  themselves ;
on  the  contrary,  we  are  drawn  by  tliis  longing  to  look  on

34 G  BOOK  III. CIIAPTEK  IV.

sensible  properties  as  acts  of  that  in  which  we  find  them.
Not  merely  are  things  coloured,  but  it  is  their  living  active
shining  that  we  view  in  their  colours  ;  their  taste,  their  smell,
are  actions  in  which  their  inmost  being  comes  toward  ours,
and  discloses  that  which,  within  the  externally-bounded  space
filled  by  their  forms,  forms  the  true  reality  of  their  existence.
Not always indeed in daily life is this earnestness in
regard  to  sensation  alike  present ; other  interests,  with  the
manifold reflections which  they  bring  with  them,  make  us
carelessly take and forget  many sense  -  perceptions ; what
would  interest  us  in  detail,  makes  on  our  absently-glancing
eye  an  indifferent  or  a  repulsive  total  impression;  we  think
we  see  unclean  chaotic  masses,  where  the  assisted  eye  often
discovers  regular  crystallization  and  traces  of  an  ornamental
formative  power. Thus  colours  become  to  us  indifferent  in
the  artificial  forms  of  our  utensils ; but  if  we  look  at the
smallest  particles  of  the  natural  substance  that  our  handicraft
has  forced  into  a  form  to  it  indifferent,  to  supply  the  neces
sities of  life,  how immediately we again come under the
power  of  the  spell  of  sense  in the  rich  depth  and brilliant
splendour  of  colours,  in  the  marvellous  play  of  broken  lights
that  iridescent  hover  over  the  finest  cracks  and  stripes  of  the
surfaces  ! Then  we  have  in  miniature  the  blossoming  of  that
same  fair  mystery  that  is  wont  to  excite  our  senses  in  the
formless  vapoury  colouring  of  the sky,  and  the  mysterious
shapes  of  flowers. The  many  sounds  that  animate  the  earth
blend  to  the  preoccupied  or  inattentive  ear  into  mere  noise  ;
but  the  thoughtful  listening  that  discriminates  them  recog
nises in the several  voices of  Nature  utterances  in  which,
though  they  are untranslatable  into any other tongue,  yet
a  mysterious inner nature  of  things  speaks  to  us  with all
distinctness. Only  the  accidental  combinations  in  which  we
are  accustomed  to  find  many  elements  of  sense,  the  arbitrary
forms  in  which  we  mould  things  for  our  own  uses,  make  the
original  significance  of  sense-perceptions  temporarily  disappear
for  us ;  but  it  is  always  felt  anew  when  we  give  ourselves  up
to,  or  seek  out,  simple  impressions,  or  when  with  perfected  art

LIFE  IN  MATTER.  3-47

\vc  combine  tilings  that,  by  the  elective  aflinities  of  their
nature,  crave  to  be  united.  Then  we  again  recognise  the
claim  made  by  our  sensuous  nature  to  give  us  insight  into  the
inmost  living  essence  of  an  alien  but  true  reality  that  in  its
alienation  faces  us  now  as  a  friend  and  now  as  a  foe.

And  of  this  belief  the  mechanical  view  of  Nature  seeks  to
deprive  us,  or  at  least  seems  inclined  to  do  so.  It  teaches  us
that  sensations  are  the  peculiar  product  of  the  soul,  suggested
indeed  by  outward  impressions,  but  resembling  neither  these
nor  the  things  from  which  they  proceed :  that  the  world  about
us  has  in  itself  neither  darkness  nor  light,  neither  sound  nor
stillness,  but,  on  the  contrary,  is  wholly  out  of  relation  either
to  light  or  to  sound,  that  things  have  no  smell  or  taste.  Nay,
what  seemed  most  unquestionably  to  warrant  the  reality  of
the  external  world — hardness,  softness,  resistance — are,  ac
cording  to  it,  forms  of  sensation  in  which  we  are  conscious
merely  of  our  own  internal  states.  Nothing  really  fills  space
save  tin  indefinite  host  of  myriad  atoms  vibrating  towards  ono
another  in  the  most  varied  forms  of  motion.  And  neither
atoms  nor  motions,  as  such,  fall  under  our  observation ;  both
are  only  assumptions  presupposed — but  necessarily  presupposed
— in  the  inferential  calculation  of  phenomena.  These  simple
elements  cannot  themselves  be  described  as  they  are,  absolutely
devoid  of  sensible  properties,  which  are  the  only  material  out
of  which  we  can  make  distinct  descriptions  ;  their  motions
we  can  indeed  indicate,  but  in  themselves  they  are  never
objects  of  our  actual  perception.  In  all  perception  nothing
is  directly  in  our  consciousness  but  that  which  it  has  itself
created  ;  only  by  subsequent  reflection  on  the  conditions  under
which  our  sensations  originate  are  we  by  degrees  carried  back  to
assume  causes  that  in  themselves  remain  for  ever  inaccessible
to  observation.  Thus,  then,  the  reality  of  the  external  world
is  utterly  severed  from  our  senses,  and  all  the  variety  of  the
perceived  world  becomes  but  a  phenomenon  of  our  own  mind,
which  we  indeed  throw  back  upon  things  as  if  it  were  their
natural  form  and  illumination,  but  which  no  more  belongs  to
or  proceeds  from  them  than  do  the  reflections  which  experience

348  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

suggests  to  us  cling  ready-made  to  the  objects  with  which  we
connect  them.

Vain  attempts  have  been  made  to  defend  the  reality  of
sense-phenomena  against  this  doctrine.  It  had  to  be  allowed
that  those  modes  of  motion  presupposed  in  calculations  are
really  the  conditions  that  give  rise  to  our  sensations ;  but
proof  was  lacking  and  was  demanded  that  these  are  not
brought  to  a  second  birth  in  consciousness  by  what,  on  the
one  hand,  is  certainly  a  product  of  our  mental  nature,  but  on
the  other  is  also  present  in  the  outer  world  itself  and  in  the
stimuli.  Undulations  of  the  luminous  aether  and  vibrating
waves  of  sound,  it  was  asserted,  traverse  space,  and  the
mechanical  mode  of  motion  is  but  the  external  means  by
which  they  stimulate  eye  and  ear  to  copy  the  actually  existing
sensible  content.  But  proof  of  the  contrary  should  not  have
been  expected  from  mechanical  physics,  as  a  little  reflection
might  of  itself  have  sufficed  to  supply  it.  "We  not  only  know
colour  and  sound  solely  through  sensation,  but  we  would  be
wholly  unable  to  say  what  idea  we  attached  to  them  if  they
were  not  perceived  by  our  own  or  some  other  consciousness.
As  velocity  is  involved  in  motion,  and  not  in  itself  something
that  might  be  added  to  motion,  so  all  sensations  have  but
one  place  of  existence — consciousness,  and  one  kind  of  exist
ence  —  that  of  a  state,  passive  or  active,  of  consciousness.
Even  before  a  mechanical  theory  had  detected  in  the  modes
of  motion  of  external  elements  the  causes  whence  our
sensations  originate,  reflection  might  have  discovered  that  at
all  events  they  are  conceivable  only  as  such  states  of  the
mind  arid  its  knowledge,  and  that  any  attempt  must  fail  which
maintains  that  what  shines  in  light  or  sounds  in  tones  is  a
property  of  things  or  an  event  taking  place  between  them,
somewhere  outside  of  sentient  beings.  It  is  vain  to  call  the
eye  sun-like,  as  if  light  were  before  it  is  seen,  and  as  if  the
eye  needed  a  special  occult  power  to  copy  what  on  the
contrary  it  has  itself  produced ;  fruitless  are  all  mystic  efforts
to  restore  to  the  intuitions  of  sense,  by  means  of  a  secret
identity  of  mind  with  things,  a  reality  outside  ourselves.

LIFE  IN MATTEL'.  349

But  however  fruitless  they  may  be,  they  will  undoubtedly  be
ever  and  anon  renewed  by  that  strange  susceptibility  that
aims  not  at  fulfilling  its  perhaps  justifiable  wishes  by  actively
setting  about  the  removal  of  difficulties,  but  only  at  cheating
them  by  a  facile  surrender  to  the  self-contradictory.

>J  2.  Must  we  then  really  give  up  all  these  claims,  which
to  naive  consciousness  seemed  so  well-grounded  ?  Must  all
the  glory  revealed  by  the  senses  be  changed  into  an  illusion
of  our  mind,  that,  incompetent  to  discern  the  true  nature  of
things,  consoles  itself  by  creating  a  show  without  objective
validity  of  any  kind  ?  If  it  were  at  least  possible  to  look  on
sensations  as  translating,  so  that  the  import  can  be  recognised,
the  properties  of  things  into  a  language  familiar  to  the  mind,
we  would  be  at  ease  and  make  up  our  minds  to  the  inevitable
loss  of  clearness  suffered  by  the  matter  of  existence  in  passing
into  knowledge.  But  what  have  vibrations  of  the  a-ther  to
do  with  light  l.  what  have  undulations  of  condensation  in  the
atmosphere  to  do  with  tones  ?  The  physical  cause  and  the
sensation  following  it  are  here  on  so  wholly  different  lines,
that  in  the  latter  we  do  not  find  even  a  faint  echo  of  the
foimer,  but  a  new  phenomenon  without  a  shadow  of  resem
blance  comes  into  view  within  us.  How  ill-fitted  therefore
is  sentience  for  the  performance  of  its  task — to  reflect  the
nature  of  things,  or  at  least  the  veritable  outside  of  their
being  !  And  consequently  how  little  trustworthy  becomes  the
hope  that  knowledge  will  penetrate  their  inmost  being .'
Beset  on  all  sides  by  error,  we  can  call  our  sense-perception
nothing  else  than  a  tissue  of  delusions  of  the  senses.

If  these  complaints  are  natural,  it  is  assuredly,  however,  not
the  spirit  of  mechanical  investigation  that  has  given  occasion
to  them.  Physical  science,  starting  from  imperceptible
elements,  tracing  their  manifold  motions,  and  seeking  to
determine  the  impression  produced  by  the  transmission  of
these  disturbances  on  the  sensitive  nerves  of  the  living  body,
and  through  them  on  the  soul,  regards  this  connection  simply
as  a  causal  chain  of  processes,  and  thinks  it  no  more  sur
prising  here  than  elsewhere  that  after  so  many  transitions  of

350  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

efficacy  from  one  agent  to  another,  the  final  effect,  the  quality
of  the  conscious  sensation  itself,  is  wholly  unlike  the  primary
occasioning  causes.  'Why,  it  would  be  entitled  to  ask,  do  you
require  anything  different  ?  Why  do  you  suppose  it  to  he
the  duty  of  your  senses  to  present  the  things  by  which  they
are  affected  as  they  really  are,  and  not  contrariwise  as  they
do  actually  present  them  ?  Why  should  they  bring  into
consciousness  the  first  causes  instead  of  the  last  effect  ?  and
are  not  the  shimmer  and  the  tone  which  they  transmit  to
you,  inasmuch  as  they  are  transmitted,  no  less  than  the
unseen  vibrations  of  the  aether  and  the  atmosphere  a  fact,
having  with  them  an  equal  right  to  be  recognised  ?  If  you
regret  the  loss  of  the  splendour  of  the  world  of  sense,  what
prevents  you  from  retaining  it,  and  rejoicing  that  there  are  in
the  world  beings  whose  inner  nature  can  be  stirred  by  the
impetus  of  these  modes  of  motion  to  so  fair  reactions,  to  the
unfolding  of  a  realm  of  colour  and  sound  ?  Finally,  what
urges  you  to  penetrate  to  the  far  less  pleasing  core,  to  shatter
the  fair  outside,  and  to  long  for  a  sight  of  the  skeleton  frame
work  whose  rigidity  is  veiled  by  its  soft  outlines  ?

There  is  indeed  every  reason  to  test  the  apparently  self-
evident  assumption,  that  the  sole  office  of  sentience  and  of  all
knowledge  is  to  present  to  consciousness  the  forms  of  things
as  they  are.  The  objection  will  doubtfully  be  brought  forward
against  us — to  what  purpose  is  such  a  doubt  ?  Must  not  the
office  of  cognition  be  to  know  ?  But  this  objection  is  only
another  instance  of  that  precipitation  to  which  we  are  all  so
prone.  For  only  in  the  perception  that  our  consciousness
contains  a  manifold  world  of  ideas,  in  whose  production  we
are  dependent  on  unknown  conditions  lying  outside  ourselves,
have  we  an  undeniable  fact  that  must  form  the  starting-point
of  our  discussion.  This  play  of  ideas,  regular  in  itself  and
connected  with  the  sphere  of  these  unknown  conditions,  limns
in  outlines  agreeing  for  different  minds  the  picture  of  a
common  external  world,  in  which  they  meet  one  another
for  mutual  transactions  and  communications.  The  thought
of  each  individual  should  therefore  be  true,  that  is,  in  the

LIFE  IX  MATTER.  351

sense  of  presenting  to  each  the  same  world  as  is  showed  to
others,  without  any  individual  illusion  shutting  us  out  from
communion  with  other  minds,  by  cheating  us  with  a  series  of
external  points  of  relation,  at  which  we  can  never  come  into
contact  with  the  activity  of  others,  because  they  exist  for
none  but  ourselves.  At  the  same  time,  it  remains  wholly
undecided  whether  the  world  that  is  uniformly  presented  to
each  of  us  in  thought,  is  for  all  alike  a  consistent  error,  or
whether  what  we  think  we  see  does  in  fact  present  the  very
form  of  the  outer  world,  on  whose  influences  we  feel  that  we
are  dependent.

Partly  the  influence  of  daily  life,  partly  the  peculiar  interest
of  science,  the  express  object  of  whose  researches  is  accurate-
ad  [uaintance  with  things,  have  accustomed  us  to  estimate  the
worth  of  our  ideas  and  sensations  by  the  accuracy  with  which
they  represent  the  nature  of  objects.  We  forget  that  the
occurrence  of  these  internal  phaenonieua  within  us  is  quite  as
much  a  pregnant  fact  as  the  existence  of  the  source  whence
they  spring  ;  and  after  we  have  once  become  used  to  apply
to  them  the  name  cognition,  and  thereby  tacitly  to  put  them
into  necessary  relation  to  something  external,  we  are  apt  to
contrast  being  and  knowing  as  if  the  former  comprised  the
whole  reality  of  the  universe,  and  the  latter  had  only  to  be  a
good  or  bad  cognitive  repetition  of  this  complete  universe.
But  the  fact  that  the  influence  of  the  existent  and  of  its
changes  causes  within  rational  beings  a  world  of  sensation  to
come  into  being,  is  no  insignificant  addition  to  the  connection
of  things,  as  if  the  import  of  all  existence  and  action  would
be  complete  without  it ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  itself  one  of  th<^
greatest,  if  not  the  greatest  of  all  events,  whose  depth  and
meaning  make  all  else  sink  into  significance,  that  could  take
place  among  the  constituents  of  the  universe.  As  we  prize  u
blossom  for  its  brilliance  of  colour  and  its  fragrance,  without
requiring  of  it  to  exhibit  a  representation  of  the  form  of  its
roots,  so  we  must  prize  this  inner  world  of  sensation  for  its
own  beauty  and  significance,  without  measuring  its  value  by  the
fidelity  with  which  it  reproduces  its  less  important  foundation.

3i)2  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

For  why,  in  fact,  should  we  not  reverse  this  whole  relation,
to  which  a  crude  mode  of  conception  has  accustomed  us  ?
Instead  of  setting  up  the  external  as  the  goal  to  which  all  the
efforts  of  our  sensation  are  to  be  directed,  why  should  we  not
rather  look  upon  the  splendour  of  light  and  sound  as  the  end
which  all  those  dispositions  of  the  external  world,  7;hose
obscurity  we  deplore,  are  designed  to  realize  ?  What  pleases
us  in  the  drama  that  we  see  developed  before  us  on  the  stage,
is  the  poetical  Idea  and  its  inherent  beauty  ;  no  one  would
expect  to  enhance  this  enjoyment  or  discern  a  profounder
truth  if  he  could  indulge  in  an  examination  of  the  machinery
that  effects  the  changes  of  scenery  and  illumination  ;  no  one,
while  taking  in  the  meaning  of  the  spoken  words,  desires  a
distinct  knowledge  of  the  physical  processes  by  which  the
organism  of  the  actors  produces  the  resonant  vibrations  of
their  voices,  or  initiates  the  motion  of  their  expressive  gestures.
The  course  of  the  universe  is  such  a  drama  ;  its  essential
truth  is  the  meaning  set  forth  so  as  to  be  intelligible  to  the
spirit ;  but  the  other,  which  we  would  often  so  fain  know,  and
in  which,  deceived  by  prejudice,  we  first  of  all  seek  the  true
being  of  things,  is  nothing  else  than  the  framework  on  which
rests  the  alone  momentous  actuality  of  the  fair  appearance.
Instead  of  complaining  that  in  sensation  the  real  properties  of
things  outside  us  are  not  represented,  we  should  rejoice  that
something  so  much  greater  and  fairer  comes  in  its  place  ;  we
would  not  gain  but  lose  if  we  had  to  sacrifice  the  radiant
splendour  of  colour  and  light,  the  power  and  sweetness  of
tones,  the  fragrance  of  odours,  in  order  to  be  consoled  with
receiving  in  exchange  for  this  vanished  world  of  utmost
beauty  the  most  accurate  acquaintance  with  vibrations
moving  with  more  or  less  velocity  in  this  or  that  direction.
Besides,  it  is  within  our  power  to  attain  to  this  knowledge  by
scientific  research,  and  actually  to  reach  those  colourless
foundations  of  the  sensible  world  over  which  actual  sensation
spreads  this  deluding,  or,  as  we  would  be  more  correct  to  say,
transfiguring  radiance.  Let  us  therefore  cease  to  lament  as
if  the  reality  of  things  escaped  our  apprehension ;  on  the

LIFE  IX  MATTE H.  353

contrary,  it  consists  in  that  as  which  they  appear  to  us,  and
all  that  they  are  before  they  are  made  manifest  to  us  is  the
mediating  preparation  for  this  final  realization  of  their  very
being.  The  beauty  of  colours  and  tones,  warmth  and  fragrance,
are  what  Nature  in  itself  strives  to  produce  and  express,  but
cannot  do  so  by  itself ;  for  this  it  needs  as  its  last  and  noblest
instrument,  the  sentient  mind  that  alone  can  put  into  words
its  mute  striving,  and  in  the  glory  of  sentient  intuition
.set  forth  in  luminous  actuality  what  all  the  motions  and
gestures  of  the  external  world  were  vainly  endeavouring  to
express.

But  however  great  be  the  importance  which  we  thus  ascribe
to  sensation  in  the  order  of  the  universe,  we  still  fear  we  may
not  thereby  have  wholly  put  an  end  to  the  old  complaints.
For  the  advantage  of  enjoyment  falls  too  partially  on  the  side
of  the  world  of  intelligence,  over  against  which  stands  all
Nature  as  merely  the  lifeless,  even  if  mobile,  framework  of
means  by  which  the  beauty  of  the  world  of  sense  may  be
produced  in  something  else,  not  in  itself.  Have  things  by
their  motions,  while  themselves  destitute  of  enjoyment,  only
to  minister  to  souls  as  mere  stimuli  to  this  inner  life  ?  Has
the  one  half  of  creation,  that  which  we  comprise  under  the
name  of  the  material  world,  no  function  whatever  save  that
of  serving  the  other  half,  the  realm  of  mind,  and  are  we  not
justified  in  lunging  to  iind  the  lustre  of  sense  in  that  also
whence  we  seem  always  to  derive  it  ?  Perhaps  now  this
longing  alone  would  not  suiliee  as  the  foundation  of  a  new
moulding  of  our  theories  ;  assuming,  however,  that  a  more
thorough  investigation  added  to  the  strength  of  this  founda
tion,  we  could  yet  assuredly  find  in  things  themselves  the
reality  of  all  content  of  sensation  only  on  supposition  of  the
conditions  on  which  it  is  conceivable  by  us.  The  content  of
sensation,  light  and  colour,  tone  and  odour,  can  be  understood
only  as  modes  or  states  of  an  intuition  or  cognition  ;  if  they
are  to  be  phenomena  not  merely  internal  in  ourselves  but
inherent  in  things,  things  must  be  capable  of  appearing  to
themselves  and  of  producing  these  in  their  own  sensation,

VOL.  i.  z

354  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

To  this  inference  that  sheds  over  all  existence  the  lustre  cf
vital  animation,  our  craving  would  have  resolute!}'  to  advance  ;
in  this  reality  within  things  alone  would  it  find  a  possible
basis  for  the  reality  of  sense  outside  us ;  on  the  other  hand,
all  efforts  would  be  vain  to  annex  what  is  conceivable  only
as  an  internal  state  of  sentience  to  insentient  beings  as  an
external  property.

We  thus  find  ourselves  here  brought  back  to  an  idea  which
we  met  in  our  first  discussions  concerning  the  nature  of  the
soul,  to  that  hypothesis  of  a  double  existence  of  all  matter —
outwardly  in  accordance  with  the  well  -  known  physical
properties,  inwardly  stirred  by  mental  activity.  We  refused
then  to  apply  this  idea,  according  to  which  the  whole  of  the
living  body  must  be  conceived  as  being  the  sentient  soul,
or  the  unity  of  our  consciousness  must  be  explained  by  the
co-operation  of  many  elements.  We  recognised  that  the  latter
is  thinkable  not  as  a  resultant  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  a
plurality  of  beings,  but  only  as  the  manifestation  of  an
indivisible  being,  and  that  a  complete  fusion  of  the  mental
energy  with  the  whole  of  the  body,  which  does  not  date  from
eternity,  but  during  the  process  of  growth  has  been  formed
by  most  heterogeneous  contributions  from  the  external  world,
is  in  opposition  alike  to  universal  possibilities  and  to  the
most  definite  facts  of  experience.  We  cannot  think  differently
now,  and  any  attempt  to  conceive  of  matter  as  animated
must  of  necessity  be  combined  with  another,  viz.  to  prove
that  the  form  in  which  we  think  we  immediately  apprehend
matter,  infinitely  divisible  extension,  is  an  illusion,  having  as  its
foundation  a  multitude  of  indivisible  beings,  whose  definition
contains  only  supersensible  properties.  Many  threads  of  our
discussion  that  have  hitherto  lain  apart  and  unfinished  now
run  together  and  draw  near  their  termination;  may  we  be
permitted,  as  a  means  of  fully  uniting  them,  once  more  and
emphatically  to  direct  attention  to  the  conception  of  matter
which  we  have  hitherto  accepted,  contenting  ourselves  simply
with  repelling  its  aggressions  across  its  own  borders,  and
from  which  we  must  now  at  last  seek  to  withdraw  even  that

LIFE  IN  MATTER.  355

which  seemed  to  come  under  its  peculiar  sway.  For,  while
earlier  thinkers  believed  that  the  mental  life  was  derived
from  the  efficiency  of  matter  as  a  simple  and  self-evident
corollary,  we  now  purpose  to  vindicate  the  exclusive  and
original  reality  of  the  mental  sphere,  and  to  show  that  it
makes  Nature  comprehensible,  and  not  vice  versa.

The  general  reflections  with  which  we  prefaced  the  sketch
of  the  bodily  life  convinced  us  that  the  manifold  forms  and
events  set  before  us  en  Hoc  in  experience  can  be  explained
only  by  the  counter-working  of  many  distinct  and  indepen
dent  centres  of  exeunt  and  ineunt  forces.  This  hypothesis  of
an  internal  systematization  of  apparently  homogeneous  masses
is  directly  confirmed  in  many  cases  by  the  observations  of  the
assisted  eye,  and  a  more  searching  investigation  into  all  the
perplexing  phenomena  presented  by  the  more  elaborately  con
structed  even  of  inanimate  bodies,  and  by  their  consequent
peculiarities  of  action,  would  find  itself  inevitably  compelled
to  admit  this  organization  of  matter  out  of  single  efficient
parts  far  beyond  the  limits  of  possible  perception.  But  the
iinal  step  of  denying  to  the  infinitesimal  atoms  to  which  we
are  thus  led  back  any  extension,  in  space,  form,  or  size,  was-
then  merely  a  possible,  not  yet  a  necessary,  termination  of  that
theory.  Although,  however,  it  was  admissible  in  respect  of
physical  science  to  leave  this  question  undecided,  we  are
constrained  by  the  conception  that  would  preserve  even  for
matter  intelligent  life  or  something  analogous,  to  seek  a  defi
nite  answer  to  it.

First  of  all,  in  opposition  to  the  current  doctrine  that
matter  is  extended,  impenetrable,  imperishable,  and  offers
resistance,  we  must  make  the  counter  assertion  that  these
properties  and  modes  of  action  have  no  subject :  we  arc  not
told  what  it  is  that  is  extended,  impenetrable,  and  imperish
able,  and  what  constrains  these  various  properties,  which  in
themselves  have  no  necessary  connection  with  one  another,  to
appear  in  combination.  Should  the  supporters  of  the  doctrine
seek  to  cover  this  defect  by  the  acknowledgment  that  the  true
essence  of  matter  consists  of  an  indescribable  supersensible

356  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

something,  from  whose  nature  those  very  properties  and  their
combination  necessarily  and  permanently  follow,  we  would
have  to  reply  that,  while  the  other  predicates  are  compatible
with  the  notion  of  something  existent,  that  of  extension  is
not,  and  yet  by  extension  it  is  that  matter  is  thought  to  be
essentially  distinguished  from  all  else  existent.

For  he  who  speaks  of  the  extension  of  matter  is  not  con
tent  to  find  in  every  point  of  the  space  that  his  eye  can  scan,
the  operative  sway,  the  power,  or  the  spiritual  presence  of  a
substance  that  yet  is  itself  present  only  at  a  single  point ;  on
the  contrary,  he  maintains  that  every  infinitesimal  part  of  this
space  is  perpetually  filled  by  it  just  as  much  as  it  would  fill
that  selected  point.  And  at  the  same  time,  on  this  theory,
each  single  point  of  filled  space  is  also  an  independent
abiding  centre  of  forces,  and  the  annihilation  of  all  the  others
could  not  prevent  it  from  continuing  its  working  in  harmony
with  the  nature  of  the  portion  of  reality  which  it  contains.
This  conception  thus  leads  to  an  infinite  divisibility  of  the
extended,  but  along  with  that  it  cannot,  it  appears  to  me,  get
rid  of  the  idea  of  an  actual  division.  For  that  which,  after
its  separation  from  a  whole,  can  undisturbed  continue  its
working  with  the  degree  of  force  corresponding  to  its  size,
must  in  the  whole  have  had  an  independent  existence,  forming
with  other  equally  independent  parts  a  regular  sum,  but
not  a  veritable  unit.  Or  vice  vcrsd,  what  can  be  sundered
into  a  number  of  wholly  independent  parts,  and  can  without
any  alteration  of  its  nature  let  go  certain  parts  and  admit  others
not  previously  belonging  to  it,  cannot,  with  such  indifference  to
increase  or  diminution,  be  conceived  as  a  single  self-complete
being,  but  only  as  a  combination  of  what  were  originally  a
plurality  of  beings.  In  contrast  to  this  external  multiplicity
may  be  set  an  inner  unity  of  the  many ;  it  may  be  supposed
that  all  these  parts  are  intimately  connected,  by  homogeneity
i)f  nature,  by  a  common  import,  and  by  joint  destination  to  a
common  development  and  mode  of  action:  but  when  we  ab
stract  from  what  they  have  been  and  what  they  shall  be,  when
we  look  simply  at  what  they  are,  none  of  these  higher  unities

LIFE  IN  MATTER.  357

can  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  primarily  they  do  indisputably
form  a  plurality.  Whatever  other  ideas  may  be  entertained  in
regard  to  the  internality  of  the  extended,  wo  insist  upon  it
that  its  externality  be  not  on  account  of  these  put  into  the
background.  And  this  externality,  i.e.  extension,  will  never
be  thinkable  unless  we  suppose  single  points  which  are  dis
tinguishable,  outside  one  another,  divided  from  one  another  \yy
intervals,  and  which  lastly,  by  the  action  of  their  forces,  or  by
their  mutual  influences  in  general,  determine  for  one  another
the  places  they  occupy.  This  distinguishability  of  a  number
of  points  is  no  mere  corollary  of  extension,  but  that  which
constitutes  its  very  notion ;  the  name  extension  denotes  a
property  implying  solely  mutual  relations  in  a  manifold
plurality,  reciprocal  action  of  several  individuals.

Any  attempt  to  apprehend  extension  as  the  predicate  not  of
a  system  of  beings  but  of  a  single  element,  must  necessarily
involve  the  other  assertion,  that  the  parts  of  this  element,
which  must  be  distinguishable  in  order  to  form  a  spatial  mag
nitude,  cannot  attain  to  free  and  independent  existence  by
division.  But  experience  confirms — in  the  main  at  least —
the  separability  of  things  distinguishable  ;  only  in  the  invisibly
minute  dimensions  of  atoms  might  we  hope  to  find  botli
extension  and  indivisible  continuity.  And  this  latter  conjecture
would  help  us  little.  For  where,  then,  would  we  seek  the
ground  of  the  fixed  extent,  neither  greater  nor  less,  occupied
unalterably  by  each  atom  ?  If  we  do  not  find  it  in  the  number
of  the  particles  which  it  comprises,  where  else  than  in  this  fact,
that  the  supersensible  nature  of  that  which  here  is  really  or
apparently  extended,  is  adequate  to  fill  this  and  no  greater
space,  to  set  up  this  and  no  greater  indivisible  outward
form  ?  Thus,  even  on  this  theory,  the  magnitude  of  extension
finally  resolves  itself  into  spatial  expression  for  the  degree
of  intensive  fore?,  and  space  is  filled,  strictly  speaking,  not
by  the  being  but  by  its  efficacy.  Let  us  therefore  rather  at
once  acknowledge  that  extension  can  no  more  bo  the  predi
cate  of  a  being  than  an  eddy  or  vortex  is  the  mode  of  motion
of  a  single  element ;  both  alike  can  be  conceived  only  as  forms

358  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

of  relation  between  many  elements.  We  are  accordingly
constrained  to  adhere  to  that  view  which  formerly  showed
itself  merely  as  a  possible  one,  and  to  conceive  extended
matter  as  a  system  of  unextended  beings  that,  by  their  forces,
fix  one  another's  position  in  space,  and  by  the  resistance
which  they  offer — as  if  to  the  intrusion  of  a  stranger — to  any
attempt  to  make  them  change  place,  produce  the  phenomena
of  impenetrability  and  the  continuous  occupation  of  space.

The  tendency  to  conceive  extension  as  a  direct  property  of
things  actual,  perhaps  rests  on  an  idea  that  we  carry  by
stealth  from  our  personal  experience  of  life  into  this  wholly
different  sphere  of  thought.  The  upholders  at  least  of  those
theories  on  which  the  extension  of  matter  is  explained  as  one
of  many  manifestations  in  which  is  revealed  a  much  more
comprehensive  striving  of  the  creative  absolute,  a  longing  for
infinite  evolution  and  diffusion,  betray  in  their  {esthetic
enthusiasm  for  this  form  of  action  their  remembrance  of  the
enjoyment  bestowed  on  us  human  beings  by  the  freedom  of
unbounded  diffusion  and  expansion  of  our  being.  To  us  the
environing  space  is  primarily  a  barrier  and  wide  extent  that
we  must  overleap  and  traverse ;  hence  to  us  motion  is  at  once
exertion  and  enjoyment ;  the  former,  because  we  can  execute
it  only  by  means  of  the  mechanism  of  our  limbs  ;  the  latter,
because  change  of  position  brings  the  excitement  of  new  per
ceptions,  and  the  consciousness  of  the  exertion  of  force  through
which  we  have  won  them.  This  mood,  this  sense  of  added
strength  and  satisfied  desire  that  animates  us  in  traversing
great  distances,  we  unconsciously  transfer  to  the  general
notion  of  motion.  All  those  enthusiasts  who  saw  in  the
perpetual  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies  an  object  of  rapturous
devotion,  and  recognised  in  it  true  existence  and  the  eternal
activity  of  the  existent,  secretly  believed  that  the  traversing
of  these  vast  spaces  was  for  the  bodies  an  achievement
costing  a  putting  forth  of  vital  force  of  which  they  themselves
were  conscious  ;  as  the  bird  rejoices  in  its  flight,  so  might  the
planets  themselves  delightedly  feel  the  impetus  of  their
motion ;  and  as  the  former  with  keen  eye  surveys  the  changes

LIFE  IN  MATTEB.  359

in  its  surroundings,  calculating  from  them  how  much  space  it
has  traversed,  so  too  might  these  somehow  be  conscious  of
the  magnitude  of  the  distances  they  had  travelled  Similar
associations  it  is  that  excite  our  enthusiasm  for  the  expansion
of  the  absolute  and  the  continuous  extension  of  matter ;  we
accompany  it  with  a  feeling  of  relief  from  a  cramping
pressure ;  and  as  in  drawing  a  long  breath  we  fancy  we
directly  feel  in  the  expansion  of  the  chest  an  increase  of  our
vital  force,  so  there  lies  an  obscure  remembrance  of  the
pleasurable  sensation  of  such  vigorous  expansion  even  in  the
thought  of  the  space-filling  energy  that  we  attribute  to  matter.
And  yet  a  simple  consideration  would  convince  us  that  of  all
the  conditions  on  which  for  us  the  possibility  of  this  pleasure
depends,  not  one  exists  for  unorganized  matter;  the  more
inherently  extension  is  supposed  to  belong  to  it,  the  less  is  it
an  achievement  requiring  for  its  performance  any  vital
exertion ;  and  the  expansion  of  the  absolute  must  be  con-
reived  not  as  the  joy  of  liberation  and  of  passing  beyond
limits,  but  exclusively  as  a  falling  into  a  multitude  of  different
points,  on  whose  externality  to  one  another  alone  all  extension
depends.

Perhaps  we  should  guard  against  the  charge  of  having  in
these  remarks  stated  accessory  ideas  that  here  and  there  creep
in  as  additions  of  individual  fancy,  as  if  they  were  essential
parts  of  the  theory  of  extended  matter.  ]5ut  we  see  from  too
many  examples  how  frequently  such  pleasing  remembrances
of  complete  human  life  do  secretly  guide  the  speculations,
whose  reins  are  believed  to  be  swayed  solely  by  the  purest  and
most  abstract  thought;  and  in  this  case  I  really  do  not  know,
if  it  docs  not  pertain  to  being  to  be  extended,  what  should
induce  us  so  obstinately  to  seek  to  attach  this  property  to  its
inner  nature,  and  to  fill  wholly  with  continuous  matter  the
.space  that  might  (adequately  for  the  explanation  of  pheno
mena)  be  under  the  control  of  supersensible  beings  with  their
vital  forces.  But  we  might  add  that  our  theory  may  succeed
where  the  other  fails  ;  inasmuch  as  every  several  being  by  its
reciprocal  action  with  others  fixes  its  o\vn  and  their  place  in

360  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

space,  emits  and  receives  effects,  it  will,  from  its  position  in
respect  of  the  total  sum  of  the  rest,  be  capable  of  receiving
also  impressions  that  would  not  have  been  secured  for  the
continuously  extended  by  its  mere  presence  and  diffusion  in
space.

§  3.  With  this  hypothesis  of  uncxtended  atoms  we  have
removed  the  only  difficulty  that  could  prevent  us  from  giving
ourselves  up  to  the  thought  of  an  inner  mental  life  pervading
all  matter.  The  indivisible  unity  of  each  of  these  simple  beings
permits  us  to  suppose  that  in  it  the  impressions  reaching  it
from  without  are  condensed  into  modes  of  sensation  and
enjoyment.  All  that  stirred  our  interest  in  the  content  of
sentience  may  now  have  a  place  of  objective  existence  in
these  beings,  and  numberless  events  ascertained,  not  directly
by  sensation,  but  on  the  circuitous  path  of  scientific  investiga
tion,  need  not  now  be  lost,  but  may,  within  the  substances  in
which  they  occur,  be  converted  into  much  glow  and  beauty
of  perception  to  us  unknown.  All  pressure  and  tension
undergone  by  matter,  the  rest  of  stable  equilibrium  and  the
rending  asunder  of  former  connections,  all  this  not  only  takes
place,  but  also  in  taking  place  gives  rise  to  some  enjoyment ;
each  several  being  entwined  with  varying  reciprocal  actions
into  the  whole  of  the  world,  is,  in  the  words  of  one  of  the
greatest  of  our  national  thinkers,  a  mirror  of  the  universe,
from  its  place  feeling  the  connection  of  all  things,  and  repre-
eenting  the  special  view  which  it  yields  to  that  particular  place
and  standpoint.  No  part  of  being  is  any  longer  devoid  of  life
and  animation ;  only  a  certain  kind  of  activity,  the  motions
which  adjust  the  states  of  the  one  to  those  of  the  other,  are
twined  like  an  external  mechanism  through  the  fulness  of  the
animated  creation,  conveying  to  all  opportunities  and  incite
ments  to  the  various  development  of  the  inner  lii'e.

In  this  sketch  we  indicate  a  conception  of  whose  essential
truth  we  are  convinced,  yet  to  which  we  can  hardly  expect
any  further  concession  than  that,  among  the  dreams  of  our
imagination,  it  may  be  one  of  those  which  do  not  contradict
actual  facts.  Nor  is  its  probability  any  more  evident  than

LIFE  IN  MATTER.  36  1

theirs,  for,  in  the  intent  to  satisfy  an  enthusiastic  craving,  it
offers  far  more  than  that  craving  cares  to  accept.  Who  could
endure  the  thought  that  in  the  dust  trodden  by  our  feet,  in
the  prosaic  texture  of  the  cloth  that  forms  our  clothing,  in  the
materials  shaped  into  all  sorts  of  utensils  in  the  most  arbitrary
manner  by  technical  skill,  there  is  everywhere  present  the  ful
ness  of  animated  life,  which  we  are  nothing  loath  to  think  of  as
slumbering  in  the  mysterious  outline  of  the  flower,  or  perhaps
even  in  the  regular  still  form  of  the  crystal  ?  And  yet  this
objection  would  be  merely  a  repetition  of  the  error  that,  as  we
formerly  mentioned,  leads  our  sense-perception  disparagingly
to  overlook  the  beauty  of  the  simple  constituents  that  chance
sets  before  it  in  unfavourable  position  and  confused  blending.
The  dust  is  dust  to  him  alone  whom  it  incommodes ;  the
indifferent  form  of  the  utensil  no  more  lessens  the  value  of
the  several  elements  of  which  it  consists,  than  a  confined  social
position  that  represses  the  outflow  of  intellectual  life  destroys
the  high  destiny  to  which  even  such  oppressed  fragments  of
humanity  are  called.  AVhen  we  speak  of  the  divine  origin
and  celestial  goal  of  the  human  soul,  we  have  more  cause  to
cast  a  sorrowful  look  on  this  dust  of  the  spiritual  world,
whose  life  often  seems  to  us  so  fruitless,  whose  work  so
purely  a  failure ;  we  have  far  less  reason  to  deny  an  inner
life  to  such  insignificant  constituents  of  the  outer  world,  for —
uncomely  as  they  may  appear  to  us  in  their  accumulations
—they  at  least  everywhere  and  without  shortcoming  perform
the  actions  permitted  to  them  by  the  universal  order  as  modes
of  expressing  their  internal  state.

In  fact,  the  partiality  which  we  here  confess  for  the  idc-u  of
a  pervading  animation  of  the  universe,  springs  not  from  any
desire  now  to  adopt  the  belief  in  the  fusion  of  our  soul  with  the
totality  of  our  bodily  organization  which  we  formerly  rejected.
It  has  no  connection  whatever  with  the  more  limited  inquiry
into  the  relation  between  the  mental  and  the  corporeal  within
us,  but  proceeds  from  a  more  general  conviction  in  regard
to  the  essence  of  things,  the  grounds  of  which  must  be  set
forth  completely  and  methodically  by  stricter  science.  This

362  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

would  have  to  show  how  radically  unthinkable  and  contra
dictory  is  the  conception  to  which  ordinary  life  and  even
computative  investigation  of  the  order  of  things  has  recourse
— the  conception  of  something  existent  that  never  had  an
independent  being,  but  in  all  its  existence  was  merely  a  focus
of  impressions,  which  were  not  any  matter  of  its  own  enjoyment
— or  a  starting-point  of  effects  which,  having  no  foundation  in
either  its  knowing  or  its  willing,  formed  for  something  else  a
stimulus  to  manifold  action.  We  would  vainly  strive  to  think
of  the  essence  of  this  being  as  characterized  by  any  simple
and  supersensible  quality ;  we  would  have  to  rest  in  the  con
viction,  that  even  as  the  sensible  qualities,  to  give  up  whose
objective  reality  we  more  easily  make  up  our  minds,  so  all
the  supersensible  qualities  which  we  are  fain  to  contrast  as
true  with  the  sensible,  have  likewise  their  existence  only  in
the  consciousness  of  him  who  thinks  them,  and  that  they
could  never  denote  the  source  of  actions  and  forces  which  we
see  proceed  from  things,  and  fur  which  we  must  seek  a  founda
tion  in  their  nature.  The  dislike  to  look  on  one  part  of  the
cosmos  as  but  a  blind  and  lifeless  instrument  for  the  ends  of
another,  the  desire  to  diffuse  over  all  the  joy  of  animation,
and  to  vindicate  a  universe  enjoying  at  every  point  through
out  its  own  existence  as  more  perfect  than  one  in  which  a
divided  structure  shows  mentality  above  an  unconscious
basis — in  this  we  have  but  one  series  of  motives  inviting
us  beneath  the  unruffled  surface  of  matter,  behind  the  rigid
and  regular  repetitions  of  its  working,  to  seek  the  warmth
of  a  hidden  mental  activity.  Another  and  more  urgent
series  of  motives  lies  in  the  self-contradictions  that  make  it
impossible  for  us  to  conceive  anything  as  simply  being,  with
out  at  the  same  time  possessing  and  enjoying  itself,  and  force
on  us  the  conviction  that  living  beings  alone  truly  are,  and
that  other  forms  of  existence  derive  their  explanation  solely
from  mental  life,  not  the  latter  from  them.

Thus  almost  at  the  end  of  our  journey  we  find  ourselves
brought  back  to  the  thoughts  that  actuated  minds  at  the
beginning  of  human  development,  in  the  poetic  fancies  of

LIFE  IN'  MATTER.  o63

mythology.  And  we  intentionally  note  this  kinship,  little  of
a  recommendation  as  it  would  seem  to  be  for  the  scientific
solidity  of  our  view.  For  in  fact  our  intention  was  in  this
affirmation  of  a  cosmos  animated  throughout  to  indicate
exclusively  one  view  that  here  opens  before  us,  making  it
possible  for  us  to  take  a  preliminary  glimpse,  and  not  actually
to  explore  infinite  distances.  Fain  as  we  are  to  keep  this
glimpse  for  ourselves,  we  yet  must  not  introduce  it  into  science;
we  would,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  only  return  to  baseless  visions
of  a  less  picturesque  mythology,  did  we  try  to  carry  out  what
we  believe  to  be  the  truth  of  the  matter ;  did  we  seek  to  show
how  the  laws  of  physical  phaenomena  arise  out  of  the  nature
of  the  mental  activity  that,  hidden  in  the  heart  of  thing?,
forms  their  true  essence  and  the  one  source  of  their  efficacy.
Alre.a'ly  in  antiquity  there  were  those  who  spoke  of  love  and
hatred  as  the  powers  that  move  substances  and  determine
their  mutual  relations,  and  who  sought  thereby  to  base  on
living  and  intelligible  motives  those  attractions  and  repulsions
which  wo,  now,  without  any  understanding  of  their  ground,
conceive  merely  as  in  fact  belonging  to  the  lifeless  mass.  "VVe
must,  indeed,  in  general  allow  and  maintain  that  all  motion  of
matter  in  space  may  be  explained  as  the  natural  expression  of
the  inner  states  of  beings  that  seek  or  avoid  one  another  with
a  feeling  of  their  need,  with  a  craving  for  completion  through
elective  affinities,  with  a  sense  of  beginning  disturbance ;  but
assuredly  we  do  not  stand  so  in  the  centre  of  the  world  and
of  the  creative  thought  expressed  in  it  as  ever  to  have  it  in
our  power  to  deduce  from  a  complete  knowledge  of  intelligent
existence  (which  we  do  not  possess)  the  precise  laws  of
physical  processes  as  necessary  results.  Here,  as  so  often
for  human  limitation,  the  path  of  knowledge  is  different  from
that  of  the  development  of  the  nature  of  the  thing  ;  nothing
remains  for  us  but  to  gather  from  experience  the  laws  found
valid  in  the  ultimate  ramifications  of  reality,  while  silently
retaining  for  the  whole  of  the  world  of  sense  the  understand
ing  that  it  is  but  the  veil  of  an  infinite  realm  of  mental
life.

3G4  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

§  4.  Let  us  now  cast  a  glance  at  the  advantages  that  may
flow  from  this  modification  of  our  views  to  our  conception  of  the
relation  between  body  and  soul,  and  we  shall  find  them  perhaps
more  trifling  than  we  expected,  perhaps  lying  in  another
quarter.  Those  who  were  staggered  by  the  idea  of  a  possible
action  and  reaction  between  the  soul  and  the  differently  con
stituted  content  of  matter,  may  now  have  their  scruples
removed  by  the  perception  that  in  fact  two  different  beings
do  not  here  face  one  another,  but  that  the  soul  as  an  indi
visible  being  and  the  body  as  a  combined  plurality,  form
kindred  and  homogeneous  terms  of  this  relation.  The  soul  acts
not  on  the  body  so  far  as  matter,  but  on  the  supersensible  beings
which  only  afford  us  the  phcenomenal  appearance  of  extended
matter  by  a  definite  form  of  combination  ;  not  as  material
and  not  with  material  instruments  does  the  body  exert  its
influence  on  the  mind,  but  all  attraction  and  repulsion,  all
pressure  and  impact,  are,  even  in  that  nature  which  to  us
seems  utterly  devoid  of  animation,  even  where  they  act  from
matter  to  matter,  only  the  manifestation  of  a  psychical  action
and  reaction,  which  alone  contains  life  and  energy.  But  we
attach  little  importance  to  this  advantage,  which  removes
only  an  imaginary  difficulty,  while  casting  no  light  on  the
real  incomprehensibility  how  one  thing  can  in  any  way  act
on  another.

Our  theory  may  still  less  please  those  who  looked  on  a
complete  development  of  body  into  soul  and  soul  into  body  as
the  necessary  and  alone  desirable  result  of  our  speculations.
For  we  now  go  on  to  contrast  as  sharply  as  ever  the  one
indivisible  soul  which  we  call  ours  with  the  animated  body;
and  as  persistently  as  before  must  we  regard  the  body
itself  as  a  system  of  parts  whose  co-opcrant  activities  form
the  source  of  its  life,  only  that  an  inner  mental
energy  now  fills  each  of  the  particles  that  in  our  former
statement  were  of  importance  only  as  starting-points  of
physical  forces.  Xo  more  than  it  formerly  seemed  to  us
possible  to  explain  the  peculiar  elements  of  mental  life  by
the  crossing  of  physical  actions  of  the  nerves,  do  we  now

MFK  IX  MATTKR.  305

find  the  spirituolized  nature  of  the  parts  adequate  to
render  more  comprehensible  the  rise  within  us  of  the  one
consciousness.  "Whatever  internal  experiences  each  atom  of
a  nerve  may  have,  whether,  under  the  impression  of  external
stimuli,  it  produce  a  sensation  like  or  unlike  to  one  of  ours,
have  along  with  it  like  us  a  feeling  of  pain  or  pleasure,  and
be  drawn  by  it  into  volition — all  this  inner  life  has  for  our
own  mental  development  no  significance  whatever  so  long  as
it  is  not  manifested.  Only  when  each  atom  of  the  nerves
transfers  to  the  one  immediately  contiguous  to  it  its  own
impression,  till  through  the  complete  chain  of  all  the  excita
tion  is  transmitted  to  the  soul  also,  do  the  internal  states  of
these  elements  palpably  affect  the  moulding  of  our  mental
life.  But  none  of  them  communicates  these  states  as  such  to
its  neighbour  ;  no  wave  of  conscious  sensation,  of  living
feeling  and  willing,  can,  by  moving  on  in  the  path  of  the
nerves  and  simply  entering  our  soul,  become  our  sensation,
our  feeling,  our  volition  ;  each  several  being  must  produce  in
itself  and  by  its  innate  energy  what  is  to  be  its  own  state,
and  it  matters  nothing  whether  the  external  stimulus  exciting
it  thereto  resembled  the  state  to  be  produced  or  not.  When
enthusiasm  for  a  great  thought  spreads  swiftly  among  a
crowd,  it  does  not  as  such  pass  from  one  to  another  like  a
kind  of  atmospheric  air  or  an  infectious  virus  exhaled  by  one
body  and  taken  in  by  another.  Each  soul  must  anew  pro
duce  it  by  its  own  force,  and  from  within  warm  into  a  glow
for  the  object,  whose  very  image  and  idea  is  communicable
by  one  to  another  only  by  a  complicated  apparatus  of  con
ventional  sounds  and  illuminating  remembrances.

"While,  then,  we  long  ago  allowed  the  possibility  that  in
each  atom  of  the  nerve  a  similar  process  may  take  place  to
that  of  which  we  ourselves  have  experience  in  conscious
sensation,  we  must  now  at  the  same  time  repeat  the  other
assertion  which  we  added — namely,  that  for  psychology  that
possibility  is  wholly  immaterial.  The  ollice  of  the  nerves  in
the  production  of  sensation  is  simply  that  of  messengers
charged  with  the  conveyance  of  tidings  to  their  destination.

3G6  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

Perhaps  the  messengers  are  acquainted  with  the  tenor  of  the
news,  and  on  the  way  are  thinking  it  over  with  kindly  interest ;
but  the  sympathy  of  the  messenger  will  not  bring  about
understanding  and  appreciation  of  the  contents  in  the
recipient,  if  both  do  not  flow  to  him  from  a  source  wit.hin,
nor  will  these  be  lessened  by  the  circumstance  that  the
message  was  finally  delivered  to  him  by  the  hand  of  one
wholly  indifferent.  The  nerves,  therefore,  perform  the  task
to  which  they  are  called  just  as  well  if  they  are  mere  paths
for  the  transmission  of  a  purely  physical  process  that  only
once,  only  on  making  an  impression  on  the  soul,  undergoes  a
transformation  into  sensation,  and  it  is  (with  no  small  benefit
to  its  certainty)  permissible  for  science  to  set  aside  all  refer
ence  to  the  unknown  mental  energy  with  which,  on  the  other
hand,  the  aesthetic  view  of  Nature  may  lawfully  fill  the  sum
of  things  actual.

In  fact,  nothing  but  the  beauty  of  the  living  form  is  made
to  us  more  intelligible  by  this  hypothesis.  That  beauty  of
course  is  not  annulled  even  for  those  who  hold  that  the  body
is  but  a  sum  of  lifeless  parts ;  as  in  the  sweeping  lines  of
drapery  we,  as  it  were,  have  an  echo  of  the  power  and  dignity,
the  grace  and  splendour,  as  it  were  the  changeful  play
of  energies  by  whose  traces  mental  life  can  animate  selfless
matter,  so  the  body — a  still  more  pliable  wrapping,  fitted  for
greater  variety  of  expression — would  reveal  the  admirable
and  absolute  dominion  of  the  soul  over  the  sense-instruments
of  phenomenal  existence.  But  assuredly  this  beauty  receives
a  new  glow  when  we  do  not  need  to  think  of  the  symmetry
of  the  human  figure  and  the  harmonious  arrangement  of  its
several  parts  as  merely  the  nice  adjustment  of  a  well-devised
instrument,  or  the  graceful  motions  by  which  in  the  change
of  attitudes  each  part  by  tension  or  relaxation  seeks  to  fall
into  new  equilibrium  with  the  rest,  as  merely  an  operation
artificially  adjusting  its  own  disturbances ;  when,  on  the
contrary,  we  can  divine  in  each  point  of  the  form  a  feeling  of
enjoyment  in  its  particular  position  and  its  manifold  relations
to  the  whole,  or  in  the  last  faint  echoes  of  slight  tensions

LIFE  IN  MATTER.  D67

with  which  every  movement  from  place  to  place  spreads  over
the  outlines  of  the  body,  discern  a  token  of  the  soulful
intelligence  with  which  all  parts  unite  in  coumioii  enjoyment
of  their  admirable  combination.

The  image  which  we  have  now  to  form  of  the  living  form
and  its  mental  life  is  that  of  an  association  of  many  beings.
The  governing  soul,  placed  at  a  favoured  point  of  the
organism,  collects  the  numberless  impressions  conveyed  to  it
by  a  host  of  comrades  essentially  similar  but  lower  in
rank  from  the  inferior  significance  of  their  nature.  Within
itself  it  cherishes  what  it  receives,  fashioning  it  into  motive
impulses,  which  it  applies  to  the  ready  force  of  its  com
rades,  that  thereby  regular  reactions  may  be  evolved.  A
common  understanding  and  sympathy  pervades  this  com
bination,  and  nothing  that  happens  to  one  part  is  of
necessity  lost  to  another,  nothing  but  the  peculiar  plan  of
the  whole  can  stop  the  diffusion  of  the  effects  on  all  sides.
I  know  not  in  what  point  the  satisfaction  which  this  view
seems  to  me  to  afford  could  be  surpassed  by  that  flowing
from  a  hypothesis  requiring  complete  fusion  of  the  soul
with  the  bodily  organism,  and  seeking  to  convert  the  in
direct  enjoyment  procured  on  our  theory  for  each  several
part  by  the  experiences  of  all  the  rest,  into  a  direct  coin
cidence  <<f  all.  When  we  think  of  the  soul  as  spread
like  a  diffused  breath  through  the  extent  of  the  body,  when
we  suppose  it  to  share  directly  in  what  at  each  moment  is
done  and  suffered  at  every  single  point  of  its  structure,  do
we  thus  gain  anything  that  might  not  be  equally  afforded  by
the  conception  of  an  indirect  reciprocal  action  ?  Do  sensa
tions  become  less  distinctly  ours  by  our  supposing  their
excitation  to  be  dependent  only  on  the  final  effect  of  u
physical  nerve-stimulus  on  the  nature  of  an  indivisible  soul,
and  are  they  made  clearer  by  our  holding  that  eacli  single
step  of  the  physical  intermediate  process  by  which  they
are  transmitted  is  accompanied  by  mental  action  that  yet
never  comes  to  light  in  consciousness  ?  Are  our  movements
in  any  higher  sense  our  own  vital  acts,  if  our  will  travels  to

368  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  IV.

the  terminations  of  the  motor  nerves,  perhaps  even  to  the
muscular  fibres,  and  would  they  not  remain  just  as  much  ours,
if  only  a  single  motion  of  the  soul  were  needed  to  call  into
activity  the  prepared  connection  of  ministering  parts  ?  "What
inducement  can  we  have  to  exchange  this  distinct  image  of
the  orderly  sway  of  one  over  an  organized  multitude  for  the
confused  conception  of  a  vague  unity  of  all,  in  which  every
regular  form  of  reciprocal  action  with  which  experience  makes
us  acquainted  would  seem  to  be  but  an  unintelligible
intricacy  ?  All  that  we  prize  in  life,  and  that  is  the  source
of  nobler  enjoyments,  rests  on  this  mode  of  combination  in  a
manifold  ;  the  human  race,  embodied  in  countless  individuals,
leads  the  life  of  constant  reciprocal  action,  of  mutual  fellow-
feeling  in  love  and  hatred,  of  uninterrupted  progress,  that
makes  all  share  in  the  gain  of  one  part.  All  blending  of  the
many  into  the  one  degrades  the  dignity  of  life  and  of  happi
ness,  for  it  lessens  the  number  of  beings,  each  of  which  mi^ht

O J  O

independently  have  appreciated  the  value  of  given  relations.
The  unity  in  which  we  long  to  be  knit  with  another  is  always
completeness  of  intercourse,  reciprocal  enjoyment  of  what  is
without,  never  the  confused  mingling  in  which  all  joy  of
union  perishes,  because  along  with  the  antithesis  it  does
away  with  the  existence  of  that  which  could  be  aware  of
reconcilement.

And  how  little  confirmation,  after  all,  does  the  dream  of
this  unity  receive  from  impartial  observation  !  The  structure
of  the  body  is  gradually  put  together  from  scattered  con
stituents  of  the  outer  world,  and  involved  in  perpetual
flux  it  is  continually  giving  back  parts  whence  they  came.
"With  what,  then,  could  the  soul  form  a  unity  ?  If  it  is
alternately  blended  with  the  entering  supply  of  the  body
and  divided  from  the  decaying  remnant,  in  what  else  can
that  unity  consist  than  in  reciprocal  actions  that  unroll
themselves  and  then  come  to  an  end,  according  as  the  course
of  Kature  in  one  case  adds  new  elements  to  those  at  work,
in  another  forces  others  out  of  their  relations.  This  life  of
the  parts  is  like  a  throng  of  travellers.  Of  these  we  know

LIFE  IN MATTE U.  309

neither  whence  they  come  nor  whither  they  go  ;  though
strangers  they  come  together,  for  a  short  time  there  goes
on  among  them  a  sociable  intercourse,  corresponding  in  its
general  rules  to  their  common  end  as  travellers,  and  each
takes  in  the  stimulations  afforded  to  him  by  the  communica
tions  of  the  others.  So  we  may  think  of  each  atom  of  the
body  as  the  seat  of  a  peculiar  mental  energy  ;  but  we  do
not  know  this  ;  we  are  wholly  ignorant  of  its  previous  history
and  of  the  development  that  may  await  it  in  the  future  ;  each
element,  drawn  for  a  time  into  the  regular  vortex  of  our  living
body,  may  enrich  its  own  internal  condition  by  new  experi
ences,  and  minister  to  our  development  by  propagation  of  the
stimulations  imparted  to  it  by  the  external  world ;  yet  its
inner  life  never  becomes  ours,  and  when  the  union  of  different
beings  on  which  our  living  form  depends  falls  to  pieces,  while
we  shall  all  have  gone  through  something  together,  it  will  1  e
as  beings  originally  different  that  after  a  passing  contact  again
separate.

VOL.  T.  2  A

CHAPTER V.

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.

Limitations  of  Knowledge  —  Questions  concerning  Primeval  History  —  Depen
dent  Nature  of  all  Mechanism — Natural  Necessity  and  the  Infinite  Sub
stance — General  Possibility  of  Action — Source  of  Definite  Laws  of  Action-
Immortality — Origin  of  Souls.

§  1.  "F)UT  whence  came  together  at  the  beginning  of  his-
-L*  tory  the  beings  who  were  together  to  perform  the
drama  of  animated  life,  and  to  manifest  so  excellent  a  develop
ment  ?  And  how  is  it  that  in  the  propagation  of  the  race
such  a  marvel  is  repeated  as  that  every  soul  finds  its  body,
every  germ  of  a  bodily  organism  receives  the  quickening
breath  of  its  spirit  ?  Lastly,  what  fate  awaits  the  several
beings  after  the  dissolution  of  their  partnership,  most  of  all
the  soul,  of  whose  destination  to  endless  development  we  seem
to  have  a  pledge  in  the  significance  of  all  that  it  has  under
taken  and  accomplished  in  union  with  the  body  ?

The  course  of  our  discussion  inevitably  carries  us  back  in
the  end  to  these  questions  ;  and  the  more  sharply  we  have
tried  to  draw  the  outlines  of  the  relations  between  body  and
soul,  the  more  imperative  do  we  feel  the  obligation  to  give
completeness  to  our  conceptions  by  an  explanation  in  regard
to  the  origin  of  this  connection  and  the  import  of  its  final
dissolution.  But  are  we  to  deceive  one  another  ?  I  by  pre
tending  to  be  able  to  solve  these  problems,  and  whoever  has
followed  me  thus  far  by  pretending  to  trust  me  ?  We  need
not  so  much  as  look  back  on  the  fruitless  efforts  of  cen
turies,  we  have  simply  to  recall  the  means  at  the  disposal  of
human  thought  to  feel  the  hopelessness  of  any  attempt  to

370

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  371

shed  over  this  beginning  and  ending  the  clearness  of  intuitive
knowledge.  Let  us  not  for  a  moment,  then,  give  ourselves
up  to  the  illusory  dream  that  we  can  ever  succeed  in  convert
ing  into  certain  knowledge  what  is  intended  merely  to
environ  the  sphere  of  human  experience  as  a  trustful  dim
anticipation.  One  task  nevertheless  remains  for  us  to
accomplish.  For  let  us,  as  we  will,  refrain  from  making  to
ourselves  images  of  what  lies  beyond  the  bounds  of  that
sphere,  we  must  yet  see  whether  the  views  which  within  it
we  have  formed  leave  open  at  least  the  possibility  of  a  satis
factory  conclusion  in  the  far  distance,  or  whether  that  which
we  hold  with  strong  conviction  cuts  off  even  the  hope  of  such
a  consummation.  Too  surely  will  gaps  that  cannot  be  filled
ii}»  remain  in  human  insight,  but  it  cannot,  without  self-
destruction,  consent  to  believe  in  that  which  it  perceives
to  be  incompatible  with  the  necessary  validity  of  its  own
principles.

Fur  the  consideration  of  these  last  questions  we  find  the
modes  of  conception  which  we  have  hitherto  been  employing
inadequate.  For  they  have  all  assumed  the  actual  order  as  a
complete,  given  fact,  and  sought  only  to  ascertain  the  general
laws  according  to  which  the  several  events  of  the  actual
course  of  things  are  respectively  developed.  Thus  they  have
all  had  as  their  exclusive  subject  the  preservation  and  con
tinuance  of  a  cycle  of  phenomena,  whose  first  beginning  and
final  goal  have  been  deliberately  left  out  of  the  range  of  their
inquiries.  And,  in  fact,  as  from  looking  at  the  structure  of  a
completed  machine  we  calculate  what  work  it  can  perform
and  in  what  order,  without  being  materially  aided  in  our
estimation  by  a  knowledge  of  its  origin  and  the  method  of  its
construction,  so  we  can  understand  the  maintenance  of  the
univer.su-  and  the  rhythm  of  its  phaenomena  from  its  present
constitution,  even  without  being  acquainted  with  the  history
of  its  genesis.  But  this  we  do,  it  must  be  remembered,  only
on  the  condition  that  for  each  several  moment  we  assume  that
the  cause  of  the  definite  form  given  to  it  by  events  was
present  in  the  preceding  moment  as  a  fact.  Thus  we  drive

372  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

the  problem  backwards  step  by  step,  and  at  last  have  to  make
the  confession  that  the  primal  origin  of  all  things  remains  to
us  a  mystery,  and  that  throughout  the  course  of  the  universe
we  discern  at  most  alternations  of  development,  but  nowhere
the  origin  of  that  primary  arrangement  on  which  the  possi
bility  of  this  rotation  absolutely  depends.

We  deceive  ourselves  if  we  suppose  that  science  can  any
where  overstep  these  boundaries.  Since  the  idea  of  the
formation  of  the  planetary  system  out  of  a  fiery  vapour — an
ingenious  speculation  in  regard  to  a  past  period  that  lies
beyond  all  experience — has  become  part  of  the  common  stock
of  culture,  it  has  been  thought  that  now  at  last  a  fair  order
of  phenomena  had  been  evolved,  not  indeed  out  of  nothing,
but  at  least  out  of  formless  prima  materia.  But  this  is  to
forget  that  the  history  of  this  ball  of  fire,  whose  subsequent
transformations  are  so  acutely  traced,  necessarily  runs  back
wards  into  an  endless  past.  Before  the  globe  gradually
cooled  and  condensed,  there  must  have  been  a  time  when  its
temperature  was  still  higher,  its  magnitude  greater;  where
now  shall  we  find  the  first  moment  of  the  process  of  con
densation  which  this  hypothesis  supposes  to  be  already  going
on  ?  And  what  originally  determined  the  direction  and
velocity  of  the  revolution  in  which  we  must  assume  all  its
particles  as  harmoniously  moving  ?  Even  this  state  of  chaos
was  not  the  beginning  of  the  cosmos  ;  it  was  only  one  of  those
middle  points  in  which  earlier  forms  of  phenomena  have  to
the  mind's  vision  contracted  into  insignificant  simpli
city  ;  but  through  this  the  matter,  the  forces,  the  motions
of  the  actual  world  pass  without  loss  or  diminution,  to
expand  again  on  the  other  side  into  the  variety  of  a  new
development.  Thus  every  orderly  combination  of  events  is
based  on  a  prior  combination,  and  varied  as  is  this  melody  of
the  Becoming,  now  swelling  into  greater  fulness,  now  shrink
ing  into  an  insignificant  germinal  form,  it  has  for  us  neither
beginning  nor  ending,  and  all  our  science  can  do  is  to  climb
up  and  down  this  interminable  stem,  comprehending  the
connection  of  particular  portions  as  the  result  of  universal

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  373

laws,  but  never  attaining  to  a  discernment  of  the  originating
principle  of  the  whole,  or  of  the  goal  of  its  development.

And  what  lesson  do  we  draw  from  the  consciousness  of
this  limitation  ?  None  other  assuredly  than  for  ourselves  an
exhortation  to  await  with  unbiassed  patience  the  results  of  the
progress  of  science  in  the  past  and  the  future — for  science
itself  the  wish  that  its  votaries  may  continue  to  labour  with
scrupulous  accuracy,  not  allowing  themselves  to  be  misled  by
partiality  for  any  one  particular  result  of  its  researches.  For
whatever  it  may  teach  us,  it  will  not  lead  us  to  the  end  of
things,  and  the  cravings  of  our  spirit  will  be  satisfied,  not  by
any  unveiling  of  the  prehistoric  stage  of  our  existence,  but
only  by  a  perception  of  the  eternal  bond  that  at  all  times
knits  together  the  changing  world  of  phenomena  and  the
world  of  true  being.  Did  wo  possess  that  knowledge,  how
little  would  it  avail  us  if  we  succeeded  in  finding  sure  answers
to  those  questions  concerning  the  origin  of  the  human  race  to
which  we  so  often  in  our  passion  attach  too  great  importance  !
Perhaps  some  day  an  unexpected  piece  of  good  fortune  will
multiply  the  now  inadequate  number  of  starting-points  of
inquiry,  and  make  us  equal  to  a  decision  that  no  one  now
can  give.  Supposing  now  this  improved  science  should  turn
for  us  into  a  certainty  the  belief  to  which  so  many  fondly
cling — the  belief  that  with  blind  inherent  necessity  the  yet
formless  chaos  of  the  infant  world  steadily  advanced  in  per
fection  till  it  reached  the  point  where  the  production  of  man
became  inevitable,  would  the  outlook  into  an  infinite  distance
that  science  seems  to  shun  then  be  closed  for  it  ?  If  it  could
make  men  comprehend  how  first  of  all  the  solid  earth-crust
and  the  skiey  spaces  of  the  atmosphere  were  separated  from
the  fiery  ball  of  vapour,  how  each  stage  of  this  separation
gave  occasion  for  new  effects  of  the  elective  affinities  of  the
elements,  how  then,  in  the  favourable  circumstances  supplied
by  the  blind  necessity  of  Nature,  the  first  germ  of  a  plant  or  of
an  animal  came  into  being,  still  simple  and  rude  in  contour,
and  with  little  aptitude  for  significant  development — how,
finally,  under  happy  conditions,  to  which  this  low  alage  of

374  LOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

life  conduced,  organic  existence  gradually  improved,  lower
species  were  in  the  course  of  countless  ages  developed  into
higher  ones,  till  at  last  man  appeared,  not  in  the  image  of
God,  but  as  the  final  link  in  this  chain  of  necessary  events  :
if  science  could  make  all  this  comprehensible,  what  more
would  it  have  accomplished  than  to  have  driven  back  the
marvel  of  immediate  creation  to  an  earlier  point  in  past  time,
at  which  infinite  wisdom  infused  into  unsightly  chaos  the
boundless  capacity  for  regular  development  ?  By  the  long
array  of  graded  stages  of  evolution  through  which  it  traced
the  development  of  the  chaotic  prima  matcria,  it  would  but
have  enhanced  the  splendour  and  variety  of  scenes  in  whose
outward  pomp  our  admiring  fancy  could  revel ;  but  it  would
have  given  no  more  sufficient  explanation  of  the  wondrous
drama  as  a  whole  than  does  that  modest  belief  which  cannot
conceive  of  living  species  as  coming  into  being  save  by  the
direct  creative  will  of  God.  So  a  decision  about  these
points,  as  far  as  science  will  ever  be  able  to  give  one,  we
must  quietly  wait  to  receive  from  its  impartial  love  of  truth.
Whichever  way  of  creation  God  may  have  chosen,  in  none
can  the  dependence  of  the  universe  on  Him  become  slacker,
in  none  be  drawn  closer.

But  of  this  patient  expectation  we  are  apt  to  have  very
little  ;  nay,  these  two  conceptions  of  the  cosmos  stand  in  the
most  vehement  antagonism,  the  one  seeking  to  convert  Xature
into  pure  mechanism,  the  other,  which  believes  in  the
immediate  efficacy  of  a  divine  ruling  wisdom,  perhaps  not  yet
fully  apprehending  its  own  import.  For  what  seems  to  me
defective  and  inadequate  in  this  theory  is,  that  it  is  usually
the  contemplation  of  life,  and  psychic  life,  that  stirs  up  those
who  hold  it  to  the  acknowledgment  of  a  higher  power  that
unites  scattered  phenomena  into  the  whole  of  a  course  of
tilings.  To  them,  too,  it  seems  at  least  possible  that  the
regular  order  of  the  outer  world  may  rest  on  the  blind
necessity  of  a  self-sufficing  mechanism  :  only  the  especial
excellence  of  the  vital  organism  and  the  nicely-adjusted
harmony  of  its  existence  constrain  r,s  here  to  betake  ourselves,

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  375

beyond  the  ordinary  means  of  explanation,  to  the  belief  of  a
creating  and  preserving  wisdom.  This  acknowledgment  seems
to  me  to  come  too  late ;  we  do  not  gain  anything  by  snatching
away  one  part  of  actual  existence  from  the  sway  of  the  general
order  of  Nature,  as  too  exalted  to  have  corne  into  being  by
mechanical  causation ;  on  the  contrary,  we  must  reconcile  our
selves  to  the  thought  that  the  immovable  necessity  that  seems
to  hold  firm  the  whole  mechanical  course  of  things  is  but  an
idle  dream,  and  that  no  reciprocal  action  ever  comes  into  play
without  the  co-operation  of  that  higher  cause  which  we  ill-
advisedly  fancy  is  needed  only  to  give  rise  to  certain  favoured
phenomena.

§  2.  It  is  a  strange  and  yet  an  intelligible  pride  that  our
scientific  illuminati  take  in  requiring  for  the  explanatory
reconstruction  of  reality  in  thought  no  other  postulates  than  an
original  store  of  matter  and  force,  and  the  unshaken  authority
of  a  group  of  universal  and  immutable  laws  of  Nature.  Strange.
because  after  all  these  are  no  trifling  postulates,  and  because
it  might  be  expected  to  be  more  in  accordance  with  the  com
prehensive  spirit  of  the  human  reason  to  acknowledge  the
unity  of  a  creative  cause  than  to  have  imposed  on  it  as  the
starting-point  of  all  explanation  the  promiscuous  variety  of
merely  actually  existent  things  and  notions.  And  yet  in
telligible,  for  in  return  for  this  single  sacrifice  the  finite  under
standing  may  now  enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  never  again  bein*
overpowered  by  the  transcendent  significance  and  beauty  of
any  single  phenomenon ;  however  wondrous  and  profound
may  appear  to  it  any  work  of  Nature,  those  universal  laws,
which  arc  to  it  perfectly  transparent,  give  it  the  means  of
warding  off  a  disagreeable  impression,  and,  while  proving  how
perfectly  it  understands  that  even  this  phenomenon  is  but  an
incidental  result  of  a  well-known  order  of  Nature,  it  succeeds
in  drawing  within  the  limits  of  its  own  finitude  what  to  tin-
unprejudiced  mind  is  conceivable  only  as  a  product  of  infinite
wisdom.

These  tendencies  and  habits  of  scientific  culture  it  will  be
hard  to  shake,  especially  by  the  arguments  usually  brought  to

I)  <  0  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

bear  on  them  by  the  believers  in  a  higher,  intelligent  guidance
of  the  course  of  Nature.  For  however  distinctly  unbiassed
observation  may  suggest  this  belief,  so  that  it  may  seem  alike
foolish  and  tedious  to  attempt  to  understand  the  order  of
Nature  without  it,  the  supporters  of  the  mechanical  conception
can  always  with  justice  reply  that  nevertheless  in  the  explana
tion  of  details  their  road  is  always  entered  by  those  who  on
the  whole  believe  unquestioningly  in  the  government  of  an
intelligently  working  power.  They,  too,  are  not  content  till,  for
each  result  ordained  by  this  power,  they  have  one  by  one
traced  out  the  efficient  means  through  whose  necessary  and
blind  causal  connection  the  required  effect  must  be  brought
about.  Even  they  will  never  seriously  believe  that  within
Nature  as  it  lies  patent  to  our  senses,  this  purposive  power
makes  new  beginnings  of  working,  such  as,  if  traced  further
back,  would  not  always  prove  to  be  the  necessary  results  of  a
prior  state  of  things.  While  thus  even  to  those  who  hold  the
more  religious  view,  the  course  of  events  is  again  converted
into  the  unbroken  chain  of  mechanical  sequence,  from  the
scientific  point  of  view  the  latter  alone  is  conspicuous,  and  the
idea  of  free  action  on  the  part  of  an  intelligent  force,  to  which
no  sphere  of  action  can  be  assigned,  is  readily  dropped.  Science
might  be  able  to  allow  that  the  origin  of  the  whole,  whose
internal  relations  alone  form  the  subject  of  its  investiga
tions,  may  be  attributed  to  a  Divine  Wisdom,  but  it  would
demand  facts  that,  within  the  sphere  of  experience,  made  a
continuous  dependence  of  the  creation  on  the  preserving  pro
vidence  of  its  author  a  necessary  condition  of  explanation.
Too  ingenuous  and  self-confident,  the  believers  in  this  living
interference  of  reason  working  towards  an  end  bring  forward
only  the  fair  aspects  of  life,  and  for  the  time  forget  its
shadows;  in  their  admiration  of  the  wondrous  harmony  of
organized  bodies,  and  of  their  careful  adaptation  to  the  ends
of  mental  life,  they  do  not  think  of  the  bitter  persistence
with  which  this  same  organized  life  transmits  ugliness  and
disease  from  generation  to  generation,  or  of  the  manifold
hindrances  that  come  in  the  way  of  the  attainment  even  of

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  377

modest  human  aims.  How  little,  then,  can  this  conception  of
the  universe — to  which  the  presence  of  evil  is,  if  not  an  in
soluble,  at  least  an  unsolved  problem — hope  by  its  assaults  to
overcome  a  habit  of  mind  that  finds  numberless  special  con
firmations  in  observation,  and  is  inaccessible  to  any  feeling  of
the  universal  deficiency  under  which  we  suppose  it  to  labour  !

And  is  it  compelled  to  make  even  the  acknowledgment
which  it  will  perhaps  make,  that  this  world  of  blind  necessity
came  forth  at  least  primarily  from  the  wisdom  of  a  supreme
creator  ?  Doubtless  it  can  reply  that  even  the  purposiveness
of  the  present  fabric,  as  it  now  is,  could  certainly  have  been
evolved  from  the  confusion  of  an  original  chaos  under  the
sway  of  universal  laws.  Fur  all  that  was  brought  together  by
a  planless  vortex,  in  unmeaning  aggregation  and  without  the
internal  equilibrium  of  constituents  and  forces  that  might
have  secured  to  it  a  longer  existence  in  the  struggle  with
tin:  onward-sweeping  course  of  external  Nature  :  all  this  has
lung  since  perished.  Along  with  and  after  numberless
unsuccessful  attempts  at  formation,  which  perhaps  filled
prinueval  times  in  a  rapid  alternation  uf  rise  and  decay,
Nature  gradually  shrank  into  a  narrower  channel,  and  only
those  select  creatures  were  preserved  on  which  a  happy
combination  of  their  constituent  parts  had  bestowed  the
power  of  withstanding  the  pressure  of  surrounding  stimuli,
and  of  propagating  their  kind  throughout  an  indefinite  period.
However  little  we  may  probably  esteem  this  theory,  we  could
yet  hardly  snatch  it  from  those  whom  it  satisfies,  and  wo
ourselves  cannot  wholly  disallow  the  charm  that  scientific
ingenuity  will  always  find  in  the  attempt  to  evolve  from  the
formless  chaos  of  whirling  motions  the  necessity  of  a  gradual
sifting,  and  the  spontaneous  formation  of  permanent  forms
of  succession  of  phenomena.

But  all  such  attempts  rest  on  the  common  assumption  that
the  universal  sway  of  unchanging  laws  prescribes  the  kind  and
amount  of  the  reciprocal  actions  engaged  in  by  the  several
substances  of  the  original  chaos,  and  thereby  compels  them
to  withdraw  from  combinations  in  which  no  equilibrium  is

378  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

possible,  and  to  enter  into  others  in  which  they  are  at  rest,  or
can  retain  a  constant  mode  of  motion.  This  assumption  it  is
whose  trustworthiness  we  must  now  test ;  with  it  stands  or
falls  the  proud  certainty  of  the  mechanical  conception  of  the
universe.  Is  this  veneration  for  an  all-prevailing  law  of
Nature,  as  the  only  bond  that  forces  the  scattered  elements
of  the  course  of  things  into  mutual  active  relations  and
determines  the  character  of  their  results,  itself  a  possible
conception,  and  can  it  put  the  finishing  touch  to  our  view  of
Nature,  whose  perfecting  in  detail  we  ourselves  have  every
where  looked  to  it  to  accomplish  ?

§  3.  Let  us  suppose  two  elements  originally  in  existence,  not
produced  by  anything,  not  sprung  from  any  common  source,
existing  from  eternity  as  things  actual  without  any  antecedents,
but  existing  so  that  they  have  no  other  community  than  that
of  contemporaneous  existence  :  how  could  the  influence  of  the
one  be  communicated  to  the  other,  seeing  that  each  is  as  it
were  in  a  separate  world,  and  that  between  them  there  is
nothing  ?  How  is  the  efficacy  of  the  one  to  make  its  way  to
the  other  through  this  nothing,  offering  no  means  of  trans
mission  ?  And  if  we  did  suppose  that  the  energy  of  each
element  constantly  diffused  itself  like  a  separable  atmosphere
through  a  common  space,  effective  like  the  rays  of  light
where  it  met  with  anything  on  which  to  act,  and  floating
idly  in  vacuo  where  nothing  presented  itself,  what  should  we
have  gained  ?  We  would  not  understand  our  own  conception,
either  how  the  action  could  issue  from  the  limits  of  that  in
which  it  was  generated ;  nor  how,  floating  for  some  interval
of  time  between  its  source  and  that  which  was  to  be  its  object,
it  maintained  itself  in  vacuo  ;  nor,  lastly,  how,  in  the  end  reach
ing  the  latter,  it  was  able  to  exert  a  transforming  power  over
its  states.  For,  while  space,  would  offer  no  obstacle  to  the
mutual  action  of  that  which,  though  separated  by  it,  was  yet
united  by  an  inherent  relation,  contact  in  space  would  not
involve  any  necessity  of  reciprocal  action,  or  explain  the
possibility  of  it  between  beings  each  of  which  in  its  complete
self-dependence  was  divided  from  the  other  by  the  impassable

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  379

gulf  of  inherent  indifference.  The  transmission  of  action
from  the  one  to  the  other  seems  simple  only  to  him  who,
looking  at  the  question  in  a  superficial,  commonplace  way,
thinks  he  can  distinctly  perceive  it  in  the  external  motions
by  which  it  is  accompanied  ;  to  any  one  examining  it  more
deeply,  it  becomes  more  and  more  inexplicable  how  the  con
dition  of  the  one  can  contain  a  force  compelling  the  other  to
a  change  of  its  own  internal  states.  As,  before,  we  were
unable  to  follow  our  will  in  its  outflow  into  the  moveable
extremities,  but  hud  to  acknowledge  that  all  volition  remains
confined  to  the  willing  mind,  and  that  the  execution  following  it
is  the  work  of  an  incomprehensible  power :  in  like  manner  all
the  forces  which  we  suppose  in  any  form  to  inhere  in  the  one
element,  will  be  inadequate  to  give  rise  to  an  influence  on
that  in  which  they  do  not  inhere.  Xow,  can  the  conception
of  the  universal  course  of  Xature  supplied  by  our  previous
speculations,  can  the  idea  of  a  realm  of  eternally  and
universally  valid  laws,  fill  this  hiatus,  and  weld  the  brittle
and  Isolated  fragments  into  the  solid  whole  of  a  reciprocally
acting  world  ?

Certainly  it  cannot ;  for  how  could  laws  exist  of  them
selves,  as  a  necessity  prescribing  particular  results  for  par
ticular  eases  ?  There  can  be  nothing  besides  being  and  its
inherent  states  ;  and  a  universal  order,  before  that  of  which
it  is  the  order  has  come  into  existence,  cannot  spring  up
between  beings  as  a  self-existent  background  holding  them
together,  an  efficient,  controlling  power.  If  we  look  back  on
our  human  life,  we  shall  find  that  the  laws  of  our  social
relations  do  not  exist  beside  and  between  us  in  independent
reality,  are  not  powers  to  direct  and  control  us  from  without
because  then;  they  are ;  they  exist  only  in  the  conscious
ness  of  the  individuals  who  feel  bound  by  them ;  they
receive  sanction  and  reality  only  through  the  actions  of  living
persons  ;  they  arc  nothing  but  the  harmoniously  and  inwardly-
developed  direction  of  many  individual  wills,  which  to  tho
later  generalizing  scrutiny  of  observation  appears  as  a  higher
externally-directing  power  because  in  its  common  authority

380  BOOK  III. CIIAl'TEU  V.

over  many  it  no  longer  presents  itself  as  exclusively  the
product  of  one.  The  laws  of  Nature  may  be  superior  to
the  ordinances  of  the  human  mind ;  while  the  latter  may
be  gainsaid  and  disobeyed,  the  commands  of  the  former  are
unlimited  and  resistless  ;  nevertheless  Nature  cannot  bring  to
pass  what  is  self-contradictory,  or  bestow  independent  exist
ence  on  that  which  can  have  its  being  only  in  and  through
what  is  self-existent.  We  are  apt  to  be  led  astray  in  these
speculations  by  a  widely  diffused  usage  of  thought  and
speech  that  exercises  no  prejudicial  effect  on  our  judgment
of  the  incidents  of  daily  life,  in  reference  to  which  it  has
arisen.  We  speak  of  ties  uniting  things,  of  relations  into
which  they  enter,  of  an  order  which  embraces  them,  finally,
of  laws  under  whose  sway  they  respectively  stand  ;  and  we
hardly  notice  the  contradiction  contained  in  these  notions  of
relations  lying  ready  before  the  things  came  to  enter  into
them,  of  an  order  waiting  to  receive  the  things  ordered,  finally,
of  ties  stretched  like  solid  threads — of  a  material  that  we
could  not  describe — across  the  abyss  that  divides  one  being
from  another.  We  do  not  consider  that  all  relations  and  con
nections  exist  only  in  the  unity  of  observing  consciousness,
which,  passing  from  one  element  to  another,  knits  all  together
by  its  comprehensive  activity,  and  that  in  like  manner  all  eflica-
cious  order,  all  laws,  that  we  are  fain  to  conceive  as  existing
between  things  independently  of  our  knowledge,  can  exist
only  in  the  unity  of  the  One  that  binds  them  all  together.
Not  the  empty  shadow  of  an  order  of  Xature,  but  only  the
full  reality  of  an  infinite  living  being  of  whom  all  finite  things-
are  inwardly  cherished  parts,  has  power  so  to  knit  together
the  multiplicity  of  the  universe  that  reciprocal  actions  shall
make  their  way  across  the  chasm  that  would  eternally  divide
the  several  distinct  elements  from  one  another.  For  action,
starting  from  one  being,  is  not  lost  in  an  abyss  of  nothing  lying
between  it  and  another ;  but  as  in  all  being  the  truly  existent
is  one  and  the  same,  so  in  all  reciprocal  action  the  infinite
acts  only  on  itself,  and  its  activity  never  quits  the  sure
foundation  of  being.  The  energizing  of  one  of  its  parts  is

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  381

not  confined  to  that  and  isolated  from  the  rest ;  the  single
state  has  not  to  travel  along  an  indescribable  path  iu  order  to
.seek  another  element  to  which  it  may  impart  itself,  nor  has  it
to  exert  an  equally  incomprehensible  force  in  order  to  compel
that  indifferent  other  element  to  participate  in  it.  Every  exci
tation  of  the  individual  is  an  excitation  of  the  whole  Infinite,
that  forms  the  living  basis  even  of  the  individual's  existence,
and  every  one  can  therefore  act  upon  every  other  which  has  the
same  living  basis ;  for  it  is  this  which  from  the  unity  of  its  own
nature  causes  the  finite  event  here  to  be  followed  by  its  echo
there.  It  is  not  anything  finite  that  out  of  itself  as  finite
acts  upon  something  else ;  on  the  contrary,  every  stimulation
of  the  individual,  seeing  that  it  affects  the  eternal  basis  that
in  it,  as  in  all,  forms  the  essence  of  its  finite  appearance,  can
through  this  continuity  of  related  being — but  through  this
alone — act  upon  the  apparently  remote.

We  are  not  constrained  to  this  recognition  of  an  Infinite  Sub
stance,  that  instead  of  an  unsubstantial  and  unreal  law  unites
all  things  by  its  actual  reality,  merely  by  admiration  for
single  spheres  of  phenomena,  by  whose  special  significance
we  are  impressed ;  nay,  every  example  of  reciprocal  action
however  insignificant,  every  instance  of  causality,  forces  us,
in  order  to  understand  the  possibility  of  a  transference  of
influence,  to  substitute  for  a  merely  natural  connection  a  sub
stantial  Infinite,  containing  unseparated  the  manifold  that
in  phenomenal  existence  is  separated.  We  could  not  seek
such  a  bond  between  the  constituents  of  the  living  body  alone,
or  between  body  and  soul  pre-eminently,  as  if  we  did  not  need
it  everywhere  ;  on  the  contrary,  seeing  that  we  look  on  all
that  happens,  however  it  may  be  designated,  as  but  the  mani
fested  internal  energy  of  a  single  Infinite  Being,  the  later
course  of  our  speculations  will  carry  us  further  from  the
resuscitated  mythology  that,  like  the  ancient  sagas,  allots
to  certain  distinguished  phenomena  their  special  genii,  and
leaves  the  remaining  work-day  reality  to  take  care  of  itself.

For  this  Universal  Being  is  not  a  mere  bond,  a  mere
indifferent  bridge,  having  no  other  office  than  to  form  a  way

382  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

for  the  passage  of  action  from  one  element  to  another  :  it
is  at  the  same  time  the  sovereign  power  that  for  every
antecedent  fixes  the  form  and  degree  of  its  consequent,  for
each  individual  the  sphere  of  its  possible  activity,  for  every
single  manifestation  of  the  latter  its  particular  mode.  "We
deceive  ourselves  when  we  imagine  we  can  derive  the  modes
in  which  things  act  on  one  another,  as  self-evident  results,
from  the  particular  properties  that  now  constitute  their  nature,
and  from  the  joint  influence  of  the  circumstances  of  each
occasion.  Honest  consideration,  on  the  contrary,  leads  us  to
make  the  acknowledgment  that  the  effects  actually  presented
to  us  by  experience  are  not  to  be  got  as  necessary  conclusions
from  these  premises  alone,  however  we  may  analyse  and
recombine  their  content,  but  that  an  unknown  power,  as  it
were,  having  respect  to  something  that  we  do  not  meet  with
among  these  prior  conditions,  has  annexed  to  their  form  the
particular  form  of  the  result.  The  Infinite  is  this  secret
power,  and  that  to  which  it  has  respect  in  the  determina
tion  of  results  is  its  own  presence  in  all  finite  elements,  by
which  the  universe  receives  the  unity  of  a  being,  and  on
account  of  which  the  course  of  its  events  must  receive  the
unity  of  a  connected  manifestation  of  the  content  of  that
being.  Every  finite  thing,  therefore,  possesses  the  capability
of  action  only  in  such  amount  and  such  quality  as  it  is  per
mitted  by  the  Infinite  to  contribute  to  the  realization  of  the
whole.

S  4.  But  we  must  be  more  diffuse,  and  allow  ourselves  to

i>

illustrate  the  faultless  consistency  of  the  theory  which  we
are  now  engaged  in  stating,  by  the  apparently  opposite
assumptions  of  which  we  formerly  made  use  in  our  own
examination  of  the  separate  pluenomena.

In  every  finite  thing,  in  so  far  as  we  apprehend  it  as  a
product  of  the  One  Infinite,  we  can  point  to  a  certain  group
of  marks  as  the  peculiar  stamp  assumed  in  it  (as  distinguished
from  every  other  finite  thing)  by  that  One.  We  cannot  suppose
that  in  any  one  of  these  particular  forms  that  make  the  one
finite  thing  this,  the  other  that,  the  being  of  the  Infinite  that

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  083

is  in  all  alike  the  common  ground  of  particular  existence  is
exhausted  ;  but  just  as  little  can  we  think  that  its  indivisible
content  is  split  up  into  countless  fragments  and  present  in
each  several  thing  in  only  a  part  of  its  fulness.  In  consider
ing  the  vital  activity  of  the  human  soul,  we  were  led  to  make
a  requirement  similar  to  that  here  forced  on  us,  and  we  may
now  be  assisted  in  forming  a  general  conception  of  the  relation
in  question  by  remembering  that  more  easily  grasped  instance
of  it.  When  the  soul  forms  thoughts  without  a  trace  of  feel
ing  or  of  willing,  we  do  not  suppose  that  this  one-sided  activity
shows  that  but  a  part  of  its  being  is  present,  while  its  other
capacities  are  slumbering  in  apathetic  unconcern.  On  the
contrary,  the  same  whole  nature  that,  under  the  influence  of
other  stimulations,  would  develop  feelings  of  pain  and  pleasure,
efforts  of  desire  and  aversion,  we  conceived  to  participate  with
the  whole  extent  of  its  being  in  the  production  of  thoughts.
But  it  is  exhausted  in  thought  no  more  than  in  any  other
particular  form  of  its  manifestation  ;  in  all  fully  present  and
•.ictive,  it  finds  in  each  but  a  one-sided  and  partial  expression,
and  behind  the  action  evolved  at  each  several  moment  a  larger
and  more  abundant  and  potential  reservoir  remains  undis
closed  and  concealed.  And  this  very  wholeness  of  the  soul's
presence,  common  alike  to  all  the  manifold  forms  of  its  mani
festation,  is  the  instrumentality  that  makes  the  reciprocal
action  of  the  various  internal  states  possible,  and  fixes  the
character  of  their  resultant.  We  did  not  find  feeling  ilow
as  a  necessary  and  self-evident  consequence  from  any  com
plication  of  ideas;  it  arose  because  the  presentative  activity
called  into  action  the  whole  living  soul,  in  whose  nature  feeling
lay  as  yet  unarou.scd,  but  ready  to  appear  under  conditions
of  which  some  are  realized  by  the  train  of  ideas.

Now  let  us  compare  with  the  soul's  indivisible  being  the
Infinite,  the  substance  of  all  things ;  with  the  several  forms  of
mental  action  those  finite  things — the  visible  elements  of  the
world — whose  various  forms  are  the  moulds  in  which  that
Infinite  lias  been  cast.  Xow,  as  in  the  soul  the  reciprocal
action  of  the  internal  states,  so  in  the  process  of  the  universe

384  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

the  reciprocal  action  of  things  will  depend,  not  only  as  to  its
general  possibility,  but  also  as  to  the  character  of  its  effects,
on  the  community  of  being  by  which  all  are  bound  together.
"What  each  individual  element  performs,  it  performs  not  as
individual,  but  only  in  so  far  as,  being  individual,  it  is  yet  a
phase  of  the  universal ;  not  because  it  is  of  such  a  kind  and
no  other,  includes  such  attributes  and  no  others,  must  it  pro
duce  such  an  effect  and  no  other,  but  only  because  in  it  as  it
is  abides  the  Infinite,  whose  abundant  nature  unites  the
attributes,  ready  with  its  force  to  protect  them  or  to  carry  out
their  alteration.  Thus  at  bottom  everything  finite  works
only  by  that  in  it  which  makes  it  secretly  better  than  it
seems,  by  the  essential  power  of  the  Infinite  latent  even  in  it ;
the  power  and  capability  of  action  belongs  not  to  the  outer
wrapping  of  particular  properties,  but  solely  to  the  core,  in  so
far  as  therein  enveloped.  Xow,  if  we  give  the  name  of
nature  of  a  thing  to  the  fused  and  simplified  duplicity  of  the
Infinite  Being  that  has  in  it  assumed  this  particular  form,
or  of  the  finite  form  that  has  become  filled  with  the  Infinite,
we  shall  be  entitled  from  this  nature  of  the  thing  to  derive
all  modes  of  its  behaviour  as  necessary  consequences.  For
inherent  truth  and  consistency  will  compel  the  Infinite,  witli
every  special  finite  form  which  it  assumes,  to  fix  also  the
unalterable  mode  of  action  to  be  executed  in  it,  in  accordance
with  the  ideal  that  presided  over  the  creative  moulding  of  this
particular  form  as  an  essential  part  of  its  manifestation.  But
the  usual  bent  of  science  is  towards  another  form  of  statement ;
the  group  of  attributes,  inefficacious  without  the  living  being
behind  them,  the  finite  envelope  of  the  truly  existent,  is  com
monly  termed  the  nature  of  a  thing,  and  little  is  said  about
what  we  must  regard  as  alone  the  enduring  and  efficacious
substance  of  these  phenomena.  From  this  merely  semi-nature
it  is  believed  that  the  procedure  of  things  can  be  deduced
as  a  necessary  consequence ;  it  is  supposed  not  only  that  we
can  understand  the  possibility  of  influence  being  transmitted,
but  that  in  a  series  of  universal  and  self-evident  truths  we
further  possess  the  means  of  deducing  the  character  of  any

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  385

result  from  the  given  circumstances  and  the  permanent  pro
perties  of  the  things.

Here  it  is  overlooked  that  the  impression  of  self-evidence
created  by  so  many  sequences  of  cause  and  effect,  proceeds
not  from  any  inherent  necessity  intelligible  to  us,  but  solely
from  the  general  and  preponderant  presence  of  those  con
nections  which,  recurring  constantly  as  actual  arrangements  of
things,  cheat  us  with  the  appearance  of  being  not  merely  facts
of  experience,  but  necessary  relations  of  thought.

After  experience  has  taught  us  that  the  amount  of  ponder
able  matter  remains  unaltered  under  all  transformations,  this
amazing  result  of  observation  assumes  in  our  eyes  the  exalted
character  of  a  primary  necessity,  and  we  imagine  that  a  neces
sary  inference  of  the  permanence  of  substance  might  have
taught  us  this  fact  anterior  to  any  experience.  After  we  have
observed  that  motion  once  begun  goes  on  the  longer  the  more
it  is  I'reed  from  obstacles,  we  are  suddenly  possessed  by  the
idea  that  perpetual  duration,  where  it  is  not  resisted,  is  its
necessary  condition,  and  yet  we  never  succeed  in  proving  this
would-be  necessary  truth  from  grounds  of  pure  thought.
Again,  after  we  have  seen  that  one  body  sets  another  in
motion  by  impact,  the  distribution  of  velocities  and  the  com
munication  of  motion  in  general  seem  to  us  phenomena
naturally  to  be  anticipated,  and  only  when  we  try  definitely
to  state  the  ground  of  this  expectation  do  we  discover  that  we
know  none.  That  every  physical  force  diminishes  as  the  dis
tance  between  the  bodies  exerting  it  increases,  we  fancy  to  be
a  law  which  we  cannot  think  otherwise,  and  yet,  to  be  candid,
we  know  no  reason  why,  on  the  contrary,  attraction  should  not
be  less  at  a  diminished  distance,  as  it  might  easily  be  decreased
in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  influence  already  exerted.
Lastly,  how  readily  do  we  ascribe  an  aflinity  to  bodies,  when
their  chemical  action  on  one  another  has  to  be  explained,  not
deducing  it  from  the  rest  of  their  nature,  but  regarding  it
literally  as  the  capability  of  an  operation  supplementary  to
their  nature !  Of  course  in  this  case  we  shall  throw  the
blame  on  the  incompleteness  of  our  knowledge  from  experi-
V»IL  i.  2  B

386  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

ence  ;  we  think  that  \ve  are  not  thoroughly  acquainted  even
with  the  nature  of  the  different  elements ;  that  it'  we  were,  we
should  find  in  it  the  explanation  of  their  chemical  affinities.
This  is  possible,  but  assuredly  only  in  the  sense  that  the
general  rules  according  to  which  we  should  infer  the  chemical
properties  from  the  better-known  nature  of  the  elements,
would  themselves  presuppose  a  number  of  those  causal  con
nections  which  are  demonstrable  as  undeniable  facts  of  the
actual  order  of  things,  but  not  intelligible  as  necessities.

From  such  fundamental  facts,  after  we  have  learned  their
significance  and  the  line  of  their  development,  we  can  of  course
deduce  manifold  particular  results,  but  we  cannot  discern  these
themselves  from  a  mere  study  of  the  things  as  given.  Only  if
we  knew  the  idea  with  which  the  Infinite  brought  these  things
into  being  could  we  understand  them.  He  who  thinks  to
demonstrate  the  order  of  events  solely  from  the  incomplete
nature  of  the  finite,  undertakes  the  hopeless  task  of  forming  a
theory  of  the  motions  of  shadows  without  regard  to  the  motion
of  the  bodies  by  which  they  are  cast,  For,  in  fact,  as  we
cannot  ascertain  the  speed  with  which  two  shadows  will  seem
to  rebound  from  mutual  contact,  from  the  velocity  with  which
they  approach  one  another,  but  only  from  the  elasticity  of
their  relative  bodies,  so  what  things  perform  depends  not  on.
their  recognisable  properties  alone,  but  on  the  elasticity  and
vitality  of  the  unconditioned,  which,  as  the  sole  comprehensive
and  efficacious  being,  presents  this  appearance  of  having  pro
perties.  Only  if  we  could  see  through  the  inner  nature  of
things  and  say  what  purpose  the  Infinite  has  in  this  multi
plicity  of  phenomena  and  their  endless  complexity,  would  we
from  that  purpose  understand  also  the  universal  laws  of  work
ing  which  it  has  laid  down  for  itself  in  this  manifestation,  and
be  able  not  merely  to  accept  them  as  facts,  but  to  comprehend
them  as  part  of  the  inherent  consistency  of  the  Infinite.

As  this,  however,  is  not  the  case,  we  would  not  find  fault
with  the  phraseology  of  physical  science,  so  long  as  it  is
designed  only  to  apply  to  current  investigations,  not  to  express
the  outcome  of  completed  inquiry.  Just  as  in  life  we  hold

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  387

fast  the  silent  conviction  that  each  one  of  our  moments  is  in
the  hand  of  God,  while  not  caring  to  desecrate  His  name  by
bringing  it  into  our  thoughts  about  every  trifling  incident
whose  dependence  on  His  will  we  do  not  understand,  so  we
shall  once  for  all  adopt  the  belief  that  each  stage  of  the  course
of  Nature  is  reached  only  through  the  working  and  shaping
power  of  the  Infinite ;  but  we  shall  not  be  ever  and  anon
repeating  this  belief  in  the  interpretation  of  particular  phae-
nomena.  For  in  such  particulars  the  Infinite  operates  only
under  the  guise  of  those  derived  principles  into  which  it  has
transformed  itself,  of  those  substances,  forces,  and  operations
which  it  has  created,  of  which  it  has  prescribed  the  character
and  laws, which, finally, it  has  woven  into  the  connected  whole  of
a  mechanical  course  of  Nature.  When  in  this  sense  we  reduce
all  events  in  Xature  to  mechanical  sequence,  we  act  in  accord
ance  with  the  spirit  of  the  Infinite,  and  show  reverence  to  its
ordinance ;  we  do  not  set  up  mechanism  in  opposition  to  it  as
an  independent,  hostile  power  that  it  has  to  subdue,  but  we
see  in  this  the  true  efficacy  of  the  Infinite,  that  which  it  would
wish  recognised  throughout  the  world  of  phenomena  as  the
hand  by  which  its  ends  are  accomplished.  Thus  physical
science  may  seem  to  do  without  the  Infinite,  because  it  does
not  speak  of  it,  and  the  superficial  physical  culture  of  our
time  may  think  it  can  do  without  it,  because,  exclusively
concerned  with  little  transitions  from  finite  to  finite,  it  lo.ses
sight  of  the  beginnings  of  tin;  web  in  which  it  is  enmeshed  ;
but,  in  point  of  fact,  all  honest  reflection  will  arrive  at  u
serious  conviction  of  the  utter  absence  of  independence  in
Xature,  and,  where  it  stumbles  upon  questions  such  as  those
which  led  to  this  explanation,  it  will  not  be  able  to  refrain
from  the  open  expression  of  this  conviction.

§  5.  Let  us  now  turn  back  to  these  questions,  in  order  not  to
linger  too  long  in  the  sphere  of  general  considerations,  and  we
shall  at  once  meet,  in  the  doubts  as  to  the  soul's  final  destiny
and  the  efforts  to  resolve  these,  with  an  instance  of  the
fruitless  endeavours  which  we  have  been  censuring.  Men
seek  in  three,  ways  to  arrive  at  certainty  in  regard  to  iminor-

388  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

tality.  For,  besides  those  many  analogies,  similes,  and
images  to  which  the  doubting  imagination  always  first  of
all  has  recourse,  and  which,  while  preparing  the  mind  for  the
reception  of  a  truth,  can  never  prove  it,  they  seek  to  prove
sometimes  that  immortality  flows  inevitably  from  the  nature
of  things,  sometimes  that  on  grounds  of  justice  it  is  a  neces
sary  concession  on  the  part  of  the  ruling  powers  of  the  universe.
We  have  no  intention  of  here  repeating  the  numerous  argu
ments  of  the  latter  kind ;  we  would  merely  add  a  statement
of  our  conviction  that  only  from  them — never,  on  the  other
hand,  from  those  apparently  more  strict  investigations  that
take  the  nature  of  things  as  their  starting-point — can  the  mind
derive  grounds  on  which,  with  some  confidence  in  their
stability,  to  rest  its  expectation  of  eternal  duration.  There
is  no  nature  of  things  that,  like  an  unforeseen  destiny,  pre
cedes  all  reality  as  a  code  of  laws  that  cannot  be  evaded ;
there  is  no  such  quintessence  of  the  essentially  possible  and
necessary  to  which  the  world-creating  power  must  have  looked
in  order  to  learn  within  what  limits  the  realization  of  its  ends
was  permissible,  and  under  what  obligations  of  consistent
development  it  must  come  at  each  starting  of  a  germ ;  finally,
there  is  no  eternal  and  premundane  birthright  of  things  or
substances,  on  the  ground  of  which  they  could  demand  that
every  power  seeking  their  services  in  the  formation  of  a  world
should  respect  their  privileges  and  employ  them  only  in  a
manner  befitting  their  inherent  dignity.  All  this — the  exist
ence  of  such  things,  the  peculiarities  of  their  nature,  and  the
rights  which  seem  to  pertain  to  it — is  at  once  and  uncondi
tionally  the  product  of  the  creative  power  itself;  the  universe
contains  them  in  just  the  quality  and  quantity  that  the
Infinite  needs  or  rather  allows  for  the  accomplishment  of  its
will ;  each  thing  possesses  those  rights  alone  which  have  been
assigned  by  the  inherent  consistency  of  the  Eternally  One  to
each  of  its  creatures  as  its  limits,  which  have  been  bestowed
on  it  by  that  creative  will ;  within  those  laws  alone  do  all  its
actions  and  its  destinies  seem  to  move  with  original  necessity.
Only  if,  standing  in  the  creative  centre  of  the  universe,  we

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  389

could  fully  scan  the  thought  whence  it  has  sprung,  could
we  from  it  foretell  the  destinies  of  the  individual  called
to  contribute  to  its  realization;  this  we  cannot  do  from
our  human  point  of  view  that  brings  us  face  to  face  not
with  the  Creator  and  His  purposes,  but  only  with  the  created.
If,  as  we  rightly  believe,  our  mind  is  in  possession  of  a
treasure  of  innate,  necessary  truth,  we  certainly  commit  the
first  and  greatest  sin  against  the  nature  of  that  truth  when
we  ascribe  to  it  any  origin  which  implies  that  even  its  content
is  not  due  solely  to  that  creative  power  ;  it  will  guide  us
in  combining  the  finite  in  harmony  with  the  whole  to  which
it  ministers,  but  it  cannot  seek  to  comprehend  the  final  destiny
of  till  things  apart  from  the  knowledge  of  the  supreme  end  on
which  that  destiny  is  exclusively  dependent.

The  one  conviction  that  has  been  brought  home  to  us  by
our  discussions  is,  that  the  soul  is  to  be  viewed  as  the  sub
stantial  and  permanent  subject  of  the  phenomena  of  our  inner
life.  But  that,  because  the  soul  is  the  abiding  substance  of
these  phenomena,  it  must  therefore  be  endowed  with  an
eternal  and  imperishable  duration,  as  the  privilege  of  its
nature — the  unprejudiced  mind  will  never  be  convinced  of
the  certainty  of  that  inference.  If  required  to  allow  that  every
substance  is  by  the  very  idea  of  it  necessarily  indestructible,
we  may  willingly  grant  that  this  idea  is  correct,  but  then  we
have  to  deny  that  it  applies  to  the  soul.  We  have  no  warrant
for  assuming  that  what  once  is  must  necessarily  always  be,
and  we  sometimes  doubt  the  possibility  of  rise  and  decay  only
because,  with  the  wonted  inquisitiveness  of  our  thought,  we
would  fain  be  able  to  conceive  how  they  come  to  pass.  Then,
if  the  connection  of  our  other  views  tends  so  strongly  to  make
us  see  in  all  finite  things  but  creations  of  the  Eternal,  it  is
impossible  that  the  destinies  of  the  individual  can  be  other
than  accordant  with  the  dictate  of  the  whole.  That  will  last
for  ever  which  on  account  of  its  excellence  and  its  spirit  must
be  an  abiding  part  of  the  order  of  the  universe  ;  what  lacks
that  preserving  worth  will  perish.  We  can  discover  no  other
supreme  law  of  our  destiny  than  this,  but  this  is  itself  inapplio-

390  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

able  in  our  human  hands.  Wo  dare  not  presume  to  judge  and
determine  which  mental  development  wins  immortality  by  the
eternal  significance  whereto  it  has  raised  itself,  and  to  which
this  is  denied.  We  must  not  seek  to  decide  either  whether  all
animal  souls  are  perishable  or  all  human  souls  imperishable,
but  take  refuge  in  the  belief  that  to  each  being  right  will  be
done.

And  even  as  the  soul's  continuance  after  death,  so  is  its
existence  before  its  birth  into  this  earthly  life  no  object  of
human  knowledge.  He  who  in  view  of  future  immortality
believes  that  an  infinite  anterior  history  of  the  soul  is  required,
can  hardly  be  incommoded  by  science  in  his  belief  and  in  the
imaginations  with  which  he  fills  up  this  void  in  our  remem
brance.  But  the  experience  of  our  present  life  contains  but
few  traces  that  can  point  a  mind  so  disposed  back  to  this  pre-
existent  state  ;  the  dream  of  a  transmigration  of  souls,  to  which
this  conception  would  almost  inevitably  tend,  has  hitherto
remained  a  dream  of  the  fancy,  nor  has  any  one  yet  succeeded
in  giving  it  a  higher  moral  significance  for  the  order  of  the
universe ;  lastly,  no  necessity  of  reason  constrains  us  to  shun
the  thought  of  a  beginning  of  the  soul.  The  organic  body,  in
process  of  being  formed,  certainly  does  not  educe  it  from  itself  j
but  the  living  body  itself  is  no  incoherent  heap  of  atoms
driven  to  a  particular  development  by  a  universal  law,  in  an
otherwise  empty  world.  As,  on  the  contrary,  every  physical
process,  even  the  most  minute,  apparently  taking  place  between
two  elements,  is  likewise  an  event  within  the  Eternal,  on  whose
constant  presence  all  possibility  of  action  depends,  even  so  the
quietly  advancing  formation  of  the  organic  germ  is  no  isolated
independent  event,  but  a  development  of  the  Infinite  itself.
Fostered  by  it,  received  by  it  into  its  own  inner  being,  this  natural
event  there  excites  the  creative  power  to  new  development ;
and  as  our  human  soul  receives  stimuli  from  without  and
answers  them  by  the  production  of  a  sensation,  so  the  con
sistent  unity  of  the  Infinite  Being  lets  itself  be  stimulated
by  this  internal  event  of  physical  development  to  produce  out
of  itself  the  soul  appropriate  to  the  growing  organism.

BEGINNING  AND  END  OF  SOUL-LIFE.  301

There  is  more  unity  and  simplicity  in  this  process  than  in
the  conception  which  we  can  give  of  it.  Differing  from  the
example  of  the  relation  between  our  finite  soul  and  stimuli
from  without,  that  event  of  Nature  is  not  to  the  Infinite  a
stimulus  which,  coming  from  without,  has  to  travel  along  a  path
before  it  finds  the  centre  whence  it  has  to  call  forth  the  new
development ;  each  several  event  of  Nature  takes  place  in  the
Infinite,  each  is  equally  near  the  centre,  and  equally  near  at
all  times.  And  the  soul  does  not  spring  forth  again  from  this
centre  as  a  new  second  element  that  has  to  travel  along  a
path  in  order  to  unite  itself  externally  with  the  body  of  which
it  is  in  search  :  unsevered  by  time  and  space  do  these  two
creations  unfold  together,  the  Infinite  expressing  in  their
simultaneous  development  the  inherent  truth  of  its  own  being.
The  soul  originates  neither  in  the  body  nor  in  nothing ;  it
goes  forth  from  the  substance  of  the  Infinite  with  no  less  ful
ness  of  reality  than  all  actual  Nature  brought  forth  from  the
same  source.  And  neither  do  soul  and  body  come  together
by  chance,  nor  is  it  the  work  of  the  body  by  its  organization
to  make  to  itself  a  soul  corresponding  to  the  possible  form  of
its  vital  activity;  nor  does  the  Infinite  arbitrarily  distribute
ready-fashioned  minds  to  infant  germs.  But  as  with  free  con
sistency  it  makes  every  bodily  organism  the  necessary  result
of  the  parent  organisms,  so  also  in  the  creation  of  souls  it
doubtless  follows  a  self-imposed  law,  that  weaves  their  succeed
ing  generations  into  the  gradations  of  an  inherent  affinity.
The  soul  of  the  parents  cannot  be  split  up  by  division  into  the
souls  of  the  children,  but  we  are  left  to  the  dim  conjecture
that  the  creative  hand  of  the  Infinite  reproduces  in  the  latter
the  mental  image  of  the  parents,  and  brings  inwardly  also  into
near  relationship  those  beings  which  it  has  linked  together
most  closely  for  outward  life.

But  a  dim  conjecture  it  is  ;  here,  too,  by  a  thousand  instances
experience  teaches  us  how  unsearchable  are  the  ways  of  God.
By  faithful  and  modest  observation  we  may  perhaps  here  and
there  gain  a  wider  glimpse  of  the  direction  in  which  they  tend,
but  we  shall  never  be  able  to  survey  the  course  of  the  spiritual

392  BOOK  III. CHAPTER  V.

order  of  the  universe  with  the  same  approximation  to  truth
that  is  granted  to  our  view  of  natural  phenomena.  And  all
the  increase  of  knowledge  to  which  we  may  hope  to  attain,  we
must  look  for,  not  from  the  contemplation  of  our  intelligent
nature  in  general,  but  solely  from  a  concentration  of  conscious
ness  upon  our  destiny.  Insight  into  what  ought  to  be  will
alone  open  our  eyes  to  discern  what  is ;  for  there  can  be  no
body  of  facts,  no  arrangement  of  things,  no  course  of  destiny,
apart  from  the  end  and  meaning  of  the  whole,  from  which
each  part  has  received,  not  only  existence,  but  also  the  active
nature  in  which  it  glories.

CONCLUSION.

I  WOULD  not  say  that  it  is  a  summit  commanding  a  wide
prospect  to  which  our  examination  has  led  us  by  a  way  long
and  yet  for  the  variety  of  the  adjacent  tract  perhaps  too  short ;
but  we  have  at  least  reached  the  height  granted  to  our  powers,
and  looking  back  we  may  well  recall  the  doubts  from  amidst
which  we  started,  and  the  altered  scene  now  presented  by  the
region  travelled  through.  "\Vhen  we  contemplated  the  struggle
between  the  different  views  of  Nature,  we  found  that,  while
it  was  especially  against  the  element  of  a  dark  and  rigid  neces
sity  of  Nature  that  the  human  spirit  unceasingly  waged  war,  it
ended  at  last  by  making  a  blind  surrender  to  the  worship  of
that  blind  sway  that  seemed  to  come  rather  from  renunciation
than  from  conviction.  Have  we  now  discovered  a  way  of
reconciling  the  antagonistic  ideas  there  in  conflict  ?  And  what
value  ought  we  to  attach  to  the  several  points  of  the  theory  that
lias  gradually  been  formed  for  us  during  the  removal  of  these
urgent  difficulties  ?  No  one  will  omit  once  more  with  honest
self-scrutiny  to  seek  a  comprehensive  answer  to  these  ques
tions,  who  has  learned  by  habitual  scientific  research  how  often
after  its  close  there  has  been  lost  much  of  the  radiance  of  the
saving  thoughts  that  were  so  dazzling  when  in  the  freshness  of
their  birth  they  leaped  to  meet  the  difficulties.  Then  they
were  lighted  up  by  the  hopeful  glow  of  labour,  and  shone  with
this  far  more  than  with  their  own  light.  Perhaps  we  too  shall
not  here  escape  this  fate ;  but  perhaps  also  something  will
remain  as  a  solid  gain,  which  we  may  carry  with  us  from  this
general  survey  of  the  conditions  of  all  life  into  the  special
consideration  of  human  affairs.

The  belief  in  personal  spirits  of  Nature,  in  which  the  mythic

tw

394  CONCLUSION.

conception  of  things  embodied  the  beauty  and  significance  of
particular  phenomena  in  the  form  of  living  enjoyment,  we
silently  relinquished.  No  experience  confirmed  this  dream  ;
but  at  the  same  time  it  was  more  than  all  experience  could
accomplish,  to  overthrow  another  dream,  in  which  the  spirit,
craving  for  inherent  vitality  in  Nature,  might  in  other  wrise  win
back  its  lost  content.  For  nothing  prevented,  and  much
encouraged  us,  to  suppose  those  simple  beings,  from  whose
combination  the  outward  form  of  lifeless  matter  seems  to  our
selves  to  spring,  to  be  the  seat  of  an  inner  life  capable  of
entering  with  the  most  varied  forms  of  feeling  into  the
peculiarity  of  every  situation  into  which  the  changeful  course
of  Nature  threw  them,  or  in  which  a  more  persistent  process
of  growth  retained  them.  On  this  conception  the  enjoyment
of  Nature  was  merely  generalized  ;  one  favoured  class  of  things
has  not  its  genii,  while  another  lies  blind  and  lifeless  ;  but  this
glow  of  feeling  might  pervade  all.  And  no  longer,  confined  to
the  forms  of  human  psychic  life,  does  this  innate  energy  now
show  us  everywhere  what  we  already  know ;  wre  can  conceive
as  dispersed  throughout  Nature,  wholly  different  indescribable
modes  of  enjoyment  and  feeling  that  hover  in  the  distance
before  us  but  in  dreamy  fancy,  so  corresponding  to  the  par
ticular  positions  of  the  simple  beings  that  no  event  of  the
varied  course  of  Nature  is  shut  out  from  this  transformation
through  conscious  enjoyment.  But  we  are  not  inclined  to
expatiate  on  the  advantages  of  this  view,  which  from  the  com
parative  absence  of  distinct  perceptibility  in  the  intelligent
beings  of  which  it  speaks,  would  the  more  commend  itself  to  the
musical  tendencies  of  culture  ;  we  prefer  to  dwell  on  the  fact
that  it  may  perhaps  not  be  an  idle  dream,  but  yet  that  it  lies
far  aloof  from  the  serious  and  weighty  convictions  on  which  we
seek  to  base  our  consideration  of  human  culture.  The  progress
of  human  development  depended  on  which  view  as  to  the  inner
life  of  Nature  was  the  prevalent  one  in  each  age,  only  so  long
as  it  could  be  a  question  whether  the  outer  world,  the  scene
and  object  of  our  actions,  was  ruled  by  wanton  freedom  and
the  caprices  of  genii  and  cliemons,  or  by  the  absolute  consist-

CONCLUSION.  395

ency  of  universal  laws.  After  that  has  been  settled,  the  sensi
tive  fancy  with  which  we  seek  to  search  out  the  soul  of  Nature,
will  be  less  favourable  to  the  advance  of  our  culture  than  the
sterner  mood  that  begins  by  taking  the  things  of  Nature  for
what  they  profess  to  be — for  blind,  deaf  products,  subject  to  a
necessary  order,  that  may  have  an  inner  life  of  their  own,
but  for  us  form  a  sphere  of  instruments.  Without,  therefore,
blaming  the  imagination  for  pursuing  the  other  line  of  thought,
we  must  affirm  that  not  in  it  but  in  the  prose  of  the  every
day  appearance  of  things  lie  the  more  important  foundations
of  our  mental  development.

In  view  of  personal  spirits  of  Nature,  mythology  could
never  get  rid  of  the  idea  of  an  unforeseen  necessity,  within
whose  limiting  bounds  moves  all  the  life  of  the  celestial
world,  lint  the  more  ready  we  were  to  grant  the  presence
everywhere  of  this  necessary  order,  the  more  decidedly  did  we
oppo.se  the  conception  of  it  as  a  premundanc  fate,  in  contrast
to  the  creative  power  to  which  the  fixed  forms  of  the  actual
world  are  due.  It  is  not  the  case,  as  mythology  in  dark
images  taught,  that  the  radiant  world  of  gods,  holding  in  their
hands  the  order  of  the  present  world,  only  comes  after  an
earlier,  dark,  and  gloomy  divinity,  by  whose  mysterious  sway
was  fixed  the  ground-plan  of  reality,  which  the  former  is  busy
enjoying  and  embellishing.  On  the  contrary,  the  most  solid
part  of  our  conviction  was  that  the  highest,  most  unbending,
most  general,  and  most  necessary  law  anywhere  presented  to
us  by  the  world,  is  but  the  self-imposed  condition  on  which
the  one  creative  Infinite  has  based  its  eternal  evolution.  Thus
of  itself  our  inquiry  led  us  into  the  domain  of  other  views
that  honour  the  quickening  and  animating  impulses  of  the
world  of  phenomena,  only  as  endlessly  varied  expressions  of
the  one  thought  that,  in  itself  unutterable,  forms  the  fulness  of
the  universal  soul.

Recognising  that  that  alone  truly  is  which  has  its  place  in
the  rational  connection  of  the  eternal  Idea,  that  that  alone
takes  place  which  lies  in  the  line  of  its  development,  that
everything  finite  possesses  solely  in  the  thought  of  the  universal

396  CONCLUSION.

soul  embodied  by  it  the  explanatory  ground  of  the  impulse
by  which  it  is  moved,  we  retained  in  these  affirmations  the
fundamental  doctrines  of  the  above  theory  of  things.  And
although  we  found  the  notion  of  impulses  inadequate  for
detailed  investigations,  and  substituted  for  it  the  unbroken
causal  chain  of  mechanism,  there  is  here  nothing  antagonistic
to  the  spirit  of  that  theory,  since  we  recognise  all  the  laws  of
this  mechanism  as  but  the  very  will  of  the  universal  soul,
all  combinations  and  divisions  of  efficient  means  as  its  own
actions,  its  operations  on  itself.  But  after  all,  what  satisfaction
could  this  theory  afford  if  it  were  unable  to  unite  the  two
great  contrasting  parts  that  together  make  up  the  world —
Nature  and  the  sphere  of  Ethics  ?  And  can  we  deny  that  all
those  doctrines  do  but  give  us  a  soul  of  Nature  instead  of
the  world  -  soul  ?  A  being  in  whose  one  infinite  shaping
impulse  the  countless  several  impulses  of  finite  phenomena
blend  like  coloured  rays  in  the  unity  of  white  light  ?  But
where  in  this  being  is  the  cause  of  the  development  of  the
moral  world,  where  that  whence  proceeds  the  distinction  of
good  and  evil  ?  If  we  will  not — relapsing  into  the  old
antagonism — either  externally  ground  the  moral  world  on  a
Nature  originally  given,  or  assume  that  the  two  separate  roots
coexist  without  any  bond  of  union  in  a  Supreme  Being  that
we  call  One,  no  other  choice  remains  than  either  to  include
the  Good  in  the  cycle  of  natural  phsenomena,  or  Nature  in  the
accomplishment  of  Good.  I  cannot  for  a  moment  doubt  that
the  latter  alternative  is  alone  permissible :  all  being,  all  that
we  call  mode  and  form,  thing  and  event,  the  whole  sum  of
Nature,  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  condition  for  the  realiza
tion  of  Good,  can  be  as  it  is  only  because  thus  in  it  the  infinite
worth  of  the  Good  manifested  itself.  But  this  decided  con
viction  indicates  only  an  ultimate  and  farthest  goal  that  may
give  our  thoughts  their  direction ;  it  does  not  indicate  know
ledge  that  deserves  the  name  of  science,  because  it  can  be  formu
lated  in  a  demonstrable  doctrine.  To  our  human  reason  a
chasm  that  cannot  be  filled,  or  at  least  has  never  yet  been
iilled,  divides  the  world  of  values  from  the  world  of  forms,  and

CONCLUSION.  397

however  energetically  our  receptive  mind  may  work  its  way
backwards  in  thought  to  spell  out  from  the  actual  forms  of
Nature  the  value  of  their  ethical  significance,  we  cannot
hence  proceed  to  prove  from  the  consciousness  of  the
highest  values  the  necessity  of  their  taking  shape  in  these
and  in  no  other  forms  of  Nature.  "With  the  firmest  conviction
of  the  undivided  unity  of  the  two  we  combine  the  most
distinctly  conscious  belief  in  the  impossibility  of  this  unity
being  known.

How  easily  could  we  avoid  this  confession  by  a  conceal
ment  of  the  facts  !  For  how  inventive  has  our  speculative
science  always  been  to  spare  itself  by  means  of  new  names  and
images  the  humiliating  confession  that  its  problem  here  is  no
other  than  that  which  has  all  along  engaged  the  unsophisticated
human  mind,  and  yet  that  it  has  come  no  nearer  a  solution.
When  the  question  is  asked  how  from  the  hand  of  the  same
God  that  established  the  sanctities  of  the  moral  world  could
come  forth  the  revolution  of  the  planets,  the  beauty  of  the
earth,  with  the  joyous  multitude  of  its  plants  and  animals
and  the  unbending  necessity  of  the  mechanism  which  these
conceal :  how  easy  it  is,  and  yet  how  contemptible,  to  speak
of  ;i  real  and  an  ideal  factor  in  God,  of  a  preponderance  of
blind  or  of  conscious  working  in  His  activity,  and  to  attribute
to  the  former,  Nature,  still  mysterious  in  its  forms,  and  to  the
latter  the  equally  shadowy  outlines  of  mental  existence  !  How
easy  is  it  to  see  in  God  something  that  is  not  God  Himself,
u  dark  ground  growing  out  into  the  material  stem  of  Natuiv
and  overarched  by  the  more  lustrous  manifestation  of  the  other
element  in  God  that  is  more  peculiarly  Himself!  With  such
miserable  shifts  is  the  seriousness  of  the  question  trifled  with,
and  after  all  less  is  said  than  is  contained  in  the  simple  creed
of  the  artless  mind,  that  the  unsearchable  wisdom  of  God  is  the
source  of  all  Unite  forms.

We  have  to  make  the  same  confession  of  the  impossibility
of  giving  scientific  precision  to  a  belief  which  is  not  on  that
account  less  sure  in  our  relation  to  the  last  great  view  of  Nature
— the  mechanical.  We  granted  it  unreservedly,  in  so  far  as

398  CONCLUSION.

concerns  the  examination  of  the  relations  between  finite  and
finite,  the  origin  and  accomplishment  of  any  reciprocal  actions
whatsoever  ;  \ve  as  decidedly  denied  its  authority,  where  it
claimed  acceptance,  not  as  a  formal  instrument  of  investigation,
but  as  a  final  theory  of  things.  While  denying,  however,  the
independent  reality  of  a  mechanical  course  of  Nature,  we
cannot  complete  the  deduction  of  its  several  laws  from  the
supreme  end  of  the  universe,  but  must  leave  it  to  the  slow
progress  of  science  to  show  how  far  this  attempt  is  practicable,
how  far  it  will  ever  lie  beyond  the  reach  of  human  thought.
All  we  could  do  was  to  point  out  how  little  necessary  connec
tion  there  is  between  the  character  of  externality,  so  often  laid
as  a  charge  against  the  mechanical  conception,  and  the  spirit
of  that  conception.  Those  who  hold  it  are  not  prevented
from  accepting  internal  states  in  the  effective  elements  by
whose  varying  combinations  they  account  for  the  variety  of
natural  phenomena,  and  a  secret  energy  in  the  life  of  these
which  they  are  at  liberty  to  heighten,  till  they  come  to  believe
in  a  play  of  mental  excitations  akin  to  ours.  The  motley
abundance  of  phenomena  does  not  necessarily  become  for  them
lowered  to  an  unintelligent  exchange  of  motions,  an  ever  new
and  ever  alike  meaningless  distribution  of  velocities,  a  restless
changing  of  the  situation  and  combination  of  the  particles  :
they,  too,  can  look  on  these  vicissitudes  of  external  Nature  as  but
the  sum  of  occasioning  causes  by  which,  according  to  immut
able  laws,  an  inner  nature  is  called  forth  which  forms  ths
inexhaustible  variety  of  feelings  within  beings.  Mechanical
natural  science  no  doubt  makes  the  external  history  alone  the
subject  of  its  examination,  and  leaves  the  internal,  which  it
cannot  study  with  the  aid  of  experience,  to  the  activity  of  our
imagination.  Yet  it  does  not  believe  that  in  the  world  of
motion  it  possesses  the  true  reality,  the  ultimate  meaning  of
all  existence,  the  final  end  of  all  creation,  but  holds  also  that
mechanism  is  but  the  collection  of  all  the  instrumental  forms
in  which  God  has  willed  that  created  beings  shall  act  on  one
another  with  their  unknown  natures,  and  that  all  their  states
shall  be  welded  into  the  endless  chain  of  a  world-history.

CONCLUSION.  399

This  view  explores  the  sphere  of  means,  not  the  sphere  of  the
ends  to  which  these  minister.  As  in  our  life  we  see  the
physical  motions  of  external  Nature  employed  as  stimuli
to  excite  that  in  ourselves  which  is  far  higher — conscious
sensation :  so,  we  think,  throughout  the  universe  mechanical
events  are  but  the  external  tissue  of  regularly  crossing
stimuli,  designed  to  kindle  at  innumerable  points,  within
innumerable  beings,  the  true  action  of  a  more  intelligent
life.

Cut  if  we  lay  stress  on  the  dependence  of  Nature,  so  that
the  deification  of  mechanism,  with  which  after  all  we  may  per
haps  be  charged,  consists  only  in  our  conceiving  it,  not  as  a
self-supporting  fate,  but  merely  as  a  product  of  divine  wisdom;
we  must,  on  the  other  hand,  require  the  recognition  of  its
absolute  validity.  We  think  we  have  shown  how,  in  most  of
the  cases  where  a  view  of  Nature,  more  sympathetic  than  clear,
oppressed  by  the  rigidity  of  this,  betakes  itself  fur  refuge  to
other  higher  forces  and  powers,  on  the  one  hand,  experience
forces  on  us  (often  most  bitterly)  the  permanence  of  mechanical
conditionally,  on  the  other,  our  own  feeling  would  reap  no
advantage  from  the  conjectures  which,  with  a  secret  conscious
ness  of  their  discrepancy,  it  might  venture  to  form  in  regard
to  given  facts.  We  did  not  find  the  freedom  which  we  may
justly  wish  to  preserve,  formally  incompatible  with  the  con
tinuity  and  firm  connection  of  the  mechanical  construction  of
the  universe ;  but  doubt  as  to  whether  in  this  case  what  we
conjectured  might  answer  to  the  rightly  understood  reason  for
its  being  conjectured,  made  us  hesitate  along  with  the  pos
sibility  of  freedom  to  speak  of  its  reality,  and  to  assign  to
the  notion  a  particular  place  in  the  whole  of  the  mechanical
universe.  The  further,  however,  we  travel  along  this  path
away  from  the  wretched  narrowness  of  the  views  of  former
times,  to  which  mechanism  was  nothing  else  than  an  endless
communication  of  mutual  shocks,  the  more  must  we  repel
every  attempt  to  withdraw  particular  parts  of  finite  reality
from  the  universal  law  of  the  instrumental  character  of  finite
events.  Nowhere  is  mechanism  the  essence  of  the  matter ;

400  CONCLUSION.

but  nowhere  does  being  assume  another  form  of  finite  exist
ence  except  through  it ;  as  we  have  not  other  gods  beside
God,  so  we  need  no  other  form  beside  this  universal  form
of  action  in  Nature.

We  are  well  aware  of  the  reason  of  the  contemptuous  aver
sion  with  which  so  many  minds  revolt  against  this  acknow
ledgment.  To  us  all  at  times  the  world  of  forms  seems  too
much  to  conceal  the  world  of  values,  the  realm  of  means  to
eclipse  the  realm  of  ends ;  we  long  for  the  unity  of  truest
being,  in  which  Ideas  have  reality  without  being  tied  to  the
mediation  of  instruments,  the  highest  happiness  exists  without
being  bound  by  the  myriad  conditions  of  particular  positions,
in  which  immediate  understanding  between  minds  makes  all
external  modes  of  reciprocal  action  superfluous ;  in  which,
finally,  Creator  and  created  blend  in  a  community  of  life,  for
whose  dim  profundity  the  noblest  mysticism  scarce  offers
adequate  expression.  While  looking  up  to  such  a  last  and
highest,  we  are  pained  by  this  world  of  resistance,  of  mediacy,
of  conditioning  circumstances,  of  delay  ;  it  disquiets  us  that
we  cannot  comprehend  the  beauty  of  natural  forms  from  a
breath  of  creative  vital  power,  but  must  think  of  it  as  reached
along  the  roundabout  path  of  countless  reciprocal  actions  of  a
plurality ;  lastly,  it  troubles  us  to  know  that  even  in  our
mental  development  we  are  fettered  by  the  mutual  working  of
powers,  whose  universal  regularity  stands  in  chilling  contrast
to  the  ardour  of  our  desires.  But,  far  as  we  are  from  denying
the  truth  of  the  unity  which  this  mystic  ecstasy  thinks  it  dis
cerns,  this  earthly  life  of  ours  assuredly  lies,  not  in  its  sphere,
but  in  that  of  duality  and  contrast.  We  stand  neither  in  our
knowing  nor  in  our  acting  at  the  motionless  centre  of  the
universe,  but  at  the  farthest  extremities  of  its  structure,  loud
with  the  whirl  of  machinery ;  and  the  impatient  longing  that
seeks  to  escape  thence  to  the  centre  should  beware  of  thinking
lightly  of  the  seriousness  and  magnitude  of  conditions  under
whose  sway  an  irrevocable  decree  has  placed  our  finite  life.
If  the  views  of  things  whence  this  longing  springs  are  higher,
they  float  like  distant  clouds,  brilliantly  lit  up  with  noble

CONCLUSION.  401

anticipations,  at  a  secure  height  above  all  the  thorny  com
plexities  of  our  situation  here  below :  they  point  out  no  path
through  the  thicket,  only  one  which  leads  to  resignation.

But  the  life  of  the  human  race  consists  not  alone  in  long
ing  tor  the  goal,  in  enthusiastic  dreams  of  having  come  within
Mght  of  it,  but  in  the  labour  of  travelling  towards  it.  If  we
would  fulfil  this  task  with  self-conscious  circumspection,  we
cannot  be  too  zealous  in  searching  into  the  conditions  imposed
even  on  the  development  of  our  mental  life  in  the  nature  of
the  scene  that  surrounds  us  and  the  course  of  the  history  by
which  we  are  drawn  along.  As  in  the  great  fabric  of  the
universe  the  creative  spirit  imposed  on  itself  unchangeable
laws  by  which  it  moves  the  world  of  phenomena,  diffusing
the  fulness  of  the  Highest  Good  throughout  innumerable  forms
and  events,  and  distilling  it  again  from  them  into  the  bliss  of
consciousness  and  enjoyment :  so  must  man,  acknowledging
the  same  laws,  develop  given  existence  into  a  knowledge  of  its
value,  and  the  value  of  his  ideals  into  a  series  of  external
I'-iims  proceeding  from  himself.  To  this  labour  we  are  called,
and  the  most  admirable  feature  in  the  history  of  our  race  is
the  unquenchable  perseverance  with  which  the  most  prominent
intellects  in  all  ages  have  devoted  themselves  to  the  perfecting
nf  the  outward  relations  of  life,  the  subjugation  of  Nature,  the
advancement  of  all  useful  arts,  the  improvement  of  social
institutions,  though  they  knew  that  the  true  bliss  of  existence
lies  in  those  quiet  moments  of  solitary  communion  with  God
when  all  human  daily  toil,  all  culture  and  civilisation,  the
gravity  and  the  burden  of  noisy  life,  shrink  into  something  like
a  mure  preliminary  exercise  of  powers  without  any  abiding
result.  In  the  energy  of  a  freedom  that  does  not  aimlessly
stray  and  desire  the  fruit  without  the  slow  growth  of  the  plant,
but  consciously  restraining  himself  within  the  linn  bounds
of  a  necessity  which  he  holds  sacred,  and  following  the  tracks
prescribed  to  him,  Man  will  be  that  which,  according  to  an
ancient  idea,  he  is  above  all  creatures — the  complete  reflection
of  the  great  real  world,  the  little  world,  the  Microcosm.

VOL.  I.  2  C

BOOK IV.

MAN.

CHAPTER I.

NATURE AND IDEAS.

Mechanical  Explanation  and  Ideal  Interpretation  of  Nature — Mutual  Indepen
dence  of  these  Conceptions,  and  Necessity  of  combining  them — Purposive
Creation— The  Ideal  in  the  Real— Nature  as  Fact.

$  1.  TTOW  reluctantly,  how  incredulously,  do  we  all  listen
-Li  while  obtrusive  shrewdness  tries  to  analyse  the
highly  complex  structure  of  our  inner  nature ;  and  how
little  are  we  impressed  by  the  calm  confidence  that  pretends,
from  general  points  of  view,  to  foretell  the  necessary  course  of
development  of  our  particular  temperament  and  disposition !

\Ve  think  that  we  are  something  more  than  one  of  many
possible  combinations  of  properties ;  that  every  attempt  to
measure  us  by  a  standard  fitting  others  as  well  rebounds  from
the  outside  of  our  being,  leaving  unapproached  and  uncorn-
].i-e] K-nded  a  unique  residue,  the  true  self,  which,  so  far  as
open  to  observation,  presents  only  an  external  surface  resembling
others.  What  we  thus  demand  for  ourselves  we  are  ready
also  to  allow,  outside  ourselves,  to  the  products  of  Nature.
There  is  a  certain  modesty  of  observation  that  is  ready  to
trace;  in  each  natural  form  the  consistent  course  of  its  peculiar
ibi  niation  ;  following  unbiassedly  the  tracks  before  it,  it  seeks
to  feel  its  way  to  a  comprehension  of  the  secret  meaning  that
gives  life  to  all  things,  and  that  perforce  escapes  us  when,  on
the  contrary,  we  unsympathetically  measure  the  characteristic
variety  of  their  development  by  general  standards.  The  course
of  our  speculations  has  hitherto  showed  no  trace  of  such
reverence  for  the  living  individuality  of  phenomena.  With
seemingly  inexorable  sternness  we  repelled  the  intrusive
eloquence  of  entreaty  with  which  they  appealed  to  us  to
recognise  their  special  significance ;  we  throughout  persisted

406

406  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  I.

in  regarding  them  but  as  examples  of  the  manifold  results  to
be  gained  from  a  general  body  of  laws  when  by  chance  the
elements  of  reality  come  under  its  operation  in  this  or  that
combination.

Undoubtedly  such  a  conception  of  the  course  of  Nature
does  not  in  the  least  satisfy  the  expectations  with  which  an
unprejudiced  mind  usually  sets  about  the  work  of  observation  ;
for,  in  fact,  did  we  proceed  solely  with  this  view,  we  could
scarcely  escape  the  charge  of  having  unawares  eliminated  from
our  view  the  very  idea  of  Nature.  No  one  understands  by  that
name  a  mere  aggregate  of  substances  indefinite  in  number,
coming  together  disjointedly  from  unknown  sources  and  set
in  motion  by  arbitrary  accidents,  whose  blind  ferment  reflects
with  inevitable  but  unintentional  regularity  nothing  but  the
irresistible  might  of  universal  laws.  On  the  contrary,  we
speak  of  a  kingdom  of  Nature  ;  and  we  desire  to  see  Nature  in
secure  possession  of  the  living  proportion  between  parts  and
whole — of  the  mutual  relations  of  complementary  and  sup
porting  structures  that  make  the  smallest  fabric  more  than  an
illustration  of  the  statical  laws  carried  out  in  it — of  the  full
rational  significance  of  internal  connection.  This  desire  for
unbroken  unity  in  Nature  may  spring  originally  from  the
longing  of  the  imagination  to  find  realized  its  ideal  of  har
monious  existence  ;  it  cannot  but  be  quickened  by  recollection
of  the  problem  that  now  occupies  all  our  thoughts — our  own
position  in  this  Nature  with  whose  unrest  and  flux  we  find
ourselves  so  inextricably  united.  The  view  which  we  form
in  regard  to  the  scene  of  our  existence  will  inevitably  help  to
determine  the  tone  of  our  beliefs  about  the  meaning  and  ends
of  our  own  action.  Were  we  plunged  into  the  midst  of  an  eddy
ing  vortex  determined  in  its  direction  not  by  any  plan  for  the
future,  but  only  by  the  necessary  after-effect  of  the  past,  we
would  fear  for  the  steadiness  of  the  aims  of  our  own  striving ;
the  confidence  of  our  hope  and  the  whole  joy  of  our  existence
depend  on  our  believing  in  a  predetermined  unity  of  the
universal  frame,  in  which  we  have  our  allotted  place,  and
which  contains  in  the  blind  operations  of  Nature  the  germ

NATURE  AND  IDEAS.  407

of  the  evolution  that  is  to  be  taken  up  and  carried  on  by
intelligent  life.

With  such  views — the  confident  ardour  of  which  we  do  not
grudge  the  human  mind,  that  will  ever  anew  create  them,  even
were  the  attempt  to  deprive  it  of  them  less  hopeless — in  such
a  mood,  we  look  back  on  the  way  along  which  we  have  been
travelling,  and  cannot  but  find  it  barren.  It  will  indeed
always  remain  true,  and  every  contrary  effort  of  imagination
will  reluctantly  be  compelled  to  confess  it,  that  all  problems
concerning  the  process  of  realization  of  a  phenomenon,  and
the  possibility  of  its  existence,  must  return  to  the  already
indicated  path  of  a,  mechanical  conception.  But  it  will  never
satisfy  us  to  hear  repeated,  for  any  impressive  harmony  and
beauty  in  reality,  the  explanation  that  it  is  produced  with
blind  necessity  as  an  inevitable  result  consequent  on  these  and
no  other  determining  conditions,  this  and  no  other  combina
tion  of  elements.  Though  mechanical  physics  rejoices  in  th»j
certainty  with  which  it  can  infer  the  nearest  necessary  results
from  any  collocation  of  things,  let  chance  weave  them  as  it
will,  we  yet  cannot  believe  that  the  whole  essence  of  Nature
is  to  bu  found  in  universal  laws  which  only  by  means  of  an
accident  gain  an  object  to  work  upon,  and  so  a  deiinite  form
for  their  effect.  Nay,  rather,  the  true  creative  Nature,  what
as  an  example  of  the  general  rule  formerly  seemed  to  be
but  a  foil  to  Nature  as  Law  and  its  unlimited  power,  lies  in
the  fact  that  there  is  a  certain  variety  of  effective  elements
under  control  of  law,  that  combinations  of  these  elements  are
not  caught  unconnectedly,  like  scattered  game,  in  the  con
nected  net  of  mechanical  rules,  but  that  in  a  definite  selection
and  succession,  grouped  together,  these  constellations  of  cir
cumstances  occur,  in  order  to  deliver  to  the  steady  guidance
of  the  laws,  for  sure  development,  the  germs  of  abundant  and
fair  outcome  contained  within  them.  To  search  into  the  basis
and  origin  of  this  order  is  a  task  whose  importance  we  must
not  try  to  depreciate,  and  which  the  mechanical  view  cannot
help  tolerating  alongside  of  itself.

The  attempt  to  solve  this  problem  this  view  will  of  course

403  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  I.

rightfully  avoid.  It  will  remind  us  how  every  explanation
must  presuppose  some  actual  matter  of  fact  which  has  to  be
recognised,  and  whose  consistent  consequences  alone  it  can
draw  out  according  to  universal  laws.  There  is  nothing,  it
will  say,  to  prevent  our  conceiving  the  first  relative  situation
of  elements  in  the  universe  to  have  been  such  as  to  involve
•in  itself  all  harmony,  beauty,  and  adaptation  to  ends  subse
quently  met  with  in  things  actual.  The  disinclination  to  rest
in  this  supposition  secretly  implies  the  other  and  stranger
assumption,  that  disorder  is  more  natural  than  order,  and  that
a  barren  chaos  is  more  likely,  nay,  has  almost  more  right,  to
have  existed  than  a  harmonious  condition  of  things  whose
establishment  required  express  assistance.  How  incalculable
are  the  turns  of  thought !  The  one  view,  in  its  conviction
that  the  deeply  felt  beauty  of  Nature  is  more  piously  honoured
by  being  derived .  from  a  far  higher  source,  finds  itself  unex
pectedly  outdone  by  the  other,  which  indignantly  points  out
.how  extravagant  and  unbefitting  the  dignity  of  reality  is  the
fear  that  it  is  easier  for  the  inferior  and  confused  to  come  into
being  than  for  the  opposite.

We  do  not  mean  to  enter  into  this  contest ;  we  are  content
with  extorting  a  concession  from  the  mechanical  view,  which,
if  it  means  to  take  up  arms,  it  cannot  withhold.  For,  refer
ring  all  beauty,  adaptation  to  ends,  and  ideal  significance  in
Nature  to  a  primitive  situation,  composition,  and  motion  of  the
elements,  it  thinks,  by  negation  ch icily,  to  ward  off  the  idea
of  a  special  rationally  creative  origin  of  tilings ;  and  yet
involuntarily  it  thereby  affirms  the  fact  that  the  primal  con
dition  of  the  world  was  a  rational  order,  and  that  all  its  own
attempts  at  explanation  but  turn  to  account  the  consequences
of  this  original  reason.  Now,  as  regards  the  immediate  ends
of  its  investigations,  mechanical  science  may  be  right  to  take
account  of  this  reason  only  in  the  form  of  an  eternally  exist
ing  fact,  without  going  beyond  it  to  account  for  its  existence.
For  in  fact  any  attempt  to  explain  its  origin  could  only  pre
suppose  another  prior  fact,  concerning  which  the  same  question,
with  the  same  result  or  want  of  result,  would  recur.  At  the

NATURE  AND  IDEAS.  -{ >

same  time,  the  necessity  of  bringing  explanations  of  the  origin
of  tilings  to  a  close  by  recognising  some  ultimate  datum,
cannot  prevent  us  from  in  a  different  form  making  this
primitive  foundation  the  subject  of  new  inquiries.  For  the
unanswered  question  will  always  come  up  again — Whence  come
the  endless  number  of  primary  relations  between  the  elements
of  the  universe  that  have  to  be  assumed — come,  further,  with
such  a  happy  mutual  complementing  and  connection  of  all
with  all,  that  the  necessary  consequence  of  this  primary
matter  of  fact  is  a  system  of  Xature  adjusted  to  common  life  ?
There  thus  arises,  besides  the  mechanical  conception  of  Xature,
another  with  different  ends,  and  a  different  character  in  its
investigation.  While  the  former,  which  is  strictly  explanatory
science,  everywhere  seeks  out  the  real  means  by  who.se  regular
combination  everything,  great  and  small,  beautiful  and  ugly,
healthy  and  diseased,  is  made,  the  other,  the  interpretative
view  of  Xature,  is  indifferent  towards  these  means  of  realiza
tion.  Giving  up  the  attempt  to  explain  the  origin  of  the
original  arrangements  which  it  is  forced  to  recognise  as  actual,
it  seeks  to  compensate  fur  this  shortcoming  by  demonstrating
that  at  least  no  disjointed  plurality  of  disconnected  details,
but  the  unit}-  of  a  significant  Idea,  forms  the  primary  datum
— an  Idea  which,  from  its  absolute  worth,  deserves  to  be  the
deepest  and  most  solid  foundation  of  the  universe,  and  from
whose  total  import  is  evolved,  with  the  persuasive  constraint
of  a  poetical  necessity,  the  infinite  variety  of  the  several
primary  relations  of  Xature.

£  2.  lietween  these  two  conceptions  of  Xature  we  find,  on
the  one  hand  a  contest  misapprehending!}'  waged,  on  the  other
an  adjustment  of  it  that  does  not  remove  all  our  doubts.  We
see  at  once  how  readily  the  two  can  be  kept  distinct  up  to  a
certain  point,  and  the  problems  of  each  be  separately  dealt
with.  The  aesthetic  effect  of  a  picture  is  primarily  the  result
only  of  the  lines  which  we  find  it  set  before  us,  not  of  any
knowledge  of  the  methods  by  which  the  artist  succeeded  in
executing  them.  In  like  manner,  insight  into  the  ideal  mean
ing  of  a  natural  product,  into  the  thought  whose  visible

410  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  I.

manifestation  it  is  called  to  be,  is  not  gained  by  acquaintance
with  the  machinery  through  which  Nature  succeeded  in  bringing
it  forth.  Only  where  a  still  advancing  evolution  is  among  the
traits  that  express  the  meaning  of  a  changing  natural  form  can
any  important  end  be  served  by  searching  into  the  ministering
elements  and  the  intermediate  processes  here  employed  to
realize  that  meaning,  not  without  there  being  significance  in
their  selection.  Now,  if  it  is  a  common  delusion  that  the  way
in  which  it  is  painted  wholly  determines  the  aesthetic  value
of  a  picture,  this  fault  is  rarely  committed  by  the  student  of
Nature ;  he  in  nowise  considers  his  explanations  of  the  genesis
of  an  event  as  a  determination  of  its  ideal  value,  but  leaves
that  to  be  ascertained  by  other  inquirers,  who  are  more  firmly
convinced  of  its  existence,  and  think  they  know  how  to  set
about  its  discovery.  Far  more  frequently,  on  the  contrary,
do  the  ideal  interpreters  of  Nature  mistake  the  boundaries
of  their  activity ;  they  often  expect  that  the  meaning  of
phenomena  disclosed  by  them  shall  also  be  accepted  as  an
explanation  of  how  they  come  about.  And  yet  the  knowledge
how  an  event  came  to  pass  is  no  more  dependent  on  the
understanding  of  the  thought,  perhaps  latent  in  it,  than  is  that
understanding  upon  the  knowledge.  For  no  matter  whether
some  Idea  directs  things  or  not,  no  matter,  further,  what  may
be  the  purport  of  this  controlling  thought,  anything  can  exist
and  can  happen  only  in  so  far  as  it  has  constraining  causes
in  antecedent  circumstances.  So,  whatever  the  Idea  ordains,
whether  and  in  what  form  its  ordinance  is  carried  out  will
always  be  decided  in  the  last  resort  by  a  knowledge  of  the
actual  means  (and  of  their  given  combination)  placed  at  its
disposal  by  Nature,  from  which,  when  they  are  there,  the  same
result  must,  with  blind  necessity,  flow,  without,  nay,  even  in
opposition  to,  the  bidding  of  the  Idea,  These  two  departments
of  inquiry  thus  become  severed  and  lie  parallel  to  one  another.
Mechanical  investigation,  step  by  step,  carries  back  the  origin
of  events  to  their  efficient  causes,  and  makes  no  objection
when  another  line  of  inquiry  thinks  it  discovers  further  a
rational  meaning  in  the  total  course  of  Nature.  The  ideal

NATURE  AND  IDEAS.  411

interpretation  brings  the  connection  and  internal  consistency
of  this  meaning  into  prominence,  and,  if  it  does  not  repel
the  demonstration  that  significant  Ideas  are  realized  only  by
means  of  mechanism,  it  is  yet  convinced  that  in  every  case,
even  were  the  sum  of  these  means  different,  the  same  thoughts
would  reappear  in  this  different  world  under  other  but  equally
appropriate  forms.

Nevertheless  there  is  a  limit  to  this  division  of  labour.  In
all  particular  researches  it  may  be  useful  thereby  to  compose
the  strife  of  the  two  views,  and  in  this  way  to  avoid  the
undue  mixing  together  of  different  problems.  Where,  how
ever,  the  matter  in  hand  is  the  shaping  of  our  theory  of  things
in  general,  it  must  be  unsatisfactory  to  keep  asunder  the
various  questions  that  ought  here,  on  the  contrary,  to  bo
answered  from  a  single  source.  However  little  our  admiration
of  a  beautiful  picture  may  depend  on  our  knowledge  of  the
technique  of  painting,  it  yet  at  least  rests  on  the  supposition
that  the  picture  is  the  product  of  an  artist's  imagination
which  by  the  unity  of  its  aim  combined  the  motley  elements
into  the  unity  of  a  connected  manifestation.  Were  we
assuredly  convinced  that  nothing  but  a  disconnected  vortex
of  accidents  had  brought  together  the  coloured  points  into
these  outlines,  could  we  not  at  least  cheat  ourselves  into
belief  of  the  contrary,  our  admiration  would  be  sensibly
diminished  by  the  consciousness  that  it  is  only  we  who  put
into  these  forms  a  significance  that  does  not  look  out  from
them  as  the  expression  of  their  own  meaning.  The  same
doubts  are  sure  to  stir  us  where  we  have  to  do  with  the
total  conception  of  reality.  We  cannot  regard  Nature  as  a
kaleidoscope  that,  shaken  by  chance,  produces  forms  that
look  as  if  they  had  a  meaning;  if  there  is  to  be  any  meaning
in  this  meaning,  we  must  seriously  assume  and  hold  fast
the  conviction  that  the  same  power  whence  proceed  the
efficient  capabilities  of  things,  also  directly  includes  that
moulding  imagination  which  assigns  to  these  capabilities  their
points  of  application  and  their  significant  lines.  It  is  not
therefore  sufficient  to  suppose  that  along  with  the  mechanical

412  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  I.

course  of  Nature — nay,  in  it — there  is  also  ideal  significance.
On  the  contrary,  any  theory  ot  the  universe  that  aims  at
completeness  must  comprise  some  definite  representation  of
the  relation  in  which  in  Nature  the  archetypal  thought  must
stand  to  the  efficient  causes  of  its  representative  realization.

§  3.  This  is  usually  accomplished  in  one  of  two  ways,  each
of  which  soon  brings  us  into  peculiar  difficulties.

One  way  unhesitatingly  applies  to  the  relation  of  Nature
to  its  source  our  own  relation  to  our  products ;  it  derives
the  harmonious  organization  of  the  world's  course  from  the
designing  and  adapting  wisdom  of  a  self-consciously  personal
God.  We  will  not  too  harshly  join  in  the  charge  laid  against
it  of  the  self-conceit  with  which  it  presumes  to  understand
divine  purposes  ;  the  universal  laws  of  the  mechanical  course
of  Nature  do  not  lie  within  us  as  innate  cognitions,  and  yet
it  is  possible  to  master  them  at  least  in  great  part.  Whv
should  it  be  impossible  for  thoughtful  observers  of  Nature,  noi
arrogantly  teaching  but  modestly  learning,  with  a  like  degree
of  approximation  to  gather  irom  comparison  of  experiences,
not  indeed  all  the  designs  of  God,  but  much  that  it  may  with
confidence  put  down  to  these,  and  utilize  in  the  methodiz
ing  of  other  phenomena  ?  Besides,  the  truth  of  its  fundamental
thought  would  not  depend  on  the  possibility  of  applying  it
effectively  throughout  the  examination  of  all  the  details  ot
the  course  of  things ;  we  do  not  doubt  the  correctness  of  the
most  general  points  of  view  of  our  mechanical  system  because
the  complexity  of  objects  often  only  allows  of  a  general  and
inaccurate  application  of  them.  In  like  manner  this  view
also  would  remain  unshaken,  however  little  it  could  fully
explain ;  enough  if,  along  witli  the  general  impression  of
Nature  in  its  favour,  no  special  experience  raised  any  insuper
able  difficulty.

But,  however  successful  this  view  may  be  in  its  efforts  to
explain  given  facts,  it  will  find  it  harder  to  overcome  the  more
general  difficulties  involved  in  the  transference  of  human  modes
of  action  to  this  infinitely  higher  case  of  creative  activity.  That
will  alone  can  have  ends,  whose  volition  is  not  tantamount  to

NATU1IE  AND  IDEAS.  413

execution,  whose  purpose,  on  the  contrary,  hindered  by  the
resistance  of  an  independent  nature  of  things,  becomes  con
verted  into  an  aim  to  be  reached  in  a  particular  way.  Action
adapted  to  an  end  is  to  be  found  not  where  an  absolute
moulding  power  produces  everything  directly  out  of  itself,  but
where  a  limited  efficacy  needs  means  for  the  achievement
of  its  results,  means  which  it  can  make  serviceable  to  its
ends  only  on  condition  of  its  accommodating  the  character  of
its  own  designs  to  the  nature  of  this  foreign  material.  All
that  we  human  beings  can  effect  is  dependent  on  this  relation
ship,  dependent  on  our  being  environed  by  a  realm  of  foreign
elements,  working  according  to  fixed  laws  independent  of  us,
connected  together  in  modes  exquisitely  traced  out  beforehand
— dependent  also  on  our  being  organically  connected  with
these  in  the  most  intimate  manner.  Thence  arises  not  alone
the  possibility  of  any  of  our  inward  stirrings,  of  our  thoughts,
intentions,  and  resolutions  coming  to  any  effect  in  the  outer
world — from  the  same  source  spring  also  the  visible  and  living
forms  of  our  action.  Those  ultimate  moving-springs  of  our
exertion  are  all  themselves  without  form :  the  pleasure  which
we  seek,  the  sorrow  that  oppresses  us,  nay,  even  all  nobler
longing  of  the  imagination  for  something  higher,  is  at  first  a
surging  within  us  without  any  definite  direction;  not  till  they
are  in  course  of  being  realized  does  the  essentially  brief  and
vague  meaning  of  our  wishes  expand  into  a  complete  pheno
menon,  and  acquire  characteristic  features,  appearing  in  forms
titted  to  overcome  definite  hindrances  and  in  modes  of  utilizing
external  impediments.  Were  the  independent  outer  world,
from  whose  educative  resistance  we  gain  shape,  to  be  anni
hilated,  the  visible  image  of  our  action  would  relapse  into  a
unity  of  purpose  and  fulfilment  that  would  elude  our  appre
hension.  Xow  we  cannot  transfer  to  the  Divine  Being,  the
source  of  the  universe,  those  conditions  which  enable  us  to
understand  the  results  of  our  own  action  for  an  end.  Be
lieving,  as  we  do,  that  wo  comprehend  the  significance  of
many  special  arrangements,  this  only  makes  more  obscure
the  origin  of  the  world  of  forms  in  general  within  which

414  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  I.

it  is  possible  to  speak  of  a  plan.  What  else  would  we  fain
think  as  the  final  quickening  source  of  creation  in  the  being
of  God  than  that  spirit  of  holiness,  goodness,  and  beauty,  in
which  yet  we  would  vainly  strive  to  find  a  necessary  direction
of  His  creative  energy  towards  the  production  of  the  definite
natural  forms  that  surround  us  ?  Only  if  an  independent
world  of  matter  faced  this  energy  could  we  understand
creative  power  being  driven  by  the  peculiar  character  of  this
foreign  condition  of  its  working  into  definite  forms  of  expression
of  its  indefinite  tendency.

This  view  thus  ends  in  a  contradiction  hard  to  reconcile.
Along  with  the  creative  wisdom  of  God,  the  source  of  the
world's  ideal  content,  appears  another  power,  a  dark  back
ground  by  which  the  formless  ray  of  Ideas  is  first  refracted
into  a  play  of  visible  forms.  We  cannot  get  rid  of  this
foreign  and  unfathomable  element,  and  yet  we  are  aware  of
nothing  that  entitles  us  to  retain  it ;  while  its  original  nature
and  its  regularity  yield  to  us,  for  whose  development  obstacles
are  necessary,  at  once  resistance  and  educative  stimulus,  they
can  offer  neither  to  the  Divine  Being.

The  other  conception  of  which  we  have  to  speak  avoids
this  fatal  opposition  between  the  adaptive  purpose  and  the
means  of  its  realization  by  directly  blending  both.  According
to  it,  an  Infinite,  a  dreaming  soul  of  the  universe,  at  once
matter  and  Idea,  pliable  material  and  shaping  thought,  pulsates
in  all  phenomena,  and  from  the  unity  of  its  impulse  of
development  evolves  the  harmonious  beauty  of  things.  Not
guided  by  an  external  consciousness,  not  burdened  with  the
obligation  to  accomplish  ends  not  spontaneously  its  own,  on
the  other  hand  not  limited  in  its  productions  by  having  to
accommodate  them  to  universal  laws,  which  indifferently  face
its  creative  impulse,  the  actual  world  is  a  spontaneous,  perpetual
self-evolution,  at  once  grave  and  gay,  the  aimless  surging  of  a
moulding  fancy  that  has  infinite  delight  in  the  manifold
unfolding  of  its  ingenious  wealth  of  forms.  In  statements
of  this  kind,  this  conception  not  only  exhibits  itself  as  a
vivid,  brief,  and  pertinent  expression  of  problems  wrhich  we

NATURE  AND  IDEAS.  415

do  not  here  create  for  ourselves,  but,  on  the  contrary,  find
involved  in  the  nature  of  the  subject,  but  likewise  expresses
that  careless  romance  of  youthful  reflection  which  fancies
that  in  the  statement  of  problems  it  has  also  their  solution.
Throughout  all  periods  of  human  culture  this  mode  of  con
ceiving  things  has  been  repeated  in  various  forms  without
making  any  material  advance  towards  the  attainment  of  its
end ;  even  its  most  recent  modes  of  expression,  to  the  echo  of
which  our  imagination  has  now  become  accustomed,  are  hardly
more  than  a  more  pompous  repetition  of  thoughts  that  from
the  dawn  of  antiquity  have  been  in  the  mind  of  all  who
uttered  the  word  Nature  or  <f>vais.

An  unpleasant  contrast  of  light  and  darkness  can  be  softened
not  only  by  brightening  the  latter,  but  by  dimming  the
former ;  we  are  almost  disposed  to  think  that  for  a  similar
reason  human  thought  has  a  natural  tendency  ever  anew  to
plunge  into  the  abyss  of  this  mystic  view.  For,  while  it
reduces  the  idea  of  a  creative  self-consciousness  to  that  of  an
unconscious  reason  that  is  at  the  same  time  self-moulding
matter,  it  diffuses  the  deep  obscurity  that  in  the  above-
mentioned  theory  enveloped  the  relationship  between  the  two
there  clearly  discriminated  terms,  as  a  comparatively  agreeable
vagueness  over  the  whole  conception.  The  intention  is  indeed
that  the  whole  world  of  natural  forms  shall  proceed  from
reason,  not  as  an  external  drapery,  but  as  its  own  outer
aspect,  that  the  reason  shall  not  labour  from  without  on
foreign  material,  but  merely  reflect  in  consciousness  what  has
been  produced  by  its  own  unconscious  action ;  but  this  end
is  unattainable,  unless  we  first  of  all  dilute  the  significance  of
the  question  that  led  to  this  attempt  at  a  blending  of  the
ultimate  opposed  terms.  For  as  long  as  we  comprise  under
the  name  of  reason  what  we  must  hold  to  be  the  animating
thought  of  the  world  of  intelligence — the  Ideas  of  holiness,  of
goodness,  and  of  bliss — we  cannot  regard  this  realm  of  forms
constituted  by  the  stars  with  their  minerals,  plants,  and  animals,
as  the  native  outer  aspect  of  that  reason,  but  as  an  external
garment  of  accidental  and  inexplicable  origin  that  hangs  about

41  6  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  I.

it,  fitted  perhaps  to  interpret  its  inner  life  by  its  drapery,
but  certainly  not  entitled  to  be  taken  for  the  only  possible
and  exhaustive  exterior  of  this  interior.  Only  if  we  dilute
the  notion  of  reason  almost  to  apathy,  and  from  the  first
seek  in  it  nothing  but  a  phantasy  dreaming  of  future
magnetism,  and  seeking  to  pour  out  its  unrest  into  the
expansive  impulse  of  the  plant  or  the  activity  of  the  animal
body,  only  then  does  the  world  of  natural  forms  become  the
exact  expression  of  this  Idea,  the  true  outer  aspect  of  this
interior.  But  then  the  meaning  of  the  question  to  which  we
were  seeking  an  answer  becomes  altered.  For  the  unity
pervading  all  Nature,  to  account  for  which  this  whole  view
was  elaborated,  bad  serious  value  for  us  only  because  it  alone
rendered  possible  the  full  subjection  of  the  actual  world
to  the  rule  of  that  truly  spiritual  ideal  world  from  whose
content  shines  forth  in  clearest  light  the  absolute  worth  of
moral  Ideas.  The  desired  end  is  not  attained  by  supposing
the  existence  of  a  soul  of  the  universe  that  knows  and  is
only  phenomena,  whose  inner  nature  shapes  its  outer,  whose
outer  models  itself  upon  its  inner  nature,  while  nowhere  is
anything  to  be  found  that  by  its  absolute  and  infinite  worth
consecrates  this  play  of  forces.  The  ideal  source,  the  creative
thought,  is  here  burdened  with  an  impulse  to  definite  shaping
that  does  not  veritably  proceed  from  itself,  and  is  limited  to
becoming  conscious  of  that  which  this  impulse  sets  before  its
view.  I  cannot  see  that  this  result  is  more  inviting  than  the
issue  of  the  first  theory,  already  stated.  If  there  we  found
discrepancy  between  adaptive  wisdom  and  the  realm  of  means
of  realization,  the  former  was  at  least  independent  in  its
designs ;  aiming  at  truly  spiritual  ends,  it  appeared  in  rela
tion  to  the  latter  as  the  ruling  power  contrasted  with  the
ministering  material;  the  second  theory  recognises  only  the
material,  ignoring  the  higher  power  above  it.  For  its  soul  of
the  universe  is  nothing  else  than  this  foreign  and  unfathom
able  element,  the  dark  background  in  which  the  other  view
also  seeks  the  definite  forms  for  the  realization  of  the  divine
purposes.  Brought  into  exclusive  prominence,  this  background

NATURE  AND IDEAS.  417

here  appears  endowed  with  consciousness  of  what  it  is ;  but  it
misuses  this  spark  of  heavenly  light  only  to  round  off  into
systematic  unity  that  self-sufficiency  and  purposelessness  of  a
motley  play  of  action  that  formed  our  charge  against  the
dreary  mechanical  theory  of  the  course  of  things.

i$  4.  Neither  of  these  two  views  accomplishes  its  end ;  they
both  leave  unsolved  the  problem — but  to  fail  in  solving  it  is
not  discreditable  to  human  sagacity.  We  shall  be  exposed  to
the  same  danger  at  the  end  of  our  speculations,  but  the  very
next  steps  we  have  to  take  should  not  be  taken  without  an
acknowledgment  of  the  unmastered  enigma  which  we  pro
visionally  leave  behind.  Our  whole  theory  of  the  universe
lias  three  starting-points.  "VVe  find  within  ourselves  a  know
ledge  of  universal  laws,  which,  without  themselves  giving  rise
to  any  particular  form  of  existence,  force  themselves  on  our
attention  as  the  necessary  and  immediately  certain  limits
within  which  all  reality  must  move.  On  the  other  hand,  we
find  within  ourselves  an  instinct  bidding  us  discern  in  Ideas
of  the  good,  the  beautiful,  and  the  holy,  the  one  indefeasible
end  whence  alone  reality  derives  any  value ;  but  even  this
end  does  not  bring  to  our  cognition  the  special  form  of  the
means  by  which  it  is  to  be  attained.  Between  these  two
extreme  points  extends  for  us  a  third  region — that  of  ex
perience — boundless  in  the  wealth  of  its  forms  and  events,
unknown  in  its  origin.  We  can  track  into  this  wealth  the
universal  laws  imposed  on  all  phenomena ;  and  in  the  first
part  of  our  discussions  we  tried  to  set  forth  their  undi-
minished  and  indistinguishable  validity  in  all  departments  of
reality.  In  this  wealth  of  reality  we  may  also  seek  the
radiance  of  those  Ideas  which  give  worth  to  all  being  and
doing;  and  in  the  last  part  of  our  discussions  it  is  our  purpose
to  follow  the  traces  of  their  presence  and  formative  energy
in  the  whirl  of  pluenomena.  But  the  more,  while  endeavour
ing  to  fulfil  one  of  these  two  tasks,  we  become  absorbed  in
the  details  of  Nature's  course,  the  more  does  Nature's  own
originality  again  come  to  the  front — the  independent  wealth  of
forms  in  which  it  envelopes  the  universal  and  colourless  laws

VOL.  I.  U D

418  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  I.

of  mechanism,  and  the  self-will  with  which  it  carries  out
Ideas  not  always  in  what  seems  to  us  the  shortest  way,  but
by  circuitous  paths  and  in  accordance  with  general  and  far-
reaching  habits  of  working.  Far  from  being  a  collection  of
single  contrivances  and  instruments  fitted  to  meet  the  several
requirements  of  an  ideal  world,  jSTature,  on  the  contrary,  is
above  all  internally  consistent — an  organism,  a  great  economy,
ready  indeed  in  its  totality  to  minister  to  the  totality  of
Ideas  and  to  receive  from  it  a  prescribed  sum  of  tasks,  but
reserving  to  itself  the  planning  of  their  perfornance,  and  not
extemporizing  a  special  momentary  effort  to  meet  each  several
need.  Events,  unmindful  of  their  tasks,  seem  for  a  long  time
to  give  themselves  up  to  the  complex  variety  of  their  own
play  of  forms,  frequently  to  follow  an  indefinite  path  leading
past  their  ends,  even  to  take  a  direction  the  opposite  of  that
which  our  precipitate  imagination  would  assign  to  them  in
the  interest  of  the  highest  ideals  ;  only  an  eye  that,  instead
of  the  section  of  ISTature — small  as  to  botli  space  and  time —
that  lies  open  to  our  observation,  could  survey  the  whole  of
it,  would  discern  the  final  prevalence  of  absolutely  excellent
ends  amidst  this  apparent  confusion.  But  even  this  is  a
conception  wrhich  we  have  to  go  far  beyond  experience  and
observation  in  order  to  grasp ;  and  although  we  would  not
hinder  its  being  silently  kept  before  our  thoughts  as  an  end
to  which  we  have  to  approximate,  we  must  yet  for  a  while
turn  away  from  it.  Our  inquiries  must  for  the  present  be
confined  to  ascertaining  what  leading  usages  and  what  modes
of  operation  Xature  actually  unrolls  before  us ;  with  what
unity  and  what  connection  in  her  several  phenomena  experi
ence  makes  us  acquainted  ;  lastly,  what  is  man's  position  in
Xature,  and  what  the  conditions,  favourable,  unfavourable,  or
moulding,  which  she  has  attached  to  his  development.

CHAPTER II.

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.

Doubt  as  to  the  Supremacy  of  Ends  —  Created  Beings  as  Ends  in  themselves—
Ends  and  Results  —  Development  of  things  from  Chaos  —  Spontaneous  Growth
of  Order  from  Unorder—  The  Elements  of  Chaos  —  Inherent  Purposiveness
in  things  and  in  their  Operations  —  The  Unity  of  Nature  considered  as  a
Product  of  manifold  Actions  and  Reactions.

§  1.  ~\VT^  have  just  devoted  our  attention  in  all  sim
plicity  to  that  view  which,  in  spite  of  the
momentary  failure  of  our  attempts  to  approach  it  more
closely,  has  in  its  favour  the  unshaken  testimony  of  the  in
herent  truth  of  its  aim,  the  living  internal  unity  of  Nature.
It  will  he  well  now  to  listen  to  another  voice,  that  of  the
spirit  of  negation  —  I  mean  of  that  very  mechanical  conception
to  which,  now  that  we  are  on  the  point  of  finally  turning
away  from  it,  we  must  grant  the  opportunity  of  a  final
vindication.

What  real  foundation  in  experience,  its  advocates  will  ask,
is  there  for  the  opinion  that  there  is  in  Nature  a  unity  such
as  requires  for  its  explanation  the  comprehensive  design  of
•  me  Creator,  or  the  impulse  to  evolution  of  a  single  substance
underlying  the  multiplicity  of  things?  We  can  understand
that  there  is  in  human  nature  a  desire  to  verify  this  view  of
Nature  ;  but  in  what  given  facts  is  there  any  proof  that  this
desire  can  be  fulfilled,  that  this  systematic  inner  vitality  and
unity  of  Nature  is  real  ?  Must  we  not,  on  the  contrary,
acknowledge  that  after  all  only  some  few  of  its  characteristics
and  events  suggest  to  us  the  idea  of  purposiveness  and  ideal
consistency,  that  then,  without  good  grounds,  we  infer  from
these  particular  experiences  a  general  harmony  and  purpose,
and  from  the  vantage-ground  thus  gained  we  conclude  the

419

420  BOOK  IV. CHAPTEll  II.

necessity  of  a  rationally  creative  being  ?  That,  finally,  we
hence  draw  the  deduction  that  there  must  be  reason  and
purposivcncss  in  Nature  even  where  (as  is  unfortunately  so
often  the  case)  we  certainly  cannot  prove  it.

A  short  review  may  suffice  to  show  us  how  our  thoughts
have  proceeded.  The  living  body  is  the  usual  starting-point
of  such  discussions.  We  overflow  with  admiration  of  the
extraordinary  fitness  of  its  formation  for  its  ends,  and  repeat
the  common  assertion  that  in  it  all  is  at  once  means  and  end.
How  many  parts  are  there  still  in  it  whose  end  no  one  as
yet  knows,  nor  can  we  actually  know  that  these  have  any  end
at  all,  and  are  not  aimless  products  of  the  formative  forces,
but  we  merely  take  all  this  for  granted  on  the  warrant  of  the
above  unproved  general  assertion  !  The  animal  world  likewise
presents  in  many  instances  a  dazzling  appearance  of  adapta
tion  to  ends,  but  undeniably,  at  the  same  time,  much  that  is
inexplicable,  much  that,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  is  purposeless  ;
myriad  oddities  of  formation  that  are  easily  understood  as
uports  and  casual  effects  of  a  Nature  joyously  breaking  out  in
all  possible  directions,  but  only  with  laboured  artificiality  can  be
construed  as  products  of  deliberate  design.  Still  less  can  the
idea  of  predetermined  adaptation  be  traced  through  the  vegetable
kingdom,  where  no  end  can  be  pointed  out  beyond  the  mere
existence  of  forms,  whose  arrangement,  duration,  development,
and  power  of  self-preservation  present  endless  differences  in
kind  and  amount.  Lastly,  is  not  this  whole  world  of  life  embraced
and  supported  by  the  globe  and  by  the  space  of  the  universe,
while  in  the  geological  formation  of  the  former,  and  in  the
distribution  of  the  masses  of  the  latter,  no  human  ingenuity
can  discover  any  pervading  adaptation  to  ends — nay,  perhaps
would  not  even  wish  to  discover  any  ?  On  the  contrary,  we
breathe  with  a  certain  sense  of  relief  when  we  perceive  that
here  at  least  there  underlies  the  much-admired  endless  calcu
lation  and  design  of  the  course  of  things  an  impressive
stupendous  reality  that,  without  pretending  to  point  to  any
thing  beyond  itself,  stretches  as  a  steady  tranquil  barrier
before  our  restlessly  searching  thoughts.  Shall  we  add  that

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  421

the  examination  of  events  would  lead  to  the  same  double
result  as  that  of  forms  ?  Further,  that  along  with  indications
of  design,  confused  inexplicable  accidents  also  present  them
selves  ;  and  still  further,  that  at  last,  weary  of  eternal  calcu
lation  and  planning,  we  not  only  resign  ourselves  to,  but
accept  with  a  feeling  of  relief,  the  thought  of  a  predominant
fate  willing  nothing  but  itself?

It  will,  perhaps,  be  allowed  that  this  is  not  an  incorrect
rendering  of  the  confused  and  indistinct  moods  into  which
we  often  find  ourselves  plunged  by  the  failure  of  our  attempts
at  explanation ;  but  our  partiality  for  the  idea  of  an  inherent
unity  in  Xature  will  not  at  once  yield  itself  captive  to  these
counter-representations.  Above  all,  it  will  recall  that  it  has
long  since  got  rid  of  the  hopeless  tendency  to  seek  external
ends  for  every  creature,  every  phenomenon,  and  every  single
occurrence — an  intellectual  habit,  no  doubt,  apt  to  end  in
incompetence  to  discover  either  the  urgent  importance  of
those  ends,  or  the  indispensableness  of  the  means  of  fulfil
ment  which  we  find  present.  The  end  of  every  creature  lies
rather  in  its  own  existence,  and  if  a  salutary  and  harmonious
action  and  reaction  between  things  different  is  a  broad  fact
of  experience,  yet  the  real  import  of  this  conception  of  Xature
lies  not  in  the  mutual  relations  of  the  several  beings  to  one
another,  which  we  very  imperfectly  understand,  but  in  the
inherent  purposive  ness  of  each  one,  whose  different  con
stituents  are  woven  into  the  whole  of  a  firmly-knit  organiza
tion.  Xo  external  utility  forms  for  each  creature  the  limit
with  reference  to  which  all  its  properties  are  formed,  but  tin;
Idea  of  its  own  existence  is  the  supreme  end  to  fullil  which
all  the  details  of  its  structure  work  together  as  means.

We  certainly  would  rather  not  return  to  the  jejune  inter
pretations  with  which  this  tendency  to  seek  in  external
utilities  the  justification  of  the  existence  of  things  has  disfigured
the  conception  of  Xature.  At  the  same  time,  the  introduction
of  an  inherent  end,  such  as  the  special  Idea  of  each  being
would  present,  in  place  of  an  external  one,  does  not  appear
to  us  calculated  to  increase  the  stability  of  the  view  in  general

422  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IT.

For  it  would  furnish  a  convincing  proof  of  the  systematic
unity  of  Nature  and  of  the  intelligent  operation  of  the  creative
force  only  if,  first  of  all,  apart  from  all  experience,  it  could
show  what  kinds  of  events  and  what  forms  of  existence  must,
on  account  of  their  absolute  worth,  be  the  necessary  ends  of
all  reality ;  and  if  it  could  further  show  that  only  such  causes
and  effects  as  promote  the  realization  of  these  ends  form  part
of  the  connected  course  of  Nature,  all  others,  though  in
themselves  neither  inconceivable  nor  impossible,  being  ex
cluded  from  it.  Only  in  this  way  would  it  produce  in  us
the  conviction  that  those  phenomena,  whose  mutual  harmony
we  are  to  be  afterwards  exhorted  to  admire,  have  a  right,  as
ends  in  themselves,  to  exist  solely  for  the  development  of  theii
own  Idea.  But  the  usual  course  of  inquirers  is  different.
They  too  soon  and  too  simply  take  account  of  the  facts  which
they  see  actually  before  them,  and  incautiously  taking  the
routine  of  events  in  which  we  habitually  move  as  in  our
vital  element,  for  an  excellent  state  of  things — or  even  for
the  most  perfect  conceivable — they,  of  coarse,  do  not  then
find  it  difficult  to  demonstrate  the  faultless  adaptation  of  all
Nature's  arrangements  for  its  establishment.

I  think  that  if  for  each  animal  species  we  set  beside
the  evident  instances  of  adaptation  in  its  formation,  which
we  understand,  all  the  unaccountable  things  in  it  which  we
do  not  understand ;  if  we  set  beside  the  nimble  dexterity  of
the  animal  in  one  direction  its  conspicuous  helplessness  in
another,  beside  its  power  of  self-preservation  against  one  class
of  hindrances  its  complete  defencelessness  against  others ;  if  we
thus  comprise  in  our  determination  of  an  animal  family  the
whole  sum  of  positive  and  negative  attributes  as  presented
in  experience,  all  happiness  and  inevitable  misery,  and  in  this
total  behold  the  Idea  which  the  family  is  meant  to  embody —
then  it  is  easy  to  show  that  the  organization  in  all  its  details
is  fitted  with  perfect  adaptation  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  office.
For  as  long  as  all  that  is  and  happens  exerts  precisely  the
amount  and  kind  of  effect  which  according  to  universal  laws
it  ought  to  do,  so  long  will  each  result  effected  contain  exactly

NATURE  EVOLVED  FKOM  CHAOS.  423

— neither  more  nor  less  than — what  was  fixed  by  its  antece
dent  causes ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  causes  will  determine
not  more  or  less,  or  other  than  what  subsequently  becomes
manifest  in  the  result.  Whenever,  therefore,  we  look  at  the
result  in  the  light  of  an  end  to  be  fulfilled,  we  must  always
and  necessarily  regard  the  sum  of  its  causes  not  merely  as  a
system  of  means  accurately  adjusted  for  its  fulfilment,  but  as
the  only  one  adequate  to  the  discharge  of  this  office.  Xo  such
inherent  consistency,  therefore,  which  we  may  observe  in  any
creature,  can  prove  its  having  originated  in  a  designing  intelli
gence  until  it  has  been  convincingly  demonstrated  that  the
whole  constitution  of  the  creature  as  we  have  it  before  us  is
entitled  to  be  considered  not  merely  an  inevitable  result,  but
a  predetermined  end.  Ly  itself  that  consistency  would  not
even  protect  us  from  the  wretched  witticism,  that  the  hunch
back  is  perfectly  fitted  to  be  a  hunchback.  Lastly,  were  the
world  quite  different  from  what  it  is,  filled  with  other  beings,
moved  by  other  forces,  had  it  sprung  from  the  most  barren
chance  or  from  many  chances,  it  would  still  possess  this
formal  character  of  designed  consistency  with  itself;  every
thing  that  could  exist  and  maintain  itself  within  it  would  be
the  bare  and  exact  expression  of  its  causes,  and  these  causes
would  always  be  the  adequate  and  only  system  of  means
adapted  to  its  realization.  It  scarcely  requires  special  men
tion  that  all  events,  however  they  might  succeed  one  another,
would  to  the  student  of  them  always  seem  to  express  some
meaning,  and  that  consequently  they  might  always  be  regarded
as  the  foreseen  and  predetermined  forms  of  manifestation  of
that  particular  Idea  which  they  chanced  to  suggest  to  the
observer.  The  theory  under  consideration  would,  following
this  track,  end  in  a  meaningless  play  on  words.

§  2.  Its  supporters  are  sure  to  meet  these  objections  with
the  reply  that  they  do  not  take  this  track,  or  at  most  use  it
only  as  a  starting-point  for  their  speculations.  They  will  un
hesitatingly  grant  that  the  relation  between  an  effect  and  the
sum  of  the  causes  that  actually  bring  it  to  pass  is  invariably
that  of  a  nicely  adjusted  system  of  means  to  its  end  ;  but  main-

i24  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

tain  that  precisely  on  this  account  the  doctrine  that  Nature
had  its  origin  in  the  unity  of  designing  and  adaptive  wisdom  is
not  based  on  this  merely  formal  adaptation,  which  occurs  no
less  in  the  unintelligent  and  the  diseased  than  in  the  intelligent
and  the  healthy.  It  is  based,  on  the  contrary,  on  the  signifi
cant  import  of  actual  effects,  which  makes  an  undesigned
convergence  of  causes  for  its  realization  highly  improbable.
In  studying  a  single  organ  of  an  animal  body,  we  may  make  the
experiment  of  regarding  its  function  as  a  consequence  of  its
structure,  and  not  its  structure  as  a  designed  means  for  the
discharge  of  its  function.  It  may  be  said  that  an  image  is
formed  on  the  retina,  because  the  mechanical  forces  of  the
animal  germ,  as  it  was,  could  not  help  forming  an  eye  refract
ing  rays  of  light ;  when  the  hand  involuntarily  seeks  to  grasp
the  object  that  has  stimulated  the  sensitive  skin  of  the  palm,
this  movement  may  be  merely  the  inevitable  consequence  of  a
transmission  of  the  stimulus  that  could  not  but  take  place  with
the  existing  connection  between  sensory  and  motor  nerves;  in
short,  it  may  be  as  Lucretius  declares — the  animals  may  be
able  to  walk  because  they  have  knees,  not  have  knees  in  order
that  they  may  walk.  But  how  far  shall  we  care  to  carry  this
way  of  looking  at  things  ?  The  organism  is  constituted  not
merely  by  an  accumulation  of  such  pairs  of  structural  relations
and  the  operations  proceeding  from  them,  but  by  innumerable
such  pairs  being  combined  in  a  form  that  makes  it  possible
for  them  to  wrork  together  for  the  realization  of  a  harmonious
plan  of  life.  Now  is  it  credible  or  conceivable  that,  without
any  directing  purpose,  in  the  same  corporeal  structure  which
possesses  here  a  reflecting  eye,  a  prehensile  member  should
there  come  into  being,  capable  of  grasping  seen  objects,  in  n
third  place,  teeth  with  which  to  break  up  what  has  been
seized,  in  a  fourth,  organs  of  digestion  fitted  to  act  upon
food  in  a  manner  beneficial  to  the  whole  array  of  parts  ?
Arid  this  apparently  predesigned  connection  of  parts  recurs
constantly  also  in  the  formation  of  the  single  organs.  Again,
shall  we  ask  whether  it  is  credible  that  without  any  directing
purpose  a  conglomeration  of  elements  should  have  been  formed

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  425

whose  blind,  mechanical  further  development  necessarily  occa
sioned  the  origination  of  transparent,  translucent  and  opaque
membranes,  being  more  or  less  refractive,  and  at  tho  same
time  the  arrangement  of  these  parts  in  just  such  positions,  and
at  just  such  distances  as  was  needful  in  order  that  a  cone  of
rays  falling  on  this  eye  should  again  converge  on  an  extremely
minute  point  in  the  back  of  it  ?

We  do  not  deny  that  in  the  actual  connection  of  tilings
organic  formation  is  carried  on  merely  by  mechanical  tradi
tion  ;  but  without  the  assumption  of  a  designing  consciousness,
we  believe  it  is  impossible  to  account  for  the  origination  of  the
germs  whose  blind  and  necessary  evolution  constitutes  the
course  of  Nature.  And  now  that  we  have  once  had  recourse
to  this  guiding  hand,  we  make  unquestionably  the  inference
laid  to  our  charge — we  believe  in  its  co-operation  even  where
we  do  not  see  it.  For  it  is  natural  to  imagine  that  we  may
iind  in  it  an  unguessed  justification  of  the  shortcomings  of  the
course  of  things  that  seem  to  militate  against  the  omnipresence
')f  designing  wisdom — a  justification  consisting  in  the  content
of  a  plan  of  the  actual  universe  which  we  do  not  profess
wholly  to  comprehend  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  without  that
wisdom  the  countless  instances  of  particular  excellence  and
intelligence  that  force  themselves  on  every  unprejudiced  mind
appear  unaccountable.  Moreover,  even  where  we  are  content
not  to  understand  what  are  the  ends  of  the  universe,  we  every
where  come  across  forms  of  being  and  acting  that  distinctly
show  they  are  the  results  of  a  comprehensive  plan.  The.  host
of  actual  living  creatures  is  divided  into  genera  and  species,
which  clearly  and  naturally  fall  into  a  graduated  series  of
more  or  less  allied  forms ;  however  obscure  may  be  the  order
and  law  of  this  series,  110  less  powerful  is  the  total  impression
which  it  creates,  of  a  unity  of  formative  volition,  a  constancy
reigning  throughout,  which  does  not  allow  the  manifold  actual
world  to  consist  of  disparate  individuals,  hut  arranges  it  as  a
well-ordered  realm  of  things.

ji  '.}.  On  such  considerations  rests  the  abiding  and  persuasive
force  with  which  this  view  of  Nature  ever  anew  asserts  itself

426  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

against  all  assailants.  Doubtless  even  the  advocates  of  the
mechanical  theory  will  in  the  end  have  to  acknowledge  the
force  of  these  arguments,  but  it  is  of  consequence  that  this
acknowledgment  should  not  come  too  early,  and  they  will  be
able  justly  to  urge  much  more  than  we  expect  against  the
statement  just  made  of  the  doctrine  of  an  organic  unity  in
Nature.

First  of  all,  they  will,  not  without  reason,  observe  that  our
admiration  of  Nature's  products  is  frequently  bestowed  not  so
much  on  the  inherent  significance  of  their  forms  as  on  the
mere  number  of  parts  which  we  see  united  into  a  whole,  and
on  the  variety  and  alternation  of  the  movements  springing  from
their  combination.  As  we  are  impressed  by  the  mere  magni
tude  of  things,  so  also  are  we  impressed  by  the  number  and
variety  of  their  internal  relationships,  no  matter  what  be  the
final  form  of  the  result ;  and  wherever  we  see  a  great  deal
take  place  within  small  compass,  we  are  secretly  disposed  to
seek  the  productive  source  in  a  power  superior  to  merely
physical  and  undesigning  forces.  And  yet  we  know  and  can
scientifically  prove  that  a  very  small  and  insignificant  number
of  elements,  and  very  simple  relations  between  them,  are  quite
sufficient  to  form  the  source  of  an  endless  play  of  exceedingly
varied  and  changeful  forma  of  development,  which,  did  they
stand  embodied  before  us,  the  human  mind  would  think
incontrovertibly  exhibited  the  prevalence  of  adaptive  design.
Whoever  bears  in  mind  that  no  organized  creature  comes
full-grown  into  being,  but  that  Nature  itself  evolves  it
laboriously  and  by  long  circuits  out  of  its  germ,  will  often
be  inclined  to  conceive  that  germ  itself  under  too  complex  a
form  ;  transferring  to  it  the  capacities  for  all  the  details  of
subsequent  development — as  if  these  were  not  successively
produced  and  heightened  by  reciprocal  action  between  the
growing  organism  and  its  environment — no  doubt  it  will
seem  to  him  incredible  that  the  elements  should  ever  have
come  together  in  this  mysterious  association  without  the
influence  of  an  overruling  purpose.  Closer  acquaintance  with
the  manifold  effects  that  may  flow  from  comparatively  very

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  427

simple  causes,  will  gradually  lessen  this  doubt  without  ever
wholly  removing  it.  For  ever  and  anon  the  thought  will
recur — however  simple  may  have  been  the  primitive  germs  of
natural  products,  it  always  remains  an  unaccountable  marvel
how  out  of  the  infinite  number  of  conceivable  combinations  of
elements  that  chance  might  have  formed,  this  appropriate
selection  should  have  found  its  way  to  realization.

But  yet  this  feeling  of  wonder  the  mechanical  theorists
can  show  to  be  based  on  a  false  assumption.  For  our
amazement  would  really  be  justified  only  if  we  found  that  all
the  other  less  significant  or  quite  unmeaning  associations  of
elements  had  from  the  first  been  withheld  from  trying  their
luck  and  occupying  so  much  space  in  the  actual  world  as
their  capacities  allowed  them.  "Were  the  actual  world  really
such  a  small  extract  from  the  infinite  realm  of  potentialities,
and  had  that  which  does  not  fit  into  its  order  and  does  not
appear  never  even  made  any  attempt  to  find  place  in  it,  then
assuredly  we  could  ascribe  this  realized  extract  to  nothing  but
a  providence  working  towards  ends  and  towards  nothing  but
its  ends.  But  we  cannot  see  that  experience  cither  constrains
or  entitles  us  to  make  such  an  assumption.  And  if  we  do
not  make  it,  then  we  can  justly  reply  that  for  the  picking  out
of  a  few  cases  from  the  infinite  region  of  potentialities  no
other  review,  judgment,  and  selection  is  needful  than  such  as
the  mechanical  connection  of  tilings  must  of  itself  necessarily
exercise.

For  let  us  start  with  the  idea  of  a  chaos,  and  let  us  con
ceive  this  as  chaotic  as  may  be,  supposing  therefore  that  there
was  in  it  no  predominant  tendency  whatever  to  any  particular
grouping,  but  that,  in  the  language  of  the  atomistic  thinkers
of  antiquity,  all  in  it  moved  confusedly  in  all  sorts  of  manners
and  all  sorts  of  directions  :  in  such  a  seething  mass  any  com
bination  of  two  or  more  elements  will  be  just  as  likely  to
occur  as  any  other  combination  of  the  same  number.  But
the  fate  of  these  groups  will  be  very  different.  None  of
them  indeed  will  be  prevented  by  a  selective  providence  from
crossing  the  threshold  of  existence,  but  a  countless  multitude

428  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

may  be  of  such  a  kind  that  the  inherent  regularity  of  the
mechanism  which  controls  the  reactions  of  all  cuts  them  off
from  any  duration  and  any  development.  Perishable  pro
ducts,  they  either  disappear  at  once  from  want  of  any  inherent
equilibrium  to  secure  their  preservation,  or  may  be  perhaps
condemned  not  even  to  enjoy  a  brief  moment  of  actual  exist
ence,  but  to  hide  themselves  in  the  stream  of  Becoming  as
products  ever  about  to  be,  but  inevitably  falling  to  pieces
before  coming  to  completion.  But  others,  whose  relations
were  such  as  at  least  to  permit  of  their  becoming  actually
existent,  have  a  very  different  lot.  The  case  is  not  in  reality
as  the  defenders  of  the  designed  unity  of  Nature  would
sometimes  have  it  appear ;  we  are  not  alike  surprised  by  dis*
tinct  traces  of  intelligent  contrivance  in  all  formations  that
have  attained  to  actual  existence.  Alongside  of  things  com
plex,  manifold,  yet  in  their  manifoldness  orderly  and  ideal,
stand  simple,  undeveloped,  rigid  forms  of  being,  which  hardly
any  one  could  deny  might  possibly  have  sprung  from  the
caprice  of  accident.  Even  the  animate  kingdom  contains  a
number  of  genera  of  differing  value,  many  ill-poised,  destined
to  perish  quickly,  though  reappearing  with  equal  readiness  in
the  course  of  events ;  while  others,  with  more  numerous  and
delicately  adjusted  parts,  form  a  varied  harmony  of  mutu
ally  interlacing  operations.  When  we  survey  creation,  we
rind  it  presenting  not  merely  an  extract  of  the  best,  but  great
and  small,  simple  and  complex,  perfect  and  imperfect  are
mingled  together  as  we  could  suppose  them  to  have  sprung
together  from  the  impartial  haphazard  of  chaos.  But  one  thing
is  absent  from  this  manifold  world — that  which  is  perverse  and
essentially  unadaptable  to  design,  and  to  this  mechanical  laws,
on  account  of  its  inherent  contradiction,  could  allow  no  per
manent  actual  existence.  Transitorily,  of  course,  as  is  shown
ny  the  great  host  of  diseases  and  so  many  deformed  specimens
of  creation,  such  contradictory  products  do  occur  ;  but  for  all
generic  forms  that  are  permanently  to  form  part  of  the
abiding  order  of  Nature,  internal  adaptability  is  synonymous
with  possibility.  It  is  conceivable  that  the  present  creation

NATUKE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  42'J

was  preceded  by  more  imperfect  efforts  of  Nature,  nay,  by
contradictory  monstrous  formations,  which  while  they  could
not  themselves  endure,  yet  having  perished  left  the  elements  so
combined  as  to  give  rise  to  better  products.  Without,  however,
indulging  in  this  mythical  idea,  we  may  in  general  assert  that,
whether  the  perverse  was  there  or  not,  the  fact  that  it  could
not  be  mechanically  maintained  would  prevent  its  continuing
to  exist.  But  the  actual  world  contains  out  of  the  infinite
number  of  combinations  of  elements  that  an  irrational  chaos
might  yield,  not  a  selection  made  by  designing  purpose,  but
the  smaller  sum  of  such  forms  as  the  mechanical  course  of
Nature  itself  tested  in  the  endless  alternation  of  its  phenomena,
and  selected  for  preservation,  as  wholes  fitted  for  ends,  out
of  the  vanishing  chair  of  the  perverse,  which  it  impar
tially  brought  into  being,  but  no  less  impartially  allowed  to
perish.

Now,  it  will  be  objected,  is  all  this  less  wondrous  ?  How
comes  it  that  this  mechanical  course  of  Nature  is  always
favourable  to  the  rational,  and  expels  the  irrational  from
reality  ?  The  rationality  of  things  which  we  meant  to
explain  is  by  no  means  identical  with  the  mechanical  absence
of  contradiction  that  has  unobserved  been  put  in  its  place,  but
consists  in  an  inherent  harmony  and  consistency  which,  far
from  being  a  mere  absence  of  defects  that  simply  guarantees
the  settled  existence  of  pluunomena,  by  the  ingenious  excel
lence  of  its  content  unites  the  most  various  elements  in  tin;
carrying  on  of  a  common  and  highly  significant  life.  How
could  mechanical  Nature — which  must  be  contented  with  all
that  satisfies  its  universal  laws — be  the  source  of  this  super
fluous  perfection  ?  To  this  the  mechanical  theorists  would,
however,  with  justice  reply,  that  the  evidence  of  experience  is
by  no  means  in  favour  of  the  invariable  rational  significance
of  all  creation,  and  yet  only  if  it  were  invariable  would  this
perfection  transcend  the  capabilities  of  a  mere  course  of
Nature.  In  fact,  it  cannot  be  demonstrated  that  all  parts  of
Nature  indicate  ideal  significance  and  definite  ends  ;  along
with  myriad  phiunomena  that  undoubtedly  do  create  that

430  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

impression,  occur  myriad  others  that  comport  themselves  as  if
they  were  unintentional  and  incidental  results  of  a  chance-
formed  combination  of  atoms — results  which  in  accordance
with  a  deliberate  plan  by  no  means  ovcjlit  to  have  come  about,
but  which  have  come  about,  and  once  in  existence  have  main
tained  themselves,  because  they  were  not  out  of  conformity
with  the  mechanical  conditions  of  existence.  Thus  mechanism
has  perhaps  produced  much  that  to  a  creative  Idea — suppos
ing  such — would  have  been  unimportant ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  perhaps  there  is  much  which  mechanism  has  not  realized,
and  which  the  Idea  would  have  desired,  in  the  existence  of
which  it  would  have  strongly  interested  itself.  For  who
indeed  would  undertake  to  prove  not  merely  that  all  that
exists  is  rational,  but  further,  that  all  that  is  rational  exists  ?
Do  then  all  fair  dreams  perish,  and  is  the  actual  all  that  can
be  desired  ?  Does  not  even  imagination  in  its  independent
creations  add  fresh  ones  to  the  list  of  forms  of  Nature  ?
The  actual  world  does  not  show  those  winged  angel  forms  in
which  religious  art  delights,  and  yet  we  cannot  show  cause
why  these  forms,  to  whose  ideal  significance  our  reverence  is
a  testimony,  have  not  deserved  to  exist :  it  may  have  been
contrary  to  the  means  and  laws  at  the  disposal  of  Nature  for
her  work.  On  the  other  hand,  Nature  profusely  brings  forth
giraffes  and  kangaroos,  and  we  do  not  comprehend  why  it
should  have  been  indispensable  for  the  complete  expression
of  the  highest  Idea  that  the  curious  modes  of  locomotion
rendered  necessary  in  these  animals  by  the  disproportion
of  their  legs  should  have  been  represented  in  the  actual
world.  I  fancy  I  hear  distinctly  the  indignant  exclamation
that  doubtless  even  in  these  facts  there  is  a  deep  meaning,
though  our  human  short-sightedness  cannot  fathom  it.  That
I  do  not  dispute  ;  I  abide  by  the  confession  of  such  short
sightedness.  But  the  question  with  which  we  were  now
dealing  was  whether  belief  in  all-pervading  deliberate  design
on  the  part  of  the  creative  force  is  justified  or  compelled  by
experience.  We  do  not  deny  that  it  may  have  other  solid
foundations  ;  but  a  significance  and  a  profound  ideality  that

XATU11E  EVOLVED  FKOM  CHAOS.  431

iii  many  cases  we  absolutely  can  iwt  discern,  does  not  hold
good  as  an  experimental  proof  of  the  rationality  pervading  all
creation.  If  we  would  put  into  words  the  impression  made
by  Nature  directly,  not  modified  by  any  theory  of  the  schools,
we  can  only  say  that  there  is  in  it  much  that  is  purposive
and  harmonious,  yet  that  on  the  whole  its  existence  seems  to
have  no  special  significance,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  we
do  not  find  realized  all  that  might  appear  to  offer  a  possible
end  to  intentional  design.  And  this  is  the  relation  which  it
is  quite  natural  to  expect,  if  we  conceive  the  world  as  sprung
from  a  planless  chaos,  that  can  give  birth  only  to  the  possible
and  self-consistent,  but  within  these  just  as  readily  and  easily
to  the  meaningless  as  to  the  most  ingenious.

§  4.  With  all  this  the  mechanical  theory  has  yet  by  no
means  been  freed  from  the  stain  of  incredibility  attaching  to
its  affirmations.  Of  course  it  must  be  allowed  that  every
creature,  even  every  organically  living  creature,  consists  of
elements  that  were  not  always  so  conjoined,  but  had  to  be
brought  together  even  by  a  creative  purpose,  if  such  a  purpose
was  active  in  the  setting  up  of  the  primeval  germs.  It  thus
was  possible  for  these  elements  to  fall  into  such  relations  to
each  other,  and  neither  the  path  by  which  they  had  to  travel
from  their  previous  position  to  this  point  of  union,  nor  the
movement  towards  unity  itself,  could  be  such  as  were  contrary
to  their  nature  or  to  the  mechanical  laws  to  which  that  is
.subject  And  then  it  may  further  be  maintained  that  any
motion  which  can  be  given  to  the  elements  by  the  propulsion
of  an  ordering  hand,  could  also  possibly  be  given  to  them  by
the  purposeless  propulsion  of  an  accident.  In  fact,  it  needed
only  a  certain  succession  of  gales  in  alternate  directions
gradually  to  raise  the  pile  of  the  pyramids  from  the  several
grains  of  .sand  carried  by  each.  The  adherents  of  the  other
view  turn  away  silently  from  the  monstrous  improbability  of
such  arguments,  refusing  to  be  satisfied  with  the  merely
not-impossible,  and  requiring  positive  grounds  why  the
elements  of  chaos  have  been  driven  precisely  into  the  actual
combinations,  in  addition  to  which — according  even  to  the

432  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

mechanical  theory — an  infinite  number  of  others  were  equally
possible.

And  now  it  really  is  time  to  take  back  a  wholly  unwar
ranted  assumption  which  we  have  above  allowed  to  be  made,
and  after  the  removal  of  which  the  mechanical  theory  will  for
the  first  time  feel  the  full  weight  of  the  arguments  brought
against  it.  There  is  evidently  nothing  in  that  phrase  of  the
atomists  of  antiquity,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  world  there
was  infinite  motion  and  mixture  in  infinitely  various  ways
and  directions.  No  one  who  means  to  think  clearly  can  form
any  idea  of  the  existence  of  such  an  infinite  agglomeration  of
countless  possibilities.  However  manifold  we  may  suppose
the  original  relations  of  the  elements  to  have  been,  they  must
yet  have  constituted  a  total  condition  of  the  universe  that
was  exclusively  actual,  and  it  is  impossible  that  the  other
infinitely  numerous  conditions  of  the  universe  that  might  have
been  in  the  absence  of  this  one,  can  have  co-existed  along
with  it.  Hence  the  abyss  of  indefiniteness,  to  which  we
formerly  gave  the  name  of  chaos,  is  unthinkable,  and  any
attempt  to  set  distinctly  before  ourselves  the  origin  of  natural
forms  must  start  from  some  particular  primitive  state,  which,
because  it  was  that  and  no  other,  from  the  first  excluded  from
actual  existence  much  in  itself  possible,  while  with  reference
to  much  else  it  contained  not  only  bare  possibility,  but  a  more
or  less  immediate  and  urgent  positive  reason  for  realization.
Now,  how  on  the  mechanical  theory  is  this  primitive  state  to
be  conceived  ?

Its  advocates  have  first  of  all  no  reason  and  no  right  to
assent  to  the  doctrine  of  the  ancient  atomists,  that  the
elements  are  like  essentially  identical  building  stones  only  cut
in  diverse  shapes — a  doctrine  itself  the  offspring  of  that
mistaken  straining  after  unity  which  cannot  tolerate  any
abundance  of  original  plurality.  On  the  contrary,  they  will
assume  an  innumerable  multitude  of  originally  diverse
elements,  which  are  not  merely  seized  upon  by  a  shaping
movement  from  without  and  welded  together,  but  whose
innate  forces  exert  an  essential  determining  influence  on  the

NATl'KE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  433

results  of  their  combination.  These  forces  are  not  externally
attached  to  them  like  subsequently  and  arbitrarily  bestowed
capabilities,  but  are  the  expression  of  many  and  various  inner
states  that  can  find  in  the  kingdom  of  space-pluenomena  no
other  mode  of  manifestation  than  the  monotonous  attractions
and  repulsions  to  which  all  physical  and  chemical  effects  are
reducible.  And  finally,  least  of  all  has  the  mechanical  theory
occasion  to  tread  in  the  footsteps  of  Materialism,  with  which
(though  they  are  really  wholly  indifferent  to  each  other)
a  current  misapprehension  is  apt  to  identify  it.  As  it  must
acknowledge  the  power  of  intelligent  life  in  experience  as  a
fact,  it  can  have  no  hesitation  in  conceiving  the  spark  of  this
inner  life  as  already  stirring  even  in  the  original  supersensible
elements  from  whose  regular  reciprocal  action  it  holds  the
show  of  extended  matter  to  proceed  and  the  universe  to  b«
constructed.  Not,  indeed,  as  if  it  could  apprehend  the  power  oi
mind  as  a  single  quickening  directing  breath,  as  an  effulgence
spreading  over  Nature ;  it  merely  breaks  up  this  surging
< in-rent  into  a  countless  multitude  of  sharply  discriminated
centres  of  radiation,  each  of  which  (in  itself  indivisible)
forms  one  of  those  reciprocally  acting  atoms  which  arc;  in
truth  the  active  causes  of  phenomena.  When  we  thus
expand  the  originally  given  elements  of  the  fabric  of  tin:
universe,  the  domain  of  chance  becomes  correspondingly  con
tracted.  "VVe  do  not  expect  to  see  the  ingenious  forms  that
fill  Nature  crystallized  all  at  once  from  the  indefinite  vortex
of  a  motion  that  drives  the  atoms  externally  against  one
another,  as  if  the  formation  of  an  organic  germ,  or  even  of  an
inorganic  shape,  were  completed  with  the  ceasing  of  the
shock  whereby  myriads  of  inert  and  patient  constituents  wen-
brought  into  a  mutual  contact  indifferent  to  all.  Here  as  in
mental  life  the  external  impetus  we  look  on  merely  as  an
occasioning  cause  so  far  approximating  the  different  beings
that  one  comes  within  the  sphere  of  action  of  another  ;  it  is
the  force  inherent  in  both  and  the  now  awaking  vital  con
nection  of  their  natures  that  determines  the  further  course  of
the  development,  conducting  it  to  far  greater  variety  of  form
VOL.  I.  2  K

434  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

and  to  infinitely  deeper  meaning  than  could  ever  have  been
done  by  the  poor  impetus  of  the  external  motion,  had  it
been  left  to  itself.

We  may  doubt  whether  even  this  inherent  vitality  of  a
multitude  of  (after  all)  scattered  elements  can  explain  the
accordant  harmony  of  the  forms  proceeding  from  them ;  closer
examination  shows,  however,  that  in  all  the  elements  a  certain
purposiveness  in  action  not  merely  is  compatible  with,  but
ought  hardly  to  be  sundered  from,  the  fundamental  conceptions
of  the  mechanical  theory.  We  are  all  agreed  that  the  forces
with  which  things  act  are  not  merely  subsequently  stamped
on  their  completed  nature  ;  he  who  speaks  of  the  force  of  an
element  means  that  the  force  belongs  to  it,  not  as  an  accidental
possession  that  might  be  wanting,  but  as  the  necessary  and
consistent  outcome  of  its  own  being.  But  not  even  this  fully
expresses  the  opinion  which  we  are  bound  to  hold  and  do
hold.  Should  any  one  assert  that  this  very  necessity  and
consistency  of  every  being  causes  all  its  reactions  on  external
stimuli  to  lead  but  to  its  own  annihilation,  or  at  least  to  the
deterioration  of  its  internal  states,  we  would  perceive  from
;>ur  involuntary  revolt  against  the  absurdity  of  such  an
opinion  how  confidently  we  had  tacitly  presupposed  a  con
trary  relation.  We  are  ready  to  acknowledge  that  in  a  com
posite  structure  the  relative  situation  of  the  parts  may  be  so
hopelessly  distorted  that  every  reaction  attempted  by  the
whole  but  hastens  its  destruction ;  but  we  do  not  doubt  that
every  simple  being  will  of  itself  develop  only  such  effects  as
are  fitted  to  bring  the  position  into  which  it  has  accidentally
come  into  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  its  permanence1.
In  so  far  as  its  activity  has  reference  to  this  task  of  self-pre
servation,  it  \vill  appear  to  us  necessary  and  self-evident ;  less
confidently  shall  we  add  the  conjecture  that  it  further  includes
a  striving  after  self-development  and  perfection.  The  term
striving  at  any  rate  will  not  properly  apply  to  what  we  mean.
For,  without  being  acted  on  from  without,  every  being  will
even  to  our  perception  persist  in  its  original  repose,  and  no
reaction  will  be  got  from  it  except  by  means  of  an  external

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  435

stimulus.  Such  reaction  is  itself  no  systematic  activity
evolved  from  itself  by  the  imagination  of  the  being  through
contemplation  of  the  image  of  a  more  favourable  situation ;
on  the  contrary,  it  remains  the  necessary  and  inevitable
consequence  of  a  contact  of  this  being  with  that  stimulus.
Hence,  limited  by  the  call  made  upon  it,  this  force  must  be
content  to  produce  the  small  element  of  purposivencss  to
which  the  call  gives  rise  ;  while  ready  to  respond  to  a  sub
sequent  stimulus  with  an  equally  purposive  element  of  working,
it  will  evolve  out  of  itself  no  far-reaching  plans  of  connected
development.

Xow,  without  setting  up  this  view  of  a  principle  of  pro
p-ess  inherent  in  everything  that  exists,  as  a  theoretical  tenet,
wi-  may  yet  make  the  experiment  of  introducing  it  among  the
means  of  our  explanations.  For  from  among  the  countless
original  facts,  some  of  which  we  must  take  for  granted,  tin;
rational  and  significant  are  not  to  be  excluded  in  favour  of
th«;  meaningless.  But  we  du  not  affirm  more  than  that  this
feature  of  inherent  adaptation  to  ends  is  part  of  that  actual
nature  of  beings  to  which  the  mechanical  theory  applies  its
laws.  Applied  to  such  a  nature,  these  laws  will  tend  to
produce  a  significant  world  of  forms  with  the  same  necessity
with  which,  brought  to  bear  on  a  different  original  nature  of
elements,  they  would  have  given  rise  to  a  manifold  sphere  of
forms  other  than  that  which  calls  forth  our  admiration  and
our  studious  interest.

Perhaps  to  many  this  speculation  will  appear  all  of  a
sudden  to  alter  materially  the  boundaries  of  that  which  even
in  our  own  vocabulary  has  hitherto  been  styled  mechanism.
"We  may  seem  to  be  opening  the  door  to  a  mysticism  that
threatens  to  blur  all  those  outlines  of  our  convictions  which
were  before  so  sharply  defined.  Nevertheless  we  have  here
merely  brought  into  prominence  a  phase  which  always  belonged
to  our  conception,  and  of  which  no  mechanical  view,  however
strict,  needs  to  rid  itself.  Every  calculation,  as  soon  as  it
becomes  more  than  a  mere  statement  of  numerical  relations,
and  is  brought  to  bear  on  the  actual  things,  must  assume  the

436  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

independent  nature  of  such  things.  What  things  in  them
selves  may  be,  and  how  they  intend  to  act  upon  each  other,
is  their  own  affair,  and  no  mechanical  theory  can  a  priori
fathom  the  depths  of  their  being,  and  assign  to  them  but  a
few  properties,  a  few  simple  forms  of  action,  to  the  exclusion
of  others.  Not  till  these  properties  and  modes  of  action
appear  as  magnitudes,  and  magnitudes  reducible  to  a  common
standard  of  unity,  will  mechanism  be  able  to  show  that  the
being  of  things  (in  itself  not  determinable  by  it)  lias  by  this
step  fettered  itself  for  the  future,  and  that  henceforth  the
value  and  the  final  form  of  its  effects  are  fixed  by  the
universal  laws  that  everywhere  govern  the  result  of  any
definite  relation  between  magnitudes.  Thus  it  is  left  to
the  nature  of  things  to  choose  with  what  properties,  what
internal  impulses  it  shall  enter  the  field  of  possible  calcu
lation  ;  but  after  it  has  once  adopted  a  particular  form  of
being  and  action,  it  can  no  longer  prevent  the  consequences
of  its  adoption  being  in  each  case  entailed  by  the  laws  of
mechanical  action  according  to  universal  rules.  Philosophical
speculation  may  venture  to  attack  the  question  what  nature
and  what  impulses  the  rational  connection  of  the  universe
allows  things  to  have ;  physical  research  has  only  to  inquire
what  modes  of  activity  actually  occur,  or  must  be  assumed  in
order  to  account  for  things  ;  but  it  mistakes  its  task  when  it
strives  to  be  more  than  an  elaboration  of  the  data  yielded  by
the  nature  of  things.  Such  an  encroachment,  at  once  narrow-
minded  and  unwise,  was  made  by  the  mechanical  theorizers
of  antiquity,  when  they  sought  wholly  to  remove  all  inherent
character,  every  occult  property  of  their  being,  from  the  ele
ments  out  of  which  the  universe  was  to  be  constructed ;  and  to
conceive  them  as  merely  homogeneous  points  of  junction  for
action,  scattered  through  space — nay,  not  even  as  such,  but
merely  as  points  capable  of  receiving  an  impetus,  and  so  of
being  set  in  motion.  It  is  but  a  short  step  in  the  other
direction  to  fill  up  the  internal  vacuum  of  these  points,  at
least  with  forces  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  so  long  as  these
forces  are  supposed  only  to  be  added  to,  not  to  proceed  from,

NATURE  EVOLVED  F1JUM  CHAOS.  437

the  nature  of  the  elements.  Just  as  physical  science  as  such
has  little  reason  to  concern  itself  with  the  internal  states  of
things,  which  it  cannot  observe,  we,  on  the  other  hand,  in
form  ing  our  ultimate  fundamental  notions,  have  to  take
account  of  the  existence  of  this  inner  life,  and,  instead  of
denying  it,  rather  to  be  ready  to  accept  the  greatest  conceivable
variety  for  it  in  order  that,  wherever  in  future  its  influences
may  be  distinctly  traceable  on  the  succession  of  phenomena,
our  modes  of  conception  may  be  such  as  to  enable  us  to
estimate  its  worth.

Xow  in  the  place  that  must  be  left  vacant  by  the  mechanical
theory  let  us  put  our  conjecture.  If  we  cannot  beforehand
determine  what  reactions  any  being  will  develop  in  contact
with  others,  and  consequently  what  material  it  will  offer  for
calculation,  we  can  permit  ourselves  the  hypothesis  concerning
this  unknown  point,  that  contact  or  a  series  of  different  con
ditions  acting  on  an  element  awaken  in  it  energies  that  aim
n  it  only  at  self-preservation,  but  also  at  the  improvement  of
its  internal  states.  We  must  not,  however,  allow  ourselves
thence  to  suppose  that  these  efforts  of  the  individual  being
bestow  on  it  any  unlimited  power  over  others.  Were  that
being  a  soul,  and  had  co-existence  with  other  elements
awakened  in  it  the  endeavour  to  procure  satisfaction  of
its  cravings  by  surrounding  itself  with  a  regular  system  of
material  substances,  the  soul  would  notwithstanding  thence
derive  no  unlimited  moulding  power,  in  obedience  to  which
the  organic  body  might  arise.  Any  internal  state  of  one
being  will  possess  radiating  force  only  if  the  absolute  regu
larity  of  Nature  not  merely  permits  of  this,  but  further
causes  that  the  said  state  shall  necessarily  be  followed  by
another  state  of  another  being ;  and  so  here  too  the  environ
ing  elements  do  not,  in  answer  to  the  soul's  wish,  combine
into  an  organic  form  agreeable  to  it,  but  merely  now  and
then  obey  it  so  far  as  they  are  compelled,  and  as  the  required
form  yields  the  same  satisfaction  to  their  own  internal  states.
The  stern  necessity  of  mechanism  will  still,  therefore,  govern  un
interruptedly  the  formation  of  things,  only  it  will  not  exclusively

438  BOOK  IV. CIIAPTEI!  II.

annex  external  states  to  external  states,  but  at  each  point  of
its  course  enter  within  the  elements,  and  concede  to  the
intelligent  workings  there  in  process  of  development  a  regularly
adjusted  influence  on  the  character  of  the  future.  There  may
therefore  be  particular  lucky  cases  in  which  a  number  of
elements,  originally  brought  together  by  accident,  all  find  in
one  and  the  same  grouping,  towards  which  they  in  common
strive,  satisfaction  for  the  new  needs  awakened  within  them
by  their  meeting.  These  fortunate  products,  in  which  what
is  suited  to  the  ends  of  the  individual  parts  yield  together  the
purposive  equipoise  of  a  whole,  will  be  living  creatures,  and
we  must  suppose  that  as  here  their  origin,  so  also  the
mechanism  of  their  propagation  and  preservation  is  pervaded
by  this  inner  purposive  activity.

The  meaning  and  process  of  such  events  become  more
distinct  if  we  call  to  mind  the  destinies  and  the  forms  of
social  grouping  which  spring  from  the  gathering  together  of
human  beings,  and  by  a  universal  instinct  are  correctly  desig
nated  organic  formations.  Men  are  not  suddenly,  by  a  series
of  impetuses  from  without,  brought  in  a  moment  into  satis
factory  forms  of  intercourse,  nor  do  they  by  an  impulse  from
within  directly  discover  a  fitting  order  of  association  in  which
to  abide  ;  just  as  little,  lastly,  is  the  organization  of  society
the  work  of  a  conscious  artistic  design,  that,  working  from  the
first  on  a  plan,  and  hovering  outside  of  and  above  individuals,
moves  them  into  their  right  places.  Any  accidental  contact
excites  in  those  sharing  in  it  impressions  and  reactions,  which
at  first  seek  merely  as  atoms  satisfaction  for  momentarily
arising  wishes  and  needs,  and  in  thus  seeking  partly  derange
the  external  collocation  of  circumstances,  partly  themselves
receive  new  feelings  from  the  advantages  and  disadvantages
of  this  derangement.  While  frequently  antagonistic  to  one
another,  these  internal  motions  of  individuals  give  rise  to
many  temporary  social  arrangements,  whose  advantage  and
pressure  react  afresh  on  the  whole  united  multitude  and  on
each  individual  in  it,  till  at  last,  after  many  vicissitudes,  more
permanent  forms  of  social  life  are  established,  which  meet  the

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  439

needs  of  the  parts  in  harmony  with  the  conditions  of  existence
of  the  whole.  In  like  manner,  accidental  contact  allies  minds
as  to  their  inner  life  into  a  reciprocal  action  iu  the  course  of
which,  not  through  the  organizing  design  of  any  individual,
but  through  the  co-operant  rational  activity  of  all  the
elements  proceeding  from  each  individual,  the  purposeless
gradually  eliminates  itself;  a  position  of  equilibrium  is
attained  in  which  the  allied  minds  are  at  rest,  whether
from  each  being  satisfied  or  from  the  dissatisfaction  of  some
having,  through  some  counter-pressure,  lost  the  power  of
exciting  fresh  disturbance.  We  have  to  concede  to  the
corporeal  elements  nothing  more  than  the  capacity  to  be
internally  affected  by  circumstances,  and  from  this  affection
with  rational  necessity  to  evolve  improving  reactions,  in
order  to  understand  how  even  from  their  chaotic  mingling
excellently  devised  organic  forms  come  forth,  not  suddenly
and  at  once  completed,  but  produced  by  a  long  and  serious
process  of  reciprocal  action,  just  as  even  now  Nature  brings
forth  none  of  these  creatures  full  grown,  but  requires  of  each
a  long  and  laborious  process  of  development  from  its  germ.
As  many  of  these  germs  as  chaos  brought  together,  so  many
might  there  be  of  partly  successful,  partly  abortive  attempts
to  reach  the  state  of  equilibrium.  Even  final  distribution
of  organized  beings  into  a  graduated  series  of  genera  and
species,  manifestly  governed  throughout  by  a  few  general
types,  does  not  need  for  its  explanation  the  hypothesis  of
an  idea  everywhere  identical  by  which  all  have  been
created,  but  only  the  assumption  that  the  elements  themselves
included  no  boundless  variety,  but  only  a  finite  number  of
distinctions — in  which  case  a  number  of  similar  characteristics
and  of  comparable  forms  of  acting  must  go  all  through  their
combinations  and  the  developments  of  the  same.

§  o.  Now  let  us  have  done  with  this  dialogue  between  the
contending  parties.  It  is  clear  whither  the  mechanical  view
tends.  Asserting  that  it  is  ever  producing  order,  however
unruly  and  confused  may  have  been  the  beginnings  of  tho
cosmos,  it  would  wean  us  from  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  a  com-

440  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  II.

preliensive  creative  will.  Now,  how  is  the  unity  of  Nature
saved  in  this  pluralism  of  origin  ?  This  objection  we  not
un  frequently  find  brought  forward  as  the  last  and  weightiest,
and  yet  I  know  not  if  it  could  not  easily  be  met.  For  there
is  a  unity  of  Nature  that  arises  in  this  condemned  way,  though
it  no  more  than  arises,  and  comes  about  as  the  final  result  of
the  Jabour  of  many,  not  preceding  their  existence  as  its  con
trolling  source.  But  is  it  any  the  worse  for  having  this
.history  ?  When  in  human  society  moral  powers  gradually
•show  themselves  and  grow  up,  when  general  views  in  regard
to  spheres  of  duty,  accordant  acknowledgments  as  to  the
services  required  of  each  individual  by  the  actual  position  of
.  his  country  as  grounded  in  its  history,  the  limits  imposed  on
him  by  the  national  code  of  ethics,  and  a  better  insight  into
the  necessary  ends  of  effort  and  the  means  adequate  to  their
•attainment,  gradually  come  to  prevail :  are  these  various
forms  of  civilisation  of  less  value  because  they  did  not
directly  spring  forth  mature  from  the  unity  of  a  germ  of
civilisation,  but,  as  fortunate  positions  of  a  finally  attained
-equilibrium,  were  won  through  a  struggle  between  countless
passions  and  conflicting  interests  ?  Now  this  unity,  the  result
of  conciliation,  Nature  also  possesses ;  in  its  present  condition
the  wild  war  of  elements  no  longer  goes  on  ;  we  are  sur
rounded  by  steady  solid  deposits  of  permanent  forms,  the
varied  course  of  phenomena  is  organized  and  governed  by
widespread  and  unchanging  habits  of  working  gradually
developed ;  the  sum-total  of  things  either  has  found  the  posi
tion  of  harmony  between  all  its  parts  that  admits  of  no  other
motion  than  that  of  a  regular  und  progressive  development,  or,
if  there  is  still  anywhere  a  lawless  war  of  forces,  even  its
future  prospects  will  appear  no  less  cheering  on  our  view  than
on  that  which  puts  a  single  plan  at  the  beginning  of  events.

There  is  nothing  in  which  we  are  so  apt  to  err  as  in  our
judgment  concerning  the  forms  of  existence  that  we  deem
indispensable  to  the  fulfilment  of  our  most  earnest  wishes.
We  have  grown  used  to  familiar  modes  of  satisfaction,  and
mistrust  every  new  situation  and  every  change  of  things,

NATURE  EVOLVED  FROM  CHAOS.  441

while  if  we  courageously  made  the  attempt  we  would  loam
that  even  new  relations  have  sources  of  enjoyment.  Perhaps
the  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  a  primal  unity  of  Nature
is  one  of  these  delusions.  Perhaps  we  were  wrong  when
we  formerly  maintained  that  our  delight  in  a  picture
would  vanish  if  it  were  impossible  to  believe  in  the  unity
of  the  imagination  whose  work  it  is.  In  fact,  when  we
admire  a  landscape,  we  can  scarce  seriously  cling  to  the
illusion  that  it  was  one  breath  of  Nature  which,  with  the
comprehensive  unity  of  poetic  phantasy,  brought  together  the
manifold  and  unique  constituents  of  the  scene.  The  cottages
and  ruins  crowning  those  heights  were  no  part  of  the  plan  of
the  forces  of  Nature,  the  seeds  of  the  plants  whose  varied
tints  of  green  enchant  us  were  wafted  to  this  valley  by  lawless
winds  knowing  naught  of  each  other,  and  the  sun  whose  rays
gild  the  peaceful  scene  shines  down  from  a  path  far  above
all,  and  through  mists  that  ascend  from  other  regions  of  the
globe.  In  this  picture  there  are  unquestionably  a  plurality  ol
origins ;  its  charm  lies  in  the  quiet  confidence  of  mutual
understanding  with  which  these  originally  alien  constituents
are  bound  together,  all  sharing  the  common  bliss  of  a  satisfv-
ing  union.

But  one  tiling  seems  wholly  incompatible  with  the
mechanical  theory — the  idea  of  predestination.  As  long  as
we  looked  up  to  one  Cause  of  the  universe,  we  knew  that  we
formed  part  of  one  great  universal  fabric  culminating  in  a
preconceived  design ;  as  fellow-labourers  on  this  fabric,  wr
found  in  the  destiny  which  it  imposed  on  us  justification  fur
our  existence  and  guidance  for  our  efforts.  A  universe  formed
by  the  coalescence  of  innumerable  origins  has  no  end  and
no  obligations  ;  whatever  it  may  be  it  has  a  right  to  be,
and  it  imposes  neither  on  itself  nor  on  its  several  elements  the
task  of  pursuing  a  yet  unattained  goal.  In  it  facts  must
throughout  prevail  and  the  actual  be  always  right,  while  all
our  human  feeling  is  consciously  under  the  obligation  to
realize  a  not  yet  existent  ideal.  Now,  does  the  mechanical
theory  cheat  us  of  this  idea,  and  seek  by  stealth  to  deprive  us

442  BOOK  IV. CIIAPTEli  II.

of  it  ?  I  think  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  familiar  with  it  in
a  different  form.  It  is  not  its  part  to  tell  us  that  by  a  wise
design  the  feeling  ot  moral  obligation  and  the  types  of  moral
ideals  have  been  implanted  in  living  souls,  and  it  therefore
does  not  involve  itself  in  the  complexities  of  the  question,
how  to  reconcile  with  this  deliberate  setting  up  of  the  germ
the  countless  hindrances  which  the  course  of  things  put?  in
the  way  of  its  development.  It  knows  only  that  even  these
inner  workings  form  part  of  the  actual  nature  of  souls,  and,
looking  on  the  moral  impulse  as  one  of  those  forces  which
the  course  of  things  brings  into  contact  and  conflict,  it  does
not  require  that  all  other  circumstances  shall  accommodate
themselves  to  it,  but  trusts  to  its  maintaining  its  place  in  I  he1
reciprocal  action  of  all.  Very  different  from  that  bizarre
Materialism  which  takes  on  itself  the  office  of  bringing
intelligent  life  out  of  unintelligent  matter  as  an  incidental
product  whose  trifling  and  precarious  value  does  not  permit
of  its  setting  up  any  peculiar  claims  in  presence  of  matter,  the
one  true  substance,  the  mechanical  view  can,  on  the  contrary,
discern  in  the  fact  of  a  moral  impulse  one  of  the  most
important  and  original  characteristics  of  the  soul,  from  which
all  its  other  regular  relationships  result  as  consistent  phases  of
self-preservation.  Neither  the  fact  that  there  are  beings  who
assign  a  value  to  themselves  and  their  manifestations,  accusing
and  excusing  themselves,  nor  the  absolute  authority  of  the
law  involved  in  it,  will  be  called  in  question  or  made  light  of
by  this  view ;  and  if  it  cannot  teach  that  alovc  the  individual
there  soar  ideals  to  fulfil  which  he  is  destined,  it  yet  acknow
ledges  that  in  each  individual  an  ideal  may  be  developed  from
which  he  cannot  without  self-condemnation  shake  himself  free.

CHAl'TEK III.

THE UNITY OF NATUKE.

Unity  of  the  Basis  of  Things,  and  its  Results— The  System  of  Material  Elements
ami  their  Distribution — Preservation  of  Unity  in  the  Course  of  Events —
Notion  of  Miracles — Plan  of  Development  in  the  World  and  in  Man —
Cosmic  Periods — Limitation  of  our  Knowledge  and  Being — Universal  and
Terrestrial  Nature — Grades  of  Natural  Products — The  Animal  Kingdom
and  its  Typical  Forms.

§  1.  T  DO  not  think  that  the  lovers  of  chaos  could  find
-•-  other  grounds  on  which  to  prove  the  origin  of  the
universe  from  it,  than  those  supplied  by  our  last  speculation.  If
these  were  all  inadequate  to  stifle  the  voice  of  a  contrary  con
viction,  we  do  not  lament  this ;  for  our  previous  reflections
pointed  out  to  us  another  path,  from  which  we  once  more  sought
to  survey  the  concentrated  force  of  the  mechanical  conception
of  the  universe.  If  our  attention  has  now  been  given  to  it  for
a  longer  time  than  to  many  may  have  seemed  needful,  this  was
because  we  could  not  see  that  its  claims  are  so  contemptible
as  they  may  appear  to  the  confident  advocates  of  the  opposite
view.  It  is  like  an  enemy  whose  internal  organization  is  too
vast  and  too  compact  to  allow  of  our  succeeding  in  an
attempt  simply  to  annihilate  it ;  we  must  incorporate  it
in  our  own  community  with  the  whole  disciplined  force  that
it  displayed  against  us,  and  there  open  up  to  its  energy
a  field  of  useful  action.  In  fact,  we  would  not  have  dwelt
in  such  detail  on  the  several  ideas  which  we  sought  to
illustrate,  did  they  not,  within  the  other  conception  which
we  have  to  vindicate,  retain  as  subordinate  parts  a  validity
which,  as  an  independent  theory  of  the  universe,  they  cannot
make  good.

AVlien,  anticipating  the  slow  course  of  my  examination,  I
sought,  in  u  preliminary  survey,  to  indicate  the  direction  it
would  take,  I  pointed  out  that  every  attempt  to  derive  from

443

444  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

formless  chaos  the  necessary  appearance  of  discrimination  and
order  in  things,  rests  on  the  assumption  that  a  sphere  of
universal  and  absolutely  authoritative  laws  unvaryingly  pre
scribes  to  all  elements  the  form  and  amount  of  their  reciprocal
action  (supra,  p.  304  sq.).  This  has  been  confirmed  in  the
course  of  our  last  discussions.  For  though  we  liberally
enlarged  the  somewhat  scanty  stock  of  means  of  explana
tion  commonly  made  use  of,  by  allowing  that  the  elements
themselves  are  endowed  with  internal  vitality  and  mobility  ;
and  though  we  accounted  for  the  reactions  exhibited  by  each
element  only  as  the  consistent  result  of  its  own  specific
nature,  it  remained  none  the  less  necessary  that  a  universal
system  of  law  should  unite  together  all  beings,  and  regulate
their  mutual  communication.  For  even  accepting  this  account,
every  reaction  must  assume  that  the  state  of  the  one  element
contains  a  call  to  the  other  to  change  its  condition,  in
order  that  the  latter  may  be  affected  by  the  former.  !<>t
it  therefore  provide  for  its  self-defence  according  to  the
dictates  of  its  own  genius;  the  fact  that  danger  could  threaten
it  will  lie  explicable  only  on  the  supposition  of  an  ali-
embracing  sphere  of  law  that  compulsorily  annexes  a  particu
lar  affection  in  things  to  every  particular  situation  of  them.
And  in  the  end,  does  not  the  internal  consistency  of  each
being  in  itself  likewise  presuppose  this  absolute  regularity  of
demeanour  throughout  the  universe  ?  Further,  a  free  inner
development  can  be  called  consistent  only  because  the  con
nection  of  its  several  stages  corresponds  to  an  externally
applied  standard,  to  a  wider  necessity,  which  decides  what
particular  consequent  can  lawfully  be  drawn  from  any  par
ticular  antecedent.  Any  course  of  things  admitting  some
events  as  possible,  excluding  others  as  impossible,  requiring
some  as  necessary,  even  if  leaving  some  to  free  choice,  can
judge  in  regard  to  these  various  cases  only  according  to
universal  laws ;  and  chaos  will  not  develop  order  until  in
obedience  to  this  law  the  frail  and  tottering  combinations  of
things  have  been  compelled  to  yield  to  those  which  are
firmer  and  self-consistent.  If,  then,  the  mechanical  theory

THE  UNITY  01'  NATURE.  445

starts  from  a  plurality  of  existent  elements,  it  grasps  nil
the  more  firmly  the  unity  of  the  universal  system  of  law,
whose  power  gradually  elaborated  from  the  planless  disorder
of  these  beginnings  the  sketch  of  a  plan  now  permanent.

Hut  we  have  satisfied  ourselves  how  impossible  it  is  to
conceive  this  sphere  of  larvvs  as  a  self-existent  power,  preced
ing  things  and  hovering  over  them  ;  we  were  irresistibly
constrained  to  apprehend  this  single  bond,  as  soon  as  it  has
to  assert  its  uniting  power  over  the  split-up  variety  of  the
elements,  as  one  actual  infinite  Being,  of  whom  all  finite  things
are  the  intimately  cherished  parts.  Only  thus  could  the
reciprocal  actions,  on  which  the  course  of  events  depends,
extend  across  the  chasm  that  divides  the  several  elements,
and  would  eternally  separate  them  from  one  another,  unless
they  derived  from  the  common  substance  from  which  they
spring  the  capacity  for,  and  the  obligation  to,  a  vital  mutual
relationship,  and  a  reciprocation  of  their  internal  states
(siijmt,  p.  3G8).  If,  then,  after  an  examination  of  the  content
of  Nature,  and  of  the  purposiveness  of  its  creations,  we  could
still  be  in  doubt  whether,  after  all,  it  had  not  possibly
originated  in  solitary  and  unconnected  beginnings,  the  fact
that  there  are  reciprocal  actions  will,  on  the  other  hand,
compel  us  to  believe  in  a  real  unity  of  all  things,  and  a
common  source  whence  they  have  (lowed.

§  '2.  In  now  endeavouring  to  track  the  consequences  of
this  conviction,  we  must  beware  of  requiring  from  it  more
results  than  it  can  yield.  The  path  by  which  we  reached
the  notion  of  this  Supreme  Cause  taught  us  nothing  about
it,  save  that  it  is  actual,  and  one  and  the  same  in  all
things ;  it  disclosed  to  us  nothing  of  the  content  of  its
being,  and  of  the  inherent  nature  with  which  it  fills  this
mould  of  unity  and  infinity.  From  so  unknown  a  Supremo.
Cause  we  cannot  venture  to  deduce  the  process  of  the  creation
of  the  world,  and  set  it  forth  in  concrete  description  ;  just  as
little  can  wo  attempt  to  determine  beforehand  the  particular
order  of  Nature,  in  which  must  necessarily  be  displayed  the
creative  energy  of  that  principle  whose  designs  and  opera-

446  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

tions  are  concealed  from  us  by  our  ignorance  of  its  peculiar
attributes.  We  can  follow  out  only  those  consequences  which
flow  from  the  formal  character  of  unity,  and  which,  in  any
creation  supposed  to  be  derived  from  a  Unity,  would  recur  as
necessary  features  of  its  organization,  independently  of  the
nature  of  the  Supreme  Cause.  Limited  as  are  these  admis
sible  conclusions,  they  yet  go  far  beyond  what  our  experi
mental  knowledge  is  as  yet  in  a  position  to  confirm,  and  we
can  but  indicate  them  as  necessary  guiding  maxims  of  our
inquiries,  not  as  facts  that  can  be  observed.

Whatever  may  be  the  process  by  which  plurality  arises
from  unity,  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  notion  of  unity  if
an  accidental  indefinite  plurality  should  arise  from  it.  On
the  contrary,  from  the  first  the  variety  of  the  elements  will
form  a  complete  system,  that  grasped  in  its  totality  offers
an  expression  of  the  whole  nature  of  the  One.  Xot  as  if  this
One,  like  a  magnitude,  fell  into  a  number  of  co-ordinate  parts,
the  sum  of  which  must  be  taken  in  order  to  make  up  the
unit  again ;  for  the  Cause,  in  the  act  of  creation,  would  send
forth  from  itself  no  single  finite  element,  without  at  the  same
time  adding  thereto  a  fixed  number  of  others,  which,  taken
along  with  the  former,  should  make  the  reality  its  com
plete  manifestation.  As  a  complex  chemical  compound  does
not  suffer  one  of  its  constituents  to  be  withdrawn  from  it
singly,  but,  on  the  contrary,  also  discharges  a  second,  which
after  the  removal  of  the  first  would  no  longer  be  in  equili
brium  with  the  residuum  ;  or,  as  it  does  not  take  in  a  new
constituent,  except  on  condition  of  simultaneously  appropriat
ing  another  also,  by  which  this  increment  may  be  balanced
in  the  constellation  of  its  internal  forces :  so  we  have  to
conceive  the  sum  of  reality  as  a  completed  formula  of  which
each  part  supplements  the  sum  of  the  rest,  so  as  to  con
stitute  a  full  expression  of  the  common  ground  of  all.

This  conception  we  have  to  apply  first  of  all  to  the
original  constituents,  which  we  find  woven  into  the  texture  of
the  universe,  or  must  assume  as  woven  into  it,  to  the  various
ponderable  elementary  substances  of  Nature,  next  to  the

THE  UNITY  OF  NATUKE.  44?

imponderable  elements  (should  we  with  advancing  knowledge
still  bj  compelled  to  retain  them),  and  lastly,  to  intelligent
natures,  if  the  various  forms  of  psychic  life  should  not  appear
to  admit  of  being  explained  as  various  levels  of  development
of  the  same  beings.

"\Vhile  our  experience,  almost  wholly  confined  to  the  earth,
is  still  taking  up  the  chemical  elements  one  by  one,  the
progress  of  discovery  is  altering  their  number,  and  their
conjoint  occurrence  seems  an  accidental  and  arbitrary  fact ;
the  existence  of  each  element,  on  the  other  hand,  involves  to
us  the  existence  of  all  the  others  as  a  necessary  consequence,
and  all  together  form  a  complete  system.  Each  link  in  this
chain,  along  with  its  special  properties  and  capabilities  of
action,  has  its  fixed  place,  and  together  with  all  the  others
forms  a  complete  expression — neither  to  be  added  to  nor
taken  from — of  the  nature  of  the  Universal  Substance.

If,  further,  the  number  and  distribution  of  the  atoms  of
each  element  should  to  our  observation  seem  subject  to  no
rule,  we  must,  in  opposition  to  this  appearance,  conceive  the
total  amount  of  each  several  clement  and  the  dispersion  of  its
parts  in  space  as  fixed  by  a  formula  that  determines  for  each
substance,  in  view  of  the  peculiarity  of  its  nature,  alike  the
(quantity  in  which  it  is  to  appear  and  the  places  whence  its
atoms  are  to  begin  their  reciprocal  action  with  others.  The
present  condition  of  Nature,  deranged  as  it  has  been  by
innumerable  regular  developments,  and  to  a  small  extent  by
the  encroachments  of  arbitrary  lawlessness,  does  not  permit  of
our  working  our  way  backwards  to  the  orderliness  of  the  first
moment  of  the  universe  ;  we  may  believe  that  such  there  was,
but  we  cannot  accept  as  the  necessary  form  of  that  original
aspect  of  things  either  the  conception  of  an  equal  distribution
of  all  elements  among  all,  or  even  that  of  a  somehow  sym
metrical  grouping  of  the  different  elements.  Just  as  little
does  our  hypothesis  enable  us  to  decide  whether  the  quantity
of  actual  existence  is  limited  or  unlimited.  Were  the  attribute
of  infinity  compatible  with  that  of  unity,  a  difference  of  total
amount  would  be  just  as  conceivable  between  elements,  each

448  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

of  them  made  up  of  an  infinite  number  of  atoms,  as  definite
and  computable  differences  of  magnitude  between  plane  angles,
the  arms  of  which  extend  ad  infinitum.

Finally,  the  world  is  not  in  a  state  of  rest ;  this  internal
equilibrium  must  not  be  present  merely  for  once  in  the
compass  of  a  moment ;  the  unity  must  be  preserved  at  each
moment  of  the  course  of  evolution.  Like  every  transverse  section
which  we  take  out  of  the  history  of  Nature,  it  must  present
in  the  new  positions  which,  in  consequence  of  recent  changes,
the  elements  have  taken  up  in  it,  a  new  and  full  expression  of
the  consonance  of  all  the  parts  to  form  the  whole.  We  can
therefore  admit  no  original  motion  of  the  smallest  atom  not
from  the  first  adjusted  so  as  to  form  a  harmonious  whole  with
the  motions  of  all  the  other  atoms ;  none  that  had  once
begun  could  go  on  by  itself  without  being  invariably  turned
back  from  any  independent  path  into  the  common  harmony,
by  its  relations  to  the  other  motions  along  with  which  it  has
its  place  in  the  fabric  of  the  universe.  As  in  every  complete
organism  the  dislocation  of  one  atom  alters  and  disturbs  the
constitution  of  the  whole,  and  is  tolerated  only  in  so  far  as
the  other  constituents,  by  corresponding  compensating  disloca
tions,  establish  a  new  state  of  equilibrium,  so  also  may  Nature
be  supposed  to  possess  a  susceptibility  that  prevents  it  from
allowing  to  any  phenomenon  an  isolated  development,  unless
all  the  rest  of  actual  existence  has  neutralized  its  disturbing
influence  by  counterbalancing  changes.  But  not  every  part
of  an  organic  body  is  in  equally  close  and  important  cohesion
with  the  others,  so  that  its  transposition  must  exert  a  perceptible
influence  on  the  states  of  the  whole;  in  like  manner  not  every
event  in  Nature  has  so  momentous  an  effect  on  the  significance
of  its  total  working  as  to  render  necessary  the  employment  of
striking  or  even  perceptible  adjustments  as  means  of  defence
against  it.  Moreover,  an  unexpected  assault  may  be  made  on
the  individual  organism  from  the  outside  world  by  which  it
is  surrounded,  and  its  energies  thus  be  roused  suddenly  to
defence ;  the  total  of  Nature  has  no  environing  region  in
which  threatening  disturbances  may  unnoticed  gather  in

THE  UNITY  OF  NATURE.  449

preparation  for  a  sudden  attack  ;  its  steady  and  uninterrupted
activity  counteracts  every  deviation  at  its  beginning.  Although,
therefore,  we  must  retain  the  notion  of  susceptibility  as  a
necessary  characteristic  of  all  manifold  reality  that  rests  on
the  unity  of  a  containing  cause,  no  improbable  stamp  of
unrest  and  fluctuation  is  thereby  impressed  on  our  picture
of  the  course  of  Nature.

It  would,  however,  be  seriously  to  misunderstand  the  nature
of  this  compensation  of  disturbances  either  to  regard  it  as
merely  a  maintenance  of  the  order  that  in  the  continuous
working  of  any  machine  is  a  matter  of  course,  or  to  suppose
that  it  is  a  re-establishment  of  order  introduced  from  above,
and  wholly  foreign  to  the  machinery.  If  all  the  actions  of
elements  take  place  according  to  universal  laws  not  partial  to
any  one  special  form  of  result  more  than  to  another,  it  is
neither  necessary  nor  probable  that  a  system  of  moving  parts,
corresponding  at  its  commencement  to  some  plan,  should
throughout  the  whole  uninterrupted  course  of  its  continued
automatic  working  adhere  to  or  restore  the  same  plan.  In
the  form  which  it  had  assumed  in  accordance  with  the
mechanical  conditions  of  its  working,  it  might  cease  to  be  in
conformity  with  the  pattern  that  it  was  intended  to  copy.
Xow  it  is  possible  for  the  individual  creature  under  such
circumstances  to  perish,  i.e.  renouncing  its  former  character
to  pass  into  another  form  of  existence  ;  Nature  as  a  whole
can  neither  stand  still  nor  cease  to  correspond  to  the  meaning
of  the  One  of  which  all  its  active  elements  are  but  dependent
emanations.  In  it,  therefore,  must  be  accomplished  the  task
of  a  perpetual  preservation,  not  merely  of  some  order,  but  of
the  order  contained  in  the  meaning  of  its  first  creation.  Now
this  cannot  be  accomplished  unless  the  automatic  working  by
which  the  first  arrangement  of  the  universe  is  perpetuated,
and  which  is  under  the  exclusive  direction  of  universal  laws,
is  constantly  being  kept  in  the  path  required  by  that  meaning.
But  we  do  not  conceive  this  keeping  in  the  path  as  effected
by  a  higher  hand  freely  interfering  with  the  working  of  the
machine  in  order  to  amend  mistakes  made  by  it  in  its  bliud-

VOL.  i.  2  F

450  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

ness,  or  to  avert  dangers  unnoticed  by  it.  On  the  contrary,
the  machine  itself  notices  and  averts  them.  For  to  us  the
elements  of  the  actual  universe  are  not  dead  and  rigid,  not
(as  physical  science  within  its  more  restricted  iield  is  entitled  to
regard  them)  selfless  and  void  points  of  attachment  for  unalter
able  forces,  compelled  irrevocably  to  accept  every  consequence
of  their  first  action  without  being  able  to  neutralize  it  by  a
second,  unless  this  second  action  should  also  without  any
merit  of  theirs  be  forced  on  them  by  the  external  course  of
events.  They  are  to  us,  on  the  contrary,  living  parts  of  the
living  One,  at  every  moment  not  merely  in  myriad  relations
to  one  another,  but  further  affected  l>y  these  relations.  But
this  affection  is  a  new  fact  with  which  the  universal  laws  that
govern  every  step  of  the  course  of  Nature  necessarily  connect
a  new  reaction,  which,  without  the  intermediate  link  of
inherent  vitality  in  the  acting  point,  they  would  never  have
connected  with  a  merely  external  relation  between  it  and
others.  It  is  thus  by  no  alteration  in  the  universal  mechanical
laws  of  working  that  we  conceive  the  constant  preservation
of  the  plan  of  Nature  as  effected,  but  by  an  alteration  in  the
bearers  of  the  forces  that  have  to  obey  these  laws.  As  we
have  never  been  able  to  look  on  efficient  force  as  an  external
appendage  of  the  elements,  but  could  only  hold  it  to  be  a  neces
sary  manifestation  of  their  being,  so  too  we  deny  that  the  same
element,  however  its  internal  states  may  vary,  must  possess
an  unvarying  amount  of  the  same  force.  If  the  unity  of
Nature  exists  in  its  essential  Cause,  and  if  each  element  traces
in  a  change  of  its  condition — be  it  great  or  be  it  infinitesinially
small — the  influence  of  the  momentary  total  position  of  the
universe,  then  corresponding  to  this  its  altered  condition  it  will
assume  another  form  of  activity,  now  become  for  it  necessary
from  the  direction  of  the  course  of  things.  It  cannot  change
universal  laws  or  resist  them  ;  it  merely  alters  the  specific
co-efficients  that  indicate  the  amount  of  its  participation  in
the  universal  modes  of  action,  and,  with  these  new  deter
minations  of  amount,  returns  with  entire  subjection  to  the
lines  of  operation  prescribed  for  it  by  general  rules.  Thus

THE  UNITY'  OF  NATURE.  451

nil  internal  connection  of  things,  whose  relations  are  regulated
by  tlie  standard  of  a  definite  plan  of  the  universe,  yields  to
the  external  connection  the  facts  that  the  latter  develops  into
their  necessary  consequences  according  to  universal  and
planless  laws.

I  can  understand  that  this  mode  of  thought  will  conic
rudely  into  contact  witli  the  current  opinion  of  the  internal
vacuity  of  tilings,  and  in  fact  it  does  contain  a  notion  highly
repugnant  to  that  opinion — the  notion  of  Miracles,  in  so  far
as  that  can  find  a  place  in  a  rounded-off  and  consistent  view
of  Nature.  To  understand  under  the  term  miracle  only  what
is  unusual,  hut  in  its  commencement  calculable,  is  evidently
to  narrow  too  much  the  signification  of  the  word ;  to  rind  in
it  a  complete  setting  aside  of  the  laws  of  Nature  is  to  say
more  than  one  would  care  to  do.  The  annulling  of  a  law  of
Xutuiv,  if  it  were  to  take  place  for  a  moment,  would  not  only
make  possible  the  particular  single  event  on  behalf  of  which
it  was  decreed,  but  at  the  same  time  set  in  confusion  all
the  rest  of  the  world,  whose  orderly  and  regular  continued
existence  we  presupposed  as  the  foil  for  the  lustre  of  the
single  miracle.  The  authority  of  the  law  of  Nature  must  be
annulled,  or  rather  another  for  a  moment  introduced  in  its
place,  only  for  the  one  particular  case  of  the  reciprocal  action
between  the  few  elements  on  which  the  miracle  is  performed.
It  would  be  difficult  to  form  of  this  partial  annulling  of  a
law  of  Nature  a  satisfactory  idea  that  should  lead  anywhere
else  than  to  the  thought  with  which  we  started.  The  miracle-
working  power,  whatever  it  may  be,  does  not  directly  turn
against  the  law  to  set  aside  its  authority,  but  by  altering  the
inner  states  of  things,  in  virtue  of  its  internal  connection  with
them,  it  indirectly  modifies  the  usual  result  of  the  law,  whose
validity  it  leaves  intact  and  permanently  turns  to  account
The  complete  and  unbending  circle  of  mechanical  necessity  is
not,  and  must  not  be,  immediately  accessible  to  the  miracle-
working  command ;  but  the  inner  nature  of  that  which  is
subject  to  its  laws  is  determined  not  by  it,  but  only  by  th«»
meaning  of  the  universe.  Here  is  the  exposed  part  on  whicli

402  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

a  power,  ordaining  in  accordance  with  that  meaning,  can  exert
its  influence ;  and  if,  in  consequence  of  its  ordinance,  the
internal  states  of  the  elements,  and  the  amount  of  their
mutual  affinity  and  antagonism,  undergo  a  change,  the  neces
sity  of  the  mechanical  course  of  the  universe  will  have  to
produce  from  the  altered  state  of  the  facts  an  external,  mira
culous  phenomenon,  not  by  setting  aside,  hut  by  strictly
maintaining  universal  laws.

It  cannot  be  within  the  compass  of  our  present  inquiry  to
decide  the  question  whether  we  may  treat  this  possibility  as
actual,  and  what  power  we  may  suppose  entitled  to  interrupt
the  course  of  natural  phenomena  by  particular  unusual
•miracle-working  interferences.  Here  we  should  rather  trench
on  the  discussion  of  that  permanent  order  by  which  the  unity
of  the  infinite  Cause  of  the  universe  is  manifested  in  the
multiplicity  of  phenomena.  To  this  end  wre  have  still  a
consideration  to  present,  a  final  result  of  that  unity,  yet  even
to  ourselves  not  of  the  same  importance,  or,  at  any  rate,  not
of  the  same  nature  as  those  which  have  preceded  it.

We  may  doubt  whether  the  unremitting  adjustment  that
brings  the  course  of  Nature  always  back  into  the  same  order,
is  adequate  to  defend  at  all  points  the  unity  of  the  Supreme
Cause.  If  at  each  moment  this  creative  Cause  could  stamp  in
ever  new  forms  the  impress  of  its  unity  on  a  universe  at
war  with  itself,  as  it  were,  through  the  motions  of  the  several
elements,  it  would  indeed  vindicate  its  unity,  but  the  induce
ments  to  vindicate  it  would  come  from  without ;  the  whole
series  of  its  triumphant  self-assertions  wrould  form  an  uncon
nected  plurality  with  no  principle  of  unity.  Man,  when
he  reviews  the  history  of  his  life,  finds  in  it  innumerable
external  accidents,  with  no  connection  between  them,  and
still  more  conspicuously  alien  from  his  own  being ;  even  if,  in
the  struggle  with  them,  he  has  guarded  the  individuality  of
his  nature,  he  yet  feels  the  course  of  destiny  as  a  foreign  con
straint  that  forced  on  him  particular  forms  of  this  self-pre
servation.  He  would  be  still  more  oppressed  by  this  feeling,
if  he  had  to  acknowledge  the  most  favourable  result  of  every

THE  UNITY  OF  NATURE.  453

struggle  with  this  destiny  to  be  nothing  but  bare  self-preser
vation,  nothing  but  a  return  to  a  former  condition ;  for  the
unrest  produced  by  continual  rousing  through  external  inter
ferences  and  ever  relapsing  into  the  old  state  of  rest,  would
seem  quite  absurd  and  aimless.  But  we  know  that,  after  all,
these  accidental  stimulations  have  been  beneficial ;  they  called
forth  energies  that  lasted  after  the  victory  had  been  won,  and
substituted  a  more  perfect  for  a  less  perfect  condition.  The
soul  in  its  self-consciousness,  by  using  every  position  gained
as  the  starting-point  of  a  new  and  higher  development,  has
lunik  itself  one  in  a  yet  higher  sense  than  that  in  which  it
previously  was  one,  and  has  linked  together  the  unconnected
multitude  of  its  accidentally  caused  acts  of  self-preservation
into  the  chain  of  a  progressive  development.  In  this  it
would  have  been  more  successful  if  external  stimulations  had
always  reached  it  in  due  proportion  to  its  need  of  develop
ment  ;  but  at  any  r;ite  it  has  thus  overcome  the  utter  frag-
mentariness  of  its  inner  being,  which  would  have  been  little
in  accordance  with  its  original  character  of  unity.  Motives
to  self-preservation  do  not  come  to  the  total  of  Nature  from
without  as  to  the  individual  soul ;  it  gives  rise  itself  to  the
original  movements  which,  as  continued,  yield  it  an  oppor
tunity  for  an  ever-renewed  working  of  its  unity.  It  would  the
less  truly  display  this  unity,  in  proportion  as  the  sequence  of
these  opportunities  remained  an  arbitrary  accident,  not  itself
dependent  on  the  meaning  of  the  unity  that  seeks  to  assert
itself  in  it.  The  series  of  cosmic  periods  cannot,  therefore,
be  a  number  of  phases,  in  each  of  which  the  one  purpose  of
the  universe  does  in  fact  maintain  itself;  it  must  rather  he
a  chain,  each  link  of  which  is  bound  together  with  every
other  in  the  unity  of  one  plan.  The  One  can  manifest  itself
in  various  forms  only  when  such  variety  of  forms  is  necessary
for  the  expression  of  its  meaning — in  a  definite  order  of
succession  only  when  this  order  corresponds  to  a  craving  for
development  in  its  nature.  As  we  previously  required  that
each  section  of  the  world's  history  should  present  a  harmony  of
the  elements  firmly  knit  throughout,  so  must  we  now  require

454  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IN.

that  the  successive  order  of  these  sections  shall  compose  the
unity  of  an  onward  advancing  melody.

We  might  have  said  more  simply,  that  the  course  of  the
universe  must  form  not  merely  a  plurality  of  successive
moments,  but  a  connected  history ;  but  then  we  must,  at  the
same  time,  have  indicated  the  reason  for  this  assertion.  Ex
perience  would  supply  but  equivocal  evidence  of  a  progressive
development  of  the  universe  as  a  whole ;  to  choose  it  in  pre
ference  to  another  hypothesis  as  the  image  of  a  fairer  existence
would  be  still  less  satisfactory  ;  to  prove  its  necessity  from  the
living  content  of  the  Cause  of  the  universe  would  overtax  our
means  of  knowledge.  Let  us  therefore  be  content  to  know
that  existence  without  motion  is  not  contrary  to  the  notion  of
the  One,  but  that,  when  we  have  before  us  the  fact  of  its
motion,  then  this  must  of  necessity  assume  the  form  of  a
connected  development.  And  to  each  stage  of  this  develop
ment  we  must  anew  apply  the  requirements  of  the  original
unity.  The  nature  of  existing  substances,  their  quantities
and  their  distribution  in  space,  the  variety  and  graduated
order  of  organic  species,  the  proportions  in  which  the  shaping-
power  divides  the  substances  among  the  different  living
forms  in  which  they  are  for  a  time  to  remain  combined,
the  direction  and  velocity  of  the  circuit  ceaselessly  travelled
by  the  elements  in  their  passage  from  one  form  to  another :
this  whole  sum  of  existence  and  action  corresponds  at  every
moment  to  a  comprehensive  adjustment  of  conditions  that
sums  up  the  requirements  of  the  One  in  all  the  manifold
phases  of  its  manifestation.  There  may  be  protracted  periods
during  which  the  frame  of  the  universe,  unaltered  in  its  main
outlines  and  in  the  nature  of  its  elements,  goes  through  a  long
course  of  internal  movements,  by  which  it  gradually  realizes
all  the  potentialities  of  manifold  development  conceivable
within  the  limits  of  that  fundamental  adjustment.  But  after
these  have  been  gone  through,  the  One,  which  did  not  in  a
thousand  moments  appear  a  thousand  times,  but  brought  to
gether  the  thousand  forms  of  its  existence  into  the  unity  of  a
single  development,  in  which  each  stage  is  a  condition  of  the

THE  UNITY  OF  NATURE.  455

next — the  One,  we  repeat,  thus  quickened  and  in  the  full
tide  of  advance,  will  not  go  back  to  its  former  beginning.
This  age  of  the  world  will  be  brought  to  a  close,  and  the
velocity  and  direction  of  the  formative  motion  with  which  the
cause  of  the  universe  reaches  that  termination,  will  compel
it  to  give  in  a  fresh  creation  a  remodelled  form  to  the  immut
able,  but  by  dint  of  constant  development  deepened  and
ennobled,  meaning  of  its  being.  A  new  adjustment  of  con
ditions  will  hold  good  in  this  age.  Other  substances,  newly
distributed  functions,  forces,  and  affinities,  another  kingdom
of  generic  forms,  and  hitherto  unknown  types  of  life  under
new  external  conditions  of  existence,  will  repeat  the  imperish
able  tlierne  as  in  a  characteristically  connected  variation.

JJ  3.  Here  we  pause.  We  have  gone  so  far  beyond  the
sphere  of  experience  that  we  must  make  up  by  a  return  to
its  modest  domain.  It  is  true  that  these  last  considerations
have  suddenly  made  the  apparently  so  solid  fabric  of  the
mechanical  science  of  Nature  fade  into  a  much  paler  radiance  ;
but  in  truth  we:  can  cherish  no  higher  opinion  of  this  sum  of
our  exact  knowledge  than  that  which  here  results.  All  our
knowledge  of  the  unchanging  laws  of  Nature,  and  all  the
research  into  Nature  made  under  their  guidance,  is  but  as  the
application  of  a  circle  of  curvature  at  one  point  of  a  curve  pro
duced  ad  iiifmiium.  We  rightly  maintain  that  the  direction
in  which  the  course  of  things  works  at  this  point,  namely,
in  the  thousands  of  years  of  our  historical  remembrance,  is
exactly  measured  by  the  curvature  of  that  circle  ;  and  doubt
less  it  must  appear  to  us  as  if  even  beyond  this  point,  in  the
two  directions  of  the  past  and  the  future,  the  course  of  things
will  remain  unchanged  for  an  indefinite  period.  But  to  more
than  this  assurance  we  cannot  attain.  So  long  as  our  object
is  to  investigate  and  determine  what  surrounds  us  during  the
short  span  of  our  existence,  we  do  well  to  shun  the  distracting
effect  cii'  an  outlook  into  the.  endless  distance  of  the  ages  oi
the  world  ;  for  what  may  be  contained  in  them  has  unques
tionably  no  immediate  influence  on  that  precious  span  of  time
within  \\hirh  lies  \vhat  must  lie  our  prime  concern — the

456  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

conditions  and  ends  of  our  action.  To  be  always  trying  to
reach  the  deepest  mysteries,  when  the  ends  of  investigation
require  us  to  keep  steadily  within  the  limited  range  of  given
facts,  would  only  be  to  clog  science  with  a  sense  of  romance.
When,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  conscious  of  a  longing  for
a  wide  survey,  for  some  certainty  as  to  hopes  and  anticipations
that  stretch  into  the  infinite,  then  we  must  remember  that
here  the  romantic  may  easily  prove  to  be  true,  and  that
reality  on  a  large  scale  is  poetry,  prose  nothing  but  the
arbitrary  and  confined  view  of  tilings  afforded  by  a  low  and
narrow  point  of  observation.  Along  with  the  extent  of
survey  sought,  the  small  standard  of  our  measurement  must
increase,  and  we  must  take  home  to  ourselves  the  conviction
that  this  known  world,  with  the  apparent  indestructibility  of
its  forces  and  its  fabric,  is  to  us  indeed  a  boundless  ocean  of
permanence,  in  which  our  existence  is  lost,  like  a  single
drop,  but  is  after  all  in  itself  only  a  fleeting  expression
of  an  infinitely  deeper  meaning.  Absolute  and  perpetual
validity  belongs  only  to  this  meaning  of  the  universe  and  to
those  most  general  laws,  as  yet  referred  to  no  definite  actual
object,  without  whose  sway  no  conceivable  actual  frame  of
things  would  present  consistency  of  any  kind ;  all  the  derived
laws  arising  from  the  application  of  these  supreme  canons  to
the  nature  of  the  created  are,  on  the  contrary,  variable  by
their  very  notion.  They  will  pass  away  with  this  creation,
"but  so  long  as  this  creation  abides  they  will  assuredly  form
the  incontrovertible  and  safe  means  of  attaining  to  a  knowledge
of  it.

§  4.  Let  us,  then,  look  on  these  speculations  as  an  orna
mental  frame  to  the  picture  of  Nature  presented  by  the  present
actual  world,  whose  peculiar  living  lines  we  have  henceforth
not  to  deduce  from  the  barren  notion  of  the  unity  of  the
Supreme  Cause  of  the  world,  but  to  derive  either  from  a
knowledge  of  what  that  Cause  is,  or  from  experience.  It  is
not  our  intention  to  enter  here  on  the  first  of  these  paths ;
we  are  not  encouraged  to  do  so  by  the  result  of  the  attempts
of  others.  We  have  already  remarked  how  little  we  can,

THE  UNITY  OF  NATUKE.  457

from  what  we  may  justly  look  on  as  the  true  and  absolute
content  of  the  Supreme  Cause,  argue  the  indispensableness  of
the  particular  natural  forms  by  which  we  are  surrounded.
This  has,  in  fact,  never  properly  been  attempted;  on  the
contrary,  while,  on  the  one  hand,  thinkers  have,  from  an  Idea
supposed  to  reign  over  the  world,  unfolded  in  large  but  as
yet  vague  outline  the  main  tasks  which  it  devolves  on  the
actual  world  somehow  to  accomplish,  on  the  other,  they  have
betaken  themselves  to  experience,  and  tried  to  ascertain  which
among  observable  phenomena  may  veritably  be  regarded  as
an  accomplishment  of  those  tasks,  as  an  embodiment  of  the
faint  outline  of  the  Idea.  From  this  half  and  half  procedure
lias  arisen  the  view  of  Nature  at  present  much  in  vogue,  that
there  is  a  constantly  creative  Unconditioned,  whose  striving
after  expansion,  directed  towards  the  greatest  possible  develop
ment  and  improvement  of  intelligent  life,  takes  shape  in  u
graduated  scries  of  forms  approximating  more  and  more
towards  perfection.  Xot  to  speak  of  the  realm  of  lifeless
matter,  which  on  this  view  forms  the  containing  frame  of
coming  life,  and  of  vegetable  existence,  which  forms  the
immediate  anticipatory  prologue  of  it,  the  animal  kingdom
most  clearly  exhibits  the  gradual  advance  from  merely  acting
existence  to  the  consciousness  of  acting,  from  blind  execution
to  the  reflective  freedom  of  purposive  action,  nor  this  only  in
the  fashion  of  the  life,  but  also  in  the  growing  significance
and  beauty  of  the  bodily  type.  At  the  end  of  this  series  we
meet  with  man's  form  instinct  with  soul,  the  most  complete
and  harmonious  blending  of  particular  characteristic  features
already  presented  by  the  lower  races,  though  in  less  happy
combinations.

]>efore  following  out  this  thought,  and  with  it  as  a  clue
seeking  to  assign  to  man  the  place  that  rightfully  is  his  in
this  realm  of  Nature,  we  would  fain  attend  to  some  objections
that  may  be  brought  against  the  general  tone  of  this  view.

Let  us  suppose  that  philosophic  speculation  has  first  of  all,
in  a  general  science  of  Metaphysics,  explored  the  depths  of
the  Supreme  Cause  of  the  universe,  and  thought  out  the

458  1JOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

hitherto  formless  thoughts  that  thronged  through  the  divine
phantasy  before  the  world  was,  and  let  us  further  suppose  that
with  these  results  of  its  reflections  it  applies  itself  -to  the  study
of  Nature,  in  order  to  find  in  it  the  embodiment  of  those
creative  Ideas  ;  in  doing  this  we  must,  above  all,  remember  the
nature  of  the  all-embracing  Cause  may  perhaps  be  divined  from
the  smallest  part  which  it  embraces,  while  of  the  great  world
of  phenomena  only  a  small  section  is  open  to  us  to  know.  In
the  force  of  gravitation  and  the  motions  of  light  no  doubt
our  observation  of  Nature  finds  objects  that  bring  all  parts  of
the  world  into  mutual  connection ;  but  in  the  sphere  of  life
and  its  orders  we  have  but  a  limited  example  of  the  develop
ment  of  the  Supreme,  of  the  forms  assumed  by  the  tasks
which  it  undertakes  on  the  surface  of  this  one  planet  and
within  the  space  of  time  embraced  by  our  observation.  We
must  here  leave  it  wholly  undetermined  what  forms  of  life —
doubtless  different  from  those  of  the  earth — may  occupy
the  other  worlds  of  the  universe ;  but  if  we  renounce  the
vain  attempt  to  form  imaginative  pictures  of  a  type  of  exist
ence  having  to  fulfil  the  general  functions  of  life  under  totally
different  external  conditions,  we  must  at  least  keep  hold  of
the  thought  that  a  boundless  expanse  of  such  different  exist
ence  spreads  around  us,  and  that  the  whole  organic  Nature
with  which  we  are  acquainted  is  but  one  of  countless  forms
in  which  the  creative  Ideas  of  the  Supreme  Cause  are  mani
fested  and  embodied.  To  the  unsophisticated  human  mind
this  thought  is  familiar  enough ;  it  is  only  philosophically
developed  science  that  professes  to  believe  that  the  creative
Cause  of  the  universe  issued  from  its  darkness  into  the  light
of  manifestation  only  by  the  narrow  path  of  earthly  Nature,
and,  after  having  formed  man  and  human  life,  again  retreated
into  its  native  infinity,  as  if  with  all  its  ends  accomplished.
For  this  dialectical  idyll  we  must  substitute  an  outlook  into
the  boundlessness  of  other  worlds,  not  with  the  vain  effort  to
know  the  unknowable,  but  with  the  view  of  letting  the  bound
lessness  of  this  background  mark  out  for  the  realm  of  existence
knowable  by  us  its  own  narrow  limits.

THE  UNITY  OF  NATURE.  459

§5.  If  we  now  confine  ourselves  to  this  terrestrial  Nature,
how  are  we  to  interpret  the  ascending  scale  of  its  products  ?
If  a  progressive  effort  at  development,  directed  towards  the
highest  evolution  of  intelligent  life,  produced  the  lower
animals  merely  as  transitional  stages,  why  do  they  continue  to
exist  (  Why  are  they  not  thrown  away  like  a  piece  of  prentice
work,  from  which  the  fully  accomplished  craftsman  subsequently
turns  away  with  indifference  ?  We  shall  perhaps  be  told  in
reply,  that  the  lower  and  the  rudimentary  must  subsist  along
side  of  the  higher,  because  only  in  such  a  simultaneous
assemblage  of  all  stages  passed  through  does  the  creative
intelligence  find  a  full  and  faithful  reflection  of  its  whole-
being  in  the  world  of  phenomena.  But  the  same  require
ment  would  hold  good  also  of  the  periods  of  history,  and  yet
the  different  ages  do  not  coexist,  but  the  civilisation  of  th«
earlier  remains  just  long  enough  to  be  embodied  by  means  of
an  imperfect  transference  in  the  stock  of  culture  of  the  later.
So  perhaps  we  are  altogether  in  error  in  this  supposition ;
perhaps  the  lower  organisms  are  not  mere  trial  specimens,
mere  incidental  products  thrown  off  by  the  creative  intelli
gence  on  its  rapid  advance  towards  the  highest  stage,  man,
hut  have  each  their  own  irreplaceable  significance.  There
were  as  many  inducements  to  the  creative  intelligence  to
form  beings  as  there  were  different  positions  of  things,  peculiar
combinations  of  circumstances,  and  special  seats  of  habitation
and  activity  upon  the  earth's  surface,  with  its  mountains  and
valleys,  with  its  atmosphere,  its  fluid  and  solid  beings,  of
which  each  one  should,  by  its  peculiar  organization,-  be  rendered
capable  of  accommodating  itself  to  one  of  these  situations,  of
adjusting  itself  to  it  as  the  horizon  of  its  life,  of  entering  into
all  the  stimuli  to  sensation  and  individual  activity  afforded
by  it,  and  of  turning  all  this  to  account  in  a  perfectly  charac
teristic  existence  of  enjoyment  and  fancy.  The  aim  of  tin-
organizing  Idea  would  then  be  to  give  shape  to  a  variety  of
types  of  life,  such  as  should  leave  no  element  unenjoyed  and
unused  ;  and  no  one  of  these  types  would  be  capable  of  taking
the  place  of  any  other,  for  a  narrow  range  of  view  yields  a

4GU  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

different  and  more  intense  satisfaction  to  the  creature  whose
all  it  is,  than  to  one  of  higher  constitution,  whose  attention  is
but  transitorily  attracted  to  it.

Thus  we  find  at  first  sight  no  occasion  to  assume  in  the
scale  of  being  anything  else  than  an  infinite  variety  of
constitutions,  each  appropriately  organized  for  the  scene  and
the  tasks  of  its  life.  But  observation  so  distinctly  shows  us
a  small  number  of  types  of  outward  form  adhered  to  steadily
throughout,  that  scientific  imagination  could  not  help  seeking
a  cause  for  this  uniformity.  It  was  believed  such  would
easily  be  found  ;  for,  however  different  might  be  the  individual
ends  pursued  by  Nature  in  her  individual  creations,  it  yet
seemed  that  Nature  working  as  One  must  in  all  the
motley  variety  of  her  production  adhere  to  a  uniform  type
of  procedure,  and  keep  to  it  while  bringing  forth  her  most
varied  forms.  An  attempt  might  then  be  made  to  specify
the  thought  on  the  expression  of  which  in  this  uniform
procedure  Nature  sets  so  high  a  value  as  to  make  all
differences  in  her  creations  but  variations  of  this  theme.
Experience,  indeed,  showed  that  it  was  going  too  far  to
speak  of  Nature  having  carried  a  single  type  through
the  whole  series  of  the  animal  kingdom.  Unquestionably
different,  though  not  indeed  numerous,  fundamental  types
result  from  a  comparison  of  the  different  classes.  But  this
only  added  to  the  interest  of  the  attempt  here  to  be  made ;
the  object  now  was  to  interpret  even  the  plainly  different
types  of  life  as  different  outward  expressions,  each  surpassing
the  other  in  value,  of  the  essential,  fundamental  Idea.  But
results,  it  appears  to  me,  yielded  scanty  justification  of  the
excusable  boldness  of  the  undertaking.

Examination  of  the  main  outlines  of  animal  forms  showed
that  one  radiates  symmetrically  from  a  centre,  that  another
shows  an  axis  from  the  sides  of  which  grow  limbs  either
equally  in  all  directions,  or  differing  but  corresponding  on
opposite  sides,  and  that  again  others  present  these  relations
multiplied,  the  extremities  of  the  axis  being  developed  into  poles
of  varying  form  and  meaning.  For  a  long  time  these  purely

THE  UNITY  OF  NATURE.  4G1

formal  relations  served  for  edification  and  for  the  foundation
of  a  belief  that  in  the  contrast  of  the  general  notions  of  centre
and  periphery,  parallelism  and  polarity,  unity  and  repeated
division,  were  contained  the  mystically  significant  types  which
it  was  the  aim  of  shaping  Nature  to  stamp  ever  afresh  on
organic  forms.  But  soon  we  shall  have  to  acknowledge  that
these  notions  have  too  little  deep  meaning  to  allow  us  to  look
on  the  embodiment  of  them  as  a  work  for  shaping  Xature ;
on  the  contrary,  they  are  relations  so  general  and  almost
universal,  that  a  force  about  to  produce  a  composite  form  could
not  help  quite  unintentionally  adopting  one  of  these  types.
For,  in  fact,  if  Xature  would  not  form  a  perfectly  uniform
sphere,  but  marked  out  a  single  point  by  a  special  function
and  form,  how  could  she  prevent  there  seeming  to  be  con
tained  in  the  resulting  figure  the  thought  of  a  relation
between  centre  and  periphery  ?  And,  if  she  started  i'nmi
the  globular  form,  into  what  could  she  have  expanded  her
forms  without  the  assertion  being  plausible,  that  she  had
intended  either  a  parallel  or  a  radiatory  arrangement,  a
division  by  one  axis  or  by  several  axes  ?  And  again,  if  she
made  the  extremities  of  an  axis  different,  must  she  not  have
seemed  to  be  thinking  of  polarity — as,  if  she  formed  any
limited  whole,  must  she  not  have  apparently  aimed  at  an
exhibition  of  the  truth,  that  everything  within  finite  limits
has  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end  ?

By  these  remarks  1  in  no  wise  mean  to  dispute  the
significance  of  the  proportions  of  form  often  so  tenaciously
adhered  to  by  Xature  ;  I  merely  deny  that  the  production  of
these  purely  geometrical  forms  was  the  ideal  which  Xature
sought  to  realize.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  organisms
exhibit  these  forms  not  in  a  mere  general  way,  but  through
vitally  active  parts,  and  that  unquestionably  the  external
form  in  which  these  parts  are  combined  receives  its  value  by
reflection  from  their  meaning  and  use,  and  the  important
effects  they  produce  on  the  life  of  the  animal.  To  exhibit
polarity  for  its  own  sake  is  no  rational  principle  on  which  to
construct  a  form  ;  on  the  other  hand,  to  place  in  external

462  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

contrast  two  parts  whose  function  with  respect  to  the  whole
essentially  involves  contrast,  would  well  beseem  a  Xature
intent  throughout  on  expressive  beauty  in  its  organisms.
Let  us  therefore  no  longer  seek  the  archetype  of  living  shapes
in  such  spatial  forms  empty  in  themselves,  but  rather  seek
in  the  content  of  that  which  has  to  take  shape  in  space  the
cause  of  the  prevalence  of  typical  habits  of  formation.

Life  on  the  surface  of  the  globe  is  confined  to  certain
substances ;  the  bodies  of  all  animals  and  plants  are  framed
from  the  carbonic  acid  and  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere,
and  from  a  few  soluble  salts  of  the  soil.  But  even  the
combinations  of  these  elements  forming  the  immediate  con
stituents  of  the  structure  of  organic  bodies  are  surprisingly
uniform  throughout  the  realm  of  life ;  everywhere  cellulose,
chitin,  and  albumen  occur  almost  exclusively  as  the  materials
of  tissue.  Perhaps  under  the  conditions  given  on  the  surface
of  our  planet,  among  all  possible  conbinations  of  those
elements  only  these  few  possessed  all  the  requisite  properties
for  serving  as  the  constituents  of  variable,  susceptible,  living
forms ;  but,  be  that  as  it  may,  the  fact  remains  of  this  uni
formity  in  the  chemical  type  of  composition,  as  far  as  living
beings  are  concerned,  and  must  have  had  the  most  momentous
effects  on  their  further  development.  For,  first  of  all,  this
chemical  nature  of  the  constituents  of  bodies,  the  necessity
for  all  animals  to  draw7  repair  for  waste  and  the  means  of
growth  from  analogous  sources,  and  to  bring  them  by  like
processes  of  chemical  elaboration  to  similar  states  of  composi
tion — further,  the  variability  of  the  completed  tissues,  which
on  account  of  their  uniform  chemical  formation  are  every
where  also  disposed  to  analogous  decomposition  —  finally,
many  other  hence  derived  similar  needs  must  determine  in
all  animals  an  essentially  harmonious  number  of  processes
and  of  corresponding  organs.  Thus  from  the  chemical
springs  a  second,  the  economic,  type  of  the  animal  kingdom
maintained  with  extraordinary  uniformity  throughout  its
more  highly  developed  orders.  Everywhere  here  we  meet,
besides  the  proper  digestive  organs,  special  channels  of

THE  UNITY  OF  XATU11E.  403

respiration,  of  the  formation  of  gall  and  urine,  of  the  circula
tion of fluids, and  only  in the  lowest  orders  of animals,
the  minuteness  of  whose  bodies  it  is  chiefly  that  makes  this
division  of  labour  among  a  variety  of  organs  less  requisite,
do  we  find  this  complicated  formation  replaced  by  a  simpler
one. Now  with this varied machinery  —  which  does not
even  serve  the  proper  ends  of  life,  but  only  that  of  bringing
together  means  by  which  they  can  be  attained — is  the  animal
organism  weighted  ;  what  it  primarily  needs  and  seeks  to  form,
the  instruments  of  sense-perception  and  locomotion,  it  has  to
arrange  and  build  up  round  this  inevitable  nucleus  of  internal
structure  ;  and  it  must  be  careful  to  combine  the  maximum
and  specific  utility  of  these  instruments  with  the  imperative
requirements  of  that  durable  internal  structure. Now  there
may,  on  the  whole,  be  many  types  of  form  that  fulfil  these
requirements ;  namely,  when  Nature can  meet the peculiar
total  craving  of  any  particular  species  by  a  new  and inde
pendent mode  of  formation  and  new  materials  selected  for
it. liut  it  is  compelled  to  make  every  animal  body  out  of
substances  differing  in  their  chemical  composition  not  incom-
mensurably,  but  only  moderately. Now  as  in  each  substance
ies  chemical  nature  determines  the  type  of  its  future  form,  the
number  of  possible  shapes  allowed  by  the  uniformity  of  the
chemical type  of  the animal kingdom  cannot  be unlimited.
On  the  contrary,  the  combination  of  all  the conditions here
referred to yields  the  result,  that  only  a  limited number of
types  are  left  to  serve  as  permanent  patterns,  and  that  every
peculiarity  of  formation  required  in  any  species  by  the  end  of
its  existence is  realized not directly, but by transforming
or  giving  a  special  stamp  to  some  part  of  the  form  already
contained in the  general  type  as  a  serviceable potentiality.
Thus  the  morphological  type  of  an  order  of  animals  is  the  last
to  appear;  not  as  the  ideal  form  held  up  from  the  first  to  be
realized for  the  sake  of  its  own  significance,  but  as  the  only
remaining mechanically  possible mode of  configuration,  in
which  alone,  under the conditions  obtaining  on the  earth's
surface,  a  great  variety  of  types  of life  is compatible  with

4C4  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  III.

the exceedingly limited and uniform choice of  means at
disposal  for  its  establishment.

With  these  remarks  we  return  to  our  last  starting-point.
The  phenomenal  world  which  we  can  observe,  with  all  the
peculiarity  of  its  types,  could  not,  it  appeared  to  us,  be
immediately  derived  from  the  strivings  after  development  of
the  Supreme  Cause  of  the  universe  ;  we  took  it  to  be  but  one
specimen  along  with  others,  and  sought  for  the  cause  of  the
unique  manner  in  which  it  (different  in  this  from  other  orders
of  things  that  we  conjure  up  only  in  fancy)  after  its  own
fashion  embodies  the  universal  ideas  of  that  Cause.  This
cause  we  find  in  the  character  of  terrestrial  Nature.  It  is  the
unique  character  of  this  planet  that  is  revealed  in  its  living
forms  ;  its  selection  of  substances,  its  relations  of  heat,  its
atmosphere,  all  in  its  physical  and  meteorological  conditions
that  distinguishes  it  from  other  heavenly  bodies,  all  meets  us
here  as  a  series  of  obstacles  and  helps,  generally  speaking  of
form-determining  conditions,  and  in  great  part  gives  rise  to  the
peculiar  relations  between  its  creatures,  which  we  look  on
wrongly  as  an  immediate  consequence  of  the  highest  Ideas.,
rightly  as  only  the  form  in  which  the  commands  of  these  Idea.?
can  be  carried  out  on  earth.

CHAPTER IV.

MAX  AND  BRUTE.

The  Tirades  of  Animals  and  their  Significance—  Structure  and  Life  —  Bodily  Size
—Bodily  Strength—  Length  of  Life—  Requirements  as  to  Food—  Capacities
of  Acclimatization  —  Erect  Form  —  Its  Causes  and  Results—  Symbolism  and
Beauty  of  Form.

§  1.  "VTTE  were  led  into  our  last  discussion  by  our
*  T  purpose  to  fix  the  true  place  of  man  in  the
scale  of  living  beings.  Its  course,  however,  seems  to  have
dissolved  the  very  aim  which  wo,  set  out  to  pursue  ;  a  free
variety  of  forms  has  taken  the  place  of  a  connected  scale  in
which  every  being  found  its  position  low  or  high,  each  called
only  to  its  own  enjoyment  and  determined  in  its  type  by
respect  to  the  general  terrestrial  economy,  none  being  found  to
adapt  itself  to  any  order  of  succession,  and  to  allow  the  amount
of  its  worth  and  importance  to  be  measured  by  its  place  therein.
In  fact,  we  stop  short  at  this  point,  and  wholly  deny  that  the
establishment  of  this  scale  is  in  and  by  itself  an  end  of
Nature,  or  that  it  is  possible  from  the  position  in  it  belonging
to  each  several  creature  to  understand  its  peculiar  nature
better  and  more  thoroughly  than  through  an  unbiassed  and
direct  examination  of  its  outward  appearance,  the  form  and
capabilities  of  its  body,  and  all  the  details  of  its  situation  and
particular  manner  of  life.  In  regard  to  man  himself  we  .shall
arrive  at  no  other  conclusion,  and,  while  even  to  us  it  was  of
interest  to  throw  light  on  his  place  in  Nature,  we  seek  the
significance  of  that  position  not  in  the  round  of  the  ladder  on
which  he  stands,  but  in  the  peculiar  character  and  the  advantages
and  disadvantages  of  the  environment  with  which  his  organism
is  designed  to  enter  into  relations  of  reciprocal  action.

Here,  too,  we  are  at  variance  with  a  widespread  habit  of
VOL.  i.  "2  c;

466  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

thought.  The  philosophic  tendency  to  derive  the  necessity  of
the  several  living  beings  from  the  content  of  the  thought  of  the
Supreme  Cause,  of  which  in  its  totality  they  are  supposed  to
serve  as  a  manifestation  and  counterpart,  has  led  to  a  decided
preference  for  the  world  of  forms  over  that  of  events.  It
seemed  that  full  insight  into  Nature  would  be  gained,  if  only
it  should  prove  possible  to  arrange  in  a  series  the  fixed  types
of  its  various  creatures  ;  little  importance  was  attached  to  the
life  itself  developed  in  each  several  member  of  the  series.
And  yet  assuredly  Nature  is  no  such  motionless  passively
ordered  system  of  typical  forms;  it  is  rather  an  infinite,
living,  noisy  tumult,  in  which  numberless  specimens  of  these
forms  enjoy  their  existence,  help  and  hinder  one  another,
sport  and  struggle  together,  destroy  each  other,  and  in  all  this
display  an  endless,  charming  variety  of  characteristic  traits
and  moods.  While  the  natural  history  of  former  times  was
never  weary  of  noting  all  the  minute  touches  of  this  fairy-
like  brilliant  picture,  the  speculative  tendency  to  assign  to  all
creatures  that  place  which  they  occupy  in  the  development
of  the  Infinite  lias  taken  away  from  the  vividness  of  this
remembrance  of  this  only  true  life  of  Nature.  In  these  efforts
.at  systematization  we  see  indeed  the  couples  in  their  places
for  the  dance,  but  we  never  get  to  the  dance  itself;  they  seem
to  have  done  all  that  is  incumbent  on  them  when  they  stand
arranged  in  solemn  stillness.

If  there  is  any  philosophic  prejudice  that  we  would  fain
see  slain,  it  is  unquestionably  this  misapprehension  of  the  true
place  in  which  the  worth  of  things  is  to  be  sought,  this
idolatry  of  lifeless  forms,  of  universal  ideals,  of  significant
types,  this  perpetual  occupation  with  the  means  prepared  for
vital  use,  without  ever  getting  beyond  resultless  trifling  to  the
real  resolute  using  of  them.  NOT  is  it  only  in  the  sphere  of
natural  conceptions  that  this  tendency  spoils  our  enjoyment
of  the  great  picture  set  up  before  us ;  its  inj  urious  effects  are
apparent  also  in  the  treatment  of  historical  facts.  Vainly  for
any  ingenuous  mind  does  it  cover  itself  with  the  disguise  of
profound  thoroughness ;  the  oft-repeated  assertion  that  it  is

MAX  AND  BRUTE.  407

impossible  to  know  man  perfectly  without  having  examined
all  the  lower  members  of  the  animal  series,  at  the  head  of
which  it  is  his  proper  attribute  to  stand,  is  but  a  caricature  of
profundity.  What  pedantry,  to  suppose  that  he  alone  under
stands  man  who  has  first  learned  to  understand  the  infusorium,
the  insect,  the  frog  !  What  audacity  to  say  this  in  the  presence
of  thousands  of  years  of  human  history,  during  whose  long
course  all  the  significance  of  human  life  has  doubtless  been
felt  over  and  over  again  in  the  most  passionate  conflict !  And
yet  the  heroes  who  marched  to  battle  were  not  aware  of  their
being  the  captains  of  the  mammals ;  and  the  deep  thinkers
whose  discoveries  opened  up  new  paths  of  progress,  were  not
led  thereto  by  reflections  on  the  width  of  the  interval  that  in
the  animal  series  separates  man  from  any  reptile.  Know
ledge  of  man  moans  above  all  knowledge  of  his  destiny,  of
the  means  given  him  wherewith  to  fulfil  it,  and  of  the
hindrances  which  he  has  to  encounter ;  if  beyond  this  there
is  a  certain  interest  in  comparing  him  and  his  life  with  the
creatures  that  around  him  go  their  own  ways,  this  is  an
inquiry  of  too  trifling  value  and  influence  to  be  made  the
foundation  of  the  other  and  more  important  one.

vj  2.  After  all  this,  it  cannot  be  our  intention  to  enter  on
the  consideration  of  what  man  essentially  is  by  the  lonij
circuit  of  a  biological  review  of  the  animal  series ;  we  shall
devote  but  a  few  words  to  his  relation  to  it,  and  that  in  a
sense  different  from  the  ordinary  one.  For  although  we  can
not  look  on  the  establishment  of  a  graduated  animal  series  as
the  design  of  Nature,  yet  the  variety  of  the  actual  forms,
whether  we  take  account  of  the  greater  or  less  complexity  of
their  shape  and  articulation,  or  the  dignity  and  scope  of
their  destiny,  cannot  but  be  differently  estimated.  Unsought
and  unthought  of,  in  this  comparison  the  image  of  an  ascend
ing  scale  will  rrcur,  or  perhaps  the  images  of  different  orders  ;
for  it  will  depend  on  the  standard  which  we  apply,  on  the
interest  which  we  bring  to  the  comparison,  whether  the  same
animals  appear  with  one  or  another  measure  of  perfection.
Physiologists,  who  delight  in  observing  the  harmonious

468  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

symphony  of  a  number  of  different  interacting  functions,  and
morphologists,  whose  desire  it  must  be  to  ascertain  the  full
extent  of  the  pliability  and  variability  of  a  simple  form-type,
will  consider  an  animal  to  be  the  more  perfect  the  greater  is
the  manifoldness  of  its  co-operating  parts,  the  more  distinctly
the  several  functions  are  distributed  among  special  organs,
further,  the  more  complexly  and  the  more  diversely  developed
the  outlines  of  form  of  a  general  type  appear  in  it.  To  those,
on  the  other  hand,  who  measure  the  value  of  the  animal  only
by  the  sum  of  enjoyment  within  its  reach  and  the  amount  of
work  it  can  perform,  this  variety  and  complexity  will  in
themselves  be  without  interest ;  they  would  esteem  the
simplest,  most  compendious  and  most  homogeneous  formation,
if  only  its  apparently  inadequate  means  sufficed  for  the  attain
ment  of  those  ends,  as  the  more  perfect,  and  would  mainly
agree  with  those  who  hold  the  other  views  already  referred  to
only  because  they  assume  that  a  larger  supply  of  organic
means,  means  also  higher  ends  in  life.

We  find  this  assumption  confirmed  when  we  weigh  the
advantages  of  the  type  of  organization  shared  by  man  with
the  vertebrate  animals,  from  whose  highest  class,  the  mammals,
he  is  divided  by  no  more  decided  difference  than  occurs
between  their  various  genera.  Out  of  soft  masses,  whose
outline  is  supported  by  neither  an  external  nor  an  internal
solid  framework,  Nature  could  form  only  animals  that  were  to
live  either  in  the  element  of  water,  everywhere  yielding  and
everywhere  equally  pressing  and  supporting,  or  on  land  under
unvarying  external  conditions,  with  capacities  for  neither  very
energetic  nor  very  varied  movements.  So  at  least  we  fancy
we  can  guess  the  possibilities  at  the  disposal  of  Nature  from
indications  whose  scant  degree  of  certainty  we  must  allow.
For  it  is  easy,  indeed,  to  understand  the  advantages  of  arrange
ments  which  we  see  before  us  in  the  structure  of  animals,  but
we  have  no  warrant  that  the  inventive  power  of  Nature  could
not  have  realized  wondrous  living  forms  which  our  imagina
tion  never  would  have  devised,  even  by  means  of  much  more
limited  utility  in  our  eyes.  Hence  we  can  only  regard  it  as

MAN  AND  BKUTE.  46 9

a  fact  not  improbably  connected  with  the  structure  being
without  a  skeleton,  that  on  land  none  of  these  animals  attain
any  considerable  size ;  only  in  the  ocean  do  we  find  apparently
as  unprotected  forms  developed  to  larger  dimensions,  mainly
because  here  with  a  comparatively  small  body  they  exercise
control  over  a  considerable  extent  of  the  fluid  element  by
means  of  numerous  widely  extending  limbs  capable  of  the
most  varied  changes  of  form,  and  in  consequence  of  the
tenacity  of  their  contractile  substance  are  able  to  exercise  no
small  amount  of  activity.

An  external  horny  or  calcareous  case  has  given  to  other
orders  of  animals  a  firmly-fixed  bodily  form.  But  the  kingdom
of  the  insects  and  of  kindred  groups  formed  on  the  same  type
presents  in  contrast  to  the  vertebrates  but  a  miniature  world,
bodies  partly  of  exceeding  minuteness,  in  which  nevertheless
a  remarkably  lively  psychic  life  goes  on.  For  it  is  chiefly  in
these  orders  that  animal  instinct  rises  to  that  admirable  per
fection  which  not  only  makes  use  of  the  matter  of  the  outer
world  directly  for  the  preservation  of  life,  but  with  provident
wisdom  applies  it  also  to  future  needs.  Now  the  mechanical
possibilities  of  an  external  skeleton  of  large  dimensions  would
not  have  been  compatible  with  such  intense  activity  of
psychic  life.  Such  a  coat  could  only  serve  as  a  defence  either
against  petty  impressions  acting  slowly  and  with  little  force,
or  fur  small  bodies  whose  fall  would  be  sufficiently  broken
by  atmospheric  resistance,  and  whose  mass  is  not  of  sufficient
weight  to  push  with  great  force  against  their  containing  case,
on  occasion  of  sudden  obstructions  of  motion.  As  soon  as  the
outer  skeleton  exceeded  modest  dimensions,  the  requisite
solidity  of  its  parts  among  themselves,  the  formation  of  larger
rigid  pieces  which  is  inseparable  from  that  solidity  and  the
weight  of  these  masses,  could  not  but  be  in  perpetual  conflict
with  the  ease  and  nimbleiiess  of  the  intended  movements  ;
these  disadvantages  being  actually  found  even  among  the
vertebrata,  in  turtles  and  crocodiles,  so  soon  as  these  encased
monsters  leave  the  watery  element.  On  the.  other  hand,  tho
plan  of  an  internal  skeleton  presents  great  advantages.  A

470  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

firm  axis  going  through  the  interior  of  a  soft  body  contains
along  with  an  equal  guarantee  for  continuity  of  form  much
less  bulk  than  a  shell  covering  the  surface  ;  further,  when
this  axis  is  divided  into  separate  parts  jointed  together,  the
contiguous  surfaces  of  each  joint  present  a  much  smaller
extent  than  would  be  contained  in  the  long  line  of  hinge
running  between  two  plates  of  the  external  skeleton,  which
would  be  required  in  order  to  render  a  movement  of  equal
range  practicable.  It  is  easy  to  see  what  a  saving  in  weight
and  resistance  is  here  effected  on  behalf  of  the  motive  force.

This,  then,  is  the  first  advantage  won  by  the  vertebrate
animals,  and  along  with  them  by  man,  from  this  general
type — the  possibility  of  a  body  of  considerable  bulk.  It
would  be  a  mistake  to  think  little  of  this,  and  to  look  on  the
standard  of  absolute  size  of  any  creature  as  a  matter  of
indifference.  Human  culture  is  impossible  without  a  certain
amount  of  physical  capability,  and  a  lower  degree  of  bodily
strength  would  result  not  in  a  daintier  miniature  repetition  of
human  life,  but  in  no  human  life  whatever.  No  doubt  many
insects  can  carry  greater  weights  than  we  in  proportion  to
their  size  ;  no  doubt  we  perform  still  more  by  the  ingenious
use  of  machinery  than  by  our  own  bodily  strength ;  still  the
latter  must  be  sufficient  for  the  manipulation  of  instruments
such  as  can  usefully  act  on  the  objects  of  our  environment.
We  must  have,  then,  the  amount  of  strength  requisite  to  con
struct  machines,  and  having  constructed  to  make  use  of  them,
and  it  is  undoubtedly  a  fixed  quantity,  not  admitting  of
arbitrary  diminution.  However  marvellous  a  labourer  in  the
soil  the  ant  may  be,  it  never  can  carry  on  agriculture  and
mining  operations.  The  roots  of  plants  reach  down  to  a
certain  absolute  depth,  the  ground  must  therefore  be  turned
up  to  this  depth  ;  this  presupposes  that  masses  of  earth  of  u
certain  size  can  be  raised  to  a  certain  height  in  a  certain
time — an  operation  that  can  be  performed  only  by  the  use  of
solid  and  strong  tools,  consequently  only  through  the  possession
of  strength  such  as  can  shape  or  handle  stone  or  iron.  But
the  cohesion  of  metals  is  a  fixed  quantity,  and  the  smaller

MAN  AND  BKUTE.  471

pieces  on  which  the  ant  would  try  its  strength  are  not  inferior
in  solidity  to  the  larger,  so  as  to  bring  their  separation  and
elaboration  within  the  reach  of  a  less  degree  of  strength.  All
industry  and  manufacture  in  the  end  depend  on  this  stock-
capital  of  a  certain  amount  of  bodily  strength,  and  a  pigmy
people,  however  many-sided  might  be  its  activity,  would  never
attain  to  that  height  of  human  civilisation  which  is  derived
from  the  power  of  moving  masses  easily,  and  which  thence
has  been  able  to  rise  to  the  survey  of  the  whole  extent  of  the
earth,  to  the  indirect  overcoming,  not  of  every  amount,  but  of
nearly  every  kind  of  difficulty,  finally,  to  the  utilization
according  to  pleasure  of  almost  all  kinds  of  matter,  however
apparently  inaccessible.

To  this  we  have  to  add  a  second  and  not  less  noteworthy
advantage.  The  limited  duration  of  life  not  only  in  skeleton-
less,  but  in  all  invertebrate  animals  is  a  fact  of  experience,
which  is  not  fully  accounted  for  on  physiological  grounds  ;
at  the  same  time  the  short  span  of  their  existence  is  frequently
occupied  with  a  remarkable  variety  of  metamorphoses  in  theii-
shape  and  mode  of  life.  Loth  characteristics  seem  to  be
closely  connected  with  the  small  size  of  the  body  ;  its  power
of  counteracting  external  influences  and  the  mutability  of  its
own  internal  relations  may  be  small,  and  it  may  be  hardly
capable  of  resisting  dissolution  in  a  state  of  rest,  but  only  for
a  time  while  undergoing  perpetual  transformation.  At  the
same  time  these  two  circumstances  are  not  favourable  to  the
development  of  intelligence  ;  they  keep  the  whole  animal  life
confined  within  one  cycle  or  a  few  great  cycles  of  Nature,
and  thereby  necessarily  hinder  the  improvement  that  might
come  from  reflection  on  oft-repeated  experience  ;  the  year  as  it
passes  through  all  phases  of  life  is  not  repeated  in  miniature-
on  behalf  of  the  small  animals,  only  those  which  live  long
have  experience  of  the  regular  recurrence  of  the  spectacles  of
Nature,  liut  further,  the  rapid  development,  the  quick  growth
and  decay,  the  frequency  of  metamorphoses,  all  this  inner
restlessness  cannot  allow  to  the  psychic  life  thut  continuous
conscious  reflective  development  made  possible  for  the  long-

472  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

lived  vertebrate  animal  by  the  slowly  and  regularly  advancing
process  of  his  growth,  the  limited  variety  of  his  external
impressions,  and  the  comparative  similarity  of  his  vital
experiences.

At  first  sight  man  seems  in  none  of  these  respects  to  stand
at  the  head  of  the  animal  series  ;  he  is  surpassed  in  bodily
size  and  strength  by  many  of  his  usual  companions,  the
domestic  animals,  in  longevity  by  the  monsters  of  the  mammal
family,  and  by  many  beings  of  a  lower  order,  in  agility  by  his
parody,  the  ape.  But  closer  examination  shows  the  superior
excellence  of  his  organization.  iSTo  doubt  there  is  a  limit
beyond  which  the  advantages  of  increasing  bodily  bulk  turn
into  disadvantages  for  high  development,  and  are  no  longer
compatible  with  the  favourable  conditions  naturally  secured
to  life  by  the  vertebrate  type.  Were  the  bony  framework  of
a  mammal  enlarged  equally  in  all  its  dimensions,  the  weight
of  the  bones  would  increase  along  with  both  their  length  and
their  thickness,  but  the  power  of  the  likewise  magnified
muscles  by  which  they  are  to  be  moved,  would  not  increase
•with  their  length  but  only  with  their  thickness,  for  this  depends
•solely  on  the  greater  number  of  efficient  fibres  lying  together
in  the  transverse  section  of  a  muscle.  In  order  to  adjust  this
disproportion  between  weight  and  force,  the  muscles  would
have  to  be  made  thicker  in  proportion  than  the  bones,  and
one  can  see  how7  this  at  once  gives  the  image  of  a  bulkier
figure,  in  which  the  spaces  between  the  bony  framework  are
filled  up  with  larger  masses  of  flesh,  or — as  a  compensation
in  the  opposite  way,  by  diminution  of  unfavourable  lever-
relations — the  prolongations  of  the  bones  are  lessened  as
much  as  possible.  These  compact  bodily  forms  can  no  doubt
wield  great  force,  but  only  in  a  comparatively  useless  fashion ;
for  their  want  of  mobility,  or  the  single  direction  in  which
their  movements  are  freely  performed,  prevents  them  from
applying  their  operative  power  at  a  number  of  points  of
attack  in  quick  succession,  and  thereby  turning  it  to  good
account.  We  marvel  at  the  huge  strength  of  the  hippo
potamus  and  the  elephant,  but  in  fact  it  is  fitted  rather  for

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  473

destruction  than  for  labour,  and  we  would  find  it  difficult  to
prove  the  corresponding  advantages  procured  for  the  animals
themselves  in  the  natural  circumstances  of  their  life  by  this
not  readily  applied  capital.  It  is  not  his  stupendous  bulk,
but  the  movable  proboscis  with  which  he  is  endowed,  that
makes  the  elephant  capable  of  the  operations  in  which  he
shows  himself  more  sagacious,  more  educable,  and  mure
powerful  than  the  other  monsters.  So,  then,  versatile  lively
mobility  without  great  strength  is  the  endowment  of  the
smaller  amimals,  preponderant  strength  without  corresponding
agility,  or  applicable  only  to  certain  kinds  of  movement,  that
of  their  colossal  brethren  ;  between  the  two  extremes  man
perhaps  stands  in  a  central  position  that,  because  it  unites
both  in  an  equipoise  of  far-reaching  utility,  may  be  held  to
be  the  true  crown  of  the  animal  series.

It  is  more  doubtful  whether  we  can  say  the  same  of  the
length  of  life.  We  think  ourselves  justified  in  pitying  the
ephemeral  races,  whose  short  lifetime  allows  them  to  see  but
a  small  section  of  the  life  of  Nature  ;  on  the  other  hand,  we
would  not  wish  life  to  be  prolonged  more  than  is  necessary
for  it  to  taste  in  succession  the  sum  of  experiences  from
which  it  can  draw  enjoyment,  and  to  condense  the  thence
extracted  pleasure  into  a  durable,  unfluctuating  temper.
With  this  opinion  we  may  be  disposed  to  think  that  the
longer  span  of  life  of  some  animals  is  no  gain  to  them.
After  they  have  come  to  maturity  their  organization  contains
no  further  means  of  bringing  them  from  year  to  year  into  new
and  interesting  situations,  fitted  to  enhance  the  value  and
beauty  of  their  inner  life  ;  each  revolving  year  brings  with
it  uniformly  the  same  observations.  In  this  respect  also,  then,
perhaps  the  lot  of  man  is  the  happiest.  On  the  one  hand,
we  cannot  stifle  a  feeling  of  regret  that,  while  our  experiences
are  ever  inviting  us  to  endless  progress,  life  is  too  short  to  let
us  exhaust  this  fulness  ;  but,  on  the  other,  the  feeling  forces
itself  on  us,  that,  along  with  this  ever  fresh  variety  of
individual  life,  the  great  experiences  that  excite  in  us  the
profoundest  interest  are  no  less  exhaustible  than  the  great

474  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

and  wide  truths  that  seem  to  be  accessible  to  us.  We  tacitly
acknowledge  that  the  essential  goods  of  this  earthly  existence
lie  very  well  within  the  natural  limits  of  our  lifetime,  and
that  were  it  considerably  prolonged,  the  effect  wrould  be  no
increase,  but  a  gradual  diminution  of  our  happiness.  If,  then,
human  life  even  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances
hardly  ever  extends  through  the  whole  of  a  second  century,
and  if  it  usually  attains  scarcely  the  half  of  this  period,  yet
the  total  effect  of  all  the  advantages  contained  in  our  organiza
tion  produces  within  these  narrow  limits  a  many-sided
development  and  a  variety  of  inner  life  such  as  falls  to  the
lot  of  no  race  of  mortals  save  that  of  man,  who  here,  too,  forms
the  true  head  of  the  line.  He  survives  several  generations  of
his  most  intimate  companions,  the  domestic  animals,  and  sees
the  grandchildren  of  those  which  were  the  contemporaries
and  playmates  of  his  childhood;  those  animals,  on  the  other
hand,  which  survive  himself  and  his  generations,  exist  for  the
most  part  outside  his  immediate  sphere  of  knowledge ;  he
hears  of  them,  but  has  not  before  his  eyes  a  longevity  that
would  more  forcibly  bring  home  to  him  his  own  transitoriness  ;
thus  he  feels  himself  in  the  happy  medium.  Only  in  other
zones  it  may  cause  a  peculiar  feeling  to  see  around  one
perhaps  elephants  that  were  fed  by  one's  fathers  and  will  be
fed  by  one's  grandchildren,  comrades  of  preceding  generations
still  living  on  with  future  ones,  wThile  in  our  native  seats
these  far-reaching  joyous  or  pensive  dreams  of  memory  and
hope  are  associated  only  with  the  silent  forms  of  venerable
trees.

Moreover,  we  are  very  imperfectly  acquainted  with  the
mechanical  causes  that  determine  the  duration  of  life
"Within  the  same  type  of  organization  the  size  of  the  body
has  undoubtedly  a  protracting  influence,  but  an  equally
powerful  influence  is  exercised  by  the  life-plan  of  each  species,
the  total  tendency  of  whicli  WTC  know  not  immediately,  but
only  in  the  characteristic  stamp  of  its  bodily  form.  Great
and  restless  mobility  wears  away  the  organic  mass,  and  the
swiftfooted  races  of  the  animals  of  the  chase,  dogs,  and  even

MAN  AND  BRCIE.  475

apes,  are  inferior  in  length  of  life  to  mankind  and  even  to  the
greater  beasts  of  prey  which  satisfy  their  cravings  by  particular
vigorous  exertions,  without  indulging  in  an  excessive  love  of
motion.  In  like  manner  the  swift,  vigorous,  but  yet  quiet
flight  of  the  eagle  involves  comparatively  less  exertion  than
the  ceaseless  unrest  of  flying  backwards  and  forwards  that
wears  out  the  light  bodies  of  smaller  birds.  On  the  other
hand,  the  lethargic  character  of  the  amphibious  animals  affords
to  even  the  smaller  among  them  a  greater  tenacity  of  life,
and  Nature  seems  to  have  further  helped  in  this  direction
by  giving  cold  blood  to  some  creatures  of  this  class.  For
all  animals  whose  life  is  to  flow  on  in  a  uniform  current  of
activity  not  interrupted  by  periods  of  sluggishness  or  of
hybernation,  it  is  an  indispensable  necessity  that  they  should
not  be  dependent  on  an  even  temperature,  although  this  in
dependence  is  a  source  of  many  internal  disturbances.  Among
these  various  possibilities  the  organization  of  man  presents
the  most  advantageous  ;  a  combination  of  strength  with
many-sided  mobility  ever  ready,  ever  wakeful,  but  never
degenerating  into  aimless  restlessness,  that  never  performs
anything  amazing  at  any  one  time,  but  within  the  span  of  life
has  time  enough  to  blend  its  several  achievements  into  an
important  whole.

Now,  as  in  these  other  respects,  so  also  as  to  the  outside
necessities  of  life,  Nature  has  placed  man  in  a  more  favourable
situation  than  the  other  animals.  It  is  well  known  how
closely  a  great  part  of  the  lowest  animal  orders  are  attached
as  parasites  to  an  exceedingly  confined  scene  of  life  which
alone  offers  suitable  sustenance  and  the  other  necessary
conditions.  The  vertebrata  are  all  set  free  from  this  coarsest
of  bonds  chaining  to  the  earth,  and  yet  many  genera  even  of
the  mammals  are  confined  to  a  limited  habitat,  and  at  the
mercy  of  changing  circumstances  on  account  of  the  particular
kind  of  food  to  which  exclusively  they  are  led  by  their
instinct.  Even  the  last,  widest  limitation  of  this  sort — that
of  being  restricted  either  to  vegetable  or  to  meat  sustenance —
disappears  in  the  human  organization.  Man's  teeth  present

476  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

the  forms  alike  of  the  carnivorous  and  of  the  herbivorous
animals;  the  joint  -  formation  of  his  jaws  permits  equally
of  their  being  vigorously  closed  from  above  downwards,  and
of  their  being  horizontally  rubbed  along  each  other ;  the
length  and  arrangement  of  his  alimentary  canal  equally  suit
the  slower  digestion  of  vegetable  food  and  the  quicker  digestion
of  meat.  Thus  the  range  of  means  of  self-preservation  is  for
man  a  wide  one,  and  on  the  other  hand  he  is  capable  of  being
content  with  a  small  section  out  of  the  wide  circle.  The
indispensable  constituents  of  his  food,  albuminous  bodies,  the
substances  belonging  to  the  group  of  starch  and  sugar,  and
fatty  substances,  occur — not,  indeed,  mixed  everywhere  in
equally  favourable  proportions,  but — no  less  widely  among
plants  than  in  the  animal  world,  and  experience  offers
examples  of  nations  that  drew  their  means  of  nutrition
mainly  or  almost  exclusively  from  one  alone  of  the  two
departments  of  Nature.

But  I  would  add  that  the  human  organization  has  not  evc.rt
to  compensate  for  any  limitation  to  a  smaller  part  of  tho
material  world  at  its  disposal  by  important  modifications  of
its  vital  activity,  although  it  certainly  cannot  neutralize  the
actual  want  of  what  is  necessary.  The  opinions  at  present
most  in  vogue  in  regard  to  this  subject  are  different,  and
people  usually  prefer  as  the  most  direct  way  to  explain  the
peculiar  character  and  amount  of  vital  force,  bodily  and
mental,  by  the  kind  and  quantity  of  nutrition.  The  fact  is,
we  have  very  little  accurate  acquaintance  with  this  branch  of
animal  economy  ;  it  is,  however,  probable  at  least  that  in  the
higher  stages  of  civilised  life  with  which  we  are  familiar  the
amount  of  sustenance  considered  necessary  often  far  exceeds
the  real  need.  The  conservation  of  heat  alone  may  render
necessary  the  consumption  of  considerable  quantities,  and
this  could  be  most  conveniently  met  in  milder  climates  by  a
vegetable  diet,  in  colder  by  the  use  of  animal  fat ;  on  the
other  hand,  the  waste  of  the  body  by  the  exercise  of  function
is  certainly  much  less,  and  hardly  requires  for  its  repair  any
large  consumption  of  the  meat-diet  which  is  unquestionably  more

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  477

appropriate  for  such  repair.  The  superfluity  of  new  matter
introduced  cither  causes  a  useful  increase  of  bodily  strength,
or  else  falls  as  a  burden  on  the  energies  employed  on  the
transformation  of  matter,  and  throws  on  them  the  useless
labour  of  a  second  decomposition.  It  is  unnecessary  to
mention  the  various  diseases  that  evidently  proceed  from  the
latter  circumstance  ;  as  regards  the  former  case,  on  the  other
hand,  the  living  body  has  a  certain  capacity  of  satiety  that
does  not  allow  of  its  turning  to  useful  account  every
excess  of  nutrition  arbitrarily  introduced.  Hence  richer,  more
abundant,  and  better  food  can  contribute  to  the  increase  of
the  bodily  powers  only  in  combination  with  their  constant
exercise  by  which  the  capacity  of  assimilation  is  increased.
Now  the  statements  that  to  this  end  meat-diet  is  a  far  more
effective  means  than  vegetable,  and  that  on  the  choice  between
these  alternatives  depends  with  equal  necessity  the  vigour
of  the  intellectual  operations,  do  not  hold  good  to  the  extent
and  in  the  sense  in  which  both  assertions  are  ol'ten
made.

Looking  first  of  all  at  the  animal  series,  we  find  that  the.
grazing  ox  of  our  herds  shows  no  lack  of  bodily  strength  or
of  courage  or  even  of  pugnacity,  though  he  feeds  in  the  same
pastures  with  the  more  patient  cow  ;  the  mighty  strength  of
bears  and  elephants  is  mainly  sustained  by  vegetable  nutri
ment,  and  the  hyrcna,  on  the  other  hand,  exhibits  neither  great
strength  nor  courage.  Should  the  lion  and  his  kinsmen  be
cited  on  the  other  side,  we  must  recall  that  their  ferocity  is
greatest  when  they  are  hungry,  and  so  without  ilesh  food  ;
their  courage  then  may  at  least  equally  well  be  deemed  a
means  given  them  by  Nature  for  the  supply  of  their  wants  as
a  consequence  of  the  substance  in  which  they  find  that
supply.  As  little  are  nimbleness  and  intelligence  connected
without  exception  with  the  kind  of  food  consumed ;  contrast
the  chamois  and  the  squirrel  with  the  herbivorous  sheep,  the
horse  with  the  carnivorous  dog.  It  is  then  undoubtedly
possible  for  Nature,  even  within  one  tolerably  comprehensive
morphological  type  of  the  mammal  world,  to  produce  all

478  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

possible  degrees  of  physical  strength  and  mental  activity  on
the  most  widely  differing  kinds  of  nutrition.  The  distinctions
must  therefore  have  their  source  in  the  innate  peculiarities  of
the  genera,  and  any  one  who  should  uphold  the  varying  values
of  modes  of  sustenance  as  applied  to  man,  would  have  to  appeal
to  experience,  not  to  doctrinaire  calculations  of  the  nutritive
effect  of  different  substances — estimations,  the  inconclusive-
ness  of  which  is  proved  by  the  facts  which  have  just  been
cited,  and  which  might  easily  be  multiplied.  Those  tables  in
which  the  several  alimentary  compounds  are  arranged,  accord
ing  to  the  amount  of  albumen  or  of  hydro-carbons  contained
in  them,  as  more  or  less  excellent  means  of  repairing  waste
of  bodily  strength  or  heat,  tell  nothing  more  than  that  in  these
substances  there  are  certain  quantities  of  a  material  that  may
be  utilized,  supposing  the  organization  to  which  it  is  offered
knows  how  to  utilize  it.  Evidence  of  this  latter  condition  is
lacking.  Between  two  substances  equally  abounding  in
albumen  there  may  be  slight  differences  in  aggregate  quality,
in  density,  in  composition  with  other  substances,  on  account
of  which  the  one  is  decidedly  inferior  to  the  other  in  actual
capacity  of  being  utilized  for  the  animal  constitution.  Thus
we  know  how  many  cases  occur  in  life  of  a  preference  for
one  kind  of  food  and  an  aversion  (that  may  amount  to  utter
incapability  of  digesting  it)  for  another,  while  in  all  chemical
properties  the  two  are  closely  akin.  A  substance  with  fewer
nutritive  elements  may  on  account  of  accessor}7  circumstances
be  more  nourishing  than  another  which  contains  useful
elements  in  greater  concentration  and  abundance  but  in  less
favourable  forms.

Turning  now  to  experience,  we  find  that  on  the  whole
abundant  food,  especially  animal  food,  without  corresponding
bodily  exercise,  instead  of  adding  to  strength,  brings  only
increased  bodily  weight  and  internal  disturbances  ;  vigorous
exercise  supported  by  a  very  nutritious  meat-diet,  developes
the  greatest  bodily  strength,  but  not  the  permanently  best
health,  for  to  be  accustomed  to  abundant  nutrition  diminishes
the  power  of  doing  without  it ;  the  same  amount  of  exercise

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  479

with  frugal  but  sufficient  sustenance  developcs  (along  with  a
great,  but  not  the  greatest,  amount  of  bodily  strength)  sinewy
forms  with  greater  power  of  enduring  hardships,  and  it  would
seem  even  capacity  of  longer  life.  Exercise  without  adequate
support  brings  on  premature  old  age,  but  there  is  a  Lick  of
evidence  that  this  weakening  of  the  organism  is  specially  due
to  a  preponderance  of  vegetable  nutriment.  But  the  attempt
directly  to  derive  higher  mental  development  from  better  food
finds  absolutely  no  support  in  experience.  Cold  garrets,  in
which  often  no  other  food  than  an  insufficient  quantity  of
bread  was  consumed,  have  witnessed  the  birth  of  more  im
mortal  thoughts  than  ever  were  fostered  by  the  more  luxurious
repasts  of  the  men  of  talent  of  these  days,  and  the  rising
generation,  which  has  at  last  discovered  in  the  application  of
phosphorus  the  road  to  an  increase  of  intelligence,  finds  itself
in  possession  of  a  store  of  knowledge  accumulated  by  many
centuries  when  as  yet  this  means  was  unknown — a  store  hard
to  be  surpassed  with  perceptible  rapidity.  Finally,  should  it
be  maintained  that  not  so  much  intellect  as  practical  vigour
and  courage  is  produced  by  better  food,  we  could  only  be
forced  to  make  a  bitter  retrospect  of  the  activity  not  so  long
since  manifested  by  the  better  fed  portion  of  the  nation ;
those  alone  did  we  then  see  act  vigorously  who  had  previously
made  use  of  their  more  fortunate  bodily  conditions  for
exercise  in  action.  And  that  they  had  done  so  was  due  to  a
courage  the  life  and  vigour  of  which  have  nothing  to  do  with
food,  but  as  to  which  it  must  be  allowed  that  it  invariably
finds  in  adequate  repair  of  bodily  waste  the  means  of  gaining
strength  for  achievement.  For  surely  no  one  will  deny  that
this  latter  is  dependent  on  the  state  of  the  body  ;  but  that
ardour  and  persistency  of  will  are  directly  determined  by  the
same  cause  we  can  allow  only  as  regards  cases  of  undoubted
disease  ;  besides,  the  melancholy  decline  of  spirit  for  specula
tion  no  less  than  for  practice  indirectly  proceeds  far  more
from  a  concurrence  of  unfavourable  social  conditions  of  lite
from  which  intellectual  life  seeks  in  vain  to  extract  the
nourishment  which  it  needs.

480  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

Man's  not  being  dependent  on  one  particular  kind  of  nutri
ment  is  in  part  the  source  of  his  capacity  of  adapting  himself
to  the  most  widely  different  conditions  of  climate.  Not,
however,  the  sole  source :  and  here  the  animal  species  are
inferior  to  mankind  not  solely  through  their  need  of  a  more
special  kind  of  food.  Although  Nature  has  bestowed  on  the
lower  animals  in  their  alternation  of  a  thicker  and  thinner
hairy  covering  a  decided  protection  against  varieties  of
temperature,  yet  but  few  of  them  are  capable  of  enduring
removal  to  a  distance  from  their  natural  climate,  and  even
these  only  because  as  animals  domesticated  by  man  they  have
the  advantage  of  his  regular  tendance  and  of  the  pro
tecting  shelter  prepared  for  them  by  his  hands.  Few  species
thrive  even  on  their  habitual  food  when  they  are  withdrawn
from  the  natural  surroundings  of  their  life.  Now,  if  their
organization  contains  a  number  of  unfavourable  conditions —

o

little  known  to  us  —  which  prevent  their  acclimatization,
it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  not  probable  that  the  human
body  in  itself  presents  conditions  much  more  favourable
thereto.  This  would,  on  the  contrary,  come  to  ruin  still  more
hopelessly  if  it  had  to  depend  solely  on  the  resources  of  its
organic  operations,  and  if  the  skill  of  the  hands  guided  by  the
soul's  reflective  powers  did  not  provide  it  with  a  considerable
number  of  variable  and  better  means  of  defence.  That
Nature  left  these  instruments  of  action  free  in  man  for  the
most  manifold  uses,  and  did  not  give  them  merely  the  single
task  of  supporting  the  body,  constitutes  the  true  and  pre
ponderant  significance  of  the  upright  position  which  has  in  all
ages  been  looked  on  as  the  source  of  the  superiority  of  the
human  form  over  that  of  all  kindred  animal  races.

A  more  poetic  than  scientific,  sometimes  a  rather  senti
mental  than  correct  conception  has — it  appears  to  me —
mistaken  the  point  where  the  meaning  of  this  distinctive
characteristic  is  to  be  sought.  It  is  all  very  well  for  aesthetic
feeling  to  see  in  the  upright  position  a  symbol  of  man's
destiny  to  exalt  himself  above  the  earth  and  turn  his  face
towards  the  stars ;  at  the  same  time  we  cannot  deny  that

MAX  AND  BRUTE.  481

the  stars  of  the  horizon  are  with  equal  convenience  gazed  at
by  the  quadruped  ;  on  the  other  hand,  to  view  those  of  the
zenith  compels  even  us  to  put  our  head  in  an  uncomfort
able  posture.  And  the  heads  of  all  animals  are  not  after
all  so  notably  chained  to  the  ground  ;  on  the  contrary,  the
giraffe  and  the  camel  might  boast  over  us  cf  the  far  wider
extent  of  view  which  is  made  possible  for  them  by  their
slender  neck.  Xor  is  even  the  smaller  degree  of  contact
with  the  ground  by  means  of  only  two  feet  our  exclusive
privilege — it  is  shared  with  us  by  all  the  birds.  That  length
wise  our  body  is  almost  perpendicular,  while  in  birds  tho
back-part  at  least  is  mainly  horizontal,  is  the  only  nearly
universal  distinction,  but  one  on  which  we  can  hardly  base
our  superiority.  We  are,  on  the  other  hand,  unequivocally
differentiated  from  birds  and  mammals  by  the  free  and  many-
sided  function  of  our  arms,  which  are  organized  not  to  act  as
supports  to  the  body  or,  like  wings,  as  means  of  locomotion,
but  to  perform  an  inexhaustible  variety  of  operations.

The  attempt  has  been  made  to  show  that  the  arrangement
of  the  upright  position  exerts  a  powerful  influence  on  the
plan  on  which  the  rest  of  the  human  body  is  formed,  and  in
many  respects  correctly,  though  we  cannot  share  the  enthu
siasm  with  which  Herder  deduced  almost  all  the  advantages
of  humanity  from  this  one  source.  Hut  as  we  cannot  see
how  in  itself  a  vertical  is  more  dignified  than  a  horizontal
line,  it  seems  to  us  that  the  attempt  should  first  of  all  rather
be  made  to  demonstrate  the  necessity  of  the  upright  position,
which  is  not  in  itself  anything  superior,  but  superior  only
inasmuch  as  it  forms  the  condition  of  a  larger  amount  of  vital
actions.  Now  I  hold  that  it  is  possible  to  prove  that,  for  a
creature  belonging  to  the  mammal  group,  the  availability  of
hands  and  arms,  on  whose  endless  advantages  we  shall  here
after  have  occasion  to  dwell,  is  conceivable  only  on  tin-
supposition  of  the  erect  posture.  The  matter  is  different  as
regards  insects  and  other  low  kinds  of  animals.  Nature  lias
supplied  them  with  a  larger  number  of  extremities,  and
sufficient  supports  for  the  horizontal  position  of  the  body

VOL.  I.  2  H

482  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

would  still  remain  were  some  of  these  developed  into  free
hands  —  as  \ve  see  them  actually  endowed  with  organs  of
somewhat  similar  character  in  feelers,  antennas,  and  claws.
The  mammal  type  presents  only  two  pairs  of  limbs  ;  if  the
one  pair  is  to  be  applied  to  free  movement,  the  support  of
the  body  (in  this  case  much  bulkier)  must  devolve  exclu
sively  on  the  other,  within  whose  vertical  axis,  consequently—
to  consider  in  the  first  place  a  position  of  repose — the  body's
centre  of  gravity  must  fall.  This  does  not  lead  directly  to
what  we  call  man's  upright  posture  ;  the  mechanical  problem
is  solved  also  in  the  structure  of  birds,  but  on  the  principle
of  the  mainly  horizontal  extension  of  the  greater  part  of  the
bodily  bulk.  In  birds  the  bones  of  the  pelvis  extend  back
wards,  and  the  fan  of  the  tail-feathers  is  attached  to  the  tail-
vertebraB.  Frequently  far  longer  than  the  body,  the  tail,  in
spite  of  its  light  weight,  by  taking  advantage  of  the  counter-
pressure  of  the  atmosphere  under  favourable  lever-relations,
acts  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  weight  of  the  body,  which
stretches  towards  the  other  and  front  side  of  the  fulcrum.
The  acute-angled  curvature  of  the  thigh  towards  the  front,
and  the  force  of  the  muscular  action  that  keeps  it  mainly
in  this  direction,  push  the  fulcrum,  which  naturally  would
lie  in  the  middle  of  a  line  joining  the  two  sockets  of
the  thighs,  more  towards  the  front,  nearer  to  the  body's
centre  of  gravity  ;  finally,  in  many  species  the  essentially
insignificant  weight  of  the  head  is  also  bent  backwards,  by  a
long  curved  neck,  towards  the  middle  of  the  body  and  near  to
the  centre  of  gravity — in  many  attitudes  even  behind  this
last,  so  that  it  can  act  as  a  counter-weight  to  the  front  half  of
the  body.  By  such  arrangements  walking  oil  two  feet  was
rendered  possible,  and  the  arms  could  be  freely  developed  into
wings.  IHit  in  order  to  their  being  available  for  flight  it  was
requisite  that  they  should  have  but  a  light  bodily  wreight  to
move ;  the  saving  in  bulk,  which  is  a  necessary  principle  of
the  construction  of  birds,  is,  among  other  cases,  strikingly
exemplified  in  the  slenderness  of  their  legs,  whose  motor
muscles  are  placed  close  to  the  body,  while  only  strong  thin

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  483

sinews  traverse  the  length  of  the  leg.  Thence  arises  an
inst.'il-ility  of  equilibrium  which  is  very  perceptible  in  tho
boJ}  of  birds.  The  trifling  bulk  of  the  legs  cannot  by  its
mere  weight  easily  counteract  the  disturbances  of  the  centre  of
gravity  above  the  level  in  which  they  support  it ;  henc'j  we
see  birds  adjust  their  balance  by  simultaneous  movements  of
the  wings,  the  tail,  and  the  head,  the  joint  effect  of  which,
partly  by  atmospheric  resistance  being  made  use  of,  partly  by
the  changes  of  position  altering  the  centre  of  gravity  for  the
body,  counteracts  the  tendency  to  fall.  "When  birds  are
quietly  walking,  it  is  mainly  in  the  pushing  forward  and
drawing  back  of  the  neck  that  this  effort  after  equilibrium
shows  itself.

Such  resources  the  organization  of  mammals  does  not
possess;  they  could  not  balance  their  far  more  bulky  bodies
in  the  horizontal  direction  on  two  equally  thin  shafts,  for  they
have  as  a  counter-weight  neither  a  fan-shaped  tail  of  feathers
nor  wings  by  whose  pressure  forwards  against  the  air  the
excessive  weight  of  the  front  half  of  the  body  could  be  coun
teracted.  Perhaps  a  refining  ingenuity  might  devise  all  sorts
of  fantastic  alterations  by  which  this  end  should  be  effected ;
but  they  would  be  sure  to  deviate  from  the  fixed  type  of
mammal  formation  more  widely  than  the  device  actually
adopted  by  Nature,  the  erection  of  the  longitudinal  axis  with
all  the  modifications  of  shape  necessarily  following  in  its  train.
Chief  among  these  is  the  formation  of  the  legs.  First  of  all
their  bulkiuess,  which  forms  a  distinction  between  man  and
all  the  animals  akin  to  him,  for  even  the  elephant's  four  L  gs
are  a  smaller  part  of  its  bodily  mass  than  are  man's  two
compared  with  his.  This  large  size  was  requisite  in  order
partly  to  balance,  by  a  certain  counterpoise,  the  great  weight
of  the  body,  which  is  wholly  thrown  upon  the  axis  of  the  legs
in  bending  and  stretching,  partly  to  render  these  movements
themselves  possible  by  means  of  powerful  muscular  action.
Hence  the  pelvis  and  its  connection  with  the  thigh  are
abundantly  surrounded  with  muscles,  forming  a  contrast  to
the  corresponding  part  in  the  body  of  the  monkey.  This

484  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

large  supply  is  continued  downwards  below  the  femora,  for
the  trunk  depends  on  the  two  sockets  of  these  bones  alone,
and  every  sideward  turning  of  it  to  be  executed  when  the
feet  are  planted  on  the  ground  requires  (since  the  line  joining
those  sockets  must  fall  differently)  a  deviation  of  the  legs  in
opposite  directions  from  the  previous  perpendicular  of  their
axis.  If  the  erect  body  planted  on  both  feet  turns  to  the
right,  the  axis  of  the  right  leg  deviates  backwards  behind  the
perpendicular  to  the  left,  that  of  the  left  leg  bends  forwards
towards  the  right — movements  of  insignificant  extent  but
great  force,  and  not  capable  of  being  usefully  executed  with
out  the  important  muscular  masses  that,  running  down  the
femur,  produce  the  variableness  of  its  position  in  respect
of  the  pelvis.  A  like  array  of  muscles  is  required  for  the
execution  even  of  the  act  of  rising,  especially  when  it  has  to
be  performed  under  the  pressure  of  a  carried  burden ;  the
further  problem,  how  to  stretch  the  knee-joint  vigorously,  leads
to  the  enlargement  of  the  muscular  mass  of  the  thigh ;  while
quiet  standing,  the  result  of  this  exertion  is  kept  up  in  a
simpler  manner.  For  in  a  standing  posture  the  bony  axis  of
the  leg  is  not  in  a  quite  straight  perpendicular  line,  but
the  thigh  forms  with  the  lower  leg,  in  front  at  the  knee,
an  obtuse  angle,  and  further  curvature  backwards  is  pre
vented  partly  by  the  knee-pan,  partly  by  the  strong  cross
ligaments  that  at  the  back  of  the  knee-joint  connect  the
extremities  of  the  femur  and  tibia,  and  whose  tension
alone,  without  the  aid  of  vital  muscular  force,  maintains  that
position  of  the  legs.  The  slightest  movement  of  the  body,
however,  especially  such  as  is  so  easily  produced  by  a  carried
load,  disturbs  this  equilibrium,  and  makes  it  needful  again  to
call  in  the  assistance  of  muscular  exertion.  Moreover,  the
slight  amount  of  relative  turning  power  with  which  the  thigh
and  lower  leg  are  endowed,  and  that  only  under  special  condi
tions,  makes  it  possible  for  the  region  of  the  knee  itself  to  be
free  from  considerable  layers  of  muscles ;  on  the  other  hand,
they  recur  in  quantities  in  the  formation  of  the  calf,  whose
development  is  likewise  a  characteristic  by  which  the  human

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  485

leg is distinguished from that  of  the most nearly  related
animals

Man's  walking  is  still  more  properly  than  the  progression  of
animal?  a  perpetually  interrupted  falling.  The  heel  in  rising
from  the  ground  raises  along  with  itself  the  whole  weight  of
the  body,  which  is  left  to  be  supported  solely  by  the  balls
of  the  feet  and  the  toes ;  meanwhile  the  other  leg,  without
any  vital  exertion,  swings  past  like  a  pendulum,  in  order  by
its  step  in  advance  to  give  the  body  inclined  forwards  a  new
point  of  support.  But  it  is  not  only  that  a  natural  gail
requires  this  not  extended  but  powerful  raising  of  the  body
so  that  we  have  an  impression  of  awkwardness  where  it  is
deficient,  and  of  affectation  where  it  is  needlessly  exaggerated  ;
rising  also  from  any  kneeling  attitude,  climbing  of  heights,
raising  of  any  weight,  render  necessary  the  assistance  of  the
same  muscles.  These  peculiar  necessities  of  motion,  who.-e
satisfaction  is  in  the  locomotion  of  quadrupeds  divided  among
a  number  of  co-operant  parts,  have  made  the  shape  of  the
human  foot  very  different  from  that  of  the  animal  foot.  A
number  of  pieces  of  bone  of  various  form  and  size,  firmly  and
yet  ela.stically  connected  by  strong  sinewy  ligaments,  form  a
Hat  arch-shaped  vault  that  touches  the  ground  only  before  and
behind,  the  middle  of  the  foot  being  raised.  On  the  highest
point  of  the  arch,  near  the  hinder  end,  is  the  ankle,  on
which  falls,  at  right  angles  to  the  foot,  the  descending  lower
1»%  and  from  which  the  whole  weight  of  the  body  directs  its
divided  pressure  through  the  two  branches  of  the  arch,  behind
and  before,  to  the  ground.  For  muscular  actions  the  foot
thus  forms  a  two-armed  lever,  to  whose  hinder  branch,  tin-
projecting  heel,  is  attached  the  short,  thick  tendon  of  the
powerful  calf-muscles,  effecting  that  elastic  raising  of  the
whole  weight  of  the  body  which  is  one  of  the  most  distinctive
characteristics  of  human  locomotion.  The  foot  of  no  animal
shows  a  similar  contrivance.  The  several  bones  that  in  tin-
human  foot  are  closely  connected  together  into  a  whole,  dis
tinguished  even  externally  by  its  horizontal  position  as  the
foot  from  the  vertical  leg,  have  in  the  animal  series  undergone

480  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

luany  modifications  and  changes  of  situation.  As  the  knee-
joint  has  in  the  mammals  been  brought  nearer  the  body  by
the  contraction  of  the  femur,  so  the  heel-joint  has  been
raised  from  the  ground,  and  the  prolonged  bones  of  the  middle
of  the  foot  are  inserted  between  it  and  the  modified  toes.  In
many  genera  the  toes  form  the  only  level  of  contact  made
use  of  in  walking ;  a  smaller  number,  the  plantigrades,  walk
on  the  flat  of  the  whole  foot.  The  feet  of  monkeys,  it  is  well
known,  are  formed  like  hands,  and  designed  as  they  arc  for  a
habitat  in  trees,  for  climbing  and  clutching,  they  arc  so  little
adapted  for  a  slower  gait,  that  they  leave  no  room  for  doubt
as  to  man's  being  exclusively  fitted  for  the  erect  posture.  He
alone  can  stretch  out  the  leg  in  a  perfectly  straight  vertical
direction,  at  right  angles  with  the  supporting  and  moving  lever
of  the  foot ;  all  animals,  when  they  walk,  walk  with  bent  knees,
and  hence  require,  in  order  to  place  themselves  in  an  upright
position  of  repose,  a  degree  of  exertion  which  man  is  saved.

We  feel  tempted  to  enter  upon  a  close  examination  of  the
organic  proportions  which  here  we  have  only  been  able  to
indicate  in  a  very  sketchy  manner;  still  more  interesting
would  it  be  to  inquire  what  further  effects  this  determination
to  the  upright  posture  exerts  on  the  structure  and  operations
of  the  rest  of  the  body.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  details
of  the  organic  structure  are  closely  bound  together,  but  the
present  results  of  scientific  research  compel  us  to  assert  that
the  extraordinary  influence  attributed  in  this  respect  to  the
upright  posture  do  not  admit  of  being  wholly  proved.  It
is  rather  merely  from  the  actual  combination  of  the  human
form  with  an  upright  gait,  and  from  the  admirable  aesthetic
harmony  between  that  form  and  the  significance  of  this  mode
of  progression,  that  the  conclusion  is  drawn,  that  there  is  a
mechanical  connection  between  the  perpendicular  direction
of  the  axis  of  the  body  and  the  other  characteristic  features
of  the  human  body.  No  important  reaction  on  the  struc
ture  and  functions  of  the  internal  organs  can  be  ascertained,
and  the  hypothesis  of  Herder,  that  in  the  upright  posture  all
the  forces  would  act  differently,  and  the  blood  stimulate  the

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  48 7

nerves  differently,  is  without  foundation,  if  it  be  applied
to  notable  differences  of  demonstrable  importance  for  the
mode  of  life.  Even  in  the  external  structure  of  the  upper
part  of  the  body  we  find  but  one  considerable  distinction
between  men  and  animals,  the  different  position  of  the
maximum  diameter.  In  quadrupeds,  the  length  of  the  cavity
of  the  chest  and  the  body  from  behind  towards  the  abdominal
side  is  greater  than  its  breadth  from  right  to  left ;  in  man,  on
the  other  hand,  the  ribs  arch  his  chest  mainly  in  the  direction
of  breadth,  and  his  breast-bone  retreats  nearer  to  the  vertebral
column.  This  difference  can  be  traced  in  the  shape  of  the
pelvis,  and  even  of  the  legs  ;  the  thighs  of  most  quadrupeds
are  ilat,  pressed  together  on  both  sides ;  the  human  leg  shows
in  its  curvature  the  increasing  breadth  that  appears  still  more
conspicuously  in  the  shape  of  the  hips.  This  arrangement  is
advantageous  for  an  upright  gait,  for  the  weight  of  the  body  is
preponderantly  concentrated  iti  the  direction  of  the  one  plane
that  is  perpendicular  to  the  supporting  position  of  the  foot.  The
length  of  the  foot  would  have  had  to  be  more  considerable  if
it  had  had  to  act  as  an  equally  good  prop  to  a  mass  having
its  greatest  diameter  from  back  to  front.  Towards  the  sides,
on  the  other  hand,  the  body  is  less  unstable  on  account  of  the
direction  of  the  main  ligatures  of  the  joints,  and  requires  less
support ;  it  has,  however,  quite  sufficient,  as  in  this  direction
where  it  is  widest  then;  are  two  feet  to  divide  its  weight  and
aid  one  another  to  counteract  the  tendency  to  fall  sidewards.
On  the  other  hand,  an  excess  of  weight  in  the  body  towards
the  front  is  counteracted  by  two  feet  only  when  they  are
placed  the  one  before  the  other;  when  planted  together,  they
act  with  reference  to  any  movement  forwards  merely  as  a
support  from  which  to  start.

The  formation  of  the  human  head  we  cannot  prove  to  be  a
necessary  result  of  an  upright  gait,  however  admirably,  once
there,  it  corresponds  witli  the  latter.  The  larger  the  head,  and
the  longer  the  lever-arm  of  the  neck  to  which  its  bulk  is
attached,  the  greater  strength  is  required  to  carry  it  in  a
horizontal  position  during  locomotion  on  four  legs.  The  erect

488  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

posture  saves  this  part  of  the  expenditure  of  force,  and  it
would  be  a  still  further  advantage  to  distribute  the  weight  of
the  head  as  much  as  possible  symmetrically  among  the  joint-
blades  that  attach  it  to  its  immediate  support,  the  cervical
vertebra?.  Hence  the  great  alteration  in  the  formation  of  the
head  which  we  find  on  passing  from  the  mammalia  to  man,
the  enlargement  of  the  arch  of  the  skull  and  the  diminution
of  the  facial  part  through  the  nose  and  jaws  being  pushed
back  out  of  their  prolongation  towards  the  front,  which
mechanically  is  not  necessary.  The  long-shaped  head  of  the
mammal  might  just  as  well  have  been  balanced  at  right
angles  on  the  cervical  column,  as  we  find  the  foot,  in  man
alone,  hold  this  position  relatively  to  the  axis  of  the  leg ;
nothing  further  would  have  been  necessary  than  that  the
occipital  foramen  through  which  the  spinal  cord  is  con
tinued  into  the  cerebrum  should  be  pushed  somewhat  more
to  the  front,  and  the  curvature  of  the  cord  as  it  joins  the
main  direction  of  the  cerebrum  should  be  somewhat  greater
than  it  actually  is  in  man.  The  brute-like  formation  often
actually  to  be  observed  in  the  human  head,  the  perceptibly
projecting  mouth  and  retreating  forehead,  a  facial  type  charac
teristic  of  whole  races  whose  gait  is  yet  erect,  show  that  the
connection  between  the  shape  of  the  head  and  the  position
of  the  body,  though  no  doubt  real,  is  by  no  means  inevitable.
Of  course  the  circumstance  that  the  abdominal  side  of  the
body  has  now  become  its  front  part,  towards  which  all  locomo
tions  take  place,  and  towards  which  the  activity  of  the  arms
is  primarily  directed,  could  not  but  make  it  fitting  that  the
organs  of  sense  should  also  be  located  on  this  side.  But
neither  this  nor  the  necessity  of  providing  space  for  a  brain
increasing  in  volume  as  the  ends  of  life  became  multiplied,  in
itself  made  imperative  this  wide  deviation  from  the  ordinary
type  of  formation  of  the  whole  order  of  mammalia.  "Within
the  prevailing  uniformity  of  this  type,  however,  there  are
characteristic  differences  between  different  genera  in  the  for
mation  of  the  head,  partly  owing  to  peculiar  food-cravings  and
the  means  necessary  for  their  appeasement,  partly  connected

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  489

with  the  general  mental  disposition  and  temperament ;  and  so
we  may  be  content  to  look  on  the  formation  of  the  human
head  also  as  that  variation  which  offered  the  most  distinct
expression  of  an  inner  life  intended  for  a  higher  destiny.

But  supposing  we  had  cut  ourselves  off  from  this  concep
tion  by  the  unfavourable  side-glances  which  we  have  already
turned  on  views  inclining  towards  a  symbolic  interpretation  of
natural  forms !  Those  strictures  were  not,  however,  intended
as  a  denial  that  beauty  is  one  of  the  ends  of  the  creation  :
what  we  could  not  grant  was  merely  that  Nature's  principal
aim  is  representation.  Where  she  calls  a  creature  to  a  great
destiny,  her  first  task  is  not  to  stamp  on  him  an  external
form  as  the  seal  of  this  vocation,  but — an  endowment  of  far
greater  importance — she  puts  at  his  disposal  all  practical
means  for  realizing  his  vocation  and  maintaining  his  rank.
She  gives  him  lirst  of  all  the  power  to  be  something,  not  the
form  to  fccni  something,  in  confidence  that  the  actual  posses
sion  and  use  of  power  is  the  surest  means  to  gain  also  its
show.  It  was  therefore  of  little  immediate  consequence  that
man  should  stand  upright  in  token  of  his  dominion,  seeing
that  the  penguins  of  the  Arctic  Ocean  can  copy  him  in  this
attitude  with  vain  solemnity ;  what  was  of  more  moment  was
that  this  position  alone  makes  possible  for  him  those  actions
by  which  he  veritably  wields  dominion  over  all  other  orders
of  beings.  When  the  important  matter  was  accomplished,
and  the  kernel  formed,  any  one  might  find  it  likely  that  the
shell  would  match  it,  that  in  the  external  form  the  total  inner
character  should  find  expression,  so  far  as  mind  can  be  ex
pressed  by  space-filling  forms.  Even  here,  however,  appears
the  doubtful  character  of  that  symbolism  which  directly  con
nects  mental  qualities  with  spatial  form,  without  taking  into
account,  as  an  intermediate  link,  the  mechanical  practical
significance  of  that  which  appears  under  these  forms.  1  d<>
not  speak  of  the  naive  conception  of  beauty  as  contained  in
simple  numerical  relations,  according  to  which  by  these  pro
portions  occurring  in  the  external  form  of  any  phenomenon,
no  matter  what  be  its  character,  beauty  is  at  once  i  in  [tatted

400  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

to  it.  On  the  contrary,  what  shows  the  emptiness  of  these
symbolical  views,  that  dwell  after  their  manner  on  the  signifi
cance  of  the  parts,  is  the  fact  that  there  is  hardly  any  con
ceivable  form  of  body  that  might  not  with  equal  profundity
be  satisfactorily  explained.  If  man  walks  upright,  it  is
significant  that  he  touches  the  earth  only  with  his  feet,  raises
his  head  towards  heaven ;  that  he  does  not  fly  is  significant,
as  bearing  witness  to  his  constant  connection  with  his  mother

o

earth ;  if  he  walked  on  four  feet  like  the  giraffe  it  would  be
still  more  significant,  for  then  he  would  turn  towards  mother
earth,  as  were  fitting,  only  his  earthly  part,  the  body,  while
his  head,  disdaining  aught  lower,  rose  on  high.  How  signifi
cant  is  the  defiant  expectation  with  which,  as  it  is,  man  turns
his  broad-arched  chest  to  meet  all  storms  !  But  had  he  the
bird's  projecting  breast-bone,  that  again  would  be  significant,
for  he  would  then  really  be  setting  his  courage  to  meet  the
current  of  events ;  finally,  were  his  chest  deeper  and  hollowed
out,  ho\v  aptly  would  this  form  symbolize  his  longing  to
embrace  the  world  within  his  heart !  In  such  a  play  of
sentimentality  and  idle  ingenuity  ends  always  the  passion  for
an  immediate  interpretation  of  spatial  forms  which  can  never
have  been  designed  by  Nature  as  such,  or  because  they  are  in
themselves  fixed  modes  of  manifesting  an  Idea.  If  there  is
an  expressive  beauty  of  forms,  we  perceive  it  always  when  in
the  form  we  discern  the  action  to  which  it  is  adapted,  when
from  the  lines  of  the  body  as  they  softly  blend  with  or  stand
out  in  sharp  contrast  to  one  another,  from  the  proportional
size  of  the  several  parts,  we  are  enabled  to  form  an  idea  of
the  intensity  of  vital  force,  of  the  ease  with  which  it  is  called
forth,  of  the  rapid  changes  of  which  it  is  capable,  of  the  enjoy
ment  procured  for  the  living  being  himself  by  the  harmonious
equipoise  of  his  manifold  parts,  of  the  feelings  with  which
these  peculiarities  of  his  structure  fill  him,  and  lastly,  of  the
passion  that  slumbers  within,  ready  to  burst  forth,  or  is  kept
in  check  by  him.

But  this  idea  of  life  can  be  formed  only  by  one  who  is
himself  alive;  nothing  but  personal  experience  and  observa-

MAN  AND  BRUTE.  491

tions  of  other  orders  of  beings  made  under  its  guidance,  can
teach  us  to  find  in  the  human  ibrm  the  expression  which  we
admire.  Nature  did  not  give  man  a  perpendicular  forehead
that  he  might  look  intellectual;  the  forehead  in  itself  is
nothing  but  a  blank  wall.  Only  experience  and  man's  un
conscious  scientific  instinct  taught  him  to  look  here  for  the
workshop  of  intellectual  life,  and  to  estimate  its  power  by  the
dimensions  of  this  part.  Xo  doubt  there  are  forms  that  have
a  certain  beauty — not  the  highest — without  reference  to  their
meaning;  but  they  are  far  better  represented  by  the  symmetrical
shapes  of  crystals  and  the  graceful  many-coloured  forms  of
flowers,  than  by  the  outlines  of  a  human  head.  Were  it
natural  for  the  root  of  a  tree  to  be  shaped  as  that  is,  we  would
soon  persuade  ourselves  that  the  curvature  of  the  arch  of  the
skull,  the  curved  lines  of  the  eye-sockets,  the  rounding  of  the
checks,  the  incision  of  the  lips,  have;  in  themselves  no  charm.
All  this,  looked  at  merely  as  a  form,  is  a  confused  agglomeration
of  elevations  and  depressions ;  not  till  we  know  what  mental
powers  work  within  that  monotonous  arched  outline,  what
sweetness  of  disposition  uses  eyes  and  lips  as  the  instruments
of  its  influence,  not  till  we  understand  this  do  those  material
forms  become  in  our  eyes  beautiful.  Nature,  then,  did  not
bestow  on  her  creatures  certain  forms  significant  in  themselves,
by  whose  self-interpreting  symbolism  their  inner  life  should
have  a  fitting  expression  ;  but  inasmuch  as  she  gave  to  living
beings  the  means  of  action,  the  forms,  in  themselves  meaningless,
in  which  this  organization  found  its  outer  manifestation,  became
at  once  symbols  full  of  meaning  for  all  whom  personal  experi
ence  or  the  observation  of  surrounding  Nature  had  endowed
with  capacity  to  divine  working  force  below  the  surface.

That  this  force  did  reveal  itself  and  was  not  wholly  con
cealed  l))r  a  homogeneous  exterior,  may  certainly  be  reckoned
among  the  designs  of  Nature  by  those  who  care  to  speak  of
such.  She  made  the  exterior  correspond  to  what  lay  within,
not  assuredly  that  there  should  be  this  manifestation  ;  she  did
not  care  that  the  inner  life  should  express  itself,  for  what  had
been  the  good  if  this  correspondence  had  been  brought  to  the

492  BOOK  IV. CHATTER  IV.

utmost  perfection  ?  The  manifestation  of  a  being  always
presupposes  a  second  to  which  it  is  manifested,  and  the  joy  of
reciprocal  existence  for  others  thence  flowing,  is  the  real  and
serious  end  to  which  all  manifestation  is  subservient.  It  were,
on  the  other  hand,  an  idle  play  of  the  pendulum,  if,  without
this  purpose,  the  creative  Cause  of  the  world  merely  brought
about  a  perpetual  oscillation  between  the  manifestation  of
being  and  the  recollection  of  that  manifestation,  the  familiar
wearisome  primal  motion,  in  which  the  upholders  of  the  fatal
view  that  resolves  all  into  symbolism  without  any  practical
value,  here  again  fancy  they  see  a  sacred  and  inviolable
necessity.  The  animal  is  intended,  not  for  a  solitary  exist
ence,  but  for  intercourse  with  his  fellows ;  the  nobler  and
more  comprehensive  is  the  content  of  his  life,  the  more  is  he
meant  not  merely  to  receive  blindly  the  influences  of  others,  but
to  gain  insight  even  into  the  internal  workings  of  others  which
are  not  at  the  moment  acting  upon  him  ;  on  this  comprehension
and  sympathy  all  intercourse  rests  ;  and  just  what  is  expressed
in  that  word  distinguishes  the  mutual  relations  of  living  beings
from  any  reciprocal  action  of  material  substances.  The  mem
bers  of  each  species  then  will  first  of  all  understand  their
fellows  and  be  beautiful  in  their  eyes ;  but  it'  higher  ends  of
life  have  bestowed  on  some  privileged  creature  a  many-sided
organization,  whose  greater  fulness  enables  it  to  throw  itself
into  the  simpler  experience  of  less  favoured  races,  and  sympa
thetically  to  repeat  and  understand  this,  we  will  not  blame  it
should  it  constitute  itself  a  judge  of  the  beauty  of  forms,
finding  the  highest  perfection  in  that  which  reflects  the  most
significant  inner  life  and  every  slightest  feature  of  it  most
distinctly.

How  could  we  deny  that  in  both  of  these  respects  the
human  body  stands  at  the  head  of  the  scale  of  creatures,
divided  by  a  great  chasm  even  from  those  whose  formative
law  most  resembles  its  own  ?  Even  a  fleeting  glance  cast  over
the  scale  of  animal  forms,  shows  that  its  development  mainly
consists  in  the  soul's  susceptibility  for  impressions  from  with
out  becoming  always  more  delicate  and  easily  awakened,  its

MAX  AND  BRUTE.  493

reacting  dominion  over  the  smaller  world  of  the  body  itself  as
over  the  greater  outside  world,  becoming  always  more  many-
sided  and  yet  making  use  of  always  simpler  means.  Xature
encases  her  lower  offspring  in  rigid  armour  and  shells  that
allow  only  a  manifestation  of  the  final  stir  of  effort  in  tin;
outstretched  limbs,  not  that  of  the  vital  elasticity  of  the  body
in  repose ;  gradually  she  diminishes  this  rigidity ;  the  bird's
covering  of  features,  the  fur  of  the  mammal,  by  degrees  bring
to  view  the  increasing  mobility  of  a  strong  and  pliable  muscular
system  which  was  wholly  concealed  by  the  scaly  mantle  of
the  fish ;  but  it  is  man's  naked  skin  that  first  discloses  all
those  slight  strainings  and  stretchings  which,  supporting  and
aiding  one  another  in  search  of  motion  or  equipoise,  run
through  his  frame  like  a  connected  melody.  Here  first  of  all
full  warm  life  with  its  pulsation  reaches  throughout  the  whole
of  the  outer  form,  while  an  uncomely  and  angular  figure  is
but  disguised  in  the  dainty  bird  with  a  softly-rounded  cover
ing  of  feathers;  in  many  quadrupeds  by  a  bushy  mass  of  hair.
As  we  rise  in  the  animal  scale,  the  head,  the  seat  of  the  ruling
will,  comes  more  and  more  out  of  the  indistinct  mass  of  the
body,  into  sharp  contrast  with  the  rest ;  neither  retreating
stumpily  into  the  body  as  in  the  Crustacea  and  fishes,  nor,  as
in  some  weak-minded  insects,  too  mobilely  suspended  to  a
thread-like  shaft,  already  in  the  mammals  it  comes  first  as  the
vigorously  ruling  beginning  of  the  body,  but  nowhere  is  it  so
conspicuously  set  on  its  summit  as  by  the  neck  of  erect  man.
And  the  mind  whose  seat  it  is,  possesses  a  quiet  and  noiseless
power  over  the  world,  not  one  that,  with  much  ado  and  a  great
expenditure  of  means  for  the  conquest  of  the  outer  world,  only
betrays  how  much  exertion  it  has  to  make.  Therefore  the
head  does  not  increase  in  volume  as  the  sphere  of  its  achieve
ments  enlarges;  did  the  bulk  required  by  the  soul  for  its
operations  grow  greater,  the  spell  of  its  power  would  wane ;
the  multiplicity  of  means  to  which  it  was  forced  to  have
recourse  would  but  betray  its  own  helplessness.  Nature  may
then  bestow  fantastic  prolongations  and  excrescences  on  the
organs  of  sense  of  lower  creatures,  but  in  the  higher  ones,  and

494  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  IV.

most  of  all  in  man,  she  unobtrusively  arranges  them  within
a  small  space.  The  eyes  do  not  protrude  and  stare  into  the
distance,  as  if  in  fear  that  things  will  escape  them  ;  quietly
resting  in  their  arched  sockets,  they  are,  on  the  contrary,
assured  that  they  can  dominate  even  what  lies  most  remote.
The  mouth  projects  neither  for  the  taking  hold  of  food  nor  for
calling ;  the  significant  sound  of  articulate  speech  will  come
without  exertion  from  the  lips,  for  it  is  no  longer  with  the
force  of  the  shriek  that  the  soul  works,  with  that  hoarse  cry,
to  emit  which,  the  animal  must  with  an  effort  stretch  forward
its  head  and  neck.  In  regard  to  the  organs  of  locomotion,
Nature's  procedure  is  similar.  On  lower  creatures  she  bestows
a  number  of  prehensile  arms,  with  suction-bowls,  warts,  hairy
appendages,  without  bones  and  joints,  with  a  repulsive  power
of  turning  in  all  directions ;  in  the  higher  ones  she  restricts
this  expenditure,  diminishes  the  number  of  limbs  in  general,
and  especially  of  those  which  are  identical  and  similar.  She
cats  down  the  superfluous  mobility  of  too  great  a  number  of
joints,  and  leaves  it  only  in  diminished  proportion  in  the
fingers  of  the  human  hand.  But,  to  make  up,  she  expands
the  remaining  limbs  into  quick  fulness  and  roundness  ;  the
pulse  of  life  pervades  the  arms  and  legs  of  the  human  figure
to  their  extremities.  How  different  appear  to  us  the  thin
legs  of  insects,  curved  by  a  number  of  joints,  externally
attached  stilts,  in  whose  thread-like  dimensions  it  seems
impossible  that  a  full  life  should  stray !  How  different  the
stiffness  of  the  sinewy  leg  of  the  .bird,  and  how  inferior  are
even  the  domestic  animals,  whose  strength  and  graceful  motions
we  admire,  as  regards  complete,  soft,  and  vigorous  animation
of  the  whole  bodily  frame  !

But  why  should  we  continue  a  line  of  thought  that  could
but  enumerate  one  by  one  the  advantages  whose  living  union
alone  brings  home  to  the  mind  the  full  value  of  the  human
formation  ?  Be  it  then  left  to  the  student  of  Nature  or  of  Art
to  enter  into  the  significant  beauty  of  a  form  whose  practical
utility  it  has  been  our  aim  in  these  reflections  to  bring  into
relief.

CHAPTER V.

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE.

Conditions  of  Individual  Development — Inheritance  of  Race-Characteristics  and
of  Individual  Traits — Resemblances  to  Brutes — Varieties  of  Race — Hypo
theses  as  to  the  Origin  of  these  Varieties — Negroes,  American-Indians,
Malays,  Mongols,  Caucasians — Notions  of  Kiwi  and  Variety — Transition
to  Book  V. — Darwinian  Theory.

§  1.  "TTNDElt  the  influence  of  a  common  illusion,  the
*^J  traveller  in  a  new  country  thinks  every  face
exceedingly  like  every  other;  the  national  characteristics
really  shared  by  all  stand  out  in  such  striking  contrast  to  the
type  of  his  native  land,  that  the  many  differences  combined
with  them  at  first  escape  his  attention.  Perhaps  it  is  from
a  similar  prejudice  that,  in  those  orders  of  animals  whose
organization  differs  more  widely  from  our  own,  we  are  apt
to  see  only  resembling  specimens  of  a  generic  type,  and —
except  a  variable  amount  and  power  of  development — to
perceive  no  essentially  individual  qualities  by  which  one  is
distinguished  from  another.  To  the  animals  themselves
perhaps  it  is  not  so ;  and  yet  we  are  not  wholly  wrong  in  our
prejudice.  For  even  in  the  higher  orders  much  more  akin  to
ourselves  in  organization,  so  far  as  our  observation  extends,
the  generic  character  is  so  strongly  prevalent,  that  in  com
parison  individual  qualities  hardly  come  into  view ;  not  till
we  reach  the  domestic  animals,  to  whose  lot  there  falls,  from
their  contact  with  human  beings,  a  peculiar  and  different
training  and  experience,  do  we  see  bodily  and  mental  indi
viduality  more  copiously  displayed.  Even  in  the  human
race,  which  without  doubt  incomparably  surpasses  all  orders
of  animals  in  sharply  delineated  personal  characteristics  even
of  the  body,  this  variety  is  not  spontaneously  and  naturally
developed.  The  more  alike  the  lot  and  occupations  of

406  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

individuals,  the  narrower  their  intellectual  horizon,  the  lower
and  more  one-sided  altogether  the  civilisation  of  a  race,  the
more  do  we  see  those  who  belong  to  it  fall  into  great  monotony
of  bodily  and  mental  character.  Uound  this  fixed  point  of
the  general  type  individual  growth  performs  its  gyrations  with
deviations  in  various  directions ;  but  in  attempting  to  ascer
tain  the  amount  of  deviation  which  it  may  undergo  and  the
determining  causes  of  its  peculiarities,  we  enter  on  a  field
where  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  affords  not  only  no
certainty,  but  frequently  not  even  the  grounds  of  a  decided
opinion  in  regard  to  the  probability  of  the  hypotheses  which
we  may  be  inclined  to  hazard.

Taking  the  infant  human  being  as  our  point  of  departure,
we  find  that  external  psychic  and  physical  influences  ol
education,  the  impressions  created  by  personal  experiences,
and  the  free  exercise  of  all  the  powers,  may  indeed  lead  to
extraordinary  differences  of  mental  development,  but  that  they
to  a  very  inconsiderable  extent  modify  the  corporeal  constitu
tion  received  at  birth.  Numberless  obstacles  may  indeed
come  in  the  way  to  hinder  the  full  development  of  an  original
capacity ;  and  the  very  circumstance  that  by  removing  such
obstacles  education  achieves  astonishing  results,  makes  it  seem
probable  that  it  might  not  only  secure  the  development  of
existing  capacities,  but  also  bestow  and  implant  such  as  were
absent  in  the  germ  of  the  individual.  Even  if  this  does  take
place  to  a  vciy  small  extent,  if  in  particular  the  growth  and
muscular  strength  of  the  body — both  intended  by  nature  to
increase  with  advancing  years  —  may  be  promoted  by  a
judicious  gymnastic  training,  on  the  whole  neither  the  form
of  the  body  nor  its  tendency  to  a  one-sided  or  morbid  develop
ment  is  much  affected  by  the  influences  that  after  birth  act
on  the  living  being.  Only  on  the  features  of  the  face  and,
by  means  of  the  habits  of  locomotion  formed,  on  the  carriage
of  the  body,  further,  on  the  general  refinement  of  the  outward
appearance,  do  we  find  higher  intellectual  cultivation  exert  a
decidedly  favourable  influence  ;  while  with  all  this  peculiar
ennoblement  it  is  yet  powerless  to  efface  the  main  outlines

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE.  497

laid  down  in  the  original  design  of  the  form.  Those  who
look  on  the  individual  soul  as  the  maker  of  its  body  must  yet
acknowledge  that  its  moulding  power  soon  ceases,  and  that
even  during  the  time  when  such  may  be  exercised  it  is
fettered  in  a  twofold  manner.  It  is  not  only  compelled  to
frame  a  body  conformable  in  general  to  the  laws  of  the
species,  but  in  particular  also  it  cannot  get  rid  of  a  number
of  peculiar  characteristics  belonging  to  the  parents,  and  the
more  these  both  represent  in  outward  appearance  the  same
family-type,  the  more  certain  is  it  that  this  familiar  form
which  the  generic  type  did  not  present,  but  only  left  room
for,  will  be  repeated  also  in  their  descendants.  Gradually,
however,  in  the  course  of  generations,  without  the  barriers  of
the  family-type  being  overstepped,  we  find  new  individual
peculiarities  of  formation  appear,  as  to  whose  origin  we  can
frame  but  few  credible  conjectures.

We  know  nothing  about  the  physical  agencies  through
which  the  capacity  for  repetition  of  the  generic  type  is
implanted  in  the  organic  germ,  nothing  about  the  processes
by  which  the  usual  resemblance  of  children  to  their  parents
is  brought  about  ;  we  are  ignorant  even  of  the  causes  that
determine  the  sex  of  the  child.  Still  less  can  we  explain
the  divergences  through  which  the  common  family  form
gradually  passes  into  different  individual  forms.  "We  may,
however,  suppose  that  the  changes  wrought  by  the  lapse  of
years  on  the  organization  of  the  parents,  their  acquired
tendencies  to  disease,  their  habits  of  life,  even  their  advancing
age,  may  all  have  an  influence  on  the  special  character  of  the
individual  about  to  come  into  being.  Such  may  be  the
circumstances  that  in  the  same  family,  even  supposing  an
originally  identical  type  in  both  parents,  gradually  bring  about
a  series  of  individual  modifications.  The  modi'  of  propaga
tion  common  to  all  higher  animal  species  must,  however,
again  limit  both  the  width  of  the  interval  between  these
individual  forms  and  the  length  of  time  during  which  they
are  kept  up  in  succeeding  generations.

If  we  wish  to  propagate  varieties  of  a  plant,  we  must,  in
VOL.  i.  2  i

498  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

order  to  secure  the  result,  make  cuttings.  In  these  a  great
number  of  cells  in  organic  connection  have  already  become
habituated  to  that  peculiar  variation  of  vital  processes  by
which  the  variety  is  distinguished  from  the  more  general
type  of  the  species.  Hence  this  strong  and  full  current  of
life  presents  a  degree  of  power  such  that  it  cannot  easily  be
diverted  by  extraneous  influences  from  its  self-chosen  path  of
development.  The  seed  of  the  plant,  on  the  other  hand,
perhaps  also  contains  the  same  special  formative  tendency,  but
it  is  represented  by  a  comparatively  small  mass,  nay,  pro
bably  only  by  particular  relations  between  particular  parts  of
this  mass.  This  smaller  amount  of  formative  motion  is  more
easily  during  development  driven  back  by  extraneous  influ
ences  into  the  common  road  of  the  higher  specific  type,  whose
form  has  a  far  firmer  basis  in  all  the  relations  to  one
another  of  all  the  elements  of  the  seed.  Hence  from  the  seed
of  the  variety  we  find  proceeding  sometimes  the  specific  type,
sometimes  other  varieties,  only  now  and  then  exactly  the
same  variety.  If  plants  of  the  latter  are  selected  and
allowed  to  grow  and  yield  seeds  under  the  same  conditions  as
those  under  which  the  original  plant  acquired  its  peculiar
formation,  the  type  of  the  variety  sometimes,  after  a  few
generations,  becomes  fixed,  and  can  then  be  propagated  by
seed ;  but  a  continuance  of  unfavourable  circumstances
always  tends  gradually  to  bring  it  back  to  the  form  of  the
species.

This  latter  mode  of  propagation  is  the  only  one  known  in
the  higher  animal  world.  Hence  it  is  from  the  first  doubtful
whether  every  peculiarity  of  the  parental  organization  will  be
effectively  represented  in  the  elements  of  the  masses  prepared
in  them  to  be  the  germ  of  the  future  form ;  this  of  course
depends  not  on  what  is  the  form  of  the  producing  body,  but
on  which  of  the  details  of  its  formation  is  so  imprinted  on
particular  relations  of  parts  of  the  germ  that  they  must  be
reproduced  in  the  subsequent  development  of  the  offspring.
We  should  therefore  be  quite  inclined  to  allow  the  influence
of  general  derangement  in  the  functions  of  transformation  of

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE,  490

substances  and  of  nutrition,  and  of  widely-diffused  diseases  of
the  lymphatic  or  nervous  system  ;  the  effects  of  such  alterations
might  extend  even  to  the  formation  of  the  propagation  germs,
and  along  with  hereditary  tendencies  to  disease  might  also
determine  a  certain  deviation  from  the  general  normal  rela
tions  in  the  embryonic  form.  This  deviation  would  resemble
the  peculiar  formation  of  the  parents,  if  their  constitution  also
had  been  formed  under  the  influence  of  a  hereditary  tendency
to  disease ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  distinguish  the
children  from  the  parents,  if  a  disturbing  agency  induced
in  the  course  of  life  had  inwardly  modified  the  organism
of  the  latter  without  materially  affecting  its  outward
form.  We  should  think  it  much  more  questionable  that
purely  personal  peculiarities  of  figure,  and  most  questionable
of  all  that  accidental  disfigurements,  would  be  repeated  in
the  children.  And  yet  experience  offers  an  extraordinary
number  of  cases  of  the  former  —  peculiar  types  of  lips,
of  eyes,  of  nose  are  distinctly  transmitted  by  inheritance
through  many  generations ;  even  malformations  not  accounted
for  by  anything  in  the  general  type  of  the  species,  such  as
hands  with  six  fingers,  are  transmitted  in  this  manner ;  only
the  heredity  of  accidental  disfigurements  not  so  transmitted
to  the  parents  has  no  support  in  experience.  On  the  whole,
therefore,  the  transmission  of  peculiarities  that  have  once;
found  u  place  among  the  details  of  the  organization  takes
place  more  regularly  than  we  were  inclined  to  think ;  but
this  throws  light  far  more  on  the  steady  propagation  of
existing  peculiarities  than  on  their  origination  within  a
common  type.  The  rise  and  gradual  transformation  of  diathetic
tendencies  into  the  formative  impulses  of  generations  is
almost  the  only  thing  here  clear  to  us ;  but  the  variety  of
individual  forms  developed  out  of  the  human  type  does  not
consist  of  a  number  of  specimens  of  degenerate  growth.

But  before  going  on  with  this  inquiry,  we  must  speak  of
the  other  obstacle  that  seems  to  come  in  the  way  of  a  special
formation  once  anyhow  originated  becoming  fixed  and  propa
gated  This  is  the  crossing  of  different  species.  The  male  and

500  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

female  flowering  organs  of  the  plant  are  produced  generally
in  close  vicinity  to  each  other,  properly  on  the  same  stem,  the
sum  of  vital  conditions  acting  on  and  maturing  them  is  for
both  the  same ;  it  might  be  expected  that  under  such  favour
able  circumstances  their  contributions  to  the  form  of  the
seedling  would  be  perfectly  harmonious,  and  so  fit  into  one
another  as  to  yield  an  exact  reproduction  of  the  family  form.
But  just  on  this  very  account  does  Kature  seem  to  have  pre
vented  or  made  difficult  the  self-fertilization  of  plants  ;  she
meant  to  reproduce  not  the  individual  characteristics  of  the
parent  form,  but  the  more  general  form  of  the  species  ;  to  this
end  she  required  the  co-operation  of  such  seed-substances  as,
having  originated  under  divergent  conditions,  did  not  arbi
trarily  seek  to  propagate  the  same  individual  peculiarities.
Cross-breeding  meets  this  demand  of  itself;  however  com
pletely  the  parents  may  originally  have  represented  the  type
of  the  species,  they  have  yet  exceedingly  seldom  grown  up
under  identical  outward  conditions ;  in  human  beings,  whose
spheres  of  life  present  the  most  striking  variety,  the  indi-
vidualization  of  the  common  character  is  likely  to  have  gone
farthest.  Among  the  alterations  which  the  bodies  have  thus
undergone  there  may  be  many  that  do  not  tell  in  propagation
in  any  physically  effective  manner,  there  will  be  others  that
do.  From  the  meeting  of  such  varied  formative  impulses
new  forms  may  of  course  appear  in  the  offspring ;  but  this
crossing,  which  further  compels  every  peculiarity  so  produced
to  co-operate  with  one  foreign  to  itself,  will  prevent  the  fixing
and  unaltered  propagation  of  any  one.  The  more,  in  par
ticular,  moral  customs  encourage  marriage  beyond  the  narrow
barriers  of  relationship  within  which  a  single  type  prevails,
the  more  will  the  blending  of  heterogeneous  singularities
hinder  the  family  form  from  being  sundered  into  a  number  of
fixed  but  very  dissimilar  forms,  and  instead  bring  about  a
general  and  unceasing  fluctuation  within  narrow  limits  about
the  centre  of  a  tolerably  constant  average  type.

By  what  other  laws  the  variation  of  the  bodily  formation
of the  parents determines that  of  the  child,  we have few

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE.  501

extended  data  of  experience  to  inform  us.  If  we  may
assume  that  on  the  average  the  offspring  strike  a  medium
between  the  two  parents,  it  is  yet  a  question  what  the
medium  means.  In  particular  respects,  as  perhaps  of  stature,
of  corpulence,  and  of  many  other  details  of  form,  the  two
formative  impulses  do  seem,  like  two  mechanical  forces,  to
unite  in  a  joint  resultant  in  which  each  has  a  share  pro
portional  to  its  strength  ;  in  the  physiognomically  significant
formation  of  the  face,  on  the  other  hand,  we  seem  frequently
to  see  a  combination  of  particular  features,  some  belonging  tu
the  father,  some  to  the  mother,  so  that  in  the  whole,  almost
as  in  a  chemical  compound,  one  (.-lenient  seems  to  take  the
place  of  another  equivalent  to  itself.  Thus  it  is  not  un
common  to  see  the  mother's  eyes  and  the  father's  hair  united
in  a  countenance  of  which  the  other  features  perhaps  present
a  Mending  of  the  peculiarities  of  both.  In  other  cases,  how
ever,  either  the  paternal  or  the  maternal  type  is  decidedly
prepotent — why  we  know  not.  Only  with  regard  to  the
sex  of  the  children  is  one  generalization  tolerably  free  from
exceptions,  that  when  the  father  is  older  more  boys  are  born,
and  this  in  a  ratio  that  increases  with  that  by  which  the
father  is  older  than  the  mother.  Here  it  has  been  thought  is
one  of  the  causes  of  an  excess  in  the  number  of  boys  born
over  that  of  girls,  which  is  not  found  in  all  countries,  but,
where  it  does  occur,  is  constant.  As,  however,  this  difference
in  age  does  not  exclude  the  birth  of  female  children,  the
generalization  throws  little  light  on  the  causes  of  the  notorious
fact  in  question.  Greater  bodily  strength  and  vigour  on  the
one  side  apparently  does  not  determine  accordingly  the  sex  of
the  children,  and  has  little  power  to  neutralize  in  the  con
stitution  of  the  latter  the  effects  of  bodily  weakness  or  disease
on  the  other  side.  That,  further,  formative  impulses  may
pass  over  a  generation  or  remain  dormant  in  it,  and  that  the
features  of  the  grandparents  not  seldom  reappear  more  dis
tinctly  in  the  grandchildren,  is  a  familiar  remark  often  made.
Even  the  belief,  rejected  in  recent  times,  that  the  phantasy  of
the  mother  can  impart  to  her  child  the  features  of  a  picture

502  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

that  has  made  a  strong  impression  on  her,  I  cannot  regard  a3
impossible,  in  view  of  undeniable  facts,  although,  persuaded  as
T  am  that  the  soul's  moulding  power  is  confined  within  narrow
limits,  I  readily  surrender  the  fantastic  misapplications  that
have  been  made  of  this  idea  to  explain  every  possible  mal
formation.

If  we  now  make  these  lines  of  thought  converge  on  a
common  point,  we  find  that  there  is  but  one  opinion  we  can
hold  as  to  the  origin  of  individual  peculiarities.  The  organi
zation  of  each  individual  receives  a  characteristic  stamp  from
the  course  of  his  life — which  is  identical  with  that  of  no  other
of  his  family,  and  works  by  means  of  special  influences  never
exerted  exactly  alike  on  several  persons.  Now,  although  these
influences  may  be  unable  to  produce  in  the  already  fixed  bodily
form  of  him  who  is  subjected  to  them  perceptible  deviations
from  the  general  type  of  his  family,  a  stronger  replica  of  them
may  appear  in  the  next  generation,  whose  whole  development
from  its  rudimentary  beginnings  onward  is  carried  on  under
the  influence  of  this  altered  constitution  of  their  parent.
Inequality  among  processes,  the  preponderant  activity  of  a
particular  group  of  organs,  the  special  direction  taken  by  the
preparation  of  the  bodily  materials,  the  one-sided  stimulations
of  the  nervous  system,  lastly,  the  habits  of  disposition  and
fancy  which  have  been  formed,  and  whose  subtle  influence  on
the  form  may  be  more  noticeable  in  the  moulding  of  the
embryonic  than  in  the  modifying  of  the  adult  organism — all
these  conditions  present  in  the  parental  bodies  may  suffice  to
separate  one  original  family  type  into  a  variety  of  individual
forms.  And  as  organic  Nature  nowhere  permits  one  con
stituent  of  its  products  to  be  altered  without  reference  to  the
others  and  without  their  being  also  correspondingly  modified,
this  sum  of  conditions  will  produce  peculiar  transformations
even  in  such  parts  as  do  not  directly  come  under  its  action.
The  continuity  of  organic  formation  may  therefore  differen
tiate  the  embryonic  body  still  more  widely  and  characteristi
cally  from  the  form  of  the  parents  than  was  to  be  expected
from  the  several  sources  of  the  transformation.  "We  have  to

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE,  503

look  here  for  the  causes  of  acclimatization,  which  in  the
course  of  a  few  generations  renders  innocuous  the  external
conditions  that  were  originally  fatal ;  the  bodily  constitution
of  the  descendants  has  doubtless  here  become  more  sell-
accordant,  Mid  has  recovered  in  new  forms  the  equipoise  lost
by  the  adult  and  unpliable  frames  of  the  ancestors  under  the
pressure  of  unaccustomed  external  disadvantages.

I'erhaps  the  same  idea  of  a  pervading  unity  in  organic
form  may  afford  in  another  direction  a  clue  to  the  multi
plicity  of  individual  forms.  Although  the  variety  of  these
forms  is  so  great  that  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  by  a  name
every  one  from  every  other,  it  is  yet  unlikely  that  it  is  a
wholly  planless  multitude  so  that  any  special  formation  of
one  part  of  the  body  might  form  with  any  form  of  another  a
combination  which  it  should  be  possible  for  the  constructive
forces  of  the  organism  to  realize.  No  doubt  the  fancy  of  the
caricaturist  goes  beyond  bounds  within  which  Nature  herself
must  keep.  Not  every  formation  of  head  is  possible  along
with  every  body,  not  every  shape  of  arm  with  every  shape  of
foot,  quite  apart  from  extravagant  proportions  of  size,  which
are  for  the  sportive  fancy  the  easiest  means  of  producing
fantastic  and  impossible  forms.  In  the  general  symmetry
resulting  from  the  law  of  the  bodily  structure,  only  lixed
values  of  the  variable  magnitudes  of  which  it  is  composed
can  be  combined  into  a  possible  and  realizable  form.  Now  it
is  not  unlikely  that  those  combinations  of  parts  which  con
stitute  a  stable  equilibrium  are  no  other  than  those  which
Nature  elsewhere  employs  in  the  formation  of  other  and
original  generic  types.  It  is  an  old  and  familiar  observation
that  occurs  to  every  one  in  daily  life,  how  strongly  the
countenance,  bearing,  and  movements  of  certain  people  recall
those  of  certain  kinds  of  animals.  I  would  not  have  this
observation  interpreted  to  mean  that  Nature  hero  amuses
herself  with  an  aimless  repetition  of  preceding  types,  which
would  assuredly  be  out  of  place  if  it  could  not  be  justi-
lied  on  the  ground  of  a  mechanical  necessity.  The  idea
of  such  a  justification  may  be  suggested  by  the  pervading

504  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

similarity  effected  by  the  most  general  law  of  form  that
governs  the  whole  series  of  the  vertebrata.  If  Nature  is
once  led  by  any  incidental  conditions  into  a  characteristic
deviation  from  the  normal  human  type,  she  will  most
naturally  and  readily  fall  into  one  of  the  fixed  combina
tions  on  which  in  other  species  she  has  already  imprinted
the  character  of  constant  types,  and  which  thus  are  proved
to  be  easily  derivable  from  the  general  principle  of  form
within  the  vertebrate  group.  Of  course  she  will  not  put
additional  animal  features  to  the  human  form,  but  keeping
rigidly  to  the  human  contour  she  will  within  that  repeat
the  characteristic  lineaments  of  an  animal  species  with  a
distinct  approximation  to  the  general  effect,  such  as  is
better  known  to  all  of  us  from  direct  observation  than  it
could  here  be  described.  We  may  add  that  these  animal
resemblances  are  usually  as  a  matter  of  common  observa
tion  recalled  only  by  the  form  of  certain  parts,  especially
of  the  face,  but  that  they  may  in  fact  go  through  the  whole
frame  and  its  operations.

Who  has  not  seen  pale  people,  with  sparse  hair,  fish-like,
prominent  round  eyes,  and  the  mouth  of  a  carp  ?  They  have
a  habit  of  smacking  their  lips,  their  skin  is  cold  and  moist,
they  seldom  tread  audibly,  but  rather  glide  about  on  flat,
shuffling  feet  whose  whole  sole  touches  the  ground.  In
others  with  the  nose  of  an  eagle  is  associated  the  sharp  ledge
of  the  socket  of  the  eye  rising  in  a  round  arch  and  the  dark
flashing  eye  of  the  bird  ;  their  face  is  not  broad,  the  mouth
without  protruding  tapers  to  the  front ;  the  comparatively
long  neck  and  narrow  chest,  the  high  arch  of  the  foot  with
hollowed-out  sole,  rapid  movements  often  marked  by  that
jerky  angularity  peculiar  to  the  bird's  walk,  complete  this  no
less  characteristic  picture.  Small  white  teeth  usually  irregu
larly  set  in  dainty  jaws,  with  a  rather  long-shaped  face  and  a
preference  for  a  dry,  sweet  vegetable  diet,  occur  along  with  a
short  slender  figure  and  an  elegant  propriety  of  movement ;
we  are  reminded  of  quite  different  animal  forms  by  the
mighty  jaws  with  crushing  molars  and  projecting  canine

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE.  505

teeth,  evidently  intended  for  the  consumption  of  meat  and
bones,  that  open  in  a  broad  face,  and  are  united  with  pro
minent  cheek  bones,  a  round-shaped  head,  a  square-built
frame,  short  and  powerful  fingers.  But  instead  of  multiplying
such  pictures,  we  will  rather  express  a  doubt  whether  we
really  are  entitled  to  attach  so  much  importance  to  them.
Unquestionably  the  whole  region  of  such  comparisons  is  very
slippery,  and  in  fancying  we  can  discern  in  them  a  serious
law  of  formation,  we  may  merely,  with  the  wantonness  of
artistic  fancy,  be  making,  out  of  a  few  actual  strokes,  complete
and  harmonious  pictures  that  have  no  reality.  It  requires  no
great  keenness  of  insight  to  detect  even  in  the  examples  above
cited  particular  strokes  that  are  indeed  aesthetically  alluring,
but,  so  far  as  our  present  knowledge  allows  us  to  judge,
physiologically  unmeaning.  "NVc  must  therefore  leave  this
idea  to  be  critically  examined  after  a  much  more  careful  and
accurate  study  has  been  made  of  the  forms  that  actually
occur  than  has  as  yet  been  given  to  them — left  as  they
have  been  to  the  casual  observation  of  everyday  life  ;
and  we  assuredly  believe  that  such  critical  examination
•vould  discover  a  grain  of  truth  in  the  heap  of  fantastic
comparisons.

vj  2.  "When  we  now  return  from  this  digression  on  the  rise
of  individual  forms  to  the  general  type  of  a  race,  our  atten
tion  is  directed,  by  the  tenacity  with  which  quite  peculiar
family  characteristics  descend  often  through  many  genera
tions,  to  the  much  greater  persistence  with  which  any  more
general  self-consistent  race-characteristic  will  undoubtedly
resist  its  own  obliteration.  AVe  cannot  doubt  that  in  a  race
all  tin;  members  of  which  share  the  same  fundamental  type,
even  its  most  trifling  details  will  be  continuously  transmitted
by  inheritance,  so  long  as  no  crossing  occurs  with  differently
developed  races.  The  distrust  entertained  of  the  vigour  and
longevity  of  races  that  have  long  been  propagated  only  by
means  of  intermarriage  within  a  confined  circle  of  kindred
types,  finds  nothing  to  justify  it  in  a  natural  race-character,
and  holds  good  only  where  in  particular  families  one-sided

506  BOOK  IV. CIIAPTEK  V.

influences  of  civilisation  have  given  to  the  more  general
character  a  special  development  that,  continuously  advancing,
puts  out  of  balance  the  whole  organic  life.  In  surveying  the
history  of  nations,  we  find  that,  wherever  an  undisturbed
home-bred  succession  of  generations  has  taken  place,  the  old
national  type  of  countenance  and  peculiarities  of  bodily
structure  have  gone  on  unaltered  for  thousands  of  years.  The
monuments  of  Assyria  and  Egypt,  which  precede  our  chrono
logy  by  many  centuries,  enable  us  to  recognise  in  their
pictorial  representations  the  figures  and  features  of  the  same
races  that  now  occupy  these  regions.  The  type  of  the
Hebrew  people,  in  spite  of  its  dispersion  through  all  climes,
has  been  preserved  distinct,  and  exhibits  only  a  certain
number  of  constantly  recurring  variations.  Even  the  distinc
tive  features  of  the  Greek,  the  Roman,  the  Keltic,  and  the
Teutonic  build  may  still  in  particular  districts  be  recognised
as  the  prevailing  type  of  bodily  formation,  in  spite  of  the
extraordinary  intermixtures  to  which  in  the  course  of  time
these  stocks  have  been  subjected.  In  fact  there  is  no  reason
to  expect  anything  else.  The  organization  of  a  natural  species
is  not  a  piece  of  machinery  so  ill-fitted  and  easily  broken
that  we  should  anticipate  its  being  reproduced  entire  only  in
rare  cases  of  successful  propagation  ;  we  would  do  wrong  to
transfer  a  distrust  of  this  sort,  which  seizes  us  in  calculating
the  results  of  artificial  contrivances,  to  the  foreseen  regular
order  of  natural  events.  The  tenacious  persistency  of  species
is  therefore  far  less  mysterious  than  their  first  development,
if  we  assume  that  they  too,  with  their  much  greater  differences
from  one  another,  have  been  evolved  from  a  more  general
generic  character  in  the  same  manner  in  which  we  see  the
slighter  variations  of  individual  constitution  arise  from  the
type  of  a  family.

That  this  much  discussed  problem  of  the  specific  unity  or
diversity  of  the  whole  human  race  cannot  as  yet  be  definitely
solved,  will,  I  believe,  be  pretty  generally  the  impression  of
unprejudiced  persons.  But  one  doubt  forces  itself  at  once
on  us  in  regard  to  the  setting  of  the  problem.  To  give

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  It  ACE.  507

a  historic  parallel  to  the  logical  and  physical  significance  of
the  graded  system  of  classes  in  which  we  combine  families
under  a  tribal  name,  arrange  tribes  into  a  nation,  and
bring  nations  under  the  category  of  a  race,  till  at  last  we
bring  all  races  together  under  the  one  notion  of  the  human
kind,  would  be  to  make  an  arbitrary  assumption.  Its  mean
ing,  no  doubt,  is  not  exclusively  logical ;  for  we  cannot  mean
to  classify  and  arrange  forms  simply  for  convenience  in
reviewing  them,  -.part  from  there  being  in  their  nature  any
affinities  to  justify  alike  their  combination  and  the  order  of
succession  in  which  we  place  them.  But  just  as  we  look
on  the  different  genera  of  plants  as  kindred  modifications  of
a  general  type  that  in  itself,  as  an  actual  plant,  never
existed,  so  the  various  races  of  mankind  may  be  variations
of  a  generic  character  that  just  as  little  preceded  them  in
actual  Nature.  They  are  collectively  the  possible  cases  that
may  arise  from  the  general  equation  of  the  human  being,
when  the  several  constants  on  which  the-  characteristic
individual  form  of  its  constitution  depends,  are  determined  in
this  way  or  in  that.  In  our  ignorance  of  this  equation  and
the  mode  of  its  physical  realization  we  make  an  arbitrary
hypothesis,  if  one  that  cannot  at  once  be  disproved,  when  we
suppose  that  the  generic  type  was  originally  embodied  in  an
actual,  and  only  in  one  actual,  form,  but  that  the  varying
determination  of  the  constants,  by  which  subsequent  differ
ences  were  to  be  brought  about,  took  place  in  this  already
existent  organism  supplementarily  and  successively  through
the  action  of  external  vital  conditions.  AVe  must,  on  the
other  hand,  ever  bear  in  niiiid  the  opposite  possibility,  that
the  realization  of  the  general  type  in  any  actual  form,  if  it
once  took  place,  prevented  the  historic  development  of  other
forms  out  of  that,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  child's  bodily
structure  is  indefinite  within  wide  limits  before  it  is  begotten,
and  while  it  is  only  the  organization  of  the  parents  that  is
fixed,  whereas  afterwards  it  has  one  constitution  to  the
exclusion  of  all  others.

It  is  natural  that  we  should  seek  to  decide  between  the  two

508  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

possibilities  by  an  accurate  analysis  of  any  particular  case
brought  under  our  notice.  No  one  will  imagine  a  primitive
mammal  that  once  lived,  and  from  which  by  means  of  external
influences,  elephants,  camels,  and  oxen  gradually  came  into
being ;  in  the  varieties  of  the  human  race,  on  the  other  hand,
the  differences  are  not  so  excessive  as  to  render  impossible  a
historical  derivation  from  a  single  source.  It  is  true  that  no
race  of  men  possesses  any  physiologically  important  organ
denied  to  another  race ;  in  none  is  the  normal  number  of
multiple  parts,  such  as  teeth  or  fingers,  different  from  what  it
is  in  another;  no  single  joint  of  the  skeleton,  no  muscular
layer,  is  formed  or  situated  on  different  plans  in  different
races ;  all  are  formed  erect,  all  capable  of  speech ;  to  all
physiological  processes  are  assigned  on  a  common  plan  ;  in  the
duration  of  life,  of  pregnancy,  in  the  attainment  of  puberty,
along  with  numerous  fluctuations  to  which,  as  regards  eaci.  of
these  points,  the  human  race  is  liable,  there  are  no  constant
differences  of  time  distinguishing  one  race  from  another.  The
actual  differences  are  varieties  in  the  proportions  of  size  of  the
parts  of  the  body,  and  more  especially  in  the  form  and  colon!
of  the  external  coverings.  Assuredly,  if  Nature  had  not  made
the  Negro  black,  the  Indian  red,  the  rest  of  the  organization
of  these  races  (whatever  might  have  been  the  case  with  the
analysis-loving  naturalist)  would  never  have  suggested  to  the
imagination  of  men  in  general  any  reason  for  treating  them
as  distinct  species,  and  excluding  them  from  an  origin  common
to  all.  For  the  actual  modifications,  like  all  differences  resting
only  on  proportions  of  magnitude  and  their  changing  combina
tions,  pass  into  one  another  by  innumerable  gradations ;  even
the  contrasts  of  colour  are  made  less  striking  by  the  observa
tion  that,  while  properly  there  are  no  intermediate  tints,  yet
after  all  each  race  can  show  the  distinctive  pigment  of  every
other  in  single  cases,  in  particular  spots  of  the  skin,  and  that
consequently  even  these  divergences  may  apparently  be  evolved
out  of  a  common  generic  type.  Finally,  let  us  add  that  the
different  races  can  be  propagated  by  crossing,  and  as  the
result  of  all,  it  will  appear  that  these  varieties  of  the  human

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  KACE.  509

race  are  connected  together  l>y  the  closest  analogy  of  physical
formation.

But  all  these  circumstances,  even  the  last,  as  I  shall  subse
quently  have  occasion  to  remark,  do  not  prove  that  a  historical
affinity  of  origin  is  involved  in  the  physical  analogy.  Con
ciliatory  adjustments  that  aim  at  minimizing  the  interval
between  two  extremes  by  means  of  innumerable  middle  points,
are  not  to  be  trusted ;  for,  granting  that  by  imperceptible
alterations  of  quantity  the  one  may  pass  into  the  other,  in
this  very  way  anything  may  be  made  out  of  anything.  But
the  question  is,  whether  Xature  with  her  operative  forces  can
accomplish  in  the  material  on  which  she  has  to  work  the
series  of  changes  that  our  imagination  can  with  the  utmost
ease  carry  out  in  a  merely  imaginary  form.  It  is  not  dilli-
cult,  by  a  constantly  repeated  slight  blunting  and  sharpening
of  the  edges  and  corners,  to  convert  in  thought  any  crystal
form  into  any  other.  But  the  minerals  themselves  are  less
tractable  ;  they  often  absolutely  decline  to  assume,  besides
their  usual  form,  another  which,  viewed  merely  geometrically,
might  seem  closely  allied  to  the  former ;  for  the  formative
forces,  the  interval  between  the  two,  is  wide  and  not  to  bo
bridged.  As  respects  the  human  form,  we  know  not  what  is
the  value  for  it — whether  great  or  small — of  the  differences
of  proportion  which  we  meet  with  in  the  races ;  the  value  of
the  colour  of  the  skin,  on  the  other  hand,  I  am  inclined  to
estimate  very  highly,  for  by  the  general  formation  of  the  skin
man  is  essentially  distinguished  from  the  lower  animals.

Now  it  is  true  that  the  contrasts  between  particular  races,
formerly  deemed  to  be  striking,  have  to  us  now  been  toned
down  by  our  better  acquaintance  with  many  intermediate
forms  that  fill  the  interval  between  the  extremes.  At  the
same  time,  I  cannot  find  here  a  cogent  proof  of  the  unity  of
the  human  race.  Historically  it  is  extremely  improbable  that
at  an  early  period  crossing  should  not  have  taken  place  even
between  races  of  very  different  types,  whence  by  degrees  a
number  of  intermediate  forms  may  have  arisen.  We  cannot,
therefore,  be  disposed  at  once  to  look  on  any  peculiarity  of

510  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

race  now  presenting  itself  as  an  original  and  distinctive  form
of  the  human  species.  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of
the  subject,  and  has  always  been  the  custom,  to  direct  atten
tion  here  (as  in  the  examination  of  any  complex  case  where
many  intermediate  stages  connect  very  dissimilar  extremes)
more  particularly  to  those  conspicuous  points  in  the  series
where  marks,  that  thence  in  both  directions  decline  in  distinct
ness  and  purity,  are  most  definitely  concentrated  into  a
complete  and  expressive  image.  Now  if  we  find  that  there
are  several  such  points ;  if  we  find  that  a  number  of  peculiar
traits,  which  occur  in  different  races  as  isolated  foreshadowings,
are  gradually  accumulated  in  others,  and  form  among  them
selves  a  certain  exclusive  combination ;  if  we  find  that  at  last,
each  severally  standing  out  in  greater  distinctness,  they  are
united  in  a  more  and  more  firm  and  characteristic  combination,
and  that,  moreover,  the  image  thus  arising  is  no  chance
Anomaly  occurring  somewhere,  but  the  uniform  stamp  of  a
great  and  widespread  nation  reproducing  itself  always  after
the  same  manner:  these  facts  unquestionably  admit  but  of
the  one  probable  inference — that  in  every  such  image  we
have  an  original  typal  form  that  is  not  the  result  of  a  gradual
confluence  of  many  and  various  determining  circumstances.
We  should  be  much  more  inclined  to  look  on  the  intermediate
forms,  lying  between  the  conspicuous  points,  as  results  of
subsidiary  agencies  by  which  one  or  another  of  the  steadier
race-forms  has  been  modified  into  something  less  characteristic.
The  forms  of  the  Negro  and  the  Ecd  Indian  are  examples  of
two  such  thoroughly  living  and  harmonious  pictures,  the
details  of  which  an  ingenuous  observer  could  hardly  derive
from  a  myriad  different  petty  influences  from  without.  As
against  this,  it  is  of  very  little  consequence  that  even  without
any  crossing  of  the  races,  many  European  heads  exhibit  the
type  of  the  Negro  or  his  woolly  hair — a  fact,  moreover,  which,
if  one  does  not  take  a  superficial  similarity  for  real  likeness,
is  probably  far  more  rare  than  is  supposed.  It  is  of  little
consequence  that  even  among  Negroes  here  and  there  white  or
fair-complexioned  children  are  born,  and  among  Europeans  cases

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  KACE.  511

of  partial  darkness  of  skin  occur.  All  these  phenomena  may
be  explained  from  disease  or  conditions  limited  in  space  and
time ;  none  of  them  is  found  among  great  nations  of  these
races  as  a  manifestation  of  their  vital  plastic  impulses  recur
ring  uniformly  through  centuries.  So  long,  therefore,  as  other
considerations  do  not  force  on  us  an  opposite  view,  the  original
difference  of  a  number  of  race-forms,  not  very  large  though
perhaps  never  to  be  precisely  fixed,  will  be  the  more  natural
supposition ;  yet  no  doubt  there  is  an  independent,  scientific
interest  in  investigating  the  possibility  of  one  of  these  types
being  modified  into  another.

Varieties  in  habitat,  climate,  food,  and  manner  of  life,
as  well  as  mental  culture,  have  been  set  down  as  condi
tions  of  this  conversion.  There  are,  however,  no  historical
observations  to  prove  that  a  combination  of  these  fluctuating
elements  is  capable  of  bringing  about  such  extensive  alterations
in  human  development.  We  are  forced  to  note  piecemeal  the
t fleets  exerted  by  each  of  them  witlu'n  a  smaller  compass  on
the  form  of  certain  comparatively  well-known  races,  and  not
even  all  of  these  single  influences  are  established  on  adequate
observations ;  .still  less  trustworthy  will  be  the  conception  we-
form  of  their  joint  result.  The  effect  of  light  and  shade  on
the  skin  has  no  doubt  always  been — for  the  popular  imagina
tion  at  least — the  most  convincing  evidence  of  the  power  of
climate.  That  the  blazing  sun  of  Soudan  darkened  the  white
man  into  a  Negro,  was  held  to  be  the  most  natural  hypothesis,
as  a  counterpart  to  which  the  other  has  not  failed  to  bi-
advanced,  if  somewhat  less  boldly,  that  the  primeval  black
man  has  gradually,  under  favourable  conditions,  been  trans
formed  into  the  white  Caucasian.  The  white  race  seemed  in
its  two  varieties,  of  the  blonde  with  fair  or  red  hair,  fair
complexion  and  blue  eyes,  and  the  brunette  with  black  hair,
dark  complexion,  and  black  eyes,  to  show  a  tendency  to  split
up  into  different  races ;  on  the  further  supposition  that  the
colour  of  hair  and  of  skin  results  from  the  same  physiological
cause,  there  seemed  every  reason  to  expect  that  the  various
types  might  all  be  evolved  out  of  this  one.  The  facts  did  not

512  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

justify  this  expectation.  The  whole  continent  of  America,
extending  through  all  the  zones,  was  inhabited  by  a  cinnamon-
coloured  race  identical  throughout,  in  spite  of  numerous  modifi
cations,  to  which  only  the  tribes  lying  farthest  to  the  north,  in
the  polar  region,  do  not  belong  ;  in  the  tropical  zone  of  the  old
world,  going  from  west  to  east,  \ve  find  Negro  tribes,  browD
Malay,  and  white  Caucasian  races  living  under  hardly  distin
guishable  climatic  conditions ;  in  the  temperate  zones  occur
both  the  Caucasian  and  the  Mongolian  types.  Moreover,  never,
where  intermarriage  between  the  races  was  effectually  excluded,
has  a  white  race  in  the  tropics  acquired,  along  with  superficial
darkening  of  the  complexion,  the  velvety  smoothness  of  skin,
the  crisp  woolly  hair,  the  shape  of  head,  the  type  of  mental
life  peculiar  to  the  black  Negro  race ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,
though  the  Negro's  skin  becomes  lighter  in  colour  in  a  coldei
ungenial  clime,  and  his  countenance  of  a  higher  order  under
improved  conditions  of  life,  has  he  ever  really  taken  on  all  the
refinements  of  the  Caucasian  type.  After  America  has  for
centuries  been  occupied  by  the  two  races  beside  one  another
tvithout  their  showing  any  such  results  of  a  common  climate,
it  is  idle  still  to  recur  to  isolated  unanalyzable  cases  of  such
effects  alleged  to  have  been  known  at  an  earlier  time.  That
in  this  matter  thousands  would  effect  more  than  hundreds  of
years  is  improbable ;  for  during  thousands  of  years  we  find
that  far  less  striking  differences  of  constitution  in  closely
allied  races  have  persisted  without  any  diminution.  A  com
promise  has  been  attempted  with  these  facts  of  experience.
Each  race,  it  has  been  said,  proceeded  from  the  primitive  race
at  the  dawn  of  history,  though  not  necessarily  at  the  same
time,  in  a  climate  that  suited  it,  but  when  once  in  existence,
it  became  fixed ;  and  the  general  and  fundamental  type  of
humanity,  after  it  has  assumed  one  of  these  specific  forms,
can  no  longer  by  means  of  reversed  climatic  influences  be
brought  back  to  its  primitive  form  or  changed  into  the  forms
of  other  races ;  only  by  means  of  intermarriage  are  inter
mediate  forms  produced.  Many  events,  it  is  said,  have
further  led  to  tho  varieties  thus  originating  crossing  the

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACK.

boundaries  of  their  original  seats,  and  their  present  climatic
distribution  does  not  present  the  climatic  conditions  under
which  they  arose.  One  can  see,  however,  how  little  difference
there  really  is  between  this  theory  and  the  other,  that  the
primeval  unity  consisted  only  in  the  specific  notion  of  iiiun  ;
for  as,  even  according  to  the  theory,  the  Caucasian  can  only
be  one  of  these  types  derived  from  climate,  sincti  had  it  been
the  primitive  type  it  would  still  have  been  convertible  into
other  types,  the  doctrine  of  a  physically  realized  and  histori
cally  existent  primitive  form  is  an  arbitrary  addition  to  facts.

Xor  are  observations  in  the  animal  world  favourable  to
the  strung  influence  of  climate.  One  does  not  care  to  cite
examples — the  force  of  which  rests  on  an  equally  insecure  basis
of  conjecture — as  perhaps  the  extraordinary  variety  of  breeds
of  dogs.  As  we  never  find  one  of  these  change  its  type  with
out  crossing  with  another,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
they  are  various  degenerate  kinds  of  a  primitive  race  ;  on  the
contrary,  their  original  variety  is  no  less  probable  than  that
of  men.  On  the  other  hand,  we  no  doubt  find  oxen,  horses,
and  sheep,  under  the  influence  of  domestication  and  of  climate,
dividing  into  fancy  species  that  in  certain  external  feature.,
differ  pretty  decidedly  from  the  general  type  of  their  kind,
not  merely  from  the  growth  of  fat  or  of  wool  having  been
encouraged,  and  from  particular  excessive  or  rare  formations
of  horns  and  tail  having  been  produced,  but  also  on  account
of  alterations  in  the  proportions  of  the  skeleton-frame  that  aie
propagated  if  the  breed  is  kept  pure.  These  varieties  corre
spond  to  the  differences  of  stature  which,  within  the  limits  of
a  single  race  of  men,  we  find  occurring  and  just  as  often
failing  to  occur  in  accordance  with  external  conditions.
Usually  the  figure  becomes  shorter  as  the  cold  of  the  climate
increases,  yet  at  the  same  time  the  maximum  height  is  found  in
the  temperate  zones  ;  tolerably  dry  and  warm  plains  turn  out
forms  at  once  stout  and  strongly  built ;  dump  lo\v  lands  produce
limp  corpulent  figures;  the  inhabitants  of  mountainous  regions
are  shorter,  square-built,  lean  ;  overwork  begun  during  growth
keeps  down  the  stature,  and  on  the  average  the  dwellers  in

VOL.  i.  -  K

514  BOOK  IV. CIIAPTEli  V.

towns  are  taller  and  slenderer  than  those  in  the  country.  But
to  all  these  rules  there  are  numerous  exceptions,  and  they
remind  us  that  external  conditions  are  a  highly  complex  web,
the  knowledge  of  which  is  still  in  its  infancy.  Among  the
lower  animals  those  varieties,  however  they  may  have
originated,  apparently  have  not  the  power  to  maintain  them
selves  after  their  causes  have  ceased  to  act  and  in  a  new
climate ;  they  relapse  by  degrees  into  the  more  general  type
of  the  species.

Experience,  on  the  whole,  therefore,  is  not  in  favour  of  any
very  important  modifying  power  in  the  external  influences
with  which  we  are  at  present  acquainted ;  and  in  fact
attempts  have  often  been  made  to  account  for  the  formation
of  races  by  climatic  influences  in  the  past  unknown  to  us,
but  supposed  to  have  acted  with  greater  intensity.  There  is
a  certain  piling  of  difficulties  one  above  another  in  supposing
for  a  phenomenon  whose  reality  is  uncertain  causes  of  which  we
can  form  no  conception.  Should  it  be  maintained  in  evidence
that  the  earth's  life  was  of  old  more  creative  and  intense  than
it  is  now,  this  somewhat  vague  idea  can  quite  as  easily  be
made  use  of  on  the  other  side.  The  more  productive  the
earth  was,  the  more  likely  is  it  to  have  brought  into  being
several  types  together.  Nevertheless,  the  hypothesis  of  the
original  unity  of  the  human  race  cannot  be  absolutely  dis
proved,  and  however  forcible  may  be  the  analogies  on  which
the  aversion  to  it  rests  on  the  part  of  scientific  inquirers,
they  yet  are  inadequate  to  constrain  belief  in  a  plurality
of  primitive  types.

Should,  however,  the  idea  of  a  gradual  evolution  of  races
by  means  of  external  influences  be  again  taken  up,  though  it
involves  the  dependence  of  an  organized  type  on  the  inorganic
world  no  less  completely  than  the  most  thoroughgoing
Materialism,  we  would  look  on  climatic  influences  merely  as
subsidiary  conditions  by  which  the  formative  impulse  may
indeed  be  carried  out  of  its  original  course,  but  can  be  diverted
into  a  new  channel  oidy  because  it  has  a  natural  tendency  to
enter  and  remain  in  the  latter.  When  to  one  chemical

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN KACE.  515

element  is  added  a  greater  quantity  of  a  second  than  is
required  to  produce  the  lowest  stage  of  combination  of  the
two,  the  surplus  remains  at  iirst  uncombined.  But  if  it  is
added  to,  a  point  may  be  reached  at  which  under  favourable
circumstances  this  increased  quantity  of  the  second  element
is  wholly  absorbed  by  the  Iirst,  and  blends  with  it  in  a  new
and  peculiar  combination.  In  like  manner  one  might  imagine
that  the  sum  of  external  influences  exerts  on  a  fixed  organic
type  modifying  effects  that  for  a  long  time  are  powerless  to
prevent  the  continuous  reproduction  of  this  species,  and  that
accordingly  give  rise  merely  to  subordinate  individual  or
national  peculiarities,  similar  to  the  varieties  among  domestic
animals  which  last  only  so  long  as  their  predisposing  causes,
lint  were  such  influences  to  last  longer,  a  point  might  be
ivaehed  at  which  it  becomes  easier  for  the  organizing  force  to
maintain  itself,  if  it  wholly  gives  up  the  original  form  and  passes
into  another — one,  namely,  that  was  equally  with  itself  con
tained  in  the  general  symmetry  of  the  organism,  not  merely  as
a  potentiality,  but  as  a  favoured  potentiality — because  in  it,
as  in  the  former,  the  formative  impulses  have  also  been
brought  into  a  stable  equilibrium  capable  of  constant  repro
duction.  We  should  then  perceive  the  various  possible  types
as  a  series  possessing  different  maxima  of  fixity,  of  internal
harmony,  and  of  organic  power  of  self-preservation.  If  the
organic  development  of  one  of  these  maxima,  these  select
types,  is  modified  by  external  agencies,  it  first  of  all  produces
fluctuating,  variable,  uncertain  forms  constantly  gravitating
back  towards  the  more  fixed  type  to  which  they  are  nearest,
when  external  circumstances  permit.  If,  however,  the  forma
tive  impulse  has  once  been  brought  by  a  sum  of  modifying
agencies  to  the  watershed  between  its  own  ground  and  that  of
its  contiguous  maximum,  it  is  carried  fairly  out  of  itself  no
longer  by  the  force  of  external  circumstances,  but  by  its  own
weight,  its  own  accelerated  velocity,  again  seeking  a  sure
equipoise  of  forces,  and  forms  arise  on  a  new  and  once  more
constant  type,  which,  like  the  other,  is  a  root  of  the  general
form-equation.  Such  a  conception  would  explain  the  strong

516  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

tenacity  with  which  certain  leading  types,  having  heconie  inde
pendent  of  external  conditions,  are  everywhere  preserved ;  it
would  at  the  same  time  explain  how  around  these  a  great
number  of  variable,  easily-effaced  intermediate  forms  truly  de
pendent  on  outside  influences  are  grouped  ;  and  lastly,  it  would
indicate  the  possibility  of  one  of  these  leading  forms  arising  out
of  another,  without  its  being  necessary  to  refer  the  transforma
tion  to  wholly  abnormal  and  unknown  causes.  Although  the
influence  of  external  agents,  continued  through  thousands  of
years,  could  not  effect  such  a  change  in  a  race  whose  nature
was  strongly  predisposed  to  one  fixed  course  of  development,
it  was  quite  possible  for  a  variety  of  forms  to  be  produced  by
this  same  influence  when  it  lighted  upon  a  formative  impulse
that,  besides  many  accidental  shapes  in  which  it  cannot  abide,
can  assume  several  forms  of  a  like  fixed  character.  But  no
doubt  experience  has  not  yet  proved  what  we  are  here
assuming — namely,  that  a  number  of  transitional  forms  when
removed  from  their  home  are  less  immutable  than  the  main
types  from  which  we  supposed  them  to  commence.

§  3.  In  any  case  the  variety  of  actually  distinct  forms  is
too  great  for  description  here,  and  in  the  interest  of  general
anthropology  it  is  not  necessary  to  perform  this  comprehensive
ethnographic  task.  But,  attending  merely  to  the  leading
types,  there  seems  no  reason  to  depart  from  the  division  laid
down  by  Blumenbach  into  the  live  main  stocks  of  the  Negroes,
the  American  lied  Indians,  the  Malays,  the  Mongolians,  and
the  Caucasians.

With  exception  of  the  inner  surfaces  of  the  hands  and
feet,  which  remain  of  a  light  flesh-colour,  the  body  of  a  Negro
child  —  at  birth  reddish  all  over  —  very  soon  becomes
darkened  by  a  layer  of  pigment-cells  lying  below  the  epi
dermis.  The  black,  which  as  it  is  lighter  or  deeper  in  tint
partly  serves  to  mark  national  differences  of  race,  becomes
more  intense  through  heat  and  light,  while  in  age  or  in  a
cooler  temperature  it  grows  paler ;  the  deepest  shade  is  found
not  at  the  equator,  but  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  line.
The  skin  is  oily  and  of  velvety  softness,  unpleasant  to

VARIETIES  OK  THE  HUMAN UACE.  517

Europeans  1'iuia  a  constant  aud  stroug-suielliug  perspiration.
The  hair  jet-black,  longish  instead  of  round  in  transverse
section,  in  early  childhood  soft  but  soon  growing  crisper,
clustering  in  single  tufts,  is  twisted  in  very  small  curls,  and
knotted  into  a  thick  woolly  texture.  The  dimensions  of  the
body  in  many  respects  recall  animal  forms.  The  pelvis,  at
least  among  males,  is  narrower  than  in  the  Caucasian  race,
and  the  Indies  are  more  perpendicular  —  hence  there  is
l.-ss  breadth  across  the  hips,  and  the  belly  protrudes.  The
upper  arm  is  shorter,  or  at  any  rate  not  longer,  than  that  of
the  European,  but  the  long  forearm  and  no  less  long  and
narrow  hand  witli  long  fingers  give  strikingly  the  effect  of
length  of  arm.  The  femur  also  is  shorter  in  proportion  to
the  tibia,  the  leg  is  lean,  and  said  often  to  present  very
distinctly,  by  compression  of  the  sides,  the  form  of  an  animal's
leg.  A  not  highly  developed  calf  leads  finally  to  a  long  Hat
foot,  the  whole  sole  of  which  touches  the  ground,  without
instep,  with  a  broad  low  heel  and  small  toes,  of  which  the
iirst  is  more  distinctly  than  among  Europeans  shorter  than
the  second,  and  separated  from  the  others  by  a  wider  interval.
A  short  muscular  neck  supports  the  head,  which  is  flattened
at  the  sides,  and  rather  long  from  back  to  front.  Joining  the
low  retreating  forehead,  between  the  obtusely  projecting  edges
of  the  eye-sockets,  is  the  Hat  bridge  of  the  nose,  with  its
round  nostrils,  high  angular  cheek-bones,  wide  prognathous
jaws,  with  rows  of  teeth  meeting  one  another  obliquely,
and  thick  swollen  lips.  The  retreating  chin  shows  very  little
beard,  the  ear  is  small  but  thick  in  the  lobe,  and  stands  out
from  the  head.  A  horizontal  line  touching  the  opening  of
the  outer  auditory  passage  forms  with  another  joining  the
most  advanced  points  of  the  forehead  and  upper  jaw  an  angle
of  70°-75°.  In  all  races  this  angle  is  greater  for  the  child
than  for  the  adult ;  in  the  Xegro  the  facial  part  of  the  head
is  particularly  large,  and  the  skull  so  much  the  smaller  in
proportion.  Yet  the  ugly  picture  formed  by  the  combination
of  all  these  brute-like  traits  is  in  many  tribes  redeemed  by
greater  refinement  of  type.  The  ebony  blacks  of  loloff,  the

518  BOOK  IV. CIIAPTEI!  V.

reddish  blacks  of  Ashantee,  the  yellowish-black  Mandingoos
and  Fellatahs,  whose  intellectual  capacities  are  superior,  have
likewise  finer  figures  and  sometimes  handsome  features ;  even
the  broad  flattened  nose  is  in  some  tribes  replaced  by  one
high  and  almost  aquiline.  The  whole  race  was  originally
confined  to  the  interior,  west,  and  south  cf  the  African
continent;  it  has  as  neighbours  in  the  south-west  the  dirty
light-brown,  stunted,  lean,  and  ugly  nation  of  the  Hottentots ;
in  the  south-east,  the  taller,  well-grown,  bronze-coloured  race
of  the  Kaffirs.

The  red  race  inhabits  the  whole  of  the  American  continent
with  the  exception  of  the  polar  regions.  Their  colour,  which
varies  between  that  of  moist  shoe-leather  and  the  different
shades  of  darker  and  lighter  red-brown,  is  made  darker  and
more  decided  by  much  active  bodily  exercise.  In  spite  of
manifold  differences  between  the  several  tribes,  observers  have
always  dwelt  on  the  uniform  impression  created  by  the  appear
ance  of  all.  Their  build  is  in  general  not  very  high,  but
thick-set  and  square,  chest  and  arms  muscular  and  well-
developed,  the  legs  less  full  and  well-shaped.  The  hands,
whose  coldness  is  said  to  be  a  characteristic  mark  found  even
in  European  half-breeds,  are  small,  as  also  the  feet ;  fingers
and  toes  are  long  and  narrow,  the  great  toe  somewhat  separate
from  the  others ;  the  carriage  is  erect,  the  abdomen  long  and
protruding.  The  head,  to  which  various  tribes  give  an  artificial
shape  by  the  use  of  compresses  and  bandages  in  childhood,  is
broad  in  the  middle,  the  occiput  being  little  developed.  The
face  is  large  but  not  flat ;  from  the  cheek-bones  being  very
high  but  not  angular,  it  has  its  greatest  width  in  that  region
of  the  cheeks,  which  are  rounded,  full,  and  undulating ;  but
even  in  profile  the  distance  from  the  ear  to  the  contour  of  the
face  is  considerable.  The  low  retreating  forehead,  narrowing
towards  the  top,  surmounts  with  projecting  bosses  wide,  deep-
set  sockets  sloping  somewhat  inwards  and  downwards  ;  the  eyes
themselves,  with  black  or  brown  iris,  overarched  by  rounded
eyebrows,  have  a  stern,  grave  glance  that  is  said  to  be  in
contrast  with  the  softer  expression  of  the  large  mouth.  The

VAKIETIKS  OF  THE  HUMAN RACE.  519

nose  is  inure  or  less  curved,  often  aquiline,  or  with  a  break
in  its  outline ;  the  lips  are  broad,  but  not  thick ;  the  ear
dainty  and  small ;  the  beard,  if  any,  generally  very  scanty,
the  hair  black,  coarse,  long,  shining,  and  quite  straight.
Degenerate  as  are  many  of  these  tribes,  their  type  of  structure
is  yet  one  that  lends  itself  to  (esthetic  idealizing  far  more  than
that  of  the  Negro.

The  Malay  race  presents  a  less  characteristic  form.  The
islands  of  the  Indian  and  Pacific  Oceans  are  occupied  by  a
mixed  population  whose  descent  and  connections  with  the
other  races  are  hard  to  ascertain.  Among  these  tribes  has
been  distinguished  that  of  the  Malays,  who  apparently,
leaving  their  homes  in  the  Philippine  and  other  adjacent
islands,  have  occupied  on  the  continent  the  peninsula  of
Malacca.  Their  complexion  is  of  manifold  shades  of  brown,
from  chestnut  colour  to  rhubarb-yellow ;  the  luxuriant  hair  is
black,  very  curly  and  soft ;  the  form  slender  and  of  middling
height,  but  muscular  and  capable  of  extraordinary  agility  ;  the
hands  and  feet  small.  The  skull  is  tolerably  narrow,  the
forehead  high  and  arched  in  a  curve,  the  eyes  wide,  the  nose
broad  with  open  nostrils,  the  mouth  large,  the  upper  jaw
slightly  projecting,  the  chin  pointed,  the  features  of  the  oblong
face  strongly  marked  rather  than  rounded  oif.

The  yellow  Mongolian  race  is  spread  over  a  vast  extent  of
territory.  It  occupies  the  polar  regions  of  Europe  and
America,  and  in  Asia  extends  fmm  the  Caspian  Sea  and  tin?
Ural  Mountains  to  Japan  and  Coiva,  from  the  Arctic  Ocean
to  the  Himalayas,  the  Ganges,  the  Gulf  of  Bengal.  The  great
variety  of  climates  embraced  within  this  extensive  region,  and
the  different  stages  of  civilisation  reached  by  its  inhabitants,
produce  diilerences  as  regards  even  the  corporeal  characteristics
of  the  race.  The  most  complete  representatives  of  the
Mongolian  type  are  the  Ptill  nomadic  pastoral  tribes  of
Central  Asia.  The  bullet-shaped  or  almost  die-shaped  skull
presents  a  low,  retreating,  lint  forehead,  very  high  angular
cheek-bones,  that  give  the  Hat  face  its  greatest  breadth
between  the  large  prominent  ears.  The  nose  is  short,  broad,

520  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V.

and  flat,  with  flattened  forehead  above  it;  the  narrow-
slit  eyes,  turned  slantwise  within  and  downwards,  stand  far
apart  from  each  other,  their  inner  angle  is  rounded,  the  lids
heavy,  eyebrows  scanty.  The  hair,  which  is  not  plentiful,  is
black  and  straight,  the  figure  of  middling  height,  well-
proportioned,  the  light  and  wiry  frame  sparingly  covered
with  flesh.  The  colour  of  the  skin,  light-yellow  or  brownish
among  these  nomadic  hordes,  is  darker  in  the  polar  tribes,
who,  stunted  in  frame  and  endowed  with  an  exceedingly
susceptible  nervous  system,  live  under  the  most  untoward
external  conditions.  Among  the  settled  and  more  civilised
nations  of  the  race,  the  Chinese  and  Japanese,  the  complexion
is  fairer,  and  especially  in  the  women  of  the  higher  classes
approaches  the  Caucasian  white  ;  features  and  figure  re
produce  the  race-type  more  closely,  and  exhibit  its  most
refined  aspect.

It  is  unnecessary  expressly  to  mention  the  well-known
peculiarities  of  the  Caucasian  race,  its  oval-shaped  face,  its
high  arched  forehead,  its  vertical  profile  with  compressed  lips
and  rounded  chin,  and  the  other  proportions  of  its  form.
Seeing  that  this  race,  as  exhibiting  the  historical  development
of  the  human  race,  will  form  the  main  subject  of  our  sub
sequent  inquiries,  we  shall  have  occasion  to  make  further
mention  of  the  characteristic  traits  of  its  several  branches.

§  4.  We  must  allow  that  but  few  details  of  the  typical
pictures  now  sketched  apply  universally  to  the  very  various
forms  which,  in  the  course  of  time,  we  find  actually  developed
within  one  and  the  same  race.  We  have,  not  without  fanciful
additions  of  dubious  authority,  but  drawn  images,  such  as
seemed  to  us  best  to  combine  in  a  characteristic  and  complete
whole  the  various  peculiarities  which  we  meet  with  singly  in
the  representatives  of  a  race.  We  are  ignorant  whether  the
aesthetic  impression  of  whose  power  we  are  conscious  has
any  physiological  significance ;  whether  these  expressive
sketches  contain  the  productive  fundamental  type  from  which
the  actual  forms  comprised  in  a  race  are  but  variously
directed  individual  deviations,  or  whether  they  do  not,  on  the

VAKIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  HACK.  521

contrary,  represent  only  the  possible  extremes  which  a  type,
corresponding  at  first  to  a  wholly  different  formula,  is
capable  of  realizing,  under  the  most  favourable  or  the  most
unfavourable  conditions.  How,  then,  the  numerous  half-way
forms  that  do  not  fall  entirely  under  any  of  our  sketches  are
to  be  made  to  lit  with  the  forms,  which  of  them  are  to
be  viewed  as  crosses  between  different  races,  which  as
climatic  transformations — the  answer  to  these  questions  we
must  leave  to  comparative  ethnography,  and  probably  to  a
distant  future.  Our  actual  observations  do  not  reach  far
enough  back  to  enable  us  confidently  to  estimate  the  influence
even  of  climate  ;  we  do  indeed  frequently  meet  with  tribes
whose  present  characteristics  seem  to  be  more  or  less
thoroughly  in  harmony  with  the  climatic  conditions  of  their
abodes  ;  but  then  we  do  not  know  the  previous  condition
which,  we  should  have  to  assume,  has  by  means  of  accommo
dation  to  these  conditions  been  converted  into  the  present
one  ;  and,  in  the  few  cases  where  we  have  historical  evidence
of  the  migrations  of  otherwise  known  races,  we  have  no
certainty  that  a  mixing  of  different  types  —  under  such
circumstances  probable — has  not  been  one  of  the  causes  of
the  change.

We  seem  to  have  in  the  common  approximation  among  the
descendants  of  the  most  heterogeneous  settlers  in  North
America  to  a  peculiar  type  one  instance  of  the  powerful
effect  of  climatic  conditions  ;  yet  we  are  at  a  loss  how  to
analyze  it ;  and  even  this  effect  does  not  come  near  the  limit
to  overpass  which  might  give  us  reason  to  suppose  that  a
new  race  had  been  established.  Our  information  is  not  more
trustworthy  as  regards  the  results  of  crossing.  Only  within
the  same  race  is  the  individual  constitution  of  the  parent  on
one  side  sometimes  almost  exclusively  transmitted  to  the
children  ;  the  first  crossing  between  different  types  always
produces  an  intermediate  form,  that  is,  a  compromise  between
the  corporeal  dissimilarities  of  the  parents.  In  regard  to
these  half-breeds  we  know  that  repeated  marriages  between
them  and  the  white  race  frequently  give  rise  to  forms  of

522  BOOK  IV. CHAPTER  V

great  beauty  and  also  of  good  mental  endowments  ;  but  it
remains  doubtful  whether  marriage  exclusively  among  them
selves  would  go  on  being  fertile  indefinitely.

Reference  to  these  relations  leads  us  to  another  point  of
view,  usually  occupied  at  once  in  an  examination  of  the  variety
of  human  types.  For  it  is  quite  common  to  preface  such
reflections  with  the  statement,  that  it  is  above  all  necessary
to  define  as  accurately  as  possible  the  notion  of  a  natural
kind  or  species  and  an  artificial  kind  or  variety.  Argu
ments  are  brought  forward  on  behalf  of  the  proposition,
that  all  the  races  of  men  are  but  varieties  of  one  species,  not
species  of  one  genus.  I  have  not  hitherto  made  use  of  these
terms  as  if  they  contained  a  decisive  motive  for  the  adoption
of  our  views,  and  in  fact  I  believe  that  a  detailed  introduction
and  discussion  of  them  is  only  fitted  to  bury  the  real  import
of  the  question  at  issue  under  a  logical  play  upon  words.  It
is  obviously  a  matter  of  no  importance  whether  we  choose
one  or  another  name  for  the  distinctions  of  human  races  ;  but
we  seek  an  answer  to  the  question,  whether  they  can  all  have
actually  sprung  from  one  and  the  same  primitive  stock  by
generation  and  climatic  influences.  This  possibility  is
supposed  to  be  established  when  they  are  assumed  to  be
mere  varieties  of  one  species ;  they  then  have  a  common  law
of  formation  that  exhibits  itself  in  various  forms  only  by
means  of  various  determinations  of  particular  magnitudes  in
it  left  indefinite.  Our  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  formation,
however,  does  not  allow  of  our  directly  proving  this  essential
identity  in  type  of  all  races,  or  even  their  identity  to  such  an
extent  that  all  distinctions  may  be  put  down  to  external
influences.  We  therefore  look  about  for  an  outward  mark  by
which  to  assure  ourselves  of  this,  and  think  we  have  found  it
in  the  fact  that  intermarriages  between  individuals  of  different
races  of  men  are  fruitful,  and  that  their  offspring  are  further
capable  of  propagation.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  this  mark
is  of  importance ;  for,  if  Nature  is  minded  to  keep  up  barriers
between  the  several  kinds  of  her  creatures,  there  must  some
where  be  a  difference  in  moulding  impulses  that  excludes  the

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  KACK.  523

production  of  intermediate  forms.  Certainly,  then,  according
to  this  evidence  of  experience,  men  belong  to  one  group
throughout  which  an  essentially  identical  formative  impulse
prevails.  But  I  know  not  what  we  gain  by  translating  this
fact  into  the  proposition  that  the  races  of  men  are  but  varieties
of  one  species.  Variety  as  applied  to  them  is  an  empty  name.
It'  it  means  merely  that  they  can  be  propagated  after  crossing
— this  they  have  always  done  and  continue  to  do  without
waiting  to  be  authorized  by  this  logical  title  ;  we  for  our  part
have  long  known  the  fact  in  so  far  as  it  really  is  one — so  far
as  it  is  not  guaranteed  by  experience,  we  shall  not  believe
it  more  iirmly  on  account  of  this  title.  For  what  is  there
to  hinder  our  supposing  that  the  external  influences  by
which  different  varieties  were  evolved  from  a  common
stock,  may  sometimes  produce  differences  that  prevent  their
continued  fertile  crossing,  that  thus  there  are  actual  varie
ties  of  the  same  species  without  that  mark  on  account  of
which  we  are  willing  to  grant  only  this  extent  of  difference
between  the  races  of  men  ?  The  unfruitf illness  of  many
marriages  within  the  same  race,  while  after  their  dissolution
both  parties  are  capable  of  propagation  with  other  individuals,
points  to  such  a  possibility.  But  if  the  term  rnri-ty  is  also
intended  to  imply  that  the  races  have  been  evolved  from  a
common  primitive  stock  by  means  of  external  influences,  what
is  there  to  justify  this  superfluity  of  assertion  ?  That  two
creatures  can  together  produce  a  third,  is  no  proof  that  they
must  have  been  both  derived  from  a  fourth.  The  above-
mentioned  crossing  is  of  tiro  organic  formative  impulses  ;
that  the  offspring  of  this  combination  are  capable  of  life  and
propagation,  is  no  guarantee  that  from  one  impulse  to  organic
formation,  simply  through  the  agency  of  external  conditions,
different  types  can  be  derived;  or  more  briefly,  that  it  is  pos
sible  to  fuse  such  organic  differences  proves  nothing  as  to  the
possibility  of  their  diverging  from  a  third.  On  the  contrary,  it
may  very  well  be  that  the  actual  races  of  men  are  so  far  homo
geneous  as  to  allow  of  hybrids,  while  yet  any  common  type
from  which  they  could  have  sprung  is  a  physical  impossibility.

524  BOOK  IV. CHAI'TEK  V.

In  this  case  species  and  variety  would  be  nothing  more  than
names  for  the  decree  of  affinity  between  the  existing  forms.

O  J  O

having  no  certain  significance  whatever  in  regard  to  the  mode
of  their  origination.  These  notions,  and  all  attempts  at  an
accurate  definition  of  them,  therefore  decide  nothing  ;  the  one
real  object  of  investigation  to  which  these  logical  prolixities
must  always  be  steadily  brought  back,  consists  in  the  problem,
not  merely  vaguely  to  conjecture,  but  to  name  external  con
ditions  through  which  one  race-form  can  be  proved  historically
and  if  possible  experimentally  to  have  been  converted  into
another.  Of  course  we  are  not  unreasonable  enough  to
require  literally  this  extreme  degree  of  palpable  evidence  ;
should  physiological  researches  be  carried  so  far  as  to  give  us
a  more  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  mechanism  of  pro
pagation  and  the  physical  processes  through  which  the
constitution  of  the  parents  and  additional  external  circum
stances  mould  the  form  of  future  generations,  then  perhaps
this  experimental  proof  might  be  replaced  by  a  physical
theory  ;  but  to  embellish  the  question  with  technical  terms  of
logic  yields  no  prospect  of  success.

Worst  of  all,  finally,  would  it  be  if  practically  also  inter
course  between  the  different  races  were  to  be  regulated  not
by  the  actual  facts  for  which  \ve  have  the  evidence  of  our
•senses,  but  by  logical  conjectures  concerning  them.  Supposing
it  could  be  proved  by  irrefragable  evidence  that  the  ancestors
of  the  Negroes  were  really  true  undoubted  apes,  but  at  the
same  time  the  fact  remained  that  the  present  Negroes  walk
erect,  speak,  think,  and  in  general  possess  the  degree  of
intelligence  (be  it  great  or  small)  which  we  know  from
experience  they  do — what  moral  excuse  would  there  be  for
the  cruelty  of  accommodating  the  treatment  of  them  not  to
what  they  are,  but  to  what  their  ancestors  were,  or — to  speak
logically — to  the  kind  or  species  to  which  by  their  descent
they  belong  ?  Or  were  it,  on  the  other  hand,  established  that
monkeys  are  degenerate  human  beings,  whose  forefathers  we
perhaps  meet  in  human  form  in  the  history  of  past  times,
would  not  the  fact  remain  that  now  they  are  nothing  else  than

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  HACK.  525

veritable  apes  ?  Assuredly  in  this  case  we  might  yield  to  a
genuinely  human  feeling  of  piety,  and  not  treat  them  like
other  beasts  of  the  chase  (a  reluctance  this  which,  even
without  such  grounds  of  reflection,  the  mere  impression  of
their  likeness  to  men  creates  in  the  mind  of  many  a  rude
hunter)  ;  but  no  one  would  on  account  of  what  their  fore
fathers  had  been,  or  of  the  natural  species  to  which  they
belonged,  overlook  their  present  condition  and  attempt  to  put
them  on  a  footing  of  social  equality  with  ourselves.  How
hard  it  is  for  our  time,  "  sicklied  o'er  with  the  pale  cast  of
thought,"  to  keep  to  the  definite  form  of  a  question  under
discussion,  and  how  strong  is  the  temptation  to  adjust  even
moral  relations  according  to,  not  the  calls  of  the  matter  as  it
actually  is,  but  the  most  uncertain  conjectures  as  to  how  it
could  have  come  to  lie  what  it  is  !

^  ;~>.  As  yet  our  inquiries  have  been  concerned  solely  with
the  corporeal  constitution  of  living  beings.  We  have  seen
how  the  peculiar  character  of  the  globe,  which  forms  the  scene
of  all  life  accessible  to  our  experience,  with  its  material  sub
stances,  its  forces,  its  succession  of  events  and  of  external
conditions  of  life,  tends  to  produce  certain  universal  types,  by
which  the  variety  of  races  must  be  limited,  so  that  within
these  limits  it  may  fall  into  the  order  of  a  highly  complex
series  of  kindred  forms.  In  all  these  forms  we  have  recog
nised,  besides  the  universal  physical  laws  that  regulate  the
mutual  relations  of  the  elements,  the  inner  nature;  of  these
elements  as  a  co-operant  force.  It  seemed  to  be  the  natural
procedure  next  to  bring  into  prominence  this  side  of  our
inquiry,  and  to  portray  the  mental  life  that  stirs  in  each  i»f
these  shapes,  partly  finding  in  them  the  conditions  of  its  mani
festation,  partly  reacting  on  them  so  as  to  influence  their  type:
thus  exhibiting  the  classified  series  of  kinds  of  :i  realm  of
intelligence  answering  to  the  corporeal  classification.  But
not  only  is  the  inner  life  of  animals  so  diflicult  of  access  to  us
that  such  an  attempt  could  but  have  resulted  in  doubtful  out
lines — we  would  also  have  met  with  an  obstacle  in  the  many
doubts  that  would  have  beset  us  as  to  whether  we  were-

526  BOOK  IV. CIIAITEl:  V.

justified  in  applying  the  scheme  of  a  systematic  arrangement
to  the  world  of  mind.  Perhaps  the  separate  examination  of
mental  life  to  which  we  now  proceed  will  lead  to  different
views  from  those  which  here  at  first  seemed  to  present  them
selves.

The  origin  of  races,  of  the  human  race  in  general,  nay,  of
the  whole  animate  world,  has  since  this  book  first  appeared
become  the  subject  of  the  most  zealous  researches,  of  the  most
audacious  assertions,  and  of  the  most  discordant  opinions.  I
have  been  reproached  by  well-wishers  for  not  having  more
distinctly  indicated  the  position  which  I  mean  to  take  up  in
view  of  so  energetic  a  movement  of  opinion.  And,  in  offering
once  more  the  preceding  section  without  material  alteration,
I  seem  to  have  neglected  the  last  opportunity  of  making  up
for  this  deficiency.  But,  within  the  limits  which  I  had
assigned  to  my  work,  and  which  I  could  not  exceed  without
relinquishing  my  special  aim,  there  was  no  room  for  the
multitude  of  highly  interesting  and  more  or  less  certainly
established  facts  for  which  recent  research,  led  by  Darwin,
claims  and  wins  grateful  attention  ;  and  as  regards  the  theory
that  has  linked  itself  to  these,  I  did  not  consider  myself  bound,
on  occasion  of  this  most  recent  current  of  thought,  to  bring
that  into  special  prominence  again,  after  I  had,  as  I  believed,
before  this  occasion  was  presented,  with  sufficient  explicitness
stated  the  convictions  with  which  I  would  meet  the  claims  of
these  not  new  but  very  old  ideas.  And  in  fact  I  know  not
now  what  I  could  add  concerning  this  matter  to  the  dis
cussions  of  the  chapter  just  closed  and  to  the  final  reflections
of  Book  III.,  in  which  some  time  before  the  appearance
of  Darwin's  work  I  considered  the  rise  of  adapted  forms  out
of  chaos  by  those  very  means  which  have  since  under  the
names  of  variation  and  selection  of  existing  varieties  through
the  struggle  for  existence  become  popular  topics  of  the  day.
As  respects  the  historical  processes  through  which  the  whole
animate  world  and  mankind  have  come  into  being,  I  then  left
the  decision  to  scientific  inquirers,  honestly  ready  to  accept  all
that  should  be  established  by  observation,  and  not  merely

VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN K.U'E.  527

asserted  in  accordance  with  preconceived  opinions.  Fur  I
adhered  to  the  conviction  which  I  have  emphatically  expressed
on  p.  374,  that  the  contemplation  of  the  whole  series  of  graded
periods  during  which  formless  matter  may  have  been  under
going  processes  of  formation  would  but  add  to  the  splendour
and  variety  of  scenes  in  whose  outward  pomp  our  admiring
phantasy  might  revel,  Imt  would  not  explain  the  wondrous
drama  as  a  whole  more  adequately  than  that  modest  1'elief
which  sees  nothing  but  the  immediate  creative  will  of  Clod
from  which  the  races  of  living  beings  can  have  been  derived  ;
whatever  mode  of  creation  God  mav  have  chosen,  none  avails
to  loosen  the  dependence  of  the  universe  on  Him,  none  to
bind  it  more  closely  to  Him.  Now  among  those  who  at  first
tn»d  confidently  the  path  of  explaining  all  by  Chance,  many
have  been  led  by  honest  reflection  to  change  their  views;
they  believe  that  at  least  in  the  heart  of  things,  and  as  a
continuous  thread  running  throughout  them,  they  must  admit
a  rational  principle  of  selection  and  an  inherent  eilort  after
ends.  Jiut  why  must  I  expressly  call  attention  to  the  fact,
that  in  our  own  day  had  occurred  an  example  of  that  revolu
tion  of  thought  which  on  general  grounds  1  had  alread;,
shown  to  be  necessary  ?  Should  things  go  so  far  as  a
relinquishnient  even  of  the  obstinacy  that  marks  the  present
eagerness  to  transfer  to  blind  existence  every  germ  of  intelli
gence  and  design,  and  to  dismiss  from  the  universe  all  that
might  be  suspected  of  being  mind,  1  would  have  still  le.-,s
inducement  to  tread  again  the  labyrinthine  path  of  these
incidents  of  the  day,  a  path  along  which  I  could  only  win  back
an  old  truth  by  turning  away  from  mistaken  points  of  view.

BOOK V.

M  I  N  D.

VOL.  I.

2  L

CHAPTER I.

MIND  AND  SOUL.1

The  Animal  Soul  and  the  Rational  Mind— Reciprocal  Relation  between  the  two-
Abolition  of  this  Duality— The  General  Concept  of  Soul  and  the  Individual
Soul— Soul  a  Phtenomenologic  Designation  of  Heterogeneous  Subjects —
Transference  of  this  Designation  to  Homogeneous  Subjects — Original
Nature  and  Development  of  the  Soul — What  is  meant  by  Xature  of  the
Soul  ?— Can  we  regard  as  the  Original  Content  of  any  Nature  the  Idea  of
its  Development? — The  Reality  of  the  Idea  and  tin-  Unreality  of  Simple
Quality — Unity  of  the  Idea—General  Attributes  of  Souls— The  Realm  of
Si>uls  and  its  Members,

5  1.  /^Vl'  *nc  inany  marvels  that  the  earth  contains  none
V_/  is  more  marvellous  than  man.  In  fact,  we  feel
tempted  to  repeat  that  old  song  in  which  Sophocles,  with  the
freshness  of  a  thought  that  had  not  yet  become  habitual,
recounts  the  astonishing  results  of  human  culture.  We  look
out  into  Nature,  and  everywhere  we  see  that  defenceless
man  has  quietly  begun  to  wage  war  with  its  terrors,  coming
to  grief  indeed  in  individual  cases,  but  victorious  on  the
whole  ;  by  his  craft  he  has  overcome  far  superior  strength  in
the  animal  world,  subdued  some  of  the  brutes  into  unwilling
obedience,  improved  the  capacities  of  others  to  his  own
advantage,  trained  many  to  devoted'  fidelity  and  affection.
And  is  more  than  a  word  needed  to  indicate,  by  recalling  all
the  blessings  of  social  life,  the  impassable  gulf  that  divides
him  from  the  rest  of  the  animate  world  ?  "Where  now  lies
the  germ  of  this  greatness  ?  Is  it  possible  to  name  any  pre
ponderantly  important  power,  any  definite  faculty  added  to
human  nature,  by  means  of  which  its  development  is  carried

1  "We  meet  with  the  word  'soul'  (Seek)  in  the  languages  of  nil  civilised
peoples  ;  and  this  proves  thnt  the  imagination  of  men  must  have  had  reasons  of
weight  for  its  supposition  that  there  is  an  existence  of  some  sjKM'ial  nature
underlying  the  pha-nomena  of  the  inner  life  as  their  subject  or  cause."—  Lotzt,
Metai>hy*ic,  I'.k.  iii.  ch.  1,  §  'J3H,  p.  420  (Clarendon  Tress  Tiuniilation).  Ci.
•M/T«,  p.  144.

611

532  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

far  beyond  the  limits  of  animal  activity?  Or,  if  in  man
capacities  common  to  the  lower  animals  are  only  carried
further,  can  we  point  to  any  circumstances  that  explain  thia
sudden  advance,  announced  by  no  preparatory  and  instru
mental  intermediate  stages  ?  Or,  lastly,  are  we  mistaken  here,
and  do  the  various  conditions  of  human  life  really  form  a
series  of  progressive  stages  of  development  that  lead  uninter
ruptedly  from  the  torpor  of  animal  life  to  the  summit  of
human  culture  ?  So  different  are  the  several  parts  of  the
great  picture  before  which  we  stand,  that  we  are  successively
tempted  to  answer  each  one  of  these  questions  in  the  affirma
tive,  according  as  it  was  this  or  that  feature  of  the  great  whole
on  which  our  glance  first  fell,  and  by  which  it  was  held
captive.

A  comparison  of  the  highest  point  of  our  culture  with  the
scarce  intelligible  and  fragmentary  utterances  in  which  around
us  the  psychic  life  of  the  lower  animals  finds  vent,  shows  the
interval  between  the  two  spheres  of  existence  to  be  so  vast,
that  apparently  the  addition  of  a  wholly  new  germ  of  develop
ment  is  absolutely  necessary  to  explain  the  superiority  of
human  culture.  And  so,  according  to  a  conception  current
already  in  antiquity,  over  against  the  sentient  soul  shared  by
man  with  the  lower  animals,  stands  the  rational  mind  as  the
higher  power  bestowed  exclusively  on  the  human  race  that
gives  a  higher  direction  to  the  stirring  vitality  of  sentient
feeling  and  effort.  And  yet  it  is  but  as  a  name  that  this  term
mind  is  free  from  suspicion ;  it  may  embrace  the  unknown
peculiarities  by  which  in  its  results  human  development  rises
above  every  other  form  of  earthly  existence,  but  it  does  little
to  render  clearer  the  causes  of  these  results.  For  we  cannot
return  to  the  na'ivcU  of  conception  that  sees  in  psychic  life
and  mind  two  different  and  separable  entities — the  former
perhaps  mere  mortal  breath  passing  away  with  the  outward
form,  the  living  mind  alone  enduring  beyond  the  term  of  this
earthly  life  and  set  to  higher  tasks.

But  it  is  not  so  much  the  apparent  rending  asunder  of  what
must  be  one  that  seems  to  us  inadmissible  ;  however  indis-

MIND  JLND  SOUL.  533

tinctly  the  mutual  relation  between  mind  and  soul  may  often
have  been  conceived,  that  does  not  in  itself  render  impossible
a  definite  view.  For,  of  course,  we  should  seek  exclusively
in  the  living  mind  the  unity  of  our  being,  our  true  self;
in  contrast  to  it  the  soul  would  take  its  place  in  the  series  of
elements,  various  in  themselves,  which  are  set  at  its  disposal
by  the  plan  of  organization.  The  series  would  but  have
added  to  it  a  prominent  member,  which  either  from  the
superiority  of  its  own  nature  or  from  the  advantageous
character  of  its  position  surpassed  all  the  other  elements  in
internal  activity,  collected  their  excitations  within  itself,
transferred  them  to  the  mind,  the  principle  of  unity,  thence
in  return  received  behests,  in  order  by  its  own  intelligence  to
prepare  for  their  being  performed  by  the  corporeal  organs.  A
twofold  life  would  then  be  going  on  within  the  material  form.
For  as  the  animal's  soul  unquestionably  concentrates  the
multitude  of  impressions  in  the  unity  of  consciousness,  feels
pain  and  pleasure  in  respect  of  them,  and  uses  them  as
starting-points  for  future  action,  so  our  soul,  too,  would
have  its  ideas,  remembrances,  feelings,  and  ellbrta  apart  from
the  mind  which  it  serves,  and  its  consciousness  would  not  be
ours.  Many  manifestations  of  what  we  are  wont  to  call  our
life  would  go  forth  from  this  living  element  within  us  without
our  knowledge  or  our  will ;  of  others  the  mind  would  be  cog
nizant,  the  reciprocal  action  between  it  and  the  soul  conveying
to  its  consciousness  also  the  impressions  filling  that  of  the
latter,  without,  however,  calling  forth  in  it  anything  more
than  toleration — anything  such  as  a  resolve  leading  to  inde
pendent  action.  l>ut  then  there  would  be  cases  in  which  the
soul's  energy,  itself  stimulated  by  exciting  causes  from  without
to  display  its  powers,  roused  the  mind  to  vital  reaction,  and
now  at  last  this  hidden  spring  would  be  disclosed,  and  in
virtue  of  universal  laws,  under  whose  control  even  this  inter
course  must  be  carried  on,  the  higher  nature  of  the  mind
would  on  the  one  hand  unfold  its  own  inner  life,  on  the  other
exert  a  modifying,  guiding,  and  directing  influence  on  the
action  of  the  soul,  and  through  it  on  that  of  the  body.

534  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

Thus  is  brought  before  us  the  image  of  a  close  and  not
unfruitful  connection  of  two  beings  that  in  distinct  separa
tion  from  one  another  carry  on  the  mechanical  action  of
psychical  reciprocity.  The  soul,  familiar  with  the  count
less  mutual  relations  of  the  organic  forms  from  which  it
received  stimulations,  would  transmit  to  the  mind,  perhaps
not  all  these  impressions  one  by  one,  but  certainly  the  total
frame  of  feeling  that  in  itself  they  combine  to  form,  and
would  thereby  secure  for  the  higher  activity  a  steady  or
shifting  background  of  peculiar  vital  feeling.  Particular
constituents  of  this  mood,  like  figure  in  clear  outline,
would  then  stand  out  in  contrast  to  its  uniform  colouring  ;
the  intuitions  of  space  and  the  manifold  aiiinities  and
antagonisms  of  the  sensations  after  having  been  arranged  by
the  soul  (for  of  this  even  the  lower  animals  are  capable)
would  come  before  the  mind,  to  receive  from  it  that  antici
patory  aesthetic  estimation  of  their  value  which  seems  to  lie
without  the  province  of  the  sentient  soul.  At  last  stirred  to
the  depths  of  its  being,  the  mind  itself,  without  knowledge  of
the  outer  world,  would  be  tossed  hither  and  thither  in  vague
swellings  of  its  phantasy ;  but  the  unutterable  impulses  of
its  higher  nature  tell  upon  the  activity  of  the  sentient  soul,
which  in  obedience  to  this  command  excites  innumerable
movements  in  the  bodily  organization  that  is  akin  to  itself,
the  result  of  which  is  to  set  distinctly  realized  before  the
mind  the  previously  indistinct  and  vague  enigma  of  its
longing.  When  at  last  this  connection  is  dissolved,  the
evanescent  soul  has  long  since  deposited  what  has  been  won
from  life  and  experience  in  the  living  mind,  which  now,
keeping  hold  of  what  it  could  not  by  itself  have  acquired,
may  enter  on  a  new  phase  of  existence.

That  the  difficulties  are  not  insurmountable  which  stand
in  the  way  of  a  distinct  conception  of  the  mechanism  of  a
relation  between  soul  and  mind,  is  sufficiently  indicated  by
these  remarks  ;  with  much  less  clearness  and  but  in  vague
terms  have  we  been  able  to  touch  on  the  division  of  labour
between  these  two  immaterial  beings  and  the  contributions

MIND  AND  SOUL.  535

made  by  each  of  them  to  the  total  of  our  life.  For  we  have
still  to  make  a  more  detailed  examination  of  the  characteristics
that  raise  human  culture  above  animal  life  ;  we  are  dissuaded
from  an  attempt  to  anticipate  its  result  here  by  the  mistrust
with  which  we  cannot  help  regarding  this  strange  and  some
what  harsh  picture  of  the  union  of  two  powers  that  like  a
double  star  are  said  to  control  the  motions  of  our  one  life.
Did  we,  without  reference  to  the  animal  kingdom,  begin  our
inquiries  with  the  development  of  man,  evidently  the  sentient
soul  would  drop  out  of  our  conception  as  a  superfluous  item.
For  with  no  more  effort  than  it  can  cost  the  soul  to  concen
trate  the  vibrations  of  innumerable  corporeal  elements  within
itself  to  the  unity  of  a  consciousness,  a  feeling,  an  impulse,  or
on  the  other  hand  to  give  to  the  effort  developed  in  the  mind
by  the  elaboration  of  these  inner  states  effective  expression
by  movements  of  those  elements,  would  the  mind  itself
directly  perform  the  same  operations  in  concert  with  the  con
stituents  of  the  body.  And  again,  all  the  difliculties  which
might  seem  to  any  one  to  be  involved  in  such  a  direct  mutual
communication  between  mind  and  matter,  return  with  un-
diminished  force  in  that  other  reciprocal  action  between  soul
and  body  which  would  take  its  place.  Here,  as  so  often  is
the  effect  of  inserting  an  apparently  explanatory  middle  term,
the  problem,  instead  of  being  solved,  would  only  have  been
made  more  complicated.  Obviously  this  sundering  of  two
supersensible  powers  has  nothing  to  recommend  it  but  the
remembrance  of  the  animal  world,  of  the  lower  sphere  of
psychic  life  which  it  shares  with  us,  of  the  higher  that  is
denied  to  it.  But  this  fact,  the  weight  of  which  we  unhesitat
ingly  grant,  perhaps  admits  of  other  explanations.

§  2.  In  reality,  hardly  any  one  can  be  disposed  to  set  mind
and  soul  over  against  one  another  so  literally  as  we  did  ;  the
habits  of  modern  thought  are  contrary  to  such  decided  separa
tions  with  their  obnoxious  clearness.  Most  will  prefer,  with
a  view  the  real  meaning  of  which  it  is  harder  to  arrive  at,  to
think  of  the  two  as  different  stages,  different  phases  or  powers
of  the  same  supersensible  being,  or  to  derive  the  pre-eminence

536  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  1.

of  the  mind  from  a  higher  faculty,  perhaps  from  reason  which,
granted  to  it,  is  denied  to  the  sentient  soul.  As  we  do  not
understand  what  is  exactly  meant  by  stages  and  phases,  we
must  pass  by  these  opinions  without  remark  ;  the  last,  how
ever,  admits  of  being  improved,  and  leads  back  to  a  practic
able  path.  For,  in  whatever  reason  may  consist,  it  is  clear
that  the  sonl  cannot  receive  the  gift  of  a  new  faculty  additional
to  its  nature,  unless  it  be  so  grounded  in  its  constitution  that
it  either  must  of  necessity  be  evolved  from  it,  or  else  might  be
evolved  should  favourable  conditions  supervene.  The  nature
of  a  thing  admits  of  no  appendages ;  if  one  thing  seems  to
possess  a  capacity  which  others  like  it  lack,  they  cannot  have
been  really  like  it,  but  that  side  of  its  nature  to  which  the
capacity  attaches  itself  must  secretly  have  been  different  from
any  part  of  the  kindred  beings  to  which  this  addition  is  want
ing.  Instead  of  looking  in  man  for  an  animal  soul  into  which
as  a  wild  stock  of  inferior  nature  a  distinctive  higher  shoot
lias  been  engrafted,  we  ought  rather  from  the  first  to  see  in
die  living  human  mind  a  peculiar  being,  whose  characteristic
nature  is  at  work  even  in  the  simplest  and  lowest  manifestations
of  its  activity,  though  its  full  significance  and  the  interval  by
which  it  is  separated  from  the  animal  soul  appears  most  dis
tinctly  in  the  final  results  of  its  development.

Universal  concepts  are  the  two-edged  weapon  through
which  alone  it  becomes  possible  for  our  human  thought  to  lay
bare  the  strong  core  of  native  force  and  energy  in  the  most
complicated  involution  of  phenomena,  and  yet  by  applying
which  we  so  often  unwittingly  injure  the  vital  impulse  that
we  fain  would  spare.  When,  in  the  process  of  comparing  a
complex  datum,  we  first  of  all  collect  the  similar  constituents
into  small  groups,  then  unite  the  divergent  characteristics  of
these  several  groups  under  higher  comprehensive  categories,
finally,  proceeding  further,  arrange  the  whole  mass  of  details  in
a  systematic  series  of  superordinate  and  subordinate  concepts  ;
then  we  fancy  that  the  upward  and  downward  course  of  our
thought  on  this  scale  is  an  imitation  of  the  internal  relations
of  dependence  of  the  things  that  we  meet  with  on  its  stages.

MIND  AND  SOUL.  537

The  most  general,  highest,  an.1  consequently  least  determinate
notion  in  such  a  series,  seems  to  us  like  the  rough  block  of
marble  from  whoso  solid  basis  of  material,  conditions  subse
quently  added  shape  definite  forms;  and  in  the  scale  in  which
our  thoughts  systematically  run  through  the  various  genera
and  species,  we  think  we  can  see  the  more  general  distinctions
of  the  higher  classes  emerging  first  from  this  real  core  of
matter,  gradually  to  pass  into  the  separate  forms  of  in
dividual  existence  through  the  constantly  renewed  influence
of  more  and  more  specific  conditions.  Or  if  we  do  not  directly
attribute  to  the  arrangement  of  our  classifications  the  signifi-
cance  of  a  historic  genesis  of  their  stages  out  of  one  another,
at  least  we  believe  that  in  them  is  reflected  faithfully  and
accurately  the  greater  or  less  extent  of  a  direct  or  indirect
dependence  subsisting  between  the  different  properties  of  tin;
individual  being  and  between  them  and  a  common  nucleus  to
which  they  adhere.  We  see  that  many  objects  of  percep
tion  agree  in  being  centres  of  exeunt  and  ineunt  effects,  in
being  acted  on  and  emitting  energy,  and  in  remaining  as
fixed  points  amidst  the  vortex  of  events  ;  on  account  of  this
character  it  is  that  we  give  to  them  the  name  of  things.  But
we  soon  forget  that  this  name  was  but  a  mark  intended  to
indicate  the  presence  amid  variety  of  a  common  form  of  being
and  acting  ;  we  unconsciously  convert  it  into  the  designation
of  an  originally  everywhere  homogeneous  content  which  con
stitutes  the  true  essence,  and  from  which  by  means  of  sub
sequently  added  conditions  is  elaborated  the  variety  of  forms
with  which  we  are  confronted  in  experience.  The  untrained
thinker  calls  whatever  possesses  the  appearance  of  independent
existence  and  of  capacity  for  acting  and  being  acted  on  a
thing,  and  deems  it  possible  that  beings  of  widely  different
natures  may  share  in  this  kind  of  existence  ;  just  as  he  calls
all  that  he  sees  to  be  pernicious  to  organic  life  jwiwn,  how
ever  various  may  be  the  substances  that  display  this  per-
niciousness.  This  natural  conception  is  first  troubled  by
iiutiatioii  into  philosophic  reflection,  at  least  where  the
simplicity  of  the  objects  dealt  with  does  not  by  iUelf  bhow

538  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  L

how  error  may  be  avoided.  For  certainly  when  we  speak  of
misfortunes  no  one  will  imagine  that  first  the  misfortune
itself  happens,  arid  then  each  particular  annoying  effect  is
evolved  from  it  by  subsequent  specializing  determinations.
Where,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  to  do  with  the  various
phenomena  of  Nature  that  present  we  know  not  whence  the
properties  of  materiality,  impenetrability,  etc.,  it  seems  to  us
self-evident  that  this  common  kind  of  demeanour  is  to  be
interpreted  as  a  common  content,  a  universal  matter,  a  frag
ment  of  which  residing  in  each  body  is  by  particular  additional
conditions  developed  into  the  specific  qualities  of  the  several
elements.  When,  further,  we  speak  more  generally  of  those
modes,  common  to  all  things,  to  which  we  have  above
referred,  we  are  apt  to  enter  upon  the  fatal  search  for  a  sub
stance  that  is  nothing  but  substance,  for  a  universal  matter
out  of  which  things  are  made,  arid  a  morsel  of  which  residing
in  each  several  thing  secures  to  it  as  a  preliminary  the  universal
attribute  of  independent  existence,  of  passivity  and  activity,  till
subsequently  special  circumstances  supervene  and  determine
what  it  is  to  be  and  how  it  is  to  act  and  be  acted  on.  Thus
the  universal  notions  with  which  as  with  official  titles  we
designated  the  similar  powers  of  beings  otherwise  undefined
and  perhaps  very  different,  have  come  to  have  quite  an
opposite  meaning ;  just  as  if  we  were  to  assert  that  the
general  notion  of  master  and  slave  is  the  preceding  reality
from  which  the  particular  persons  bearing  these  names  with
all  their  individual  qualities  are  derived  in  consequence  of
subsequently  added  conditions.

Psychology  also  has  felt  the  influence  of  this  change  of
notions.  The  comparative  study  of  mental  life  showed  in
different  beings  everywhere  homogeneous  modes  of  manifes
tation —  sensation  and  thought,  feeling  and  volition — and
everywhere  similar  laws  and  customs  regulating  the  mutual
connection  and  reciprocal  action  of  these  manifestations.  On
account  of  this  common  character  the  unknown  subjects  of
these  shifting  phenomena  were  designated  by  a  common
name ;  whatever  else  they  might  be,  they  were  to  be  called

MIND  AND  SOUL.  539

souls,  in  so  far  as  they  all  alike  invested  their  inner  states
with  these  peculiar  forms ;  for  the  rest,  the  original  content
which  the  individual  beings  sought  to  express  in  this  common
language  might  be  very  different,  nay,  such  as  hardly  admitted
of  comparison  one  with  the  other.  But  insensibly  the  word
came  to  be  used  in  exactly  the  opposite  sense ;  the  name  for
the  similar  behaviour  of  the  essentially  different  became  the
name  ibr  an  identical  inner  being  to  which  the  variety  was
to  be  attached  as  an  external  appendage.  Above  all,  the  true
and  essential  nature  of  the  subject  of  the  inner  phaenomena
was  supposed  to  lie  in  its  being  a  soul,  in  its  being  capable
of  sensation,  feeling,  will ;  but  what  were  its  sensation*,  how
it  felt  and  willed,  that  depended  on  other  conditions,  that
might  be  put  down  to  the  bodily  organization,  or  to  the
peculiar  character  of  external  circumstances,  or  to  a  subse
quently  added  endowment ;  in  one  of  these  ways  alone  could
henceforth  the  homogeneous  psychic  element  in  all  living
beings  reach  once  more  the  variety  of  development  presented
to  us  in  experience.

Conceptions  of  this  sort,  very  variously  modified,  have  come
to  be  in  vogue  among  us.  In  the  conflict  against  Materialism,
psychic  substance  has  not  seldom  been  spoken  of  in  a  way  that
pretty  distinctly  betrayed  a  tendency  to  oppose  to  universal
matter,  as  the  substance  out  of  which  things  are  made,  another
substance  from  which  souls  may  be  made.  The  point  of  chief
importance  seemed  to  be  to  secure  a  firm  and  durable  nucleus
that,  set  in  the  midst  of  the  inner  phenomena,  should  be
there  for  them  to  adhere  to ;  all  that  was  needed  was  that
this  nucleus  should  be  of  a  different  nature  from  the  sub
stratum  of  the  material  world;  however  devoid  of  content  it
might  otherwise  be,  the  distinctive  qualities  of  individual  souls,
it  was  hoped,  could  be  derived  from  it  no  less  than  the
particular  elements  of  Nature  from  universal  matter.  This
was  to  overlook  that  the  latter  attempt  am  but  apparently
succeed,  and  that  it  has  the  appearance  of  possibility  because
there  is  nothing  to  forbid  our  reducing  the  differences  of  the
material  elements  to  various  combinations  of  atoms  —  suu-

540  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

posing  only  that  we  resolved  to  treat  those  elements,  not  aa
simple,  but  as  compound,  and  supposing  further  we  knew  of
reasons  for  the  persistency  with  which  these  various  combina
tions  of  the  in  itself  identical  substance  endure  as  unalterable
foundations  of  Nature  without  passing  into  one  another.  The
necessary  simplicity  of  the  soul  puts  such  an  attempt  out  of
the  question.  Neither  from  condensation  and  rarefaction,
nor  from  various  collocations  of  the  elements  of  a  universal
psychic  substance,  can  we  explain  the  difference  of  souls ;
either  they  must  be  exactly  alike,  and  the  difference  in  the
levels  of  development  which  they  can  reach  proceeds  solely
from  the  influence  of  circumstances,  or  else  they  are  originally
unlike,  and  along  with  the  common  characteristic  of  employ*
ing  homogeneous  modes  of  manifestation  there  must  be  an
unlimited  diversity  of  content  which  they  express  in  these
modes.  We  find  ever  giving  way  this  perverse  conception  of
an  indefinite  substance  that  pre-exists  as  a  general  coalescent
condensing  into  durable  existence  the  subsequently  arising
content,  whatever  it  may  be  ;  we  must  go  back  to  the  acknow
ledgment  that  it  is  no  other  than  the  living  content  itself
that  by  its  own  specific  nature  directly  acquires  the  capacity
to  act  and  be  acted  on,  the  attribute  of  substantiality,  and
that  then  imposes  on  the  unwary  thinker  the  illusion  of  this
form  of  existence  being  due,  not  to  itself,  but  to  a  core  of
universal  substance  inherent  in  it.

In  somewhat  different  terms  must  we  bring  a  charge  on
the  whole  similar  against  that  theory  which  essays  to  con
struct  the  manifold  inner  life  from  the  mutual  actions  and
reactions  of  ideas  as  simple  efforts  at  self-preservation  on  the
part  of  the  soul  against  threatened  disturbances.  Here  there
was  no  presupposition  of  a  universal  psychic  substance,  no
fashioning  of  individual  souls  out  of  it ;  a  quality  to  us
unknown,  but  definite  and  simple,  was  looked  on  as  the  con
tent  forming  the  nature  of  each  being,  and  from  the  first  an
infinite  variety  of  these  qualities,  with  an  equally  great
original  difference  between  beings,  was  admitted ;  those  were
finally  classed  under  the  category  of  souls  whose  efforts  at

MIND  AND  SOUL.  541

self-preservation  wear  the  form  of  ideation  or  sensation.  But
as  this  theory  sought  to  evolve  all  the  higher  and  more
complex  operations  of  intelligence  from  the  continued  lecip-
rocal  action  of  sensations  alone,  without  allowing  any  other
renewed  co-operation  of  the  nature  of  the  soul  besides  tint
which  results  from  the  purely  formal  aspect  of  its  unity,  it
virtually  came  back  to  the  point  of  view  which  we  have
already  found  inadequate.  For  this,  too,  again  set  up  the  notion
of  the  ideating  being  as  that  of  the  material  whence  solely
through  the  agency  of  added  external  conditions,  which  allow
of  a  greater  or  less  complexity  of  internal  reciprocal  actions
between  the  operative  elements,  arise  the  distinctive  charac
teristics  of  different  souls,  human  as  well  as  animal.  Of
course  there  is  no  objection  to  the  hypothesis  that  those  first
manifestations  of  self-preserving  activity,  the  simple  sensa
tions,  turn  out  different  according  to  the  original  diversity  of
nature  in  souls ;  hence  much  may  appear  different  to  animals
and  to  us ;  but  the  mechanical  laws,  according  to  which
the  further  elaboration  of  these  elements  among  themselves
takes  place,  are  expressly  and  doubtless  rightly  stated  to  be
absolutely  the  same  in  all  beings.  On  this  view,  therefore,
there  remains  no  adequate  inner  source  of  the  variety  in
mental  development ;  for  assuredly  no  one  would  dream  that,
whether  a  soul  reacted  to  the  stimulus  of  waves  of  light  by
the  seeing  of  colours  or  by  some  other  kind  of  sensation,  this
and  the  like  formed  such  a  source.

On  the  opposite  side  we  have  already  expressed  our  convic
tion  how  impossible  it  is  to  explain  all  the  forms  of  activity
embraced  within  the  life  of  one  soul  from  the  mechanical
reciprocal  actions  of  ideas  ;  how  essential  it  is,  on  the  other
hand,  to  conceive  the  soul  as  constantly  interposing  anew  in
these  operations,  interposing,  too,  with  capacities  for  activity
t liat  found  no  occasion  for  prominent  action  in  the  production
of  simple  ideas,  but  held  back,  to  be  gradually  called  forth
by  the  relations  that  unfold  themselves  between  the  variously
meeting  ideas  as  by  stimuli  of  a  higher  order.  A  far  greater
depth  of  peculiar  content,  it  seemed  to  us,  was  latent  in  tl.u

542  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

soul  than  merely  the  bare  capacity  to  maintain  itself  by
sensations ;  each  momentary  aspect  of  the  course  of  thought
appeared  to  us  to  have  two  results ;  the  one  to  be  foreseen,
and  in  virtue  of  the  mechanical  laws  of  the  inner  life  alike  in
every  soul ;  the  other  not  to  be  foreseen,  and  proceeding  from
the  further  effect  of  the  first  result  itself  on  the  peculiar
character  of  this  same  soul.  Absolutely  the  same,  then,  as
may  be  the  mechanical  laws  of  the  course  of  inner  phenomena
for  all  beings,  yet  the  result,  the  level,  and  the  special  colouring
of  the  mental  development  depend,  not  only  on  the  greater  or
less  breadth  and  variety  of  this  common  mechanical  current,
but  on  some  original  difference  in  the  soil  through  which  it
Hows,  on  the  diverse  natures  of  the  souls  on  which  it  is  always
reacting,  and  against  which  its  waves  dash.  Thus  we  might
satisfy  our  craving  to  think  of  the  highest  and  most  original
results  that  the  soul  reaches  in  its  development  as  grounded
on  what  is  deepest  and  most  original  in  its  nature,  without
having  to  give  up  the  advantages  held  out,  at  least  to  future
science,  by  the  conviction  of  a  mechanical  order  in  mental  life.
These  considerations,  further,  thus  lead  back  to  a  mode  of
conception  to  which  in  other  cases  the  natural  understanding
is  favourably  disposed ;  it  is  only  in  this  question  that,  from
being  contrary  to  its  habit  occupied  with  objects  that  cannot
be  intuited,  it  becomes  involved  in  baseless  doubts.  Nobody
imagines  that  the  stock  is  alike  in  all  plants,  and  that  it  is
circumstances  alone  that  develop  in  it  the  variety  of  vegeta
tion  in  leaf  and  flower  and  fruit ;  we  know  that  every  peculiar
detail  of  the  subsequent  formation  is  predetermined  in  the
germinal  cell,  and  that  all  resemblances  in  the  later  develop
ment  are  but  similar  modes  of  expression,  a  common  tongue,
in  which  the  originally  diverse  natures  of  plants  unfold  and
utter  themselves.  We  must  not,  of  course,  carry  the  simile
too  far ;  it  ministers  to  distinctness  alone,  but  is  not  sufficient
for  proof.  For  no  doubt  the  primitive  cell  itself  is  a  combina
tion  of  diverse  elements,  and  the  special  mode  in  which  parts
are  grouped  that  are  again,  it  may  be,  common  alike  to  all
plants,  is  the  sufficient  cause  of  the  special  formative  impulse

MIND  AND  SOUL.  543

of  each  plant  in  particular.  And  at  this  point,  as  already
observed,  our  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  soul,  whose  indi
visible  unity  we  have  to  uphold,  necessarily  parts  from  this
simile.

§  3.  But  in  order  to  remove  a  palpable  confusion,  we  would
fain  here  append  some  further  remarks  as  to  the  mode  in
which  this  conception  is  to  be  framed,  to  a  train  of  thought
that  on  a  former  occasion  (supra,  pp.  183  seq.)  we  had  no
inducement  to  pursue  thus  far.

The  question  what  any  particular  object  is,  is  always
answered  by  us  in  the  first  place  by  a  description  which
further  reflection,  however,  very  soon  shows  to  contain  mere
indications  of  what  the  object  does  or  undergoes,  not  of  what
it  is.  All  the  sensible  properties  which  we  assign  to  it  are
modes  of  its  behaviour  in  the  case  of  reciprocal  action  with
other  objects ;  nay,  all  the  supersensible  attributes  by  which
we  later  try  to  define  the  nature  of  things,  when  examined
more  closely,  invariably  transform  themselves  into  proposi
tions  as  to  what  they  do  under  certain  conditions,  or  as  to
events  that  take  place  between  them.  However  clear  any
theory  may  make  the  whole  tissue  of  these  mutual  relations
between  things,  they  themselves,  the  fixed  points  which  enter
into  this  network,  or  from  which  its  threads  proceed,  remain
wholly  unknown  as  to  what  they  are  in  themselves.  Although
in  the  preceding  passage  to  which  we  have  referred  we  wen;
forced  to  acknowledge  that  the  nature  of  the  soul,  as  it  is
prior  to  all  development  by  means  of  external  influences,
eludes  our  knowledge,  we  at  the  same  time  expressed  our
belief  that  our  knowledge  does  not  in  consequence  suffer
much  loss.  For  it  seemed  to  us  that  in  what  the  soul  becomes
in  the  course  of  its  development  lies  its  essential  content,  with
which  alone  we  are  concerned.  In  the  still-repeated  desire
to  know  it  as  it  is  in  itself,  we  saw  rather  curiosity  as  to  how
anything  can  come  to  exist  which,  while  capable  of  acting
and  being  acted  on,  sends  forth  from  itself  the  content  of
mental  development,  essentially  unknown  to  us.  In  fact,  we
could  not  have  looked  for  a  clearer  comprehension  of  the

544  BOOK V. CHAPTER  I.

soul's  essential  nature  from  a  revelation  of  what  it  is  before
this  lii'e ;  only  here,  as  in  the  case  of  every  work  of  art  whose
significance  consists  wholly  in  its  form,  and  can  be  fully
gathered  by  us  from  that  form,  we  have  also  a  secondary
interest  in  knowing  the  material  of  which  it  is  formed,  and
through  which  it  becomes  possible  that  these  beautiful  and
expressive  lines  traverse  space  distinct  and  durable  and  recog
nisable  by  us.  The  question,  then,  as  to  how  existence  and
action  come  to  be,  we  pronounced  absurd  ;  the  desire,  on  the
other  hand,  to  know  what  the  soul  is  apart  from  its  develop
ment,  appeared  to  us  superfluous ;  on  both  points  we  have
now  closely  connected  supplementary  reflections  to  offer.

First  of  all,  as  regards  the  second  point,  no  insight  into
what  the  soul  performs  in  its  development  would  wholly
satisfy  us  unless  we  had  some  guarantee  that  in  the  part  of
its  development  which  we  know,  the  whole  depth  of  its  being
is  displayed.  But  the  soul  does  not  grow  into  a  visible
clearly-outlined  form  like  the  plant,  of  which  we  know  that
all  the  impulses  and  shaping  force  latent  in  its  germ  live
their  life  fully,  in  the  period  between  the  first  sprouting  and
the  ripening  of  the  new  seed,  in  the  familiar  forms  of  a
vegetation  alike  for  countless  individuals.  There  is  nothing
in  our  intelligent  existence  answering  to  the  definite  structure
of  our  bodily  frame :  we  have  not  a  set  and  fixed  complement
of  ideas,  of  emotions,  of  springs  of  action,  as  our  body  has  its
appropriate  number  of  limbs.  Among  the  several  elements
of  our  inner  life  there  is  no  cycle  of  functions  such  as  we
find  pre-established  among  the  organs  of  the  body.  Or — if
we  allow  that  there  is  anything  of  the  kind— still  our  inner
life  does  not  consist  in  that ;  but  in  the  music  which  first
results  when  such  preconcerted  chords,  awakened  from  with
out,  group  themselves  into  a  melody  which  is  incompre
hensible  in  variety,  incalculable  in  composition,  and  never  in
two  different  minds  alike.  Nay,  not  even  a  melody  affords  a
correct  image  of  this  life  ;  for  even  the  changes  of  key  and
measure  within  the  preadjusted  scale  are  forced  upon  the
soul  by  the  extraneous  provocations  to  which  the  course  of

ASD  SOUL.  545

the  world  subjects  it.  All  these  shocks  must  be  worked  up
into  the  composition  it  is  evolving,  and  so — as  the  soul  is
thereby  often  driven  to  many  a  startling  turn  or  unforeseen
variation — its  own  true  and  proper  nature,  what  its  own  self
intends,  consists  not  directly  in  this  audible  melody,  but  in
what  is  inaudible  and  restricted  to  no  set  intervals,  in  the
form,  magnitude,  and  specific  character  of  the  elasticity
whereby  it  appropriates  what  is  foreign  to  it,  and  makes  it  a
means  to  its  own  expression.  It  would  be  difficult  to  appre
hend  this  abstract  character  even  if  we  had  before  us  the
complete  series  of  tones  in  which  it  gradually  expresses  itself
to  the  full.  But  how,  if  we  have  to  admit  that  the  series
of  exciting  causes  capable  of  calling  forth  response  and
further  development  from  the  soul  is  endless — that  myriad
hindrances  may  check  the  development  of  germs  contained
within  it — that  even  in  this  life  we  are  often  surprised  by
the  novel  character  of  reactions  which  we  find  consequent
on  impressions  scarcely  to  be  called  essentially  new — nay
more,  that  in  other  forms  of  existence,  which  the  inherent
meaning  of  earthly  development  leads  us  to  anticipate,
new  capacities  as  yet  undreamed  of  may  find  their  develop
ment  ?  For  the  moment  it  matters  not  how  far  we  are  right
in  giving  admission  to  each  one  of  these  doubts;  enough  that
an  actually  ft-lt  mistrust  keeps  us  from  thinking  the  nature
of  the  germ  of  mental  life  as  exhausted  in  the  actual  course
of  its  development.  This  development  we  therefore  believe
we  cannot  fully  comprehend  unless  we  find,  in  what  the  soul
is  in  itself,  the  regulative  creative  formula  from  which  we  may
learn,  by  supplementing  what  experience  cannot  show  us,  to
make  intelligible  and  connected  even  that  fragment  of  experi
ence  which  lies  open  to  our  observation.  This  craving  it  is
that  carries  us  ever  back  to  the  question  concerning  what  the
soul  is  in  itself — but  in  different  wise  from  before.  What
we  are  now  in  search  of  is  not  a  universal  nature  of  the  Soul,
whence  proceed  the  various  individual  souls,  but  the  Idea
within  each  soul  that  expands  into  the  variety  of  manifold
activities,  as  Into  its  natural  results.

VOL.  I.  2  M

546  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

We  are  not  therefore  now  asking  whether  we  shall  succeed
in  finding  and  expressing  this  quickening  and  productive  Idea
of  anything ;  but  we  find  it  interesting  to  consider  whether
this  form  of  an  Idea  is  an  admissible  mode  of  apprehending
that  in  which  we  seek  the  essence  of  a  thing.  In  two
directions  its  fitness  might  seem  doubtful.  For,  first,  an  Idea
seems  not  to  have  body  enough  to  form  a  fixed  steady  some
thing  from  which  effects  may  proceed  ;  and  ogam,  it  seems
not  to  possess  that  stamp  of  unity  indispensable  to  the  essence
of  whatever  really  exists.

The  first  doubt  brings  us  back  again  to  the  point  towards
which  some  of  our  preceding  remarks  were  directed — the
tendency  to  suppose  a  psychic  substance  as  existing  previous
to  the  actual  soul.  But  whereas,  before,  that  substance  was
to  be  the  universal  psychic  nature  whence  now  the  special
characteristics  of  souls,  now  it  is  sought  as  the  reality  that
supports  the  phenomena  of  individual  life  as  their  fixed
subject.  We  are  familiar  with  the  inclination  of  ordinary
thought,  which  in  every  phenomenon  that,  amid  its  change-
fulness,  yields  glimpses  of  a  steadfast  law,  seeks  an  obscure  core
of  unfathomable  reality  as  the  cause  of  this  consistency.  Wo
do  not  suppose  that  what  we  actually  understand  can  have  a
full  and  true  reality ;  not  till  we  come  to  a  remainder  which
we  have  no  hope  of  making  clear  to  ourselves  do  we  think  we
have  found  the  truly  existent,  the  thing  as  opposed  to  thought,
funl  to  it  absolutely  incomprehensible,  in  short  the  real.  We
fancy  we  have  insight  only  into  the  composite  ;  as  our  thinking
penetrates  into  the  joinings  of  the  combination  of  reality,  we
learn  by  this  analysis  to  understand  the  properties  that  depend
exclusively  on  the  nature  of  this  combination.  But  while
we  thus  lay  bare  the  compound,  the  real  itself,  that  forms
the  matter  of  the  combination,  our  thinking  does  not  resolve,
at  most  it  breaks  it  up  ;  suspended  like  a  chemical  substance
in  a  fluid  medium  in  which  it  is  not  soluble,  these  simple,
proper  nuclei  of  reality  iloat  in  our  connecting  thought,  no
better  known  than  before.  And  this  itself  is  to  us  a  guarantee
that  they  are  something  truly  existent.  Were  they  soluble

MIND  AND  SOUL.  547

by  thought,  could  what  they  are  be  fully  expressed  in  thoughts,
they  would  have  become  mere  thoughts,  and  would  be  no
longer  things.  Should  we  suppose  that  what  they  are
resembles  a  quality,  then  the  quality  must  be  the  quality  of
something;  should  we  call  their  essence  a  power,  that  were
to  assume  a  subject  by  which  it  is  exercised  ;  should  it  be
to  us  an  Idea,  there  must  be  some  one  who  has  or  thinks  the
Idea,  In  short,  represent  the  essence  of  things  as  we  will  in
thought,  the  representation  is  never  more  than  a  mere  image
of  the  thing;  there  still  is  lacking  the  fixed,  insoluble  core
of  reality  by  which,  or  in  which,  or  round  which,  or  pro
ceeding  from  which,  the  several  significant  details  of  the
image  may  be  condensed  into  permanent  existence.

Thus  we  come  at  last  to  seek  within  ourselves  an  inexpres
sible,  insoluble,  real  something,  and  to  bring  the  clear  fulness
of  known  mental  life  into  a  relation  of  dependence  to  it
never  to  be  made  clear.  In  fact,  this  perverted  way  of  think
ing  can  maintain  itself  only  so  long  as  we  do  not  attempt
more  precisely  to  define  that  dependence,  but  are  satisfied
with  the  crude  image  of  a  subject  to  which  the  manifold
content  of  existence  is  attached  externally.  As  soon  as  we
see  clearly  that  to  have  a  property  is  a  direct  proof  of  the
existence  of  that  which  has  it — moreover,  that  two  beings
always  distinct  in  their  attributes  must  of  necessity  be  diverse
in  what  they  are — thus  that  the  privilege  of  being  a  tkinyt  a
real,  does  not  belong  to  one  content  everywhere  the  same,
but  that  the  different  and  the  manifold  are  real :  we  recognise
that  reality,  as  a  particular  mode  of  existence,  is  the  earlier
notion  that  must  come  lirst  in  our  thinking,  and  that  the
name  of  the  Heal  is  to  be  given  to  every  content  to  which  this
mode  of  existence  is  proper,  on  grounds  of  whatsoever  nature,
find  whether  such  us  our  research  can  discover  or  not.
JUit  the  converse  does  not  hold,  that  things  have  reality  in  so
i';ir  as  they  contain  something  real.  ]>y  their  content  alone
are  things  whnt  they  are ;  through  the  fact  that  this  content
is  capable  of  acting  and  being  acted  on,  and  of  forming  the
abiding  element  in  a  changeful  series  of  phenomena,  things

548  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

arc,  and  can  be,  as  real,  distinguished  from  their  image  ;  but
how  it  comes  about  that  this  content  is  endowed  with  a»-
actual  existence  capable  of  passivity  and  activity,  is  that
foolish  inquiry  as  to  the  machinery  of  existence  which  we
have  already  more  than  once  dismissed  from  consideration.
This  alone  we  know,  that  we  gain  nothing  by  the  whimsical
attempt  first  to  provide  a  universal  basis  of  actual  existence,
a  real,  and  then  from  it  to  hand  over  actual  existence  in  fee
to  whatever  will  adhere  to  it ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  we  must
regard  existence  as  a  precipitate  whose  genesis  never  can
be  understood,  and  which  falls  directly,  without  any  interpos
ing  medium,  on  that  which  forms  the  content  of  the  existent.
If  in  the  meanwhile  we  assume  (more  will  have  to  be  said
about  it)  that  this  content  is  not  made  wholly  incomprehensible
by  having  a  nature  utterly  alien  to  thought,  but  that,  in
contrast  to  such  unanalyzable  reality,  it  deserves  the  name  of
the  ideal,  we  can  state  the  result  of  our  discussion  in  these
terms — the  real  is  nothing  else  than  the  Idea,  embodied  in
a  manner  incomprehensible  by  us,  in  the  form  of  efficacious
substantiality.

This  opinion  differs  from  another,  equally  hostile  to  the
cult  of  fixed  nuclei  of  reality,  which  we  hear  frequently
expressed.  After  having  got  rid  of  this  most  palpable  error,
we  are  apt  to  run  into  enthusiasm  for  an  equally  impossible
opposite  pole,  and  to  hold  that  the  essence  of  things  is  pure
unceasing  activity  itself,  unsupported  by  a  something  different
from  itself  whence  it  proceeds.  It  is  obvious  that  this
language  cannot  be  meant  to  convey  the  idea  suggested  by
it  at  first  hearing.  We  cannot  make  mind  equivalent  to  the
infinitive  to  think,  but  feel  that  it  must  be  that  which  thinks;
the  essence  of  things  cannot  be  either  existence  or  activity,
it  must  be  that  which  exists  and  that  which  acts.  The  sub
stantive  designated  by  these  participles  has  to  be  correctly
defined,  but  nothing  is  gained  by  its  being  denied,  and  in  its
place  the  infinitive  put  which  cannot  fill  the  place.

It  is  always  a  very  doubtful  undertaking  to  try  indirectly
to  confute  an  error,  the  inconceivability  of  which  must  be

MIND  AND  SOUL.  549

directly  evident.  I  feel  this  embarrassment  in  the  first  step
of  the  attempt,  which  yet  I  am  resolved  to  make,  to  show  the
absurdity  of  placing  the  essence  of  things  in  mere  working,
the  essence  of  the  soul  in  mere  thinking  or  acting.  For  when
I  ask  myself  whether  the  notion  of  a  subjectless  thinking  or
acting  conveys  anything  that  can  be  apprehended  as  the
content  of  independent  actual  existence,  I  am  but  too
distinctly  aware  that  the  meaning  these  notions  themselves  are
said  to  have  cannot  really  be  thought ;  thinking  means  nothing,
if  it  is  not  the  thinking  of  a  thinker;  acting  and  working  main
nothing,  if  in  endeavouring  to  conceive  them  we  leave  out  the
conception  of  a  subject  distinguishable  from  them  from  which
they  proceed.  Uut  concerning  notions  which,  as  we  tried  to
think  them,  can  main  absolutely  nothing,  it  is  quite  idle  to
inquire  further  whether  they  are  fitted  to  be  apprehended  as
the  essence  of  actual  existence.

To  obscurities  of  thought  which  arise  from  real  difficulties
in  the  subject  we  can  patiently  make  all  concessions  that
yield  the  prospect  of  fuller  understanding.  If,  then,  wo
suppose  that  there  is  some  mcanimj  in  the  conception  of  a
pure  subjectless  action,  we  may  further  ask  how  things  must
present  themselves  to  us  if  their  essence  consist  wholly  in
such  action.  Xow  here  it  appears  to  us  that  either  from
each  thing  a  uniform  activity  a  must  How  continuously,  or
— should  its  essence  be  constituted,  not  by  an  ever  homo
geneous,  but  by  a  changing  action — the  several  phases  of  this
action  must  follow  one  another  in  the  fixed  order  a  1>  c  <l,  like
the  cadence  of  a  melody.  The  first  case  is  self-evident  ;
the  second  becomes  necessary  if  we  grant  the  condition,  in
itself  not  admissible,  that  in  action  a,  which  at  one  moment
constitutes  the  essence  of  the  thing,  are  contained  a  ground
and  a  capability  of  passing  into  some  other  action.  For  then
what  results  from  a  can  be  only  a  definite  I,  not  with  tho
same  necessity  any  chance  m  or  n;  I  can  be  followed  only
by  c,  not  by  any  haphazard  }>  or  q;  the  sequence  of  action  is
then  quite  fixed  ;  and  were  it  conceivable  that  /,  an  earlier
member  of  the  series,  should  ever  be  required  by  a  later  onu

550  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  L

r  as  its  consequent,  the  whole  of  the  series  between  /  and
r  would  have  to  be  perpetually  repeated  like  the  period  of
a  decimal  fraction.  Now  here  no  one  assuredly  recognises
the  behaviour  which  we  think  that  we  observe  in  things  or
must  ascribe  to  them ;  if  they  were  such,  to  assume  them
would  be  of  no  use  for  the  explanation  of  the  course  of  the
universe,  they  themselves  would  be  incapable  of  giving  rise  to
it.  We  shall,  however,  be  accused  of  a  disingenuous  incom
pleteness  ;  we  shall  be  told  that  we  have  forgotten  that  the
uniform  activity  a  may,  under  the  influence  of  external  con
ditions,  change  into  manifold  forms  of  action,  and  that  for  the
same  reason  the  whimsical  second  hypothesis  of  an  unalterable
sequence  in  the  phases  of  action  is  idle.  But  this  other
behaviour  which  unquestionably  we  do  observe  in  tilings,
seems  to  us  itself  at  variance  with  the  hypothesis  that  their
essence  consists  in  pure  action.  He  who  speaks  of  the  influ
ence  of  any  condition  must  mean,  one  would  think,  that  that
on  which  the  condition  acts  is  acted  on  by  the  condition ;  but
without  doing  away  with  the  notion  of  pure  action,  it  cannot  be
predicated  of  it  that  it  is  acted  on  ;  if  things  are  acted  on,  their
whole  essence  is  no  longer  pure  action,  but  that  whence  activity
and  passivity  can  be  derived ;  and  in  this  foundation  of  their
being,  distinguishable  from  each  several  act  and  each  several
state,  reappears  once  more  that  very  subject  which  on  this  theory
was  believed  to  be  superfluous  for  the  notion  of  pure  action.
But  perhaps  objection  will  be  taken  to  the  introduction  of  the
notion  of  passivity ;  perhaps  it  may  be  thought  that,  if  a
condition  acts  on  the  action  a,  a  new  action,  b,  will  at  once
arise  and  take  the  place  of  a,  without  any  necessity  for
ascribing  to  the  vanishing  a  a  passive  state  such  as  were
possible  not  for  it,  a  subjectless  action,  but  only  for  an  active
subject  not  here  present.  Even  this  last  expedient,  however,
is  a  failure.  For  on  such  a  supposition  nothing  of  a  would
remain  at  the  moment  when  b  followed  it,  and  instead  of  active
things,  what  would  be  affirmed  would  be  merely  a  becoming
or  happening  such  as  determined  the  relative  succession  of  a
multiplicity  of  phrcnomena  unconnected  by  any  inherent  bond.

MIND  AND  SOUL.  551

Xo\v  this  conception  of  an  absolute  becoming  (into  whose
further  impossibility  we  do  not  here  enter)  would  by  no  means
commend  the  theory  against  which  we  contend.  It  was  not
intended  that  it  should  do  away  with  or  deny  things ;  on  the
contrary,  it  was  to  uphold  them,  and  was  founded  on  the
belief  that  in  pure  action  their  absolutely  true  nature  had
been  grasped.  So  long,  then,  as  we  think  that  a  changing
series  of  phenomena  must  be  viewed  as  inherently  connected
by  the  nature  of  a  thing,  we  cannot  conceive  the  essence  of
things  as  pure  activity,  and  must  seek  it  in  the  power  that
unites  and  regulates  a  complexus  of  action,  of  passion,  and  of
reaction.  This  content  is  what  stands  before  us  as  sharing  in
existence,  in  action,  in  operation — as  itself  existent,  agent,
operant,  and  it  is  no  less  far  removed  from  ceaseless  flux  into
activity  than  from  the  rigidity  of  a  nucleus  never  entering  on
motion,  but  only  allowing  it  to  come  to  itself  from  without.

§  4.  But,  it  will  be  doubtfully  objected,  supposing  we  grant
all  this,  is  what  we  here  apprehend,  under  the  form  of  the
Idea,  as  the  essence  of  the  thing,  capable  of  participating  in
that  existence  which  must  pertain  to  tilings  ?  Not  as  if,  in
spite  of  former  concessions,  we  were  still  seeking  to  know  by
what  magic  things,  whatever  they  may  now  consist  in,  came
by  their  existence  ;  but  since  not  all  thinkable  things  possess
objective  existence,  the  Idea  must  at  least  have  to  show  the
universal  marks  which  distinguish  what  is  admitted  to  such
existence  from  what  is  excluded  from  it.  Xow,  is  not  chief
among  those  attributes  of  everything  truly  existent  this,  that
it  is  in  itself  one  ?  And  does  not,  on  the  other  hand,  every
thing  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  Idea  seem  to  presuppose
a  number  of  elements,  of  whose  mutual  connection  it  is  the
expression — and  such  an  expression  that,  as  the  result  of  its
influence  on  our  susceptible  imagination,  there  arises  in  us
an  harmonious  unity  of  mood,  although  nothing  correspondent
to  this  unity  of  our  own  state  exists  outside  ourselves  in
the  relations  of  the  elements,  so  far  as  we  know  ?  After
all,  then,  is  not  every  Idea  a  thought,  framed  by  the  com
paring  activity  of  an  intelligent  being  when  it  embraces

552  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

within  itself  the  multitude  of  phenomena,  without  this
thought  being  ever  present  in  that  multitude  itself  as  a
productive  and  moulding  force  ?

These  objections  have  often  been  made,  and  in  order  to
meet  them  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  substitute  for  the
Idea,  which  of  course  includes  manifold  tendencies  and  rela
tions  of  one  being  to  another,  an  absolutely  simple  primitive
quality  as  the  essence  of  each  individual  thing.  This,  accord
ing  as  one  views  it,  is  to  introduce  either  only  a  new  name,
or  with  that  also  an  old  error.  For  the  essence  of  the  thin"

o

must  in  any  case  be  of  such  a  nature  that  its  subsequent
effects  and  manifold  attributes  can  proceed  from  it — not,
indeed,  without  being  occasioned,  but  under  the  influence  of
external  conditions ;  it  must,  further,  be  such  that  those  com
binations  of  its  states,  which  are  not  exclusively  dependent
on  the  sequence  of  stimuli  from  without,  must  be  developed
from  it  on  occasion  of  such  stimuli;  in  short,  that  simple
quality  must  contain  exactly  the  same  source  of  action  and
passion  and  of  arrangement  of  internal  states  that  wre  sought
in  the  Idea.  So  far,  the  simple  quality  is  merely  an  altered
name,  containing  at  most  an  admonition  to  conceive  the  con
tent  of  the  Idea  as  the  essence  of  the  thing,  not  in  that  dis
membered  fashion  in  which,  if  we  knew  it,  we  would  express
it  in  language,  but  concentrated  in  the  unity  of  a  single  attri
bute,  in  the  form  of  a  primitive  quality.  Unquestionably,
such  concentration  was  involved  also  in  our  meanin^  •  the  error

O >

of  this  conception,  on  the  other  hand,  lies  in  the  fact  that
the  form  of  Quality  is  incapable  of  accomplishing  the  con
centration  of  the  Idea  to  unity.

For,  however  unknown,  nay,  unknowable,  we  may  pronounce
the  quality  of  anything  to  be,  if  the  name  quality  is  not  to
be  a  quite  meaningless  arbitrary  designation  of  the  essential
content  of  things,  but  to  denote  it  (at  least  formally)  with
precision  and  significance,  the  unknown  quality  of  beings
must  possess  the  characteristics  peculiar  to  every  quality  as
such.  But  we  know  only  the  qualities  of  sensation ;  from
them  alone  is  the  universal  notion  abstracted,  and  of  them

MIND  AND  SOUL.  553

alone  do  we  think  when  we  speak  of  the  essence  of  things  as
this  theory  does ;  we  form  our  conception  of  supersensible
qualities  entirely  on  the  model  of  the  sensible  ones  with
which  we  are  familiar,  and,  so  far  as  we  succeed  in  this,  we
are  for  the  moment  satisfied.  "We  conceive  the  essence  of
things  as  no  less  one  with  itself  than  the  blue  of  the  skyey
vault  above  us  which  fills  void  space  with  its  fulness  and  form,
in  changeless  repose  without  a  trace  of  or  a  tendency  towards
aggressive  mobility;  we  conceive  it  as  free  from  internal  rela
tion  and  division  as  every  simple  colour,  and  we  even  rest
contented  in  the  contemplation  of  it  so  conceived.  We  only
forget  that  this  repose  is  too  motionless,  this  unity  too  simple.
For  we  are  certain  to  be  reminded  that  the  unity  of  things  is
not  meant  to  rejoice  perpetually  in  itself,  but  must  send  forth
from  itself  the  motley  variety  of  phenomena.  And  this  id
impossible  for  a  content,  that  from  its  nature  must  be  con
ceived  in  this  form  of  quality.  It  could  be  abolished,  but  not
altered,  for  any  alteration  presupposes  a  permanent  identical
foundation  on  which  what  is  changing  falls  back  in  order  to
evolve  from  it  the  new  form.  The  simple  quality  has  behind
it  nothing  of  this  kind — and  the  simpler  it  is,  the  less  do  the
notions  of  activity  and  passivity  admit  of  being  associated
with  it.  The  quiet  open  smoothness  of  unreserved  self-
identity  that  we  remarked  in  the  sensible  qualities,  and
admired  as  the  most  genuine  expression  of  the  unmoved
nature  of  the  existent,  on  the  contrary  is  never  found  in  this.
It  does  not  even  indicate  an  immobile  attribute ;  it  is  but  a
pleasing  appearance  in  which  is  fixed  for  our  thought  some
restless  moment  of  an  event,  of  reciprocal  action  between
several  elements ;  the  existent  itself,  whose  calmest  and  most
objective  embodiment  we  expected  to  find  it,  is  what  we  can
least  of  all  apprehend  according  to  this  analogy.

And  now  to  bring  this  inquiry  to  a  close.  If  any  one  still
asks  how  the  content  of  an  Idea  can  have  the  unity  which  is
indispensable  to  the  existent,  and  which  we  found,  indeed,  in
the  quality,  but  without  the  germ  of  variety  which  is  no  less
indispensable,  we  point  the  interrogator  to  the  following  train

554  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

of  considerations.  To  thinkers  seeking  to  express  and  repre
sent  the  essence  of  any  object  by  means  of  notions  and  words,
it  is  of  course  not  the  expression  itself  but  the  content  which
it  connotes  that  stands  for  the  essence  of  the  object.  The  term
Idea  has  a  double  meaning,  and  expresses  first  the  content  of
things,  but,  secondly,  the  form  of  the  thought-image  in  which
we  reproduce  that  content.  The  circuitous  ways  along  which
our  representative  thought  travels  do  not  exist  in  the  thing
represented ;  the  number  not  only  of  words,  but  also  of  points
of  relation,  perhaps  thought  without  words,  which  we  require
in  order  to  make  clear  to  ourselves  what  we  mean,  does  not
imply  an  equal  number  of  parts  in  the  contemplated  object.
If,  therefore,  Idea  in  this  sense  of  a  thought  in  us  is  a  mani
fold  and  restless  energy  of  relating  and  comparing  knowledge,
which  cannot  in  this  form  be  apprehended  as  the  objective
essence  of  the  thing,  on  the  other  hand,  what  this  thought
means  is  capable  of  original  unity.  The  same  revolving
meditation  reproduces  in  us  from  the  varied  sequence  of  the
elements  of  a  poem  the  unity  of  its  poetic  soul.  An  Idea
concentrated  in  the  form  of  such  unity  we  call  the  essence  of
a  thing.  Should  an  insatiable  curiosity  still  seek  a  hint  as
to  how  the  content  of  an  Idea  can  be  condensed  into  this
unity,  and  how  the  result  of  such  an  exertion  conceived,  this
would  imply  entire  misapprehension  of  the  problem  and  of
what  cognition  can  accomplish.  For  such  a  requirement
would  be  tantamount  to  the  desire  to  experience  what  must  be
done  in  order  to  be  that,  the  cognition  of  which  is  the  subject
of  our  present  discussion.  Even  the  fulfilment  of  that  wish
would  not  lead  to  the  desired  goal ;  for,  could  we  now  really
transform  ourselves  so  that  we  should  be  that  which  we
would  discern,  the  very  effort,  then,  to  know  also  what  we
were  would  of  necessity  change  even  the  new  being  into
which  we  should  have  been  transformed  from  a  unity  into  a
composite  representative  image  consisting  of  manifold  parts
and  their  relations.

We  have  but  one  word  to  add  in  regard  to  our  reason  for
availing  ourselves  of  the  double  meaning  of  the  term Idea;

MIND  AND  SOUL.  555

for  it  was  clone  with  a  purpose.  Among  the  various  ways  of
apprehending  objects,  we  distinguish  by  means  of  this  term
that  which  characterizes  its  object,  not  by  a  certain  number
of  fixed  marks,  or  by  a  particular  kind  of  connection  between
variable  marks,  but  solely  by  the  permanent  identical  meaning
that  can  be  expressed  in  a  boundless  variety  alike  of  the  marks
and  of  their  modes  of  combination.  It  is  a  man's  image  in
space  that  is  intuited  (Die  Amchauung  dcs  Mcnschen  ist  scin
raumliches  Bild)  ;  the  generic  image  (Vorsielluny)  of  man  adds
to  the  other  attributes  of  this  image,  and  of  the  remembrance
bound  up  with  it  the  secondary  thought  that  all  this  variety  forms
a  whole ;  we  acquire  the  notion  (Bcgriff)  of  man  when  we  set
the  wider  superordinate  category  of  the  species  as  an  ordering
centre  into  the  midst  of  his  particular  attributes  ;  but  we  have
not  the  Idea  (Lice)  of  man  till  we  apprehend  the  thought  to
realize  which  he  is  called,  a  thought  bound  to  no  particular
series  of  attributes,  but  containing  the  reason  why  man  must
be  a  phenomenon  in  space,  a  connected  organism,  the  head  of
the  animal  kingdom.  This  significance  which  lies  fur  us  in
the  Idea  as  a  form  of  thought,  we  sought  to  trnnsf'er  also  to
its  object  by  the  use  of  the  same  term  :  our  aim  was  not  to
think  the  essence  of  the  thing  as  exhausted  by  an  inactive
quality,  or  to  apprehend  it  through  a  certain  action  or  a
certain  series  of  several,  hut  to  discern  its  full  content  only
in  the  meaning,  which  it  realizes  in  the  mo*t  varied  manner
and  by  the  most  varied  forms  of  development.

On  the  other  hand,  it  was  by  no  means  our  intention  by
the  choice  of  this  term  to  intimate  our  assent  to  the  celebrated
proposition  that  Thought  and  Being  are  identical,  and  our
belief  that  things  have  no  other  content  than  that  which  wo
can  by  thought  reproduce  in  the  form  of  the  Idea,  or  even,
perhaps,  than  this  form  of  the  Idea  itself.  We  have,  indeed,
already  expressed  the  general  conviction  that  the  essence  of
things  does  not  consist  in  something  so  alien  from  mind  as  to
be  to  it  impenetrable;  but  mind  and  mental  life  are  more  than
thinking.  It  is  quite  possible  that  what  things  aro  is  not
beyond  the  possible  experience  of  the  whole  mind,  and  yet

556  BOOK  V. CHATTER  I.

that  it  is  wholly  incomprehensible  by  this  one  form  of  its
inner  energy — thinking.  Feeling  and  volition,  pleasure  and
pain,  are  forms  of  our  inner  experience,  for  which  our  con
scious  thinking,  as  it  watches  them,  devises  names  indeed,
while  yet  never  making  intelligible  by  forms  of  thinking  the
distinction  that  separates  them  from  all  thinking ;  they
are  intelligible  only  to  him  who  knows  them  by  experience.
In  like  manner,  the  essence  of  things  could  be  described  by
thought  proper,  if  the  mental  eye  ever  pierced  to  it  through
the  veil  of  phenomena,  though,  perhaps,  this  description
would  contain  many  terms  whose  meaning  cannot  be  con
ceived — only  lived.  But  whatever  this  essence  might  be,  it
wrould  involve  the  Idea  as  the  formless  permanent  ground  of
changing  forms.

§  5.  We  must  now  plead  for  indulgence  for  this  long  course
of  abstract  reasonings.  They  were  not  intended  to  set  at  rest
questions  which  only  Metaphysics  can  answer,  but  merely  to
indicate  the  point  of  view  of  our  next  inquiry.  If  we  now
cast  a  glance  backward  to  what  led  to  this  digression,  we
shall  remember  that  we  found  we  could  not  predicate  of  the
human  mind  in  general  an  essential  similarity  with  the  souls
of  the  lower  animals,  in  order  afterwards  to  exalt  man  above
the  whole  animal  world  by  the  compensating  addition  of  a
higher  faculty  peculiar  to  himself.  AVhat  he  is  he  must  be,
as  an  indivisible  whole ;  what  the  souls  of  animals  are,  they
too  must  be  as  vitally  active  complete  Ideas,  each  wholly
distinct  from  the  other,  each  a  perfect  unit  in  itself.  And
thus  we  might  conceive  a  realm  of  souls  in  which  each  species,
and  in  it  each  individual,  should  have  its  fixed  place  according
as  the  vital  Idea  whi-jh  it  expresses  stands  higher  or  lower
than,  or  on  a  level  with,  others  in  the  cosmic  order.  It  may
thence  seem  as  if  here,  too,  a  deeper  knowledge  of  the  indi
vidual  were  to  be  hoped  for  from  a  survey  of  the  whole  to
which  it  belongs ;  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  human  mind
from  the  study  of  the  animal  souls,  which  are  the  preliminary
stages  leading  up  to  it.  But,  apart  from  the  necessarily
defective  character  of  our  knowledge  of  the  psychic  life  of

MIND  AND  SOUI*  557

animals,  which  in  most  cases  would  only  permit  of  our  sub
stituting  unproved  ideas  for  certain  facts,  this  theory  is  also
on  other  grounds  fallacious,  or  at  least  for  our  present  object
useless.  For  this  order  of  the  realm  of  souls,  if  we  knew  it,
would  give  us  a  deeper  comprehension  of  the  Infinite  I>eing
that  may  behold  itself  in  this  image  ;  but  it  would  contribute
little  to  the  right  appreciation  of  the  tasks  assigned  as  its
share  to  human  life,  and  of  the  means  at  man's  disposal  for
their  execution.  In  regard  to  this  last  question,  it  is  but  of
remote  interest  to  know  what  position  the  human  mind  fills
in  the  scale  of  beings  ;  on  the  other  hand,  an  acquaintance
with  the  conditions  acting  causally  on  him  and  determining
his  development,  is  of  very  great  importance.

In  this  relation  his  position  is  different  in  the  realm  of
souls  from  what  it  is  in  such  a  scale  of  species.  I  low  nearly
akin  to,  or  how  far  remote  from,  ours  the  soul  of  any  kind  of
animal  may  be,  is  to  us  a  matter  of  indifference,  if  it  does  not
act  on  us.  The  animals  for  the  most  part  stand  in  this
relation  of  indifference  to  our  development,  and  soulless  or
inanimate  Nature  possesses  under  the  conditions  of  our  culture
a  far  higher  importance  in  proportion.  That  the  dexterous
instinct  of  many  of  the  lower  classes  of  animals  moves  in  (at
least  apparently)  quite  different  and  alien  modes  of  action
when  compared  with  the  energy  of  the  human  soul,  is  to  us
on  the  whole  a  fact  of  small  significance  ;  myriads  of  such
instincts  may  still  be  unknown  to  Iran,  even  those  with
which  we  are  acquainted  come  little  under  our  view  ;  whether
they  were  there  or  not,  human  development  would  remain  the
.same.  Of  other  classes  we  can  speak  differently  ;  many  of
them  approach  us  efl'ectively,  but  perhaps  they  are  not  just
those  which  stand  next  us  in  the  scale  of  psychic  species.
The  progress  of  human  civilisation  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  apes,  much  with  the  horse  and  the  other  domestic  animals.
Not  only  do  they  serve  us  by  their  bodily  strength  like  living
machines,  but  on  our  intercourse  with  them  mainly  rest  the
conceptions  which  we  form  of  a  psychic  life  different  from
ours,  and  yet  in  general  related  to  it ;  ami,  unquestionably.

558  .BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

the  very  conceptions  which  we  form  of  a  soul  other  than  our
own  are  the  most  important  part  of  the  influence  exercised  by
it  upon  us.  The  action  of  man  on  man  is  the  most  natural
of  all;  the  importance  of  this  relative  influence  throws  into
the  shade  all  the  other  relations  of  a  similar  nature  in  which
we  stand  to  the  animal  world.  In  research  into  these  things
must  lie  enlightenment  as  to  the  essential  peculiarities  of
human  life ;  any  attempt,  on  the  other  hand,  to  place  man  at
the  head  of  an  earthly  realm  of  souls,  and  to  explain  his
destiny  from  the  nature  of  the  lower  stages,  would  be  one  of
those  brilliantly  beginning  but  vainly  ending  spectacles,  many
of  which  have  in  succession  been  presented  by  anthropology.

We  have  not  as  yet  answered  the  second  of  the  questions
which  we  proposed  at  the  opening  of  this  inquiry.  For  in
what  we  have  hitherto  stated  we  could  only  try  to  show  how
an  essential  peculiarity  of  the  human  mind  must  be  thought,
should  the  examination  of  facts  compel  us  to  presuppose
such.  "VYe  have  not  yet  solved  the  problem  whether  perhaps
the  human  mind  may  not  carry  on  the  course  of  psychic  life
in  the  animal  world  without  any  essential  break,  with  no
distinction  save  its  higher  development.  Though  we  have
made  no  secret  of  our  disposition  to  answer  this  question  in
the  negative,  to  return  a  definite  answer  is  not  here  possible,
and  we  must  content  ourselves  with  dwelling  on  the  diffi
culties  of  such  an  answer.  Should  we  seek  to  decide  it  apart
from  the  comparison  of  experience,  we  might  well  expect  it
from  nothing  short  of  the  final  results  of  speculation  in
regard  to  the  necessary  formation  of  the  universe  and  the
connection  of  its  parts.  What  is  to  be  derived  from  this
source  we  shall  towards  the  close  of  our  inquiry  try  to  bring
together  as  a  whole,  and  we  shall  see  that  the  value  of

O

the  question  itself  for  this  highest  standpoint  is  greatly
diminished.  The  general  principles  that  might  be  besides
applied  would  lead  to  no  certainty.  Perhaps  to  meet  the
hypothesis  that  everywhere  similar  souls  would  reach  different
levels  of  culture  only  by  means  of  the  very  different  degrees
of  advantage  given  to  them  by  corporeal  organization,  the

MIND  AND  SOUL.  559

argument  might  be  brought  forward,  how  incredible  it  is  that
similar  souls  should  be  attached  to  so  widely  differing  cor
poreal  husks.  But  all  sorts  of  conjectures  in  regard  to
transmigration  of  souls,  fanciful  ami  unsupported  by  experi
ence,  yet  incapable  of  being  disproved,  would  at  once  be
ready  to  remove  this  paradox,  and  to  show  what  a  lesson  of
progressive  training  might  lie  in  the  gradual  transference  of
originally  quite  equal  beings  into  other  and  more  perfect
bodies.  If  we  turn  to  experience,  the  task  of  decision  becomes
no  easier.  All  the  facts  that  lie  before  us  are  limited  to
the  universal  and  indubitable  impression  of  a  far  lower
development  in  animals ;  but  this  impression  has  been  so
imperfectly  analyzed  that  no  sure  inference  can  be  drawn
from  it  as  to  the  causes  of  this  inferiority.  Our  acquaintance
with  animal  psychic  life  is  much  more  superficial  and  un
certain  than  it  mostly  suits  the  self-coniideiice  of  philosophical
classifiers  to  allow.  We  certainly  often  estimate  the  decree
of  its  development  wrongly,  probably  often  too  low  ;  for  we
quite  correctly  ascribe  to  the  animals  the  energies  whose
operations  we  have  before  us  ;  but  with  very  questionable
justice  we  deny  to  them  others  which  they  either  cannot
express  or  of  which  their  expressions  are  too  alien  to  bo
comprehended  by  us.  If  we  now  try  to  draw  from  these
defective  premises  conclusions  as  to  the  likeness  or  unlikeness
of  animal  and  human  souls,  we  find  ourselves  tempted  to
enter  on  two  opposite  paths  of  error.

We  necessarily  start  from  the  contemplation  of  our  own
inner  life  ;  from  it  iirst  falls  a  glimmer  of  comprehension  on
animal  psychic  life,  with  which  we  are  not  directly  acquainted.
If,  now,  we  are  not  in  the  habit  of  analyzing  the  several
operations  of  our  own  mind,  and  of  tracing  back  to  simpler
processes  the  origin  of  many  apparently  new  powers,  we  are
struck  by  every  superficial  difference  between  men  and
animals,  and  fall  into  that  easy  mode  of  classification  which
defines  the  nature  of  the  different  souls,  as  with  the  certainty
of  chemical  formulas,  by  the  combination  of  various  con
stituents,  i.e.  of  various  powers  supposed  to  belong  to  the  one

560  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

species,  to  be  wanting  in  the  other.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
even  this  correct  habit  of  tracing  back  composite  or  derived
mental  functions  to  their  simple  roots  leads  to  the  opposite
fault  of  over-estimating  the  external  aids  of  working,  and  to
the  folly  of  trying  by  means  of  endlessly  varied  external
excitements  to  call  forth  from  absolutely  similar  beings
operations  that  can  flourish  only  on  originally  different  soils.
Of  course  in  this  respect  one  comes  back  mainly  to  the  bodily
organization,  for  this  it  is  that  mostly  gives  their  peculiar
colouring  to  the  external  circumstances  of  each  individual
life  whose  influence  constitutes  the  second  great  circle  of
conditions  of  the  specific  direction  of  the  soul's  growth.  Now
it  can  be  demonstrated  to  a  certainty  that  many  corporeal
arrangements  promote  or  hinder  particular  forms  of  mental
expression ;  thus  the  conception  of  space  that  may  be
developed  by  eyeless  animals  must  necessarily  be  different
from  that  of  those  which  see  ;  to  those  of  completely  symme
trical  structure  it  must  be  impossible  to  distinguish  directions
in  space ;  to  those  without  voice  the  communication  of
internal  states  must  be  not  only  different,  but  far  more
imperfect.  But  whereas  in  general  from  the  absence  of
an  organ  we  may  conclude  the  absence  of  an  operation,
we  cannot  with  equal  directness  infer  from  the  presence
of  an  organ  its  use,  and  the  variety  of  the  mental
energy  that  manifests  itself  in  it.  We  must  leave  to  the
course  of  this  inquiry  the  bringing  forward  of  particular
cases  of  these  things ;  wherever,  however,  we  let  a  side
light  fall  on  the  psychic  life  of  animals,  it  is  with  the
object  of  bringing  out  by  contrast  the  significance  of  that  of
human  beings  ;  in  most  cases  such  comparisons  but  embody
our  fancies  as  to  how  it  may  be  with  the  animals,  not  as  to
how  it  certainly  is  or  necessarily  must  be.

This  uncertainty  of  our  judgment  is,  however,  without  any
material  influence  on  the  subject  of  our  immediate  researches.
Of  course  for  an  inquiry  relating  not  exclusively  to  human
culture  but  to  the  whole  mechanism  of  psychic  life,  the  ques
tion  as  to  the  likeness  or  unlikeness  of  the  means  by  which

MIND  AND  SOUL.  5C1

the  various  levels  may  be  reached  would  be  one  of  vital
importance.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  are  concerned  chieflv
with  what  man  is,  not  with  what  the  lower  animals  are  not.
The  anxious  shrinking  from  being  brought  into  too  close
affinity  of  nature  with  them  is  wrongly  associated  with  the
question  whether  we  belong  to  the  same  species  or  not.  For,
after  all,  ours  is  the  higher  development ;  this  possession
forms  the  abiding  distinction  between  us  and  them,  and  the
gulf  between  us  does  not  become  greater  or  less  according  as
it  is  pronounced  to  be  a  generic  distinction  or  the  result  of
similar  capacities  meeting  with  various  kinds  and  degrees  of
furtherance.  Things  always  are  that  which  they  actually
prove  to  be  ;  it  would  not  be  worth  the  trouble  to  become
anything  if  one  were  to  be  estimated  according  to  what  one
originally  was.

We  have  preliminarily  to  add  almost  the  same  remarks —
especially  the  last — in  regard  to  the  third  of  the  questions
which  at  starting  we  proposed.  The  mental  culture  of  the
human  race  itself  varies  from  brutal  coarseness  up  to  the
height  of  a  genius  which  we  rashly  think  to  honour  by  calling
it  divine.  Is  there  in  these  vast  differences  a  certain  common
element  that  we  may  be  right  in  regarding  as  the  human
mind  ?  Are  the  minds  of  the  various  races  of  mankind  essen
tially  different?  Within  the  same  race  where  can  we,  amid
the  infinite  variety  of  individuals,  find  a  common  standard
and  how  apply  it  ?  Does  it  in  general  fall  high,  and  does
clownishness  remain  below,  kept  back  by  the  unfavourable
influence  of  circumstances  and  by  defects  of  bodily  organiza
tion,  or  does  it  fall  low,  and  does  genius  rise  above  it  in
virtue  of  favourable  conditions  of  life  and  superior  bodily
organs?  Or,  lastly,  can  we  name  any  definite  attributes  or
characteristic  habits  of  working  which,  recurring  in  all  human
souls,  bind  them  into  a  harmonious  whole,  while  permitting
to  individuals,  in  infinitely  different  degrees,  an  indescribable
variety  of  individual  character  ?  It  is  the  affirmative  answer
to  this  last  question  that  is  the  object  proposed  in  further
inquiry.  After  we  had  put  beyond  doubt  this  common  bond,

VOL  L  2s

562  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  I.

\ve  should  have  no  reason  to  exclude  from  the  series  of  con
ditions  determining  the  highest  level  of  culture,  outward
circumstances  and  bodily  constitution,  neither  of  which  is
adequate  to  determine  it  alone.  The  universal  standard  of
human  culture  falls  neither  high  nor  low  in  the  sense  in
which  we  made  the  inquiry  ;  an  average  of  actual  culture
can  be  struck,  but  no  measure  can  be  found  for  what  it
ought  to  be.  The  body  has  a  normal  form,  and  is  perfect
when  it  fills  the  outline  of  that ;  before  the  mind  floats,  not
a  normal  image  of  its  development,  but  an  ideal  image  of
perfection,  never  reached  ;  the  energies  characteristic  of  man
kind  prescribe  in  general  but  one  direction  to  be  followed  in
pursuing  it,  but  they  yield  no  measure  of  the  distance  at
which  it  lies.  Finally,  whatever  doubts  may  arise  as  to  the
equality  of  mental  capacities  in  the  different  races  of  men,
these  capacities  are  at  any  rate  sufficiently  alike  to  make
them  all  capable  of  a  common  human  intercourse,  in  which,
however,  their  shares  are  of  varying  degrees  of  importance ;
they  together  form  the  great  community  of  mankind  exer
cising  reciprocal  educative  influence.  In  this  genuine  practical
unity  of  reciprocal  action  we  have  ample  compensation  for
the  denied  gratification  of  an  idle  logical  curiosity,  as  to
whether  men  take  part  in  this  task  as  different  species  of
one  genus  of  minds  or  as  closely-related  members  of  one  and
the  same  stock

CHAPTER II.

HUMAN  SKNTIKNCK.

Different  Explanations  of  the  Senses— The  ImliflVitmt  Content  of  Sense,  an<l
the  Feeling  of  ruin  or  Pleasure  that  accompanies  it— Intrinsic  Worth  ol
Sense-Impressions — Consonance  of  their  Xature  with  the  Stimuli  to  which
they  correspond — Examples:  Light  and  Sound  —  ^Esthetic  Judgment —
Symmetry  in  Space  and  Time— Mathematical  Aspect  of  Souse- Imagination
—Understanding  and  Sympathetic  Enjoyment  of  Alien  Forms  of  Existence
—  Of  the  Use  of  Implements — Of  Dress  and  Ornament — Ot  Ceremonies.

J;  1.  "VTOT  only  does  the  whole  current  of  intelligent  life
•^-'  commence  with  the  sensations,  but  to  these  it
incessantly  returns  in  order  to  find  materials  and  starting-
point  for  new  developments  of  its  activity.  We  too  must
refer  to  the  sensations  when  our  object  is  t<»  review  the
peculiar  and  permanent  inclinations  and  habits  in  which  the
nature  of  the  human  mind  displays  itself,  and  from  which
combined  "we  must  form  our  idea  of  that  nature.  No  doubt
it  is  scarce  possible  exhaustively  to  measure  the  whole  depth
of  the  mind's  original  endowments  from  even  the  fullest
manifestations  of  its  activity,  but  still  the  unity  of  its  being
must  light  up  with  some  promise  of  its  higher  efforts  even
the  simplest  mental  processes,  and  perhaps  the  traces  of  its
presence  are  distinct  enough  to  be  recognised.

Meanwhile,  of  the  numerous  lines  of  thought  that  connect
themselves  with  the  consideration  of  human  sentience,  we
set  aside  some  that  are  foreign  to  the  object  of  our  discussions,
and  in  which,  as  it  appears  to  me,  information  is  often  sought
such  as  they  are  incapable  of  yielding.  Among  these  is  first
of  all  the  inquiry  into  the  physical  causes  of  our  sensations.
We  formerly  found  reason  to  believe  that  a  sensation  in  con
sciousness  retains  no  indication  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  the

564  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

outer  movements  that  act,  as  stimuli,  on  our  organs  of  sense.
The  note  has  taken  the  place  of  the  atmospheric  vibrations,
colour  the  place  of  the  undulations  of  the  luminiferous  ether —
Loth  of  the  two  sensations  results,  neither  of  them  copies,  of  the
external  agency  that  produced  them.  For  untrained  conscious
ness  at  least  all  is  obliterated  that  preceded  the  appearance  of
the  internal  phenomena  that  as  tone  and  colour  are  perpetual
productions  of  the  mind's  peculiar  nature  ;  as  such  they  go
on  working  in  the  natural  course  of  the  inner  life,  and  an
investigation  of  the  effects  which  they  produce  in  it  would
vainly  turn  to  the  special  character  of  their  external  causes.
As  we  do  not  hear  the  number  of  waves  of  sound,  but  only  a
note,  so  music  is  not  more  harmonious  for  him  who  under
stands  how  the  tones  and  their  chords  are  formed  than  for
him  who  without  any  such  knowledge  simply  and  ingenuously
lets  himself  be  moved  by  it.

Another  question  is — What  is  the  relation  of  our  whole
sentience  to  the  outer  world  forming  our  scene  of  life,  for  the
representation  of  which  it  somehow  seems  intended  ?  Each
one  of  the  physical  processes  that  act  as  stimuli  to  our  senses
may  in  the  connection  of  Nature  discharge  a  distinct  office,
or — to  speak  without  presupposition — each  one  contributes  to
the  total  of  Nature  a  peculiar  and  more  or  less  important
characteristic.  Taking  account  of  the  definite  value  of  the
sense-stimuli  in  relation  to  the  outer  world,  we  can  trace  in
the  fact  that  each  reappears  within  us  in  this  definite  form  of
sensation  and  in  no  other,  a  peculiar  meaning  perhaps  rather
to  be  felt  than  to  be  put  into  words.  We  shall  then  perceive
that,  in  spite  of  all  incommensurability  between  physical
motions  and  the  sensations  that  result  from  them,  yet  the
latter  render  in  their  language  the  special  meaning  belonging  to
each  of  the  former  in  the  web  of  mutually  crossing  natural  effects.

There  is  here  an  element  of  truth  which  we  meet  with
also  in  another  conception  of  human  sentience,  though  there
it  is  misinterpreted.  Attempts  have  very  often  been  made
to  represent  the  several  forms  of  mental  activity  as  an
articulated  series  in  which  an  inherent  impulse  of  the  mind

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  565

to  see  itself  reflected  in  things  attains  an  ever  higher  degree
of  satisfaction.  In  like  manner  man's  five  senses,  or  whatever
scientifically  corrected  number  may  be  put  in  their  place,
have  been  regarded  as  a  connected  system,  the  function  of
whose  members  it  is  to  translate  the  essential  forms  of
the  vital  activity  of  Nature  into  corresponding  forms  of
mental  stimulation.  It  is  true  \ve  never  get  from  such
speculations  an  idea  of  the  true  mental  life  which  con
sists,  not  in  trains  of  reasoning,  but  in  the  infinitely
varied  crossings  of  all  those  forms  of  activity  which,  with
complete  oblivion  cf  the  rank  assigned  to  them  in  the  system,
are  at  every  moment  thronging,  in  the  busy  mind.  But
as  regards  sentience  at  all  events,  it  might  be  replied  trial
in  the  outer  world  the  great  fundamental  forms  of  the
life  of  Nature  are  themselves  constantly  coming  into  the
same  confused  collision,  and  yet  that  they  do  not  on  that
account  cease,  as  the  binding  threads  of  the  whole  web,  to
retain  the  old  distinctions  in  the  value  of  their  .significance.
This,  it  may  be  said,  is  repeated  in  sentience,  and  when  it
unites  different  sensations  in  one  moment,  or  brings  them  one
after  another  at  random,  it  but  imitates  herein  the  procedure
of  Nature,  that  likewise  now  brings  to  the  front  her  simpler
elementary  impulses  alone,  so  that  they  fill  the  whole  plueno-
menal  scene,  now  brings  into  relief  against  this  darker  back
ground  their  more  perfect  modes  of  operation.

Now  I  certainly  doubt  whether  those  who  have  made
attempts  of  this  kind  have  grasped  the  peculiar  meaning  cf
the  processes  that  underlie  the  sensations,  and  their  value  for
the  meaning  of  Nature  as  a  whole;  I  doubt  whether  light  is
the  pure  identity  of  matter  with  itself  or  the  unity  of  its
reflection  in  itself,  if  sound  is  a  denial  that  spatial  externality
of  one  part  to  another  is  something  existing  independently,  if
heat  in  the  form  of  a  living  energy  is  the  denial  of  the  con
tinuous  occupation  of  space  ;  and  I  am  not  sure  that  to  define
smell  as  specific  air,  or  taste  as  specific  water,  would  add  any
material  charms  to  the  natural  image  suggested  by  the  sensa
tions.  Uut  even  an  excess  of  awkwardness  in  its  elaboration

566  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

would  not  in  itself  affect  the  truth  of  a  principle  of  explana
tion,  and  we  cannot  deny  that  there  is  an  interest  in  comparing
the  significance  for  Nature  of  the  external  sense-stimuli  with
the  greater  or  less  vividness,  force,  and  peculiarity  of  the
forms  of  sensation  corresponding  to  them  in  ourselves.  But
the  point,  as  it  appears  to  me,  wherein  almost  all  these  attempts
fail  is,  that  they  take  a  speculative  interpretation,  which
our  reflection  can  connect  with  the  content  of  sensation,  but
in  general  would  do  better  not  to  connect  with  it,  for  a  natural
constituent  of  that  content,  that  must  of  itself  come  into
connection  with  it  in  every  unsophisticated  soul.  Those
speculative  meanings  which  the  philosopher  perhaps  rightly
attributes  to  sensation  and  its  objects,  are  not  in  the  sensation
itself,  or  in  the  sentient  soul,  either  as  incidental  thoughts
always  associated  with  the  impression,  or  as  conscious  motives
that  must  give  the  special  character  of  the  content  of  sensation
an  influence  of  definite  amount  and  direction  on  the  rest  of
the  mental  life.  They  are  all  no  more  than  fancies  about
sensation,  not  the  peculiar  fancy  of  sensation  itself,  and  yet
we  can  perhaps  show  that  there  is  something  that  deserves
the  latter  name.

I  have  so  often  already  committed  the  sin  of  allowing
myself  to  wander  from  my  limited  subject  into  very  wide
digressions,  that  I  would  in  fact  gain  nothing  by  refraining  for
once  from  doing  so.  Tho.se  theories  in  which  the  distinction
is  so  admirably  drawn  between  the  mere  existence  of  a  form
still  in  its  germ  and  the  full  existence  for  self  of  its  developed
perfection,  seem  to  me  to  show  in  most  of  their  applications
a  forgetfulness  of  this  commendable  distinction.  The  aim  of
their  whole  view  of  Nature  and  of  mental  life  is  invariably
directed  towards  discovering  for  every  being  and  every
phenomenon  an  Idea  which  each  is  to  be  looked  on  as
realizing;  but  the  question  is  exceedingly  seldom  proposed,
how  much  of  the  profound  content  of  the  Idea  represented
for  us  by  any  being  exists  in  that  being  itself,  whether  as  an
effective  conscious  motive  of  conduct,  or  as  an  object  of
conscious  enjoyment.  In  short,  we  learn  indeed  how  objects

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  5G7

look  to  us  in  virtue  of  their  Idea,  but  not  what  they  them
selves  have  of  it.  This  last  question  is  not  unmeaning  and
idle,  when  the  subject  of  inquiry  is  no  longer  natural  processes,
in  which  perhaps  but  an  unconscious  reason  is  at  work,  but
intelligent  existence.  We  may  allow  that  even  in  the  pro
cesses  of  the  inner  life  there  is  often  a  rational  connection  not
discerned  by  the  very  subject  of  that  life  ;  but  at  any  rate  that
cannot  be  so  throughout,  and  not  expressly  to  raise  the  ques
tion  what  each  several  being  as  such  may  possess  of  the  Idea
that,  as  part  of  a  whole,  it  contributes  to  realize,  is  to  neglect
what  at  least  possibly  is  a  very  important  aspect  of  the  subject,
perhaps  the  very  one  in  which  are  contained  the  really
efficient  causes  for  the  production  of  the  most  momentous
events  of  life.  In  the  study  of  history  it  is  not  enough  to
enumerate  one  after  another  the  world-moving  Ideas  that
suggest  themselves  to  the  comparative  student  thousands  of
years  later  as  the  essential  features  of  each  age ;  we  have  also
to  learn  how  the  age  itself  and  each  individual  in  it  felt,  and
to  what  extent  the  Idea  which  we  discern  in  distant  perspec
tive  was  then  present  in  minds  as  an  actually  tasted  enjoy
ment,  as  a  practical  direction  of  phantasy,  as  a  vitally  effective
motive  of  effort,  as  comfort,  as  sorrow,  as  incitement,  as  hope.
In  like  manner,  for  our  study  of  sentience  the  question  is  not
what  meaning  might  be  found  in  its  processes,  but  what
meaning  the  sentient  soul  itself  inevitably,  though  not  with
the  distinctness  of  full  reflective  consciousness,  connects  with
these  processes  at  the  moment  of  their  performance.

A  former  inquiry  resulted  in  our  framing  the  conjecture
that,  strictly  speaking,  the  impression  produced  by  an  external
stimulus  never  consists  in  an  indifferent  sensation  yielding
only  a  definite  content  to  perception,  but  that  attached  to  each
sensation  is  an  element  of  feeling  which  measures  in  terms  of
pain  and  pleasure  the  value  of  the  stimulation  received  for
our  individual  existence.  As  concerns  the  qualitative  content
of  sensation,  it  will  always  be  impossible  to  decide  whether
in  different  souls  the  same  sensation  responds  to  the  same
stimulus ;  but  there  is  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  the

5G8  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

contrary.  And  so  \ve  take  for  granted  that  all  animals
endowed  with  organs  for  the  transmission  of  an  external
stimulus  perceive  it  in  the  same  form  as  we  do — luminiferous
undulations  as  light,  atmospheric  vibrations  as  sound.  Whether
the  limits  of  their  susceptibility  are  wide  or  narrow  can  also
be  accurately  determined  neither  by  observation  nor  by  experi
ment  ;  if  a  class  of  animals  is  destitute  of  the  organ  on  which
for  us  depends  the  influence  of  a  particular  stimulus  in  its
usual  form,  that  is  not  to  say  that  it  is  wholly  cut  off  from
that  influence ;  still  it  is  probable  that  it  will  make  a  less
important  contribution  to  the  sum-total  of  sentience.  From
the  general  impression  created  by  observations,  it  seems  likely
that  to  animals  in  general  the  finer  contrasts  between  the
different  perceptions  of  the  same  sense  by  which  we  are  struck
are  less  distinct,  and  that  fewer  of  them  are  embraced  within
the  series.  While  to  ourselves,  on  account  of  the  peculiar
character  of  our  nervous  energy,  only  a  few  octaves  of  tones,
and  scarcely  so  much  as  a  full  octave  of  colours,  are  perceptible,
the  sentience  of  animals  perhaps  moves  here  within  yet
narrower  bounds,  and  what  they  perceive  may  be  discerned
with  less  of  vivid  discrimination ;  somewhat  as  we  notice
affinities  between  particular  tastes  without  being  able  to
arrange  them  into  a  scale.  As  a  compensation  for  this
deficiency,  in  particular  classes  of  animals  many  states  may
be  developed  into  greater  clearness  than  with  us  from  the  dark
chaos  of  what  we  call  general  sense  (Gemeingefuhl) ;  and  it  is
conceivable  that  for  many  subtle  modifications  of  the  electrical
and  chemical  state  of  the  body,  and  further  (by  means  of  a
peculiar  structure  of  the  nervous  tissue)  even  for  the  phases
of  transformation  of  matter  and  plastic  activity  within  their
own  bodies,  the  consciousness  of  animals  may  embrace  a  power
of  discernment  that  we  are  without.  On  such  circumstances
may  be  grounded  many  of  the  adapted  activities  of  animals,
which  seem  to  us  to  involve  an  anticipation  or  prevision  of
the  future,  while  really  springing  from  perceptions  to  us
wholly  unknown  of  changes  that  have  already  taken  place  in
the  vital  conditions.

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  569

The  other  constituent  of  sensation,  the  feeling  of  pain  and
pleasure,  that  associates  itself  with  its  content,  we  should
doubtless  also  meet  with  in  the  inner  life  of  the  animal — in
many  cases  probably  raised  to  greater  intensity ;  but  in  this
very  point  we  believe  may  be  found  an  essential  distinction
between  human  and  animal  sentience,  or  at  any  rate  a,
significant  and  important  characteristic  of  the  former.

In  the  lowest  of  our  senses,  those  which  on  account  of  the
structure  of  their  organs  and  the  nature  of  their  sensory
content  are  least  adapted  for  a  subtle  perception  of  manifold
objective  relations,  we  find  liveliness  of  feeling  at  a  maximum
of  intensity.  In  pains  caused  by  disturbances  of  the  internal
organs,  or  by  violent  irritations  of  the  skin,  all  distinctness  of
sensory  content  gives  way  to  the  intensity  of  the  suffering
and  becomes  perceptible  again — then  even  but  faintly — only
on  the  abatement  of  the  irritation.  We  describe  our  pains  only
in  terms  of  their  appearance  in  time  and  space ;  whether  they
be  piercing,  rending,  stinging,  or  gnawing,  their  own  qualita
tive  character  cannot  l>e  put  into  words.  Only  their  lesser
degrees  show  some  affinity  with  the  peculiar  character  of  the
sensation  of  warmth ;  but  if  we  call  them  burning,  we  thereby
still  but  denote  the  pain  itself,  to  cause  which  too  high
degrees  of  heat  concur  with  other  pernicious  stimuli.  Smell
and  taste,  both  accessible  to  a  greater  variety  of  impressions,
both  still  incapable  of  giving  rise  to  an  image  in  which  are
represented  the  relations  of  a  composite  object,  both,  finally,
very  closely  connected  with  the  energies  on  which  depends  the
preservation  of  the  individual  bodily  life,  are  the  source  of
multiform  feelings  of  less  intensity.  Multiform,  because
along  with  the  more  distinctly  apprehended  content  the  help
or  hindrance  which  it  brings  us  also  becomes  apparent  in  its
peculiar  character;  the  distaste  for  the  bitter  differs  from  the
shrinking  from  the  disgusting,  not  only  in  the  degree,  but  in  the
kind  of  suffering  involved  ;  each  scent  is  in  its  own  fashion
agreeable  or  the  reverse.  But  however  intense  these  feelings
may  be,  they  yet  never  attain  the  force  of  pains,  and  it  will  be
allowed  that  even  the  most  repulsive  in  this  region  does  not  actually

570  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

hurt  us.  The  tones  in  whose  succession  and  simultaneous
combination  music  opens  to  us  a  world  of  sharply  discriminated
relations,  are  only  incidentally  associated  with  any  disturbing
impression  ;  sometimes  the  excessive  loudness,  sometimes  the
confusion,  sometimes  some  special  grating  or  shrill  effect,  of
sounds  irritates  our  nerves  sufficiently  to  cause  convulsive
movements,  but  in  itself  and  its  own  nature  no  sound  is  so
unpleasant  as  many  a  smell  or  taste.  While  a  perfectly  clear
and  well  sustained  note  does  of  itself  produce  an  unmistake-
a.ble  feeling  of  pleasure,  displeasure  can  arise  only  with  the
combination  of  tones ;  but  however  irritating  to  our  sense  of
hearing  a  discord  may  be,  our  sense  of  discomfort  never
approaches  the  degree  of  physical  repulsion  caused  by  a
disgusting  smell.  We  do  indeed  feel  hurt  by  the  want  of
due  proportion  in  the  tones,  but  at  the  same  time  we  have  the
thought  that  their  combination  is  in  itself  no  less  faulty  than
the  impression  on  us  is  unpleasant.  Light  is  free  even  from
the  sense  of  discomfort  that  attends  the  peculiar  sound  of
many  tones  ;  only  its  greatest  intensity  dazzles  us ;  particular
colours  are  associated  with  peculiar  pleasure  or  pain  only
for  the  arbitrary  idiosyncrasies  of  individuals,  and  even  want  of
purity  in  colouring,  or  want  of  harmony  in  the  arrangement
of  colours,  does  not  call  forth  the  decided  aversion  that  is  the
result  of  discordant  tones.  We  feel  that  our  self  is  no  longer
threatened  by  the  nature  of  the  impressions,  and  so  we  begin
merely  to  disapprove  of,  as  in  itself  not  beautiful,  that  which
in  other  senses  we  repel  from  us  with  the  direct  abhorrence
instinctive  to  injured  personal  existence.  It  is  clear  that  for
the  eye,  whose  office  it  is  to  render  a  true  and  impartial  record
of  an  infinite  multitude  of  closely  related  points,  nothing  else
is  suitable  than  this  even  impartiality  of  sensation,  which
never  suffers  its  equable  attention  to  be  betrayed  into  a  false
distribution  by  the  agreeable  or  disagreeable  nature  of  the
impression.

While  thus  in  the  higher  senses  the  emotional  intensity  of
the  feelings  gradually  declines,  there  becomes  in  them  more
distinctly  prominent  another  mode  of  judging  of  impressions

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  57  1

which  is  already  secretly  at  work  in  the  less  highly  developed
sensations,  and  in  which,  we  believe,  lies  the  properly  distinc
tive  characteristic  of  human  sentience.  On  the  one  hand,
we  never  apprehend  the  impressions  of  sense  merely  as  a
qualitative  content,  and  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  feeling
that  accompanies  them  we  never  become  aware  merely  of  a
value  for  us,  but  also  of  an  intrinsic  value.  Only  in
the  lower  senses  does  the  intensity  of  pain  overshadow  this
never  wholly  absent  judgment,  and  make  it  seem  as  if  pain  or
pleasure  were  the  measure  only  of  the  degree  of  the  utility  or
hurtfulness,  not  of  the  inherent  value,  of  impressions  ;  in  the
perceptions  of  seeing  and  hearing,  on  the  other  hand,  this
brutish  egoism  of  sensation  becomes  transformed  into  a  clear
recognition  of  sweetness  and  significance  inherent  in  the
content,  as  apart  from  the  fact  of  its  pleasing  us.  I  do  not
believe  that  this  pha-nomenon  enters  into  the  psychic  life  of
the  lower  animals.  They,  too,  repel  with  aversion  the  object
that  offends  their  senses  ;  this  shows  that  they  conceive  it  as
a  something  from  which  their  discomfort  proceeds,  but  I  do  not
believe  that  they  form  a  conception  of  u-hat  this  something  is
in  itself,  apart  from  the  mo<le  in  which  they  are  affected  by
the  object.  They  fill  up  the  outline  of  this  something  only
with  a  reflection  of  their  well  or  ill  being,  and  they  push  away
the  disagreeable  object  because  they  see  in  it  the  embodiment
of  their  own  pain,  which  acts  on  them  as  if  from  without.
Yet,  as  already  observed,  such  conjectures  cannot  be  used
as  positive  assertions,  but  only  as  illustrative  contrasts  for
what  we  observe  in  man.  Now  in  him  the  facts  are  as
follows.

However  repugnant  and  most  forcibly  recalling  animal  life
the  special  development  of  the  sense  of  taste  may  appear  to
us,  it  is  yet  true  that  even  in  the  most  degraded  debauchery
it  is  not  merely  the  pleasure  of  the  palate  that  is  sought
as  an  agreeable  bodily  stimulation ;  on  the  contrary,  the
discriminating  tongue  recognises  in  the  taste  of  the  dishes  a
virtue  peculiar  to  each,  in  whose  agreeable  accessory  efi'ects  it

I  o  *

no  doubt  very  readily  takes  pleasure. It  is  the  animal  alone

572  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

that  merely  gorges  and  swills  its  food  and  drink — i.e.  applies
the  outward  means  solely  to  getting  rid  of  a  disagreeable
craving,  or  to  causing  an  egoistically  pleasurable  sensation;
it  does  not  linger  over  these  means,  but  is  in  haste  to  consume
them ;  it  does  not  throw  itself  into  their  nature  by  noticing,
tasting,  and  considering ;  to  it  they  are  nothing  but  means  for
its  end.  Man  when  eating  and  drinking,  on  the  other  bund,
cannot  help  accepting  sweetness  as  something  friendly  in  the
things  that  have  it,  cannot  help  looking  on  their  bitterness  as
something  malicious  in  them  ;  he  can  fall  into  raptures  over
the  inherent  excellence  of  the  natural  substances  to  which
he  has  access  only  through  his  sense  of  taste.  Not  as  if  all
he  sought  were  his  ow7n  enjoyment ;  only  there  is  no  other
means  of  recognising  and  appreciating  this  good  in  things
but  the  tasting  of  them  by  sense.  Even  the  equivocal  pre
ference  of  human  appetite  for  the  fluid  form  of  taste-stimuli
shows  its  freedom  from  the  yoke  of  the  coarsest  corporeal
enjoyment ;  still  more  distinctly  does  the  delight  in  perfumes
exhibit  this  tendency  to  absorption  in  an  objective  charm  of
material  things.  The  animal  world  seems  not  to  share  this
tendency ;  strongly  as  the  sense  of  smell  is  in  some  classes  of
animals  developed  in  the  service  of  their  vital  ends,  we
nowhere  meet  with  a  definite  case  of  pleasurable  feeling  to
which  scents  sufficiently  minister.  Human  civilisation,  on
the  other  hand,  very  early  surrounds  itself  with  fragrant
odours,  at  first  in  solemn  moments  of  religious  fervour,  ere
long  as  an  embellishment  of  daily  life.  This  practice  cannot
have  arisen  from  the  trifling  amount  of  sensual  pleasure  so
created  ;  it  receives  significance  first  from  the  imaginativeness
of  human  sentience,  which  does  not  allow  itself  to  be
transported  into  another  atmosphere  of  existence  without
recognising  (even  if  dimly)  not  only  the  pleasure  which  it
thence  receives,  but  also  its  peculiar  and  inherent  value.
Shall  we  add  that  the  content  even  of  the  other  senses,  that
even  heat  and  cold,  are  apprehended  by  us  neither  as  indifferent
distinctions,  nor  merely  as  forces  causing  pain  or  pleasure ;
that,  on  the  contrary,  even  in  them  we  find  an  independent

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  573

and  inherent  beauty  or  ugliness,  the  beneficial  or  mischievous
effect  of  which  strikes  us  only  by  the  way  ?  Finally,
returning  to  the  higher  senses,  shall  we  recall  how  in  sound
and  colour  almost  every  trace  of  egoistic  interest  has  been
effaced,  and  we  give  ourselves  up  wholly  to  the  contemplation
of  a  self-dependent  excellence  ?  So  great  is  the  inherent
value  of  these  impressions,  that  amid  all  the  poverty  of  our
life  in  other  respects  we  may  ever  thank  the  kind  fate  that
day  by  day  spreads  this  fair  world  before  our  senses,  and
permits  us  to  plunge  into  the-  living  mysterious  depths  of
colours  and  tones  and  odours.

§  2.  But  now  what  is  it  that  our  imagination  fancies  it  ran
discern  in  these  elements  of  sentience  ?  We  can  hardly  put
it  into  words,  and  yet  a  perfectly  natural  impulse,  no  less
peculiar  to  the  human  mind,  is  wont  to  ask  and  try  to  find
an  explanation.  In  the  phraseology  of  every  civilised
language  many  instances  are  to  be  found  of  an  attempt  to
render  distinct  the  peculiar  character  of  one  set  of  sensations
by  comparing  them  with  another  set;  some  point  of  resemblance
in  the  different  sensations  is  thus  perceptible  to  our  minds.
We  speak  of  biting  and  fiery  tastes,  we  also  compare  a  lower
note  witli  darkness,  a  higher  one  with  light;  we  fancy  we
Lave  before  us  in  the  scale  of  vowel-sounds  such  natures
and  distinctions  of  nature  as  we  have  in  the  scale  of
colours,  and  the  colours  to  many  susceptible  persons  seem  to
repeat  over  again  the  peculiarities  of  the  tastes.  Of  course  in
all  these  matters  the  wide  differences  between  individuals,  as
well  in  bodily  organization  as  in  mental  disposition,  will
always  prevent  universal  agreement  ;  and  oven  if  for  every
one  a  and  u  should  still  stand  as  white  and  black,  assuredly
every  one  will  no  more  conceive  of  c  as  yellow,  of  i  as  red,
and  of  o  as  blue,  than  every  one  will  find  in  red  an  aromatic
sweetness,  in  blue  fluid  acidity,  in  yellow  a  metallic  taste.
No  doubt  we  may  still  further  allow  that  for  each  individual
the  resemblances  which  he  discerns  between  various  impres
sions  rest  at  bottom  not  on  a  comparison  of  their  immediate
content,  but  on  a  perception  of  a  subtler  and  more  hidden

574  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

resemblance  between  the  disturbances  which  both  cause  in  his
own  general  sense  ;  but  these  two  concessions  do  not  alter  the
value  of  this  \vhole  conception  for  our  human  development.
The  first  does  not  :  for  the  individual  mind  prizes  only  the
vivacity  with  which  the  impulse  to  these  comparisons  stirs
within  it,  while  to  it  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  it
discovers  anything  universally  recognised  or  not ;  the  second
does  not :  for  all  sentience  lives  and  must  live  in  the  delusion
of  taking  its  own  excitation  for  the  nature  of  objects.  No
matter,  accordingly,  what  be  the  genesis  of  this  theory  and
how  great  a  portion  of  truth  or  of  error  it  may  contain  :  as  it
is,  it  forms  a  distinctive  feature  of  our  sentience,  and  exerts
an  immeasurable  influence  on  our  view  of  the  external  world.
The  pain  and  pleasure  which  we  experience  from  the
thronging  impressions  of  things  becomes  transformed  into  a
direct  intuition  of  vitality,  good  or  bad,  in  the  things
themselves — an  intuition  that  no  longer  helplessly  confronts
the  iriexpressibility  of  sensible  qualities,  but  discerns  in  them
of  what  spirit  they  are  all  the  children.

Between  the  motionless  and  moving  masses  of  Nature  the
vibrations  of  elastic  substances,  whence  are  derived  light  and
sound,  hurry  to  and  fro  as  the  rarest  and  fleetest  instruments
of  mutual  communication.  It  is  long  before  the  forces
usually  at  work  in  Nature  bring  bodies  apart  from  each  other
into  any  important  new  reciprocal  action,  and  slight  obstacles
are  sufficient  to  prevent  or  render  incomplete  the  transference
of  their  respective  states.  Without  those  living  uudulatory
motions  the  several  masses  of  the  globe  would  have  in  the
pressure  which  they  all  exert  on  each  other  a  poor  bond  of
community,  but  the  peculiarities  of  each — both  its  outer  form
and  the  character  of  its  internal  connection,  as  well  as  the
nature  of  its  constituents — would  for  the  most  part  remain
without  any  effect  whatever.  To  this  chaos  of  masses,
knowing  nothing  of  each  other,  the  waves  of  the  lummiferous
ether  give  an  inherent  connection.  Every  plane,  every  edge,
every  corner  of  a  body,  every  capricious  projection  in  its
form,  tells  by  means  of  the  special  direction  in  which  it

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  575

reflects  the  waves  as  they  come ;  each  body  irradiates  with
the  geometry  of  its  own  f'jrm  all  the  elements  of  its
environment  ;  and  beyond  its  immediate  vicinity,  with
velocity  swift  as  thought,  unconfused  by  the  similar
emanations  from  other  bodies,  this  revelation  of  its  nature
reaches  to  the  furthest  distance.  Xay,  the  peculiar  character
of  what  fills  up  its  outline  in  space  is  indicated  by  the  colours
that  it  reflects  and  those  that  it  absorbs ;  its  transparence
discloses  the  symmetry  of  its  structure  and  the  uniform
continuity  of  its  internal  arrangement,  its  opaqueness  the
heterogeneous  character  of  its  constituent  parts.  Thus
what  each  body  was  for  itself  has  now  also  become  actual  for
others  ;  not  as  if  we  were  entitled  to  speak  of  light  as  a
spirit  shining  in  or  into  Nature  ;  but  assuredly  its  undulations
are  the  universal  and  pliable  medium  of  communication
which  each  several  element  can  stamp  with  the  image  of  its
individual  states,  and  by  which  it  can  bring  them  to  bear
on  other  bodies.  To  bear,  however,  with  an  influence  that
is  limited  to  a  minimum.  For  very  rarely,  when  not
accompanied  by  waves  of  heat,  do  the  luminiierous
undulations  alone  produce  an  abiding  change  in  the  nature
of  bodies  ;  myriads  of  times  the  blight  ray  passes  through
the  transparent  body,  or  i.s  reflected  from  its  mirroring
surface  without  producing  any  efl'ect,  and  the  general  result
of  the  manifold  play  of  waves  is  not  so  much  any  energetic
reciprocal  action  on  the  part  of  the  elements  as  the  knitting
and  (fleeting  of  mere  relations  which  do  not  affect  the  nature
of  things,  and  only  as  it  were  reveal  the  existence  of  one
thing  to  another.

Do  we  now  again  find  this  significance  of  the  waves  of
light  in  the  fact  that  to  our  eye  they  appear  as  radianeo
and  colour  ?  I  feel  how  difiicult  it  is  to  answer  this  question,
the  import  of  which  cannot  be  made  distinct  by  dint  of  con
trast  with  any  other  conceivable  relation.  For  who  can  form
a  clear  conception  of  what  would  be  the  state  of  things  sup
posing  the  stimulations  of  our  eye  through  the  undulations  of
the  ether  appeared  to  us  not  as  light,  but  as  some  totally

576  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IT.

different  kind  of  sensation,  resembling  colours  only  in  this,  that
like  these  its  perceptions  involved  extension  in  space  and
being  definitely  situated  beside  one  another  ?  Could  we  form
such  a  conception,  then  more  easily  than  now  we  would
perceive  that  in  the  peculiar  character  of  our  sensation,  in
what  makes  light  light,  in  the  bright  radiance  and  glitter
itself,  is  immediately  contained  the  impression  of  a  clearness
of  all  relations,  of  the  solution  of  all  doubts,  and  of  a  com
prehensive  unity,  in  which  everything  individual  has  or  can
find  its  place.  Not  like  sound  arising  only  here  and  there,
interrupted  by  pauses  and  coming  from  particular  directions,
the  universal  light  of  day,  to  which  countless  reflections  give
a  continuous  brilliance,  forms  the  open,  clear,  and  wide  scene
of  our  perceptive  activity,  in  which  the  myriad  reciprocal
actions  of  things  may  meet,  but  in  which  primarily  shining
only  without  effect  in  the  security  of  their  mutual  relations
they  are  arranged  alongside  of  one  another.  No  other
sensation  yields  the  same  direct  impression,  no  reflection  sup
plies  it ;  to  ourselves  in  the  dark  the  infinite  extension  of
space  no  longer  seems  so  cheerful  a  belief  as  in  light,  however
firmly  we  may  remain  convinced  of  it ;  and  the  person  born
blind,  even  if  by  combining  ideas  of  motion  and  sensations  of
touch  he  gains  an  accurate  idea  of  his  surroundings,  will  never
learn  what  it  is  to  be  in  space  as  the  man  with  eyes,  before
whom  the  world  lies  bathed  in  light.  Of  course  one  part  of
this  superiority  is  due  to  the  ease  with  which  the  glance
surveys  at  once  innumerable  details,  that  the  sense  of  touch
must  laboriously  put  together ;  yet  I  do  not  think  that  the
peculiar  character  of  the  sensations  of  light  and  colour  is
without  a  share  in  it.  The  language  of  our  poetic  phantasy
would  not  borrow  from  them  its  names  for  all  knowledge,  all
waking  life,  if  the  radiance  of  colour  did  not  to  our  natural
feeling  seem  the  most  direct  manifestation  of  a  foreign
reality  by  which  we  are  confronted,  into  whose  depths  we
fancy  we  can  look,  and  yet  of  which  only  the  charming  surface
- — with  which  it  takes  its  place  in  the  order  of  all  things —
ever  becomes  clear.  Colour  of  course  does  not  profess  to  give

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  577

more  than  the  outline  of  reality ;  it  is  the  most  complete
example  of  what  we  call  quality,  of  that  content  through
which  the  existent  first  gains  for  us  fulness  and  clearness,  ami
which  yet,  just  because  it  is  quality  to  he  discerned  from
without,  remains  an  image  eternally  foreign,  impenetrable,  and
never  to  be  completely  transformed  into  soul.

The  inner  nature  of  things,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  always
been  thought,  is  apprehended  only  by  means  of  sound.  And
in  fact  it  is  the  very  substance  of  bodies  that,  mightily  moved
by  the  waves  of  sound,  is  not  seldom  abidingly  altered — nay,
rent  asunder,  by  the  power  of  the  vibration ;  the  intensity  of
the  strain  with  which  the  efficient  forces  resist  change  in
the  connection  and  situation  of  the  particles,  and  hardness
and  softness,  and  brittleness  and  unsusceptible  submission
to  derangement,  are  evidenced  by  the  sounds  that  are
caused  by  the  vibrations.  Responding  as  it  does  to  such
relations,  sound  does  not  like  colour  mirror  existence  in  repose,
but  breaks  forth  like  the  passionate  soul  of  things,  like  their
animating  impulse,  or  as  if  it  were  the  immediate  manifesta
tion  of  that  most  essential  character  from  which  all  these
physical  forces  are  derived  as  consistent  modes  of  communica
tion.  We  no  longer  estimate  the  hardness,  the  density,  the
brittleness,  the  elasticity  of  a  body  according  to  the  force
which  it  exerts  or  the  amount  of  the  resistance  with  which  it
meets  external  forces ;  but  rather  in  the  fulness  of  sound,  in
its  softness  or  hardness,  in  the  cutting  or  liquid  and  rounded
character  of  the  sound  do  we  seem  for  the  first  time  to  discern
of  what  spirit  all  those  physical  properties  are  the  children,
and  what  veritable  hardness  and  brittleness,  what  genuine}
sweetness  of  nature  and  existence,  is  concealed  in  the  world
behind  the  external  forms  of  forces  acting  in  space.  There
are  many  means  of  intelligence  and  communication  ;  but  even
the  most  perfect  will  nt-ver  reach  the  convincing  clearness
with  which  sound  comes  to  us  as  the  natural  herald  of  the
inner  states  of  things.

But  enough  of  these  examples,  which  we  must  leave  it  to
natural  feeling  to  pursue  farther.  1'erhaps  they  are  sufficient

VOL.  i.  2o

578  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

to  make  it  credible  that  our  modes  of  sensation  are  not  linked
ineaninglessly  to  external  stimuli ;  of  course  we  cannot  prove
that  atmospheric  vibrations  must  be  perceived  as  sound,  waves
of  ether  as  light ;  but  after  we  know  that  they  are  so  per
ceived,  we  think  we  understand  that  the  significance  attached
in  the  economy  of  the  universe  to  the  undulations  of  the
ether  and  to  the  other  kind  of  vibrations  is  rendered
intelligibly  in  the  one  case  only  by  the  radiant  beam,  in  the
other  by  the  reverberating  note.

§  3.  We  have  thus  found  in  human  sentience  an  innate
tendency  to  see  in  the  nature  of  external  things  a  virtue
peculiar  to  themselves,  an  immediate  worth  or  the  reverse,
recognised  by  our  pain  or  pleasure,  but  not  dependent  on  their
presence.  This  tendency  comes  much  more  distinctly  into
prominence  in  a  comparison  of  different  contents  than  in  a
consideration  of  one  taken  by  itself,  and  shows  itself  here  at
once  not  only  in  the  exceeding  frequency  with  which  such
comparisons  are  made  (such  comparison  in  its  deliberate
character  being  doubtless  a  mark  of  the  distinction  between
human  reflection  and  the  animal  train  of  ideas),  but  still
more  definitely  in  the  effort  to  assign  to  each  individual
content  a  fixed  place  in  the  series  of  those  of  similar  nature,
and  to  apprehend  the  series  itself  as  an  organized  system.
Herein  the  nature  of  the  content  of  sensation  supports  us  in
various  measure.  Thus  the  tones  arrange  themselves  for  us
into  a  scale  of  parts,  whose  intervals,  affinities,  or  dissonances
we  perfectly  understand  to  belong  of  native  right  to  the
world  of  sound,  while  the  colours  less  definitely  show  a
similar  regulation  by  law,  and  the  other  kinds  of  sensations
afford  but  a  faint  echo  of  this  internal  and  mutual  connected
ness  of  individual  examples.  The  power  of  accurately  dis
criminating  most  of  these  distinctions  seems  to  have  been
denied  to  the  animal  world  as  well  as  the  feeling  of  their
value ;  even  the  song  of  birds,  though  some  of  them  can
distinguish,  remember,  and  imitate  harmonic  intervals,  does
not  move  in  them  spontaneously,  but  merely  expresses  in
rising  or  falling  tones,  just  as  in  the  wanton  variety  of

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  579

sportive  motion:?  of  the  body,  the  depth  and  force  of  their
emotions;  in  this  along  with  the  musical  beauty  of  their
voices  lies  the  charm  of  their  songs.

Our  imagination,  besides,  systematizes  both  the  content  of
particular  classes  of  sensations  and  the  universal  forms
embraced  in  which  they  reach  us — time  and  space.  It  is
vain  to  try  to  define  the  idea  of  both  formed  by  the
lower  animals ;  seeing  that  even  in  the  natural  consciousness
of  mankind  we  find  by  no  means  that  idea  of  them  which
philosophers  are  fain  to  lay  down  as  the  correct  or  the
universally  human  one.  For  although  we  very  easily  allow
ourselves  to  lie  driven  to  the  recognition  of  the  infinite  extent
and  inherent  insubstantiality  of  space  and  time,  we  spontane
ously  think  neither  of  the  one  nor  of  the  other.  Space
appears  to  us  as  real  extension  indefinite  in  its  range  ;  time
as  an  actual  current,  no  matter  how  long  it  may  go  on  ;  but
\v«  think  we  can  discern  in  both  an  inherent  order.  Not  to
the  terrestrial  horizon,  to  which  they  really  belong,  but  to
space  itself  do  we  attribute  the  various  regions  of  north  and
south,  east  and  west,  above  and  beneath  ;  not  till  it  has  been
so  distributed  does  the  space  of  the  universe  become  real  to
us,  and  these  fixed  directions  have  to  serve  as  guides  to
natural  movements.  We  do  not  call  the  point  whence  the
sun  rises  east,  in  order  to  distinguish  it  as  something  in
different  from  other  equally  indifferent  points  of  space,  but
from  the  east  as  a  point  of  space  distinguished  in  itself  from
the  beginning  rises  the  sun,  to  sink,  as  we  of  course  rind,  in
the  equally  pre-eminent  point  of  the  west.  And  if  as  the
seasons  revolve  it  changes  its  place  of  setting,  it  seems  to  us
for  mysterious  reasons  to  miss  the  point  that  in  itself  has  a
right  to  l)e  its  place.  In  like  manner,  time  in  the  unchanging
swiftness  of  its  course  seems  to  us  to  be  the  common  measure
of  all  motions  ;  and,  though,  did  Nature  not  offer  us  a  series
of  measurable  recurrences  of  absolutely  similar  phenomena,
we  should  l>e  unable  to  divide  the  length  of  time  and  compare
the  magnitudes  of  its  parts,  yet  to  the  view  of  our  imagina
tion  the  time  so  won  inevitably  becomes  transformed  into  the

580  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

independent  and  naturally  divided  standard  in  whose  sections
we  distribute  the  sum  of  all  that  is  done.  In  the  developing  of
all  these  conceptions  we  are  more  or  less  aided  by  the  nature  of
our  experience,  and  we  have  had  no  intention  here  of  denying
this  gradual  development  of  our  ideas  of  space  and  time,  or  of
describing  them  as  an  inherent  possession  of  human  phantasy.
But  they  would  not  have  been  developed  if  external  ex
periences  were  not  met  by  the  tendency  of  our  mind  to  see
everywhere  in  things,  phenomena,  events,  a  fixed  inherent
measure  and  right — a  tendency  slow  to  be  convinced  by  science
of  what  is  often  only  the  relative  value  of  its  estimations.

Numbers  and  measures  of  magnitude  are  to  us  the  most
indispensable  means  of  testing  the  regular  character  of  the
individual  phenomena  contained  within  these  two  enclosing
frames  of  space  and  time.  It  has  often  been  said  that  man
differs  from  all  animals  as  a  being  that  can  count.  Such  short
definitions  seldom  include  what  is  mainly  characteristic  of  a
particular  development,  and  their  accuracy  is  hard  to  prove.
It  will  be  readily  granted  that  the  restless  reflection  with
which  the  human  mind  makes  the  relations  between  its
several  thoughts  the  subject  of  new  thoughts,  alone  renders
possible  even  the  laying  down  of  the  elements  of  mathematical
science.  But  at  the  same  time  we  find  that  this  reflection
lias  not  at  every  stage  of  culture  been  carried  very  far,  that
the  arithmetical  achievements  of  many  savage  tribes  stop  at
low  figures,  that  for  higher  numbers  they  possess  only  general
terms,  that  consequently  their  ideas  in  regard  to  the  mutual
relations  of  the  few  numbers  which  they  know  are  but  little
beyond  the  bare  conception  of  less  and  more  with  which  we
must  credit  even  the  animals.  Doubtless  even  to  an  animal
three  men  seen  are  always  different  from  two ;  doubtless  the
three,  seeing  that  they  are  separable  and  by  parting  do  go
asunder,  do  not  even  to  an  animal  form  one  mass  or  one
presentment,  but  unquestionably  they  are  distinguished  as
three  images,  and  this  triplicity  itself  from  the  duplex  image
in  another  case.  If  this  apprehension  of  differences  is
counting,  then  animals  count;  if  under  counting  we  include

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  581

the  concomitant  knowledge  that  three  is  to  be  found  in  its
definite  place  in  an  infinite  series  between  two  and  four,  and
is  derived  from  these  two  numbers  by  addition  or  subtraction
of  the  unit,  then  undoubtedly  animals  do  not  count,  and  man
alone  possesses  the  capability  of  applying  measure  and  number
to  things  with  such  a  clear  recognition  of  all  their  relations.
We  have,  moreover,  in  our  own  sensations  a  peculiarity  that
yields  an  analogy  for  a  state  of  the  power  of  conception
incapable  of  definite  comparisons  of  number.  We  very  easily
distinguish  the  different  degrees  of  strength  of  sense-stimuli
as  more  or  less,  and  the  most  delicate  differences  do  not
escape  us.  Our  eye  follows  the  waxing  brightness  of  the
newly  kindled  light,  our  ear  the  dying  away  of  the  sound,
and  wt-  notice  every  most  trifling  distinction  of  these  changing
impressions  ;  but  there  never  comes  a  point  at  which  wn
could  say  the  light  now  is  double  what  it  was  before;  this
tone  three  times  as  loud  as  another  quite  similar ;  the  felt
degrees  of  less  or  more  cannot  be  counted.

Without  at  present  entering  further  on  the  development  of
mathematical  science,  we  may  observe  how  easily  and  early
all  sorts  of  ideas  as  to  relations  of  magnitude,  not  only  in
external  phenomena,  but  also  in  the  forces  through  which
they  are  produced,  find  their  way  into  our  minds.  As  a  kind
of  natural  Metaphysics  guides  us  in  our  most  general  judgments
concerning  things,  so  man  even  on  the  lowest  stages  of
civilisation  follows  the  dictates  of  a  certain  mathematical  and
mechanical  instinct.  We  find  universally  in  use  the  simplest
machines,  the  inclined  plane,  the  lever,  and  many  contrivances
adapted  from  them  ;  applied  indeed  without  knowledge  of
their  principle  of  working,  therefore  often  at  a  disadvantage,
in  cases  where  the  details  of  the  given  requirement  have  made
it  difficult  to  grasp  the  whole  case.  lint  even  so  theso
conceptions  suffice  to  prove  the  presence  of  an  Idea  of  internal
regularity,  which  our  phantasy  everywhere  works  into  tin;
content  of  perceived  phenomena,  whose  visible  expression  it
seeks  in  them,  and  which  it  strives  to  establish  where  it  does
not  find  it.

582  BOOK  V. CIUPTEII  II.

In  these  words  I  would  call  to  mind  the  (esthetic  judgment
to  which  our  phantasy  subjects  the  forms  and  events  of  Nature.
Our  natural  conceptions  of  things  of  sense  are  wholly  under
the  control  of  Ideas  of  equilibrium  and  symmetry,  of  unity
and  completeness ;  in  these  formal  properties  seems  to  us  to
lie  the  natural  and  inviolable  la\v  of  all  things  which  they
must  obey,  and  any  failure  here  offends  us  as  an  imperfection
in  their  nature.  When  one  reviews  the  whole  variety  of
unmeaning  gestures,  of  sportive  movements,  of  graver  actions,
with  which  man  acts  upon  and  variously  modifies  his
environment,  one  is  indeed  sure  to  find  among  them  a  certain
rude  trait  of  rather  destructive  than  creative  working,  a
caprice  that  seems  to  be  nothing  but  the  wanton  love  of  doing
with  things  as  one  will,  put  into  practice.  But  very  soon
this  trait  disappears,  and  in  place  of  pulling  down  comes
building  up ;  if  the  products  of  Nature  are  withdrawn  from
their  natural  situation  ar.d  combinations,  it  is  to  put  them
into  others,  certainly  with  the  intention  of  improvement,  so
that  in  the  new  and  apparently  capricious  arrangement  may
be  distinctly  displayed  the  innate  order  and  fidelity  to  law
which  are  prescribed  to  things  by  their  own  nature,  but
obscured  in  the  confusion  of  Nature.  How  early,  for  example,
in  the  culture  of  the  soil  does  the  impulse  become  active  to
level  its  rugged  surface  into  a  geometrically  exact  plane,  and
to  give  it  definite  limits  and  divisions  by  means  of  regular
sharply  cut  straight  lines ;  how  soon  follows  a  preference  for
a  symmetrical  distribution  of  objects,  such  as  is  unknown  to
Nature  !  It  seems  to  be  the  duty  of  objects  to  occupy  the
places  that  in  the  network  of  space-relations  are  allied  as
favoured  points  by  similarity  of  meaning  and  value ;  through
this  position  they  have  to  establish  an  equivalent  distribution
of  masses,  without  the  visible  expression  of  which  there  would
seem  to  be  something  lacking  in  the  genuineness  and  reality
of  the  whole  grouping.  Everything  that  most  vigorously  and
severely  expresses  the  idea  of  subjection  to  law — straight
lines,  parallel  sides,  right  angles,  plane  surfaces — in  short,
all  easily  surveyable  symmetry,  is  by  preference  substituted  by

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  583

this  budding  artistic  sense  for  the  meaningless  forms  of  Nature,
and  it  requires  a  far  advanced  cultivation  of  phantasy  to
recognise  this — nay,  a  yet  higher — harmony  in  the  informal
and  therefore  at  first  despised  outlines  of  Nature  herself.

It  would  be  an  interesting  task  to  search  out  in  a  treatise
of  comparative  psychological  aesthetics  the  simple  forms  to
the  delineation  of  which  men  have,  under  the  most  widely
different  conditions  of  culture,  been  led  by  a  universal
tendency.  Wherever  sports  and  dances  or  any  sort  of  solemn
celebration  is  to  lie  found,  man  is  impelled  to  divide  and
arrange  time  according  to  some  kind  of  rhythm,  space  by
some  kind  of  symmetrical  outline ;  nothing  goes  right  if  it
do«'s  not  coincide  with  the  rhythmically  marked  points  of
time,  nothing  rests  rightly  if  it  does  not  rest  in  its  place  in
the  row.  Even  where  the  achievements  of  artistic  imagination
hardly  go  beyond  the  painting  and  tattooing  of  the  body,
there  soon  appears  a  feeling  for  form  distinctly  containing  a
sense  of  an  inner  law  for  every  line  lhat  is  drawn.  If  the
line  is  curved,  the  sweep  witli  which  it  begins  is  matched
by  a  depth  and  breadth  in  the  continuing  sweep  that  is
necessary  for  equipoise  ;  parallel  repetitions  often  enhance
the  effect,  and  testify  to  the  figure  having  had  no  chance
origin  ;  if  on  the  right  cheek  the  curve  of  the  line  turns
towards  the  right,  the  same  design  is  not  unfrequently
repeated  on  the  left  side  turned  towards  the  left ;  thus  an
inborn  instinct  lias  taught  fancy  to  secure  the  sense  of
equipoise  by  the  combination  of  patterns  alike  and  yet  not
identical.  Wherever  a  utensil  is  to  be  ornamented,  the
necessity  is  first  of  all  felt  to  distinguish  it  as  a  naturally
connected  and  complete  whole  from  a  chance  fragment  of  the
material ;  it  must  not  only  begin  and  end,  but  confine  itself  as
if  spontaneously  within  its  own  limits.  The  phantasy  is
therefore  never  content  to  break  off  a  plane  at  its  actual  end,
but  by  one  or  more  parallel  edges  it  indicates  its  gradually
gathering  resolution  to  limit  itself  voluntarily.  And  whero
lines  in  two  different  directions  meet,  it  fill.-?  up  their  angle  by
a  transition  line  in  order  to  signify  the  reciprocal  relation

584  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

that  the  different  parts  of  a  whole  must  not  lack ;  finally,
where  it  puts  a  small  ornament  as  a  characteristic  specimen
of  its  peculiar  power,  it  repeats  this  in  great  numbers
in  rows,  for  there  is  more  sensibly  an  essential  meaning  in
the  oft-recurring  than  in  the  isolated,  and  yet  at  the  same
time  the  effect  of  recurrence  is  to  reduce  its  value  to  that  of
an  incidental  result.

By  all  these  impulses  human  imagination  is  stirred  in  the
very  first  stages  of  its  development ;  they  guide  the  child's
hand  in  its  childish  efforts,  and  reappear  with  a  heightened
consciousness  of  their  significance  in  the  higher  stages  of  art.
But,  wherever  they  appear,  their  significance,  it  seems  to  me,
is  never  that  of  pointing  to  an  inviolable  but  otherwise
unintelligible  inherent  order  in  things  ;  the  forms  which  they
lead  us  to  realize  or  to  rejoice  in  as  manifested  in  Nature,  are
modes  of  relation  of  the  manifold  into  the  joy  of  which  we
are  able  to  enter.  I  have  already  expressed  the  opinion  that,
just  as  there  is  no  sense-perception  without  its  share  of  feeling,
so  too  the  notion  of  a  relationship  never  arises  within  us  without
our  tasting  the  special  degree  of  pleasure  or  of  pain  which
this  relationship  must  confer  on  the  two  things  between  which
it  exists.  We  never  notice  identity  without  at  least  a  faint
recollection  of  the  blessedness  of  peace,  or  see  contrast  without
a  glimpse  sometimes  of  the  hatefulness  of  enmity,  sometimes  of
the  enjoyment  that  springs  from  the  mutual  complementing
of  opposites ;  we  cannot  discern  equipoise,  symmetry,  rigidity
of  contour,  without,  as  we  gaze,  being  stirred  by  the  manifold
pain  and  pleasure  of  secure  repose,  of  bondage  under  fixed
laws,  or  of  limitation  and  confinement.  The  world  becomes
alive  to  us  through  this  power  to  see  in  forms  the  joy  and
sorrow  of  existence  that  they  hide  ;  there  is  no  shape  so  coy
that  our  fancy  cannot  sympathetically  enter  into  it.

Unquestionably  the  vividness  of  these  perceptions  is  added
to  by  our  abiding  remembrance  of  the  activity  of  our  own
body.  Some,  indeed,  of  the  notions  most  important  to  the
formation  of  our  conception  of  things  would  remain  indis
tinct,  if  what  they  symbolize  did  not  offer  also  a  side  on

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  585

which  they  can  be  grasped  by  sense.  Only  he  who  himself
moves  with  toil  and  effort  can  know  what  motion  means  ;
had  Xature  made  our  limbs  the  unresisting  servants  of  our
volition,  so  that  their  movements  were  never  attended  by  tin-
slightest  feeling  of  burden  or  weariness,  then  those  move
ments  themselves,  in  spite  of  their  harmonious  adjustment,
would  be  to  us  but  an  unintelligible  contraction  ;  and  all  the
motion  outside  us  in  Nature  would  but  create  in  us  the  un
intelligible  impression  that  something  is  now  here.,  now  there.
We  should  neither  feel  ourselves  to  be  the  cause  of  any
event,  that  had  cost  us  no  sensible  exertion  of  energy,  nor
think  of  introducing  into  the  examination  of  natural  pheno
mena  the  notion  of  kinetic  energy,  to  which,  for  unsophis
ticated  thought,  an  association  not  only  with  the  will,  but
also  with  the  toil  of  work  very  distinctly  adheres — associa
tions  these  from  which  it  must  be  deliberately  purged  ere
it  can  be  utilized  for  the  purposes  of  scientific  research.
As  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  not  so  :  every  movement  which  we
execute,  every  attitude  in  which  we  repose,  has  its  meaning
rendered  plain  to  us  by  the  feeling  of  exertion  or  of  enjoyment.
We,  therefore,  the  sentient  beings  whom  thousands  of  petty
sensations  are  ever  reminding  of  the  contour  of  our  bodily  frame,
and  to  whom  they  indicate  what  fulness  of  muscular  power,
what  delicate  susceptibility  or  patient  strength,  what  graceful
frailty  or  iron  rigidity,  is  latent  in  each  several  part  of  that
frame — we,  thus  aided  by  our  sentience,  can  assuredly  com
prehend  also  the  alien  silent  form.  Xor  is  it  only  into  the
peculiar  vital  feelings  of  that  which  in  Xature  is  near  to  us
that  we  enter — into  the  joyous  flight  of  the  singing  bird  or
the  graceful  fleetness  of  the  gazelle  ;  we  not  only  contract
our  mental  feelers  to  the  most  minute  creatures,  to  enter  in
reverie  into  the  narrow  round  of  existence  of  a  mussel-fish
and  the  monotonous  bliss  of  its  openings  and  shuttings,  we
not  only  expand  into  the  slender  proportions  of  the  tree
whose  twigs  are  animated  by  the  pleasure  of  graceful  bending
and  waving  ;  nay,  even  to  the;  inanimate  do  we  transfer  these
interpretative  feelings,  transforming  through  them  the  dead

586  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

weights  and  supports of  buildings  into  so  many  limbs of  a
living  body  whose  inner  tensions  pass  over  into  ourselves.

S  4.  Not  only,  however,  with  this  aesthetic  enjoyment  do
we  sympathetically  expand  our  sentience  beyond  the  limits  of
our  body,  but  also,  when  we  desire  with  practical  aims  to
modify  the  outer  world,  we  are  aided  in  the  calculation  of
its  relations  by  a  similar  projection  outwards  of  our  imagina
tion,  put  within  our  power  by  the  delicacy  of  our  sense  of
touch  and  the  ease  with  which  we  combine  past  experiences.
The  skin  surface  of  our  body  is  not  at  all  points  so  organized
that  it  can,  by  the  production  of  different  local  signs,  dis
criminate  the  stimulations  of  their  immediately  contiguous
points,  and  call  up  in  consciousness  different  sensations
answering  to  them,  and  consequently  an  image  of  their  com
bination,  form,  and  situation.  In  most  regions  of  the  body
the  stimulated  points  must  be  at  a  perceptible  distance  from
each  other  in  order  that  the  total  sensation  may  not  be  indis
tinct  and  confused  ;  a  few  parts — among  them  par  excellence
the  surface  of  the  finger-tips  —  are  so  constructed  that
stimuli  striking  them  at  a  distance  from  one  another  of
only  a  fraction  of  a  line,  from  various  local  feelings  being
excited,  are  distinctly  felt  as  different  impressions  adjacent  to
one  another  in  space.  These  susceptible  surfaces  the  human
hand  brings  into  contact  with  things,  and  not  one  merely,  but
five,  adapted  to  the  simultaneous  apprehension  of  a  great
number  of  distinguishable  points ;  these  five,  further,  not
fixed  in  one  position,  but  capable,  by  means  of  the  finger-
joints,  each  of  which  by  itself  and  apart  from  the  others  can
move  its  tip  through  a  semicircle,  of  being  put  into  the  most
varied  relative  positions.  And  in  adjusting  not  only  these
changes  of  position,  but  the  variable  intervals  between  the
opened  or  clenched  fingers,  we  are  at  every  moment  guided
by  a  feeling  of  situation  apparently  immediate,  but  really
arising  out  of  a  number  of  previous  associations  of  ideas.
This  marvellous  system  of  susceptible  surfaces  is  finally  ex
tended  freely  into  all  directions  of  space  by  the  bendings  and
extensions  of  the  wrist  and  elbow,  and  the  still  more  un-

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  587

limited  mobility  of  the  upper  arm,  and  there  is  no  part  of
our  own  body  that  cannot  be  touched  by  one  of  our  hands.
It  thus  assuredly  needs  no  words  to  confirm  the  remark
already  made  in  antiquity,  that  a  considerable  part  of  human
civilisation  depends  on  the  structure  of  the  hand,  and  on  the
ease  with  which  it  enables  us  to  make  innumerable  observa
tions,  to  nearly  all  the  lower  animals  rendered  either  im
possible  or  but  accidentally  attainable  by  the  comparatively
imperfect  formation  of  their  organs.  For  the  making  of
observations  is  not  the  all-important  matter;  the  progress  of
culture  depends  perhaps  still  more  on  the  way  in  which  they
are  made.  While  the  one  hand  is  grasping  the  object,  the
c>ther  examining  it  and  changing  its  position  so  as  to  examine
it  further,  our  experimental  knowledge  is  coming  into  being.
A.s  we  fee.1  that  it  is  in  our  power  now  to  bring  into  pro
minence  the  several  properties  of  the  object,  now  to  make
them  retire  to  the  vanishing-point,  we  are,  on  the  other  hand,
impressed  in  the  midst  of  our  work  by  the  opposite  feeling,
that,  namely,  of  an  internal  orderly  connection  by  which  all
those  properties  are  held  captive  under  conditions.

Of  all  living  beings,  man  is  the  only  one  that  from  his
natural  defencelessness  is  forced  to  use  implements  in  order  to
attain  his  ends.  The  capacity  for  using  them  depends  not  only
on  the  muscular  power  of  the  arm,  but  to  a  very  large  extent  on
delicacy  of  sensation  and  an  extraordinary  ease  and  certainty,
in  associating  ideas.  If  a  rod  lightly  grasped  is  lying  in  our
hand,  so  that  its  motions  have  some  free  play,  it  presses  the,
surface  of  our  skin  at  various  points.  The  apparently  direct
feeling  which  we  have  at  every  moment  of  the  position  of  our
limbs,  teaches  us  to  judge  whether  these  momentarily  pressed
spots  of  our  hand  can  be  connected  together  by  a  straight  or
a  curved,  a  vertical  or  a  horizontal  line  ;  we  ascribe  the  same
form  and  position  to  the  rod  that  causes  these  sensations.
If  the  rod  begins  to  move,  the  pressed  points  of  our  skin
vary  from  moment  to  moment ;  for  each  of  these  momenta  our
sense-phantasy  calculates  the  direction  of  the  line  in  which
for  the  time  the  rod  is  lying,  and  at  the  same  time  generates

588  BOOK  v. ciiAriEU  n.

a  conception  of  the  point  at  which  all  these  lines  cut  one
another.  If  the  one  end  of  the  rod  has  met  with  any  resist
ance  and  so  been  stopped,  and  if  only  the  other  end  could  be
carried  round  in  space  by  the  movements  of  our  hand,  the
point  of  intersection  is  that  at  which  the  rod  is  in  contact
with  the  resisting  object ;  to  this  point — really  out  of  reach
of  any  immediate  sensation  of  ours — we  transfer  our  actual
feeling  of  resistance,  and  now  we  fancy  that  we  feel  the  con
tact  of  the  rod  with  the  object  at  a  distance  from  us  as
directly  through  sense  as  we  do  its  contact  with  the  surface
of  our  hand.  On  this  double  feeling  of  contact — a  beneficent
sensory  illusion — depends  all  use  of  implements  ;  none  ot
tli em  would  be  pliable  enough  for  us  if  we  were  aware
merely  of  its  presence  in  the  guiding  hand,  and  not,  with
a  like  palpable  distinctness,  of  its  action  on  the  material  to
be  operated  on.  Only  on  this  condition  is  the  stick  with
which  he  gropes  of  use  to  the  blind  man  or  the  probe  to  the
physician ;  pen  and  brush  would  be  clumsy  instruments  in
the  hand  of  the  clerk  or  the  painter,  if  we  did  not  directly
feel  their  contact  with  the  paper,  and  if  a  subtle  instinct
gradually  trained  by  our  experience  did  not,  moreover,  teach
us  to  take  into  account  the  slight  curvatures  which  these
elastic  implements  undergo  from  the  pressure  of  our  hand,  in
estimating  their  effect  on  the  foreign  surface.  Knife  and  fork
would  fail  in  one  part  of  their  office  if  we  were  aware  only  of
the  position  of  their  handle  in  our  hand,  and  not  at  the  same
time  of  the  incision  made  in  the  objects  by  the  blade  and
prongs  ;  in  every  movement  of  the  knitting  needle  we  can
simultaneously  feel  the  slight  tension  with  which  its  free
end  is  caught  in  the  thread  ;  in  sewing  we  seem  to  be  im
mediately  percipient  at  the  point  of  the  needle,  and  we  feel
how  it  raises  the  texture  into  an  elevated  point  before  making
its  way  through  with  a  sudden  dart.  So,  further,  does  tho
woodcutter  feel,  along  with  the  axe?s  reaction  against  his
hand,  its  hissing  cleaving  of  the  wood ;  so  does  the  soldier
feel  his  weapon  piercing  the  flesh  of  his  antagonist ;  so  the
savage  rejoices  that  he  can  himself  feel  the  blows  which  he

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  589

deals  ;  be  would  have  no  pleasure  in  another's  pain  if  he  did
not  directly  and  with  the  utmost  distinctness  feel  the  blows
of  the  club  on  his  back.

I  need  not  further  mention  what  an  extraordinary  amount
of  assistance  in  the  investigation  of  objects  we  receive  from
this  character  of  our  sense  of  touch,  and  how  we  are  thereby
enabled  to  examine,  in  regard  to  their  shape,  hardness,  elas
ticity,  and  mobility,  objects  that  from  their  minuteness  or
their  inaccessibility  cannot  be  directly  handled.  I  add  but
in  a  word,  that  not  only  the  hands  but  the  whole  body  is
capable  of  similar  perceptions,  though  with  different  degrees
of  delicacy  in  different  parts,  and  often  with  the  assistance
of  other  conditions.  The  unyielding  stone  below  our  feet
causes  a  different  feeling  from  the  wooden  step  of  a  staircase
or  the  rung  of  a  ladder,  botli  of  which  are  by  our  weight  set
vibrating  with  various  degrees  of  amplitude  and  velocity.
15y  the  distinctions  of  the  vibrations  we  can  easily  tell
whether  the  round  of  the  ladder  is  broad  or  narrow,  and
we  fancy  we  directly  feel  its  length  as  well  as  the  points
at  which  its  vibrations  backwards  and  forwards  intersect
each  other,  namely,  their  fixed  points  of  attachment  in
the  frame  of  the  ladder.  Even  whether  a  pliable  rod
which  we  shake  in  the  dark  is  inserted  at  one  or  at  both
ends  into  masonry  or  otherwise  fastened,  whether  we  have
grasped  near  the  free  end  or  nearer  that  which  is  fixed,  all
this  we  fancy  we  do  not  disover  by  reasoning — sensation
itself  seems  to  contain  full  knowledge  on  all  these  points.
As  briefly  will  I  lastly  point  out  that  these  striking
phenomena  must  be  taken  account  of  by  those  to  whom
the  feeling  which  we  never  are  without,  of  the  outline,  the
position,  and  the  movements  of  our  own  body  seems  explic
able  only  on  the  supposition  that  the  sentient  soul  is  diffused
or  extended  through  the  whole  of  the  body.  In  the  coses
referred  to  the  soul  extends  still  farther;  exactly  the  same
persuasive  illusion  that  made  us  before  say  it  was  in  the
finger-tips,  makes  us  now  say  it  is  present — percipient  and
sentient — at  the  end  of  the  stick,  of  the  probe,  of  the  needle.

590  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

Nobody  will  seriously  believe  that  it  is  really  shed  or  pro
longed,  like  an  electric  fluid,  into  these  implements  at  the
moment  of  use  ;  but  if  it  be  granted  that  this  illusion  of  a
sensation  taking  place  outside  of  our  body  is  the  result  of  a
highly  complicated  chain  of  ideas,  then  it  must  be  granted
that  the  illusion  by  winch  the  soul  seems  to  be  immediately
present  in  each  organ  of  sense  and  each  point  of  the  body
from  which  it  is  at  any  moment  receiving  impressions,  can  be
brought  about  much  more  easily  and  by  a  shorter  chain  of
such  intermediate  ideas.  We  therefore  look  on  the  feeling  of
the  omnipresence  of  the  soul  in  the  body  as  a  delusion,  but
a  beneficent  delusion  due  to  Nature's  care  for  us  ;  a  like  care
fully  framed  delusion  is  this  seeming  immediate  sensation
beyond  the  limits  of  the  body  ;  by  it  alone  are  we  trained  to
a  living  apprehension  of  outside  things  and  their  changes,  and
brought  into  intercourse  with  them  in  such  a  manner  as  is
indispensable  for  the  growth  of  our  .conception  of  things.
But  we  will  now  try  to  show  that  we  reap  still  further
advantages  for  our  development  from  this  character  of  our
sentience.

The  preceding  examples  were  drawn  from  the  practical  use
which  we  make  of  implements  in  order  to  modify  external
objects ;  others  of  kindred  nature  lead  us  to  the  means  which
man  employs  for  the  sole  purpose  of  embellishing  his  own  life.
We  speak  of  dress,  to  which  we  alone  are  impelled  by  an
original  instinct,  that  of  the  ape  being  merely  one  of  imita
tion.  We  speak  not  of  other  points  of  view,  which  either  do
not  deserve  to  be  examined  or  must  stand  over  to  other
opportunities,  of  the  use  of  clothes  as  a  protection  against  the
inclemency  of  weather,  of  the  sense  of  modesty  that  chooses
them  as  a  covering ;  our  inquiry  is  exclusively  as  to  the
source  of  the  pleasure  which  they  and  other  kinds  of  decora
tion  afford  to  the  human  soul.  It  lies  by  no  means  only  in
the  gratification  of  the  vanity  that  seeks  to  be  admired  by
others,  but  in  the  heightened  and  ennobled  vital  feeling  of
the  wearer  himself.  The  colours  and  the  metallic  lustre  of
the  finery  alone  minister  to  the  craving  for  outside  admira-

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  591

tion  ;  in  other  respects  our  pleasure  in  ornament  and  dress  is
derived  from  the  sensations  which  l>oth  excite  in  ourselves.

Ever)  one  knows  that  to  our  feeling  it  makes  a  difference
whether  we  grasp  and  raise  a  rod  of  equal  thickness  throughout
in  the  middle  or  towards  one  of  the  ends.  In  the  tirst  case
it  lies  horizontal  in  our  hand,  and  so  long  as  it  is  at  rest  we
feel  only  its  weight,  not  its  length  ;  we  must  shake  it  lie  fore
we  can  guess  this  also  from  the  character  of  the  vibratory
motion  set  up  in  it.  In  the  second  case  we  feel  that  the  rod
inclines  to  lie  in  a  sloping  direction  in  our  hand,  and  a  turn
is  required  in  order  to  bring  its  heavier  end  into  a  horizontal
position.  Now,  as  through  this  preponderant  weight  the  one
ana  of  the  rod  is  constantly  working  downwards,  constantly
in  reality  falling  a  little,  and  ever  again  being  raised  by  slight
muscular  efforts,  in  this  case  we  generally  know  from  the  first
pretty  well  what  is  the  length  of  tin*  pole.  If  we  balamv
the  rod  in  a  perpendicular  position  on  our  finger-tip,  at  the
moment  when  it  is  really  in  perfect  equilibrium  we  are  a  \\are
only  of  its  weight ;  as  soon,  however,  as  the  upper  end  swerves,
and  we  are  forced  to  make  a  movement  of  the  hand  in  order
to  keep  it  still  upright,  we  at  once  fancy  that  we  have  an
absolutely  direct  perception  of  the  height  of  the  rod  and  of  the
distance  of  its  free  end  from  the  point  of  support.  If  a  hall  is
suspended  by  a  thread  from  our  hand  at  first  motionlessly  and
vertically,  here  too  only  its  weight,  not  the  length  of  the  thread,
is  perceptible  ;  if  we,  however,  set  it  in  circular  motion,  so
that  the  thread  exerts  pressure  with  varying  degrees  of  tension
and  velocity  on  different  points  of  the  hand's  surface  in  a  regular
sequence,  we  now  imagine  that  we  are  directly  aware  of  tin-
length  of  the  interval  at  which  tlie  hall  is  revolving,  as  well
as  of  the  radius  of  its  rotating  circle,  and  of  the  velocity  and
weight  with  which  it  moves  in  the  circumference  of  this  circle.

O

If  with  the  finger  we  firmly  press  upwards  on  the  bottom  of  .1
hollow  vessel,  perhaps  so  that  we  balance  it  thereon,  having  the
hand  inserted,  we  become  aware  of  any  contact  with  the  vessel,
in  whatever  point  it  be,  and  we  form  a  judgment,  not  only  as
to  the  direction  whence  such  a  bl-jw  comes  to  the  vessel,  and

592  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

the  distance  of  the  point  struck  from  the  surface  of  our  arm
(consequently,  with  great  accuracy,  as  to  the  size  of  the  vessel),
but  we  also  discern  from  the  nature  of  the  vibrations  produced,
which  are  transmitted  to  our  finger-tip,  the  hardness  and
elasticity  of  the  material  of  the  vessel ;  an  experiment  which
every  intelligent  housekeeper  is  in  the  habit  of  making  when
she  buys  pots  and  pans.  The  mechanical  theory  of  all  these
processes  is  to  some  extent  complicated,  and  very  protracted
would  be  the  psychological  analysis  of  all  the  associations  of
ideas  from  which  these  instinctive  calculations  proceed  with
the  certainty  of  a  direct  feeling ;  on  the  other  hand,  there
can  be  no  doubt  of  the  effect  which  they  all  have  in  changing
our  vital  feeling.  Wherever,  in  fact,  we  bring  a  foreign  body
into  relationship  with  the  surface  of  our  body — for  it  is  not
in  the  hand  alone  that  these  peculiarities  are  developed — the
consciousness  of  our  personal  existence  is  prolonged  into  the
extremities  and  surfaces  of  this  foreign  body,  and  the  conse
quence  is  feelings  now  of  an  expansion  of  our  proper  self,  now
of  the  acquisition  of  a  kind  and  amount  of  motion  foreign  to
our  natural  organs,  now  of  an  unusual  degree  of  vigour,  power
of  resistance,  or  steadiness  in  our  bearing.

The  earliest  stage  of  these  feelings,  to  mention  a  few  ex
amples,  is  brought  about  by  coverings  for  the  head  and  feet,
both  peculiarly  adapted  to  add  something,  at  least  apparently,
to  our  height.  Every  form  of  head-gear  represents  in  the
perpendicular  that  passes  through  its  centre  of  gravity  the
above-mentioned  rod  ;  its  value  for  feeling  is  enhanced  with
its  height  and  partly  with  its  form,  namely,  when  the  result
of  the  latter  is  a  distribution  of  bulk  such  as  perceptibly
moves  the  centre  of  gravity  upwards,  and  at  the  same  time,
in  the  swerve  from  the  vertical  direction,  brings  about  a  strong
inclination  towards  one  side  that  must  be  counteracted  by  a
balancing  effort  of  the  muscles.  The  head-gear  is  of  no  use
till  there  is  a  threatening  of  this  want  of  balance :  in  equi
librium  it  is  only  a  definite  amount  of  weight ;  hence  one
intentionally  puts  on  one's  hat  somewhat  aslant,  in  order  that
one  may  always  be  aware  of  the  distance  between  its  highest

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  593

inclined  point  and  its  plane  of  support,  the  head.  Thus
arises  the  pleasing  delusion  that  we  ourselves,  our  own  life,
and  our  strength  reach  up  to  that  point,  and  at  every  step
that  shakes  it,  at  every  pull*  of  wind  that  sets  it  in  motion,  we
have  quite  distinctly  the  feeling  as  if  a  part  of  our  own  being
were  solemnly  nodding  backwards  and  forwards.  Evidently,
therefore,  one  feels  quite  differently  in  a  cylindrical  hat  that
encourages  these  emotions  from  what  one  does  in  a  cap,  the
raised  peak  of  which  would  perform  the  same  ollice  very
imperfectly ;  and  we  come  quite  to  understand  the  disposition
(showing  itself  early  and  in  low  stages  of  culture,  and  per
fected  afterwards  in  higher  ones),  by  means  of  high  erect
helmets,  bearskin  caps,  and  lofty  coifTures,  to  fortify  the  con
sciousness  of  the  wearer  with  the  feeling  of  a  majestic  upward
extension  of  his  personality,  as  well  as  to  increase  the  fear-
inspiring  or  respect-inspiring  effect  of  the  figure  on  others.  It
would  take  too  long  to  analyse  the  specific  feelings  yielded  by
other  broader  and  lower  forms  of  head  attire  ;  obviously  they
do  not  encourage  pride,  but  call  forth  the  feeling  of  a  weighty
task  being  laid  on  shoulders  not  adequate  to  meet  it.  Of
kinds  of  chaussure  I  mention  only  high  heels,  which  again
represent  the  rod,  as  appears  in  stilts,  which  they  are  in
miniature.  Heels  and  stilts  afford  a  quite  distinct  feeling  of
double  contact ;  we  feel  their  tread  on  the  ground  as  well  as
their  pressure  on  the  foot,  and  at  the  same  time  can  correctly
enough  estimate  the  distance  between  the  two  places  of  con
tact.  Thus,  as  can  be  understood,  arises  a  lively  feeling,  not
only  of  being  exalted  above  the  ground,  but  of  filling  this
whole  space  upwards  with  our  own  increased  stature,  for  we
do  not  lose  our  sense  of  the  ground  beneath  us.  It  may  be
added  that  every  stick  which  we  use,  not  as  a  support,  but
as  a  toy  to  be  carried  in  the  hand,  awakens  the  same  con
sciousness  of  a  prolongation  of  our  personality  to  its  extremity,
of  whose  distance  from  and  contact  with  objects  we  are
directly  aware.  Itods  of  oflice  have  therefore  in  various  forms
always  been  emblems  of  power.

The  second  class  of  these  feelings  we  derive  from  all  hanging
VOL  L  2  P

594  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

and  waving  drapery,  which,  after  the  model  of  the  ball  set  in
revolving  motion,  agitates  the  surface  of  our  body  by  a  charming
variety  of  extensions  in  different  directions,  and  causes  us  to
feel  as  if  we  were  ourselves  present  in  the  gyrations  of  the
freely-floating  ends.  When  children  fasten  on  to  themselves
the  tail  which  Nature  has  denied  them,  they  do  not  merely  wish
others  to  see  it,  but  as  its  point  trails  along  the  ground  they
feel  its  contact  with  the  soil ;  when,  as  they  run,  it  flutters
in  the  air,  the  longer  it  is  the  more  distinctly  do  they  feel
these  flutterings  to  its  farthest  extremity ;  they,  too,  thus  have
something  of  the  same  enjoyment  of  an  existence  prolonged
in  this  direction,  as  if  this  new  organ  had  really  grown  to
them.  This  form  of  the  feeling  is  more  especially  capable  of
tasteful  poetic  refinement,  and  has  actually  in  all  ages  formed
the  ideal  of  the  art  of  the  toilette.  Has  not  Nature  herself
adorned  our  head  with  floating  hair  ?  To  gather  this  into
single  curly,  wavy  clusters,  and  to  encompass  the  seat  of
thought  with  a  peculiarly  arranged  variety  of  exquisite  sensa
tions  of  motion  was  naturally  the  first  task  of  fancy,  and  it
would  not/  be  impossible  from  the  style  of  headdress  preferred
by  particular  nations  to  draw  conclusions  as  to  the  character
of  their  imagination,  and  as  to  their  preference  for  severity  and
stiffness  or  for  greater  geniality  and  freedom.  The  mussel-shells,
the  glass-beads,  the  stones  and  bits  of  bone  which  the  Indian
squaw  strings  to  hang  and  jingle  on  her  wrists  and  fingers,
the  earrings,  the  floating,  hanging  ribbons  and  sash-ends  of  our
maidens,  the  light  lace,  the  heavier  knots  and  tassels  of  uni
forms,  massive  chains  and  crosses,  plumes,  watch-appendages,
waving  veils  and  mantles,  all  these  means  are  applied  by  in
genious  fancy  in  order  not  merely  to  expand  our  existence  on  all
sides,  but  to  create  the  pleasing  delusion  that  it  is  ourselves
that  float  and  wave  and  sway  in  all  these  appendages,  rising  and
falling  in  rhythmic  cadences.  And  where  there  actually  is  no
sensation  it  even  supplies  this  lack,  and  in  the  delicate  tissue
of  hanging  lace  makes  us  think  we  hang  and  take  part  in  its
swaying  motion.

The  last  form  of  those  to  which  we  referred  is  that  assumed

HUMAN  SENTIENCE.  505

by  our  feelings  under  the  influence  of  clothes  in  the  strict
sense.  The  greater  or  less  tension  and  firmness  possessed  by
the  material  in  itself,  or  due  to  its  cut,  is  transferred  to  us  as  if
it  resulted  from  our  bearing.  A  corset  resembles  the  above-
mentioned  hollow  vessel,  only  that  it  is  filled  by  the  body,
not  at  one  point  merely,  but  throughout  its  whole  extent ;
on  every  occasion  of  contact  with  this  stiff  case  the  tension
and  firmness  of  its  framework  is  felt  exactly  as  if  both  pro
perties  belonged  to  our  body  ;  unquestionably  this  also  is  a
means  of  imparting  the  feeling  of  a  more  vigorous  and  elastic
existence.  "With  every  tight  girdle,  every  bracelet,  there  is
to  some  extent  a  recurrence  of  this  feeling ;  the  first  pair  of
trousers  fastened  by  braces  fill  the  boy  with  pride  in  the
manly  vigour  of  his  existence,  even  though  the  ideal  of  his
wishes  remains  the  steel  suit  of  armour,  from  the  weight  of
whii-h  he  turns  away  his  thoughts  to  revel  all  the  more  in  the
majestic  feeling  of  irresistible,  unbending  straightness  which
it  holds  out  to  his  view.  With  this  sense  of  firmness,  which
she  does  not  quite  despise,  the  maiden  mingles  the  feeling
for  easily  moved  and  finer  garments,  for  as  a  matter  of  fact
the  fragrant  folds  of  the  light  gauzy  stuffs  with  which  she
drapes  her  form  are  not  merely  intended  to  be  graceful  in
the  eyes  of  others.  On  the  contrary,  the  wearer  herself  is  by
feeling  directly  present  in  all  the  graceful  curves  that  with
feather  weight  touch  but  a  few  points  of  the  skin,  and  yet
through  these  points  excite  the  most  distinct  sensation  of  the
breadth,  lightness,  and  softness  of  their  sweep.  Nay,  even
the  pleasure  afforded  by  such  a  sight  is  derived  far  less  from
the  pleasing  effect  of  the  draper}  which  we  see  than  from  the
fact  that  we  can  transport  ourselves  by  thought  into  the
imaginative,  joyous,  or  dainty  vital  feeling  which  the  myriad
petty  impressions  from  the  garments  must  infuse  into  the  form
which  they  conceal.  From  the  same  reason  is  it,  lastly,  that
an  artificial  replacement  of  lost  embonpoint  deceives,  not  only
others,  but  also  the  person  concerned ;  for  every  stimulus  that
strikes  these  false  dimensions  is  by  virtue  of  the  double  sensa
tions  of  contact  felt  as  if  it  had  actually  reached  the  living  body.

596  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

§  5.  After  having  by  the  laying  down  of  these  three  funda
mental  laws  performed  for  the  exact  science  of  dress  the
same  service  as  Kepler  for  astronomy,  I  make  over  to  others
the  further  scientific  profit  therefrom  accruing,  and  turn  to
the  examination  of  several  phenomena  in  which  the  same
tendency  here  observed  to  alter  with  aesthetic  wilfulness
directly  given  relations  of  Nature  and  enhance  their  value,  is
exhibited  in  a  graver  form.  In  all  actions,  from  the  simple
movement  of  the  body  up  to  complicated  social  arrangements,
is  shown  the  disposition  to  put  in  the  place  of  the  natural
course  of  events  a  ceremonious  order  having  its  origin  solely
in  the  will  of  the  subject,  and  yet  claiming  to  regulate  them
as  they  must  be.

Graceful  harmony  in  motions  of  the  limbs  is  not  a  result
of  culture,  nor  is  it  to  any  considerable  extent  affected  by
the  worth  and  character  of  the  intellectual  life ;  it  is  wholly
determined  by  the  mechanical  laws  of  motion  not  meeting
with  resistance  as  they  may  do  in  the  case  of  stunted  bodily
structure.  Not  only  does  every  animal  living  in  a  natural
state  of  freedom  develop  with  perfect  want  of  constraint  the
grace  peculiar  to  its  kind,  but  every  puppet,  if  its  limbs  were
attached  to  its  body  with  free  scope  and  no  retarding  friction,
would  display  in  its  motions,  from  mechanical  laws  alone,  all
that  rounded  sweep  and  that  harmony  in  the  play  of  the
different  limbs  which  we  so  often  admire  in  the  living  body
as  the  expression  of  soul.  There  it  does  become  the  expres
sion  of  soul,  but  only  because  there  is  a  soul  in  whose  varying
inner  states  are  the  key  to  this  mechanism  and  the  peculiar
beauty  of  its  symmetry  of  motion.  So  long,  therefore,  as
favourable  conditions  of  life  preserve  the  natural  liveliness
and  activity  alike  of  body  and  of  soul,  we  find,  even  without
any  notable  degree  of  mental  culture,  a  fully  developed  grace
fulness  in  the  movements  of  the  body.  This  is  not  so  where
an  ungenial  climate  makes  the  limbs  more  awkward,  or  where
the  energies  of  the  sentient  soul  are  blunted  by  a  narrow
monotonous  round  of  experience,  or  lastly,  where  the  division
of  industrial  labour  imp  >ses  the  constant  practice  of  a  uniform

HUMAN  SEUT1EXCE.  597

scries  of  movements.  Then  this  beauty  is  lost,  partly  from
the  growing  resistance  which  the  soul's  impulses  meet  with
in  the  stiffened  limbs,  partly  from  the  growing  indifference  of
the  soul  and  its  consequently  scanty  supply  of  such  impulses.
Hence  the  contrast  between  many  happy  tribes  of  the  Pacific
Ocean  with  the  beauty  and  elasticity  of  their  movements,  as
described  for  us  by  their  first  discoverers,  and  the  inhabitants
of  the  Arctic  regions  weighted  by  disadvantages  of  climate,  as
well  as  many  Europeans  grown  clumsy  under  the  burden
of  monotonous  labour.  When  advanced  civilisation  recovers
gracefulness  in  bodily  movements,  it  creates  nothing  new,  but
merely  removes  the  obstacles  that  hinder  the  nobleness  of  the
natural  mechanism  of  motion.  I>ut  before  it  wholly  returns
to  Nature  it  passes  through  the  stage  of  affectation.  Among
all  the  nations  with  whose  life  we  are  intimately  acquainted,
it  has  first  of  all  introduced  a  code  of  manners,  a  style  of
demeanour,  that  got  the  upper  hand  of  the  natural  tendencies
to  motion,  here  took  off  somewhat  of  their  vivacity,  there
added  gestures  that  have  no  ground  in  the  organization  of  the
body  and  in  the  predetermined  manner  in  which  it  gives
expression  to  the  mind's  states.  Thus  here,  too,  man  thinks
that  this  arbitrarily  chosen  deportment  is  something  better
than  what  the  simple  dictates  of  Nature  teach.

The  animal  seeks  to  gratify  his  corporeal  impulses  at  once,
and  as  they  make  themselves  felt,  and  knows  no  other
aim  than  that  of  taking  off  the  edge  of  appetite.  Man
has  no  sooner  escaped  from  the  pressure  of  extreme  need  than
he  makes  each  of  these  cravings  the  occasion  of  a  ceremonial
celebration.  While  the  beast  consumes  his  food  at  all  times
and  in  all  places  that  afford  his  greed  immunity  from  inter
ference,  man  prepares  his  meals.  Even  the  time  of  the  repast
is  not  to  him  a  matter  of  indifference ;  hunger  is  not  what
fixes  the  moment  of  eating,  but  the  day  is  for  the  life  of  man
a  marked-off  portion  of  time  with  its  own  internal  arrange
ment  ;  it  is  in  keeping  that  one  craving  should  be  gratified  at
one  fixed  hour,  another  at  another.  Then  he  has  company
nt  his  repast ;  it  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  appeasing  appetite

598  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  II.

but  through  the  joint  participation  of  several,  even  this
proceeding  has  to  be  recognised  as  an  action  that  in  the  con
nection  of  all  human  life  has  its  fixed  place,  significance,  and
justification.  How  soon  do  we  find  the  beginning  of  settled
life,  the  establishment  of  a  home,  the  development  of  worship,
followed  by  a  multitude  of  elaborate  ceremonies  designed  to
bring,  not  only  the  simplest  proceedings  of  the  day,  but  all
the  more  important  periods  of  existence,  as  parts  into  a  well-
framed  whole  of  human  life !  Among  the  lower  animals,
generations  live  on,  are  born,  multiply,  grow  old,  and  perish,
and  the  idea  never  occurs  to  them  to  survey  this  changeful
life  and  mark  off  its  periods  with  a  consciousness  of  their
significance.  On  the  other  hand,  wherever  human  races  have
not  quite  degenerated  in  consequence  of  the  exceeding  hard
ships  of  their  life,  we  find  the  birth  of  the  child,  his  attain
ment  of  manhood,  marriage,  death,  and  burial,  all  distinguished
by  ceremonies ;  the  celebrations  often  but  rude — nay,  it  may
be  the  rites  repulsive,  still  indicating  the  feeling  that  in  human
life  nothing  takes  place  rightly  and  as  it  should,  if  it  merely
takes  place,  if  it  is  not  recognised  and  set  in  its  fitting  place
in  the  succession  of  events  by  the  participation  in  some  cere
mony  of  a  community,  a  society,  a  family.  A  person  is  not
rightly  born,  does  not  rightly  die,  if  the  symbolic  solemnities
handed  down  by  custom  and  tradition  are  not  grouped  around
these  natural  events.  The  higher  we  ascend  into  the  past  of
a  nation,  the  more  rigorously  may  we  say  we  find  every  inci
dent  of  life  avouched  in  this  way  by  accurately  prescribed
forms,  and  a  glimpse  of  the  mode  of  thought  of  the  people
even  in  our  own  time  shows  at  once  how  persistent  still  is  the
tendency  to  look  on  no  event,  even  after  its  content  has  been
fully  realized,  as  really  complete  until  it  has  been  attested  by
the  seal  of  some  traditional  ceremony.

And  here,  for  the  present,  we  break  off  this  subject ;  what
further  belongs  to  it  cannot  be  brought  into  an  examination  of
human  sentience.  Of  that  alone  I  meant  here  to  speak,
bringing  into  relief  the  characteristic  feature  which  alike  in  all
its  various  exhibitions  seemed  to  form  the  properly  human

HUMAN  SENTIKXCE.  599

element.  "\Vhatever  our  sentience  may  receive,  it  receives  not
as  a  mere  indifferent  content,  and  just  as  little  as  merely  what
is  to  itself  pleasing  or  unpleasing,  it  realizes  in  it  a  peculiar
excellence  through  which  it  fills  its  place  in  a  significant  order
of  phenomena.  Whatever  man  is  impelled  by  instincts  of
sense  to  do,  he  does  neither  under  the  pressure  of  mechanical
necessity  nor  merely  for  the  gratification  of  his  appetites,  hut
he  gives  to  his  action  a  form  in  virtue  of  which  it  takes  its
place  in  the  special  system  of  an  order  of  life  that  ought  to
he,  and  yet  is  not  by  Nature.

Let  us  now  cast  one  more  glance  over  the  whole  group
of  details  with  which  we  have  been  occupied,  and  we  can
correct  a  pot-tic  lament  that  is  still  often  renewed.  Wide
regions  of  sentience  with  all  their  enjoyment  seem  to  be  closed
to  our  organization.  We  demand  to  know  the  agreeable
sensations  of  the  fish  as  it  swims,  the  joy  of  the  bird  as  it
cleaves  the  air,  and  from  a  loftier  height  surveys  the  heights
of  the  earth.  To  me  it  seems  that  the  poetic  phantasy  by
asking  such  questions  shows  that  it  is  really  in  possession  of
the  answer  to  them.  We  can  in  fact  so  completely  transport
ourselves  into  these  situations  of  our  animal  kindred  and  enter
into  the  nature  of  their  enjoyment,  that  to  know  it  by  actual
sensation,  while  it  might  increase  the  intensity  of  the  impres
sion,  would  not  make  more  distinct  to  us  the  distinctive
character  of  this  foreign  delight.  Far  from  being  poor,  human
sentience  is  the  intensest  and  the  richest.  The  swimmer
and  bather  knows  by  experience  how  the  wave  swells  and
bears  him  along  and  gently  washes  his  limbs  ;  but,  saved  from
the  terrible  monotony  of  a  life  filled  throughout  its  whole
duration  by  these  impressions  alone,  we  may  pity  the  fish
whose  lot  he  for  a  moment  envies.  And  after  all,  in  the-
prospect  from  mountain  summits  that  we  have  reached  by
laborious  exertion,  in  the  consciousness  that  the  manifold  con
formations  of  the  globe  present  obstacles  to  our  locomotion,  is
there  not  a  far  more  solid  enjoyment  than  the  comprehensive
glance,  won  without  any  trouble,  of  the  bird  that  soars  from
peak  to  peak  as  if  there  were  no  difference  between  them  and

COO  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IT.

the  valleys.  Let  us  then  take  to  ourselves  the  comfort  that
in  our  direct  sensations,  and  in  what  is  added  by  our  imagina
tion  from  its  entering  into  every  form  of  existence  in  the
outer  world,  we  have  a  goodly  sum  of  pleasure,  greater  than
bas  fallen  to  the  share  of  any  of  the  animal  species

CHAPTER III.

SPEECH AND THOUGHT.

Carrying  off  of  Excitation  by  Movement  generally— By  Change  of  the  Respiratory
Movements— The  Voice— Articulate  Sound  and  the  Organization  of  Sounds
—  Corporeal  Basis  of  the  Capacity  of  Speech  —  The  Meaning  of  Words
— Thought— The  Parts  of  Speech — Syntactical  Forms  of  Language — The
National  Logic  of  Language — Dependence  of  Thought  on  Speech — Importance
of  Names — Substantive  Forms  to  which  no  T/iinja  correspond — Order  of
Thought  and  Order  of  Construction  in  a  Sentence — Silent  Speech-
Intuition  and  Discursive  Thought — Conversation.

§  1.  "TN"  whatever  may  consist  that  state  of  excitation  into
J-  which  the  nerves  of  sense  are  brought  by  external
stimuli,  it  at  any  rate  presents  a  definite  amount  of  some
physical  motion  of  masses  that  by  the  Law  of  Persistence  cannot
cease  of  itself,  but  must  either  be  stopped  by  some  definite
resistance  or  reduced  to  zero  by  distribution  over  the  environ
ment.  If  the  organs  of  sense  are  designed  to  be  to  us  a
medium  of  knowledge  of  the  outer  world,  it  is  necessary,  in
order  to  our  receiving  this  unadulterated,  that  the  tremor  pro
duced  by  the  impression  of  one  moment  should  rapidly  be  so
far  mitigated  as  not  to  counteract  the  impression  of  the  next
moment  or  blend  with  it  as  an  adulterative  clement.  So  long
as  the  physical  stimuli  by  which  the  senses  are  acted  on  are
but  inconsiderable  amounts  of  motion,  this  perpetual  eflace-
ment  of  their  effects  may  be  accomplished  partly  within  the
organ  of  sense  through  the,  uninterrupted  processes  of  the
transformation  of  matter,  partly  through  the  generation  of  the
sensation  itself.  For  even  sensation,  as  a  newly  manifested
internal  phenomenon  of  the  soul,  which  as  a  substance  stands
in  a  mechanical  relation  of  reciprocal  action  with  the  elements
of  the  body,  cannot  merely  arise  on  occasion  of  nerve-stimula
tion,  part  of  the  latter  must  be  utilized  in  its  production.  The

stimuli  of  light  and  sound  constantly  acting  on  us  keep  within

001

602  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

these  limits  of  intensity,  and  we  are  not  aware  of  any  special
corrective  agency  by  which  their  influences  require  to  be
adjusted.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  external  impressions  reach  a
painful  degree  of  strength,  we  must  expect  to  find  a  corre
sponding  provision  of  means  for  their  removal.  Xow,  as  it  is
the  office  of  the  nerve-filaments  to  transmit  to  the  brain  the
stimulations  received  at  their  extremities,  it  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  this  provision  can  consist  in  any  sudden
hindrance  to  transmission,  or  in  any  considerably  increased
distribution  of  the  stimulation  in  all  directions.  Both  are
unfavourable  to  the  natural  function  of  the  sensory  nerve,
and  we  may  look  on  it  as  universally  characteristic  of  the
organization,  that  it  meets  threatened  disturbances  not  with
new  and  unusual  means,  but  with  means  of  a  type  that  has
already  appeared  in  the  healthy  condition.  So  long,  then,  as
the  intensity  of  the  stimulus  does  not  directly  injure  the  nerve,
and  thereby,  of  course,  preclude  the  further  effects  of  a  too
violent  impression,  we  assume  that  the  excitation  is  trans
mitted  to  the  central  organs  and  dissipated  by  there  producing
a  larger  proportion  of  after-effects,  the  fainter  traces  of  which
may  be  discerned  even  in  the  ordinary  degrees  of  stimulation.
Three  roads  are  open  for  the  further  extension  of  the
stimulation  in  the  brain ;  for  the  sensory  nerve  finds  there —
(1)  other  sensory  nerves  ;  (2)  sympathetic  nerves;  (3)  motor
nerves.  The  transference  of  its  excitation  to  other  sensory
nerves,  consequently  the  production  of  an  accompanying
sensation  in  other  than  the  actually  stimulated  parts,  must  be
confined  within  a  narrow  range  if  the  purpose  of  sentience,  to
bring  about  somehow  a  knowledge  of  the  outer  world,  is  riot
to  be  too  much  restricted.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  strongest
stimulation  of  one  organ  of  sense  does  not  produce  any  dis
tinct  stimulation  of  another ;  excess  of  light  produces  no
sensation  of  sound,  a  loud  sound  no  sensation  of  smell ;  only
the  general  sense  shares  in  the  disturbance  through  the  change
effected  in  its  states.  A  transference  of  the  stimulation  to  the
vegetative  filaments  of  the  sympathetic  system  would  be  more
advantageous,  because  among  the  manifold  functions  of  these

SPEECU  AND  TIIOUGHT.  603

nerves  there  are  many  that  without  any  detrimental  effect  on
life  can  be  for  the  moment  increased  in  amount,  and  by  which,
as  well  as  by  many  alterations  in  the  process  of  material  trans
formation  due  to  them,  the  disturbance  of  the  organism  can
be  harmlessly  carried  off.  The  phenomena  of  lever  offer  an
example  of  transference  of  excitation  in  this  direction.  But
in  the  natural  course  of  life  the  sensations  are  specially
designed  to  serve  as  incitements  to  movements  by  which  the
soul  somehow  subjects  perceived  objects  to  its  elaborating
processes.  So  many  reasons  render  necessary  the  close  con
nection  of  sensory  with  motor  nerves  and  the  excitation  of
movements  by  the  direct  action  of  the  former,  that  we  cannot
wonder  if  even  painful  disturbances  are  for  the  most  part
counteracted  in  this  way — always  kept  open  fur  the  purposes
of  healthy  life  —  viz.  by  a  communication  to  motor  nerves,
consequently  by  means  of  the  production  of  motion.

Hence  it  is  that  we  find  all  violent  pains  in  the  living
body,  powerful  irritants  even  in  decapitated  animals,  call  forth
movements  at  first  in  the  immediately  affected  parts,  as  the
impression  becomes  stronger  throughout  the  whole  body.
Sometimes  there  comes  to  be  a  changeful  succession  of  these,
a  tremulous  agitation  of  the  whole  body — sometimes,  where  a
strong  effort  at  patient  endurance  is  made,  a  rigid,  persistent,
exceedingly  violent  contraction  of  a  single  group  of  muscles  is
brought  about,  in  order  that  in  the  surplus  energy  here  ex
pended  the  internal  stimulation  may  have  an  outlet.  So  the
sufferer  grinds  his  teeth  or  clenches  his  fists,  or  straightens  his
back  and  stretches  out  his  aimlessly  stiffened  leg.  At  last  the
persistent  or  increasing  irritation  withdraws  these  movements
from  the  influence  of  the  will  and  exhausts  itself  in  incessant
spasmodic  attacks.  Mental  agitations  from  within  act  upon
the  nerves  in  the  same  fashion  as  the  sense-impressions  coming
from  without  do  here.  In  view  of  the  reciprocal  action
between  body  and  soul,  we  cannot  look  upon  these  two  pro
cesses  as  running  their  course  exclusively  within  the  latter
and  requiring  special  causes  to  make  them  assume  a  corporeal
form ;  from  the  first  they  are  a  certain  quantum  of  effective

CO  4  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IIL

motion,  whose  impression  on  the  body,  instead  of  needing  to
be  brought  to  bear  by  special  means,  must  by  special  means
be  prevented.

§  2.  It  is  unnecessary  to  describe  at  greater  length  the
general  state  of  disturbance  and  the  half  convulsive  attitudes
into  which  the  body  is  thrown  by  the  pressure  of  mental
emotions.  One  group  of  special  importance  must,  however,  be
singled  out  from  the  multitude.  Where  the  mental  agitation
contains  likewise  a  motive  to  a  particular  action,  gestures  make
their  appearance  which  either  copy  that  action  in  miniature
or  exhibit  it  in  its  first  stage.  Ry.  the  gestures  of  anger  when  its
object  is  in  sight  or  at  least  known.  On  the  other  hand,  where
the  mind  is  helplessly  tossed  to  and  fro  in  a  sea  of  pain  or
pleasure,  the  internal  agitation  finds  vent  chiefly  in  the  most
various  changes  of  the  breathing,  or  rather  limits  itself  to  this
mode  of  expression,  which  is  never  wholly  absent  in  the
,'ilready-mentioned  contortions.  In  joy,  in  grief,  in  surprise,
respiration  becomes  unequal,  accelerated,  and  deep,  or  rapid
and  short,  or  remittent,  irregular,  more  like  a  sigh ;  with
emotion  is  associated  the  tremulous  movement  that  takes  the
place  of  the  quiet,  uniform  activity  of  the  respiratory  muscles
and  precedes  an  outburst  of  sobbing ;  anger  and  rage  for  a
moment  keeps  back  the  deep-drawn  breath,  that,  after  the
fashion  of  all  assailants,  it  may  meet  its  object  with  firm-
braced  chest ;  the  fury  that  has  no  object  on  which  to  expend
itself  begins  to  snort,  intentionally  executing  and  exaggerating
respiratory  movements  that  at  other  times  go  on  instinctively
and  imperceptibly  ;  finally,  in  laughter,  delight  in  a  harmlessly
absurd  incongruity  breaks  out  in  spasmodic  working  of  the
muscles  of  respiration.  All  these  convulsive  movements  have
the  conspicuous  peculiarity,  that  nothing  is  effected  by  means
of  them  ;  with  air  for  their  material  and  no  aim  at  any  pro
duct  whatever  any  more  than  a  direction  towards  any  definite
end,  they  are  the  purest  expression  of  mere  excitement,
pleasurable  or  painful.  Even  as  such  they  would  afford  the
onlooker  a  vivid  and  faithful  picture  of  the  internal  state ;
but  Nature  has  attached  the  vibrating  bands  of  the  vocal

SPKECH  AND  THOUGHT.  605

ligaments  to  the  system  of  the  respiratory  organs,  and  thus
gives  an  opportunity  to  the  faintest  ingredients  of  this  aim
less  disturbance  to  embody  themselves  in  the  audible  tones
of  the  voice,  and  to  make  themselves  heard  at  a  distance  in
the  outer  world.  So  in  the  animal  kingdom  we  have  the
sound  of  pain  and  the  sound  of  joy — infinitely  poorer  in
definite  indication  of  objects  and  actions  than  the  rudest
gesture,  in  expression  of  the  hidden  emotion  itself  incom
parably  richer  than  any  other  means  which  living  races  could
have  chosen  for  mutual  communication.  For  as  a  photo
graphic  likeness  is  the  exact  reproduction  of  the  form,  so  is
the  voice  in  its  pitch,  its  peculiar  timbre,  and  the  degree  of
steadiness,  strain,  and  loud  ness,  the  direct  audible  likeness
of  the  innumerable  minute  and  finely-knitted  impressions
produced  by  the  emotion  of  the  mind  on  the  mobile  masses
of  the  body.

The  view  has  been  held  that  speech  was  an  invention,  in
such  a  sense  that  out  of  several  means  of  communication  men
deliberately  chose  this  ;  but  there  certainly  is  no  fear  of  its
being  revived  in  these  days,  and  the  foregoing  remarks  show
how,  on  the  contrary,  by  a  naturally  predetermined  physio
logical  necessity,  the  soul  is  compelled  to  express  in  tones
at  least  the  general  character  of  its  inner  states.  lint  we
are  still  a  long  way  distant  from  human  language,  and
modern  theorists  who  content  themselves  with  admiring  tin:
organic  unity  and  connection  of  the  thought-forming  phan
tasy  and  the  sound-forming  voice,  overlook  a  great  number
<if  intermediate  links,  some  of  which  it  is  quite  requisite  to
mention.

Nature  has  bestowed  voice  on  may  races  of  animals  ;  many
develop  it  into  song,  none  into  speech.  The  question  arises,
what  is  the  cause  of  this  ?  Is  it  that  the  animals  an-  without
any  matter  which  they  have  the  desire  to  express,  or  that  they
are  prevented  from  doing  so  by  some  physical  obstacle  ?  How
ever  the  case  may  stand  with  the  content  of  animal  conscious
ness,  I  cannot  be  one  of  those  who  answer  the  latter  question
in  the  negative,  for  I  am  convinced  that  defects  of  organization

606  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

would  in  any  case  prevent  the  development  of  the  animal
voice  into  speech,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  man's  superiority
rests  partly  on  the  better  organization  peculiar  to  him.  The
anatomical  investigation  of  the  vocal  organs  which  formerly
led  Rudolph!  to  make  the  assertion  that  the  absence  of
speech  in  apes  was  at  all  events  not  determined  by  any
deficiency  in  their  organs,  can  at  most  prove  that  all  the
conditions  of  vocalization  are  present ;  and  the  most  ordinary
experience  makes  it  needless  to  prove  this.  But  speech
develops  itself  out  of  voice  through  the  articulation  of
sounds ;  and  in  the  animal  kingdom  we  find  this  either
not  at  all  or  only  in  the  most  fragmentary  form.

Taking  as  a  basis  of  comparison  the  human  system  of
vowel  and  consonant  sounds,  we  may  note  as  a  remarkable
fact,  that  while  some  birds  can  imitate  our  words,  even
this  mechanical  capability  has  never  been  observed  in  any
mammal.  And  yet  the  formation  of  the  cavity  of  the
mouth,  the  teeth,  the  tongue,  the  palate,  in  this  class  of
animals  far  more  resembles  the  human  than  that  of  any
bird.  It  may  further  be  added  that  among  the  mammalia
different  particular  consonants  and  vowels  are  actually  to
be  met  with  divided  among  different  species,  though  in  the
same  species  they  are  never  united  into  a  compound  speech-
sound.  The  dog  says  r  and  guttural  cli  very  distinctly,  the
cat  is  acquainted  with/,  cows  and  sheep  with  nasal  n,  and
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  most  of  the  fixed  positions  of  the
mouth  on  which  our  articulate  sounds  depend,  would  be
mechanically  possible  to  animals  if  only  there  were  for
their  muscles  an  impulse  to  produce  them,  and  for  their
phantasy  an  impulse  to  combine  them  together.  But  even
the  ape,  with  its  propensity  to  mimicry,  remains  dumb  ;  the
dog,  attentive  as  he  is  to  the  purport  of  our  words,  makes
not  the  slightest  attempt  at  speech ;  only  birds  repeat  sounds
made  in  their  hearing,  but  by  nature  they  too  keep  to  the
inarticulate  tones  and  melodies  of  their  kind.  Now  wherein
lies  the  obstacle  ?  In  my  opinion,  in  these  two  things : —
1st,  defective  sense  of  hearing  ;  and  2nd,  want  of  an  organically

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  C07

constituted  harmony  between  ideas  of  sound  and  the  muscular
movements  that  are  requisite  for  the  production  of  sounds.

Even  the  highest  achievement  of  animals  in  the  direction
of  voice-development,  the  song  of  birds,  is  remarkable  for
a  total  want  of  harmonious  tone  -  relations.  The  melody
advances  in  the  most  irregular  fashion  ;  sometimes  lingering
on  one  note  with  all  possible  purity  and  with  bewitching
quality  of  voice,  sometimes  running  through  a  series  of
sounds,  in  each  of  which  an  indefinite  number  of  rapid
transitions  from  one  pitch  to  another  are  combined  into  a
kind  of  chaotic  noise,  sometimes,  finally,  continuing  through
quarter-tones  or  quite  inharmonious  intervals.  There  is  no
reason  to  suppose  that  the  sequence  of  two  pure  tones  form
ing  a  concord  is  impossible  for  birds,  for  they  do  occasionally
make  it ;  there  is  rather,  evidently,  an  absence  of  any  sensuous
motive  for  preferring  this  sequence  to  any  other.  I  am  there
fore  of  opinion  that  birds'  ear  and  phantasy  lack  susceptibility
for  harmonic  intervals,  and  that  the  scale  seems  to  them  only
more  or  less  in  the  matter  of  pitch,  while  the  qualitative
relations  through  which  to  us  two  tones  at  a  wider  interval  in
the  scale  yet  may  be  more  nearly  related  than  two  close
together,  are  lost  upon  them.  This  defect  would  not  be  a
decisive  obstacle  to  speech  but  for  its  association  with  another
which  we  also  meet  with  in  the  voices  of  all  animals.  All  are
aware  of  the  difficulty  there  is  in  expressing  their  sounds  by
a  written  notation  ;  although  in  the  growling  bark  or  snarl
of  dogs,  when  we  think  of  it  as  divided  into  infinitesimal
intervals  of  time,  we  have  almost  every  one  of  these  intervals
filled  with  a  particular  vowel  or  consonant,  yet  the  animals
hardly  ever  keep  their  mouth  for  a  measurable  time  in  one
position,  and  every  definite  sound  has  no  sooner  been  uttered
than  it  passes  into  another.  "While,  then,  the  voices  of  dogs
or  oxen  sound  to  a  great  distance,  they  never  emit  one
unequivocal  vowel,  but  from  moment  to  moment  hover
between  one  and  another.  Here,  too,  I  cannot  think  that
there  is  any  muscular  incapability  to  prevent  the  retention  of
the  pure  sound  ;  rather  I  believe  that  to  the  ear  of  animals

608  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

the  distinctions  of  articulate  speech-sounds,  though  not  in
capable  of  being  perceived,  have  no  such  emphatic  aesthetic
value  as  to  lead  to  any  importance  being  attached  to  them.
In  this  connection  I  must  introduce  a  general  remark  in  regard
to  the  sound-material  of  speech,  which  forms  a  continuation
of  the  reflections  already  made  on  the  peculiar  character  of
human  sentience.

Were  we  to  try  to  put  into  characters  all  the  vowel-sounds
that  have  been  emitted  by  individuals  or  by  nations,  we
should  require  a  countless  multitude  of  signs;  but  it  is  at
once  apparent  to  our  natural  feeling  that  this  multitude  of
different  sounds  have  not  all  a  uniform  value.  Ou  the  con
trary,  there  stands  out  from  among  them  a  very  small  group
as  pure  primitive  vowels,  distinguished  not  only  by  being  re
cognised  as  simple  elements  in  our  now  fixed  written  language,
but  by  having  in  themselves  an  obviously  distinct  character
and  a  special  value.  Between  these  fixed  points,  a,  e,  i,  o,  u,
we  insert  all  other  vowel-sounds  as  deviations,  approximations,
obscurations,  and  mixtures,  just  as  we  reduce  the  endless
variety  of  tints  to  a  small  group  of  simple  primary  colours.
Thus  to  our  ear  the  innumerable  vowel-sounds  are  by  no
means  a  vague  confused  host,  that  we  might  increase  by  the
addition  of  new  vowels  at  any  moment  when  we  either  gave
ourselves  trouble  to  put  our  mouth  into  an  unusual  attitude,
or  chose  to  suppose  that  our  vocal  organs  were  differently
constituted.  The  group  is  a  closed  one  in  spite  of  the  end
less  number  it  contains  ;  for  there  are  fixed  points  between
which  all  other  conceivable  modifications  must  take  their
place.  The  vowels  then  stand  before  our  imagination  as  a
system,  a  regular  series  of  intrinsic  value,  so  that  our  voice
in  pronouncing  them  does  not  emit  arbitrary  sounds,  but
subjects  itself  to  the  inherent  necessity  and  regularity  of  a
scale  which  would  be  such  even  if  no  one  had  ever  embodied
its  parts  in  speech.  In  spite  of  the  obscurity  still  hanging  over
the  physical  conditions  under  which  the  several  vowels  arise,
the  supposition  is  probable  that  in  the  five  simple  ones  the
manifold  reverberation  of  the  sound-waves  of  the  voice  within

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  609

the  cavity  of  the  mouth  produce  a  particularly  simple,  regular,
and  symmetrical  development  and  intersection  of  rarefaction  and
condensation,  so  that  the  total  movement  of  the  particles  of
air,  could  it  be  made  visible,  would  form  for  each  of  these
vowels  a  figure  whose  formula  could  easily  be  stated.  Hence
it  may  arise  that  these  sounds  alone  appear  to  us  pure,  genuine,
normal,  and  simple,  and  that  our  ear  seeks  to  derive  all
others  from  them  as  compound  or  mixed.  Xow  this  sus
ceptibility  for  such  an  objective  truth  in  sounds  is  what  I
would  assign  to  the  human  sense  of  hearing  in  contrast  to
the  animal  ;  and  the  more  delicate  this  power  of  discrimina
tion  the  more  will  sentience  strive  to  reproduce  these  sounds,
through  the  voice  as  their  productive  organ,  and  to  reduce
and  articulate  the  chaotic  sum  of  possible  sounds  into  these
sharply  separated  elements.

It  would  be  more  difficult  to  prove  the  same  in  regard  to
the  consonants ;  but  a  glance  at  their  application  in  languages
shows  with  what  delicacy  their  mutual  affinity  is  felt,  and  I
think  that  one  would  perceive  this  affinity  immediately  from
their  sound,  even  were  one  not  clear  as  to  the  analogy
between  their  modes  of  origination.  Palatals  are  by  every
one,  apart  from  any  theory,  discriminated  from  others  as  a
connected  group  of  sounds  passing  into  one  another.  Now,  I
do  not  believe  that  any  speech  could  be  formed  for  the
expression  of  thought  were  all  this  otherwise ;  did  not  the
whole  material  of  sound  stand  before  us  as  an  objective  system
of  tones,  each  several  member  sharply  discriminated  from  the
others  and  yet  allied  with  many  by  natural  affinities,  each
one  pure  and  distinct,  yet  capable  of  grouping  around  itself  a
multitude  of  proximate  modifications.  From  this  point  of
view  it  is  intelligible  that  human  speech  has  not  adopted  a
considerable  number  of  sounds  which  we  can  unquestionably
make,  but  which  are  too  indistinct  in  their  relations  of
affinity  with  others  to  be  utilizable  material ;  it  is  further
not  improbable  that  speech  in  the  earliest  stage  of  its  growth
was  content  with  the  three  vowels  a,  i,  u  as  the  most  sharply
discriminated  and  those  which  alone  are  perfectly  pure,  and

VOL.  L  '2  Q

610  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IIL

that  not  till  later  did  it  recognise  e  and  o,  which,  without
deliberate  attention,  are  never  sustained  pure,  but  pass  into  i
and  u.  I  do  not  mean  that  only  those  three  have  from  the
first  actually  been  uttered ;  on  the  contrary,  that  strange
phenomenon  in  speech-consciousness,  of  sounds  and  words
being  different  in  name  from  what  they  are  as  spoken,  may
have  showed  itself  at  an  early  period — curious  conflict  that  it
is  between  the  conception  of  the  sound  as  it  by  rights  must
be,  and  the  facility  of  uttering  it.  It  seems  to  me  natural,
however,  that  in  its  first  exercises  this  working  phantasy
should  most  readily  exhibit  its  arbitrary  legislation,  or
recognition  of  law,  in  the  harshest  and  sharpest  contrasts ;  a
phonic  system  so  weakened  and  moving  by  preference
among  such  minute  distinctions  as,  for  instance,  the  English
language,  at  present  can  belong  only  to  a  time  that  puts
together  breccias  and  conglomerates  out  of  earlier  original
formations.

My  original  intention,  therefore,  was  to  show  that  by  the
human  sense  of  hearing  are  discriminated  distinctions  in
sounds  which  to  that  of  animals  are  not  indeed  as  zero,  yet  are
not  perceived  in  the  full  significance  of  their  mutual  relations.
This  by  itself  would  explain  the  absence  of  spontaneous  produc
tion  of  these  sounds ;  but  I  added  above  the  conjecture  that,
besides,  the  difficulty  of  producing  them  is  increased  by
imperfection  in  the  mechanism  by  which  the  voice  is  moved.
The  process  by  which  all  voluntary  movements  are  executed
is,  as  we  have  already  (supra,  p.  283)  shown,  concealed  from
consciousness  ;  the  image  of  the  new  position  to  be  effected,
and  the  remembrance  of  the  peculiar  modifications  of  our
general  sense  by  which  on  former  occasions  its  execution  was
accompanied,  are  the  sole  two  points  appearing  in  conscious
ness,  to  which  the  carrying  out  of  the  movement  itself  is
subsequently  attached  by  means  of  an  unconscious  and
automatically  working  mechanism.  In  the  case  of  speech,
the  auricular  image  of  the  sound  to  be  produced  takes  the
place  of  the  ocular  image  of  the  movement  to  be  performed.
To  the  actual  utterance  of  the  sound  it  is  now  indispensable

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  6  1 1

that  along  with  this  auricular  image  —  which  we  must
conceive  not  as  a  mere  internal  psychic  state,  but  also  as  a
slight  stimulation  of  the  auditory  nerve  thence  proceeding-
be  associated  by  an  organic  arrangement  the  impulse  to  a
distinct  muscular  movement,  namely,  to  that  complex  move
ment  by  which  all  the  organs  concerned  in  the  production  of
a  sound  are  moved  into  the  necessary  relative  situations.
Where  this  organic  provision  is  lacking,  the  conception  of  the
sound  may  be  present,  but  it  will  not  be  manifested  iu
movements  of  the  vocal  organs.  Now,  I  think  that  in  general
there  is  such  an  arrangement  of  the  nerves  in  all  animals
endowed  with  voice  ;  but  in  man  alone  probably  is  this  organ
so  exquisitely  developed,  that  there  is  not  only  a  power  of
discriminating  between  the  most  various  sounds  as  to  their
pitch  no  less  than  as  to  their  melodiousness  and  timbre,  but
also  a  finely-organized  adaptation  of  the  motor  nerves  to  the
reproduction  of  all  these  peculiarities.  This  is  what  might  be
called  a  corporeal  organ  of  speech;  for  the  body's  contribu
tion  to  the  formation  of  speech  cannot  extend  certainly  further
than  to  placing  ;it  the  soul's  disposal  this  pliable  medium
of  expression,  and  to  inducing  it  to  make  use  of  the  same
by  means  of  the  already  mentioned  physiological  impulse.
Physiologists  seem,  in  fact,  to  have  been  so  fortunate  as  to
discover  this  organ  in  one  of  the  anterior  convolutions  of  the
cerebral  lobes — injury  in  this  spot  being  followed  by  aphasia,
i.e.  want  of  power  to  make  the  desired  speech-movements
follow  the  conceptions  of  sounds.

When  we  compare  the  training  to  speech  of  deaf  mutes
with  the  training  of  parrots,  we  find  that  one  and  the  same
result  is  reached  from  two  different  starting-points.  The
former  are  deficient  in  conceptions  of  sound,  but  their  organs
of  speech  are  constituted  like  those  of  their  shaking  teacher;
by  means  of  their  human  capacity  of  attention  they  can
therefore  be  brought  by  careful  and  laborious  training  not
only  to  form  a  conception  of  the  particular  movement  of  these
organs  that  corresponds  to  a  seen  character,  but  also  to
execute  this  movement  and  produce  the  required  tone.  Now,

6 1  2  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

the  feeling  of  movement  experienced  by  the  deaf  inute  during
utterance  forms  for  his  memory  in  future  the  starting-point
which  his  consciousness  first  repeats  on  meeting  again  with
the  character,  and  which  then  is  followed  with  mechanical
ease  by  the  renewed  execution  of  the  movement.  Of  course
the  modulation  of  speech  so  acquired  will  never  quite  lose  the
harshness  proceeding  from  the  want  of  a  perception  of  the
produced  result.  The  bird  under  training,  on  the  other
hand,  has  the  conception  of  the  sound,  but  externally  his
organs  are  so  unlike  those  of  his  human  teacher  that  his
animal  intelligence  finds  the  chief  difficulty  in  guessing  how
the  latter  produces  the  sound,  and  how  he  himself  must
manage  his  differently  constructed  vocal  organs  in  order  to
produce  the  same.  Obviously  this  can  be  done  only  if  the
bird's  organization  is  such  that  the  tone-conception,  in  so  far
as  it  is  at  the  same  time  stimulation  of  the  nervous  tract,
acts  directly  on  the  vocal  nerves,  and  at  once  effects  for  the
bird  what  he  could  not  of  himself  bring  about.  To  the
human  child  only  this  second  mode  of  learning  to  speak  is
natural ;  it  learns  words  not  by  watching  the  mouth,  but
through  its  vocal  organs  being  directed  by  its  conception  of
sound.  Two  things  are  remarkable :  the  extraordinary
interest  with  which  the  child  devotes  himself  to  this
working  of  his  organs  of  motion,  and  at  the  same  time  the
trouble  which  it  costs  him  to  become  fully  master  of  them.
At  a  time  when  the  motion  of  the  other  parts  of  the  body  is
far  behind  the  agility  already  attained  by  animals  of  the  same
age,  there  awakes — generally  along  with  pantomimic  move
ments — the  effort  to  talk  by  means  of  the  most  marvellous
curlings  of  the  lips,  contortions  of  the  mouth,  and  movements
of  the  tongue  ;  while  usually  the  power  of  moving  the  palate
and  back  parts  of  the  cavity  of  the  mouth  is  acquired  later.
By  observing  these  phenomena,  one  can  obtain  ocular  evidence
of  the  working  of  a  physiological  impulse  evidently  here
impelling  the  inner  states  of  the  general  sense  into  this
particular  form  of  expression.  And  the  difficulty  which,
nevertheless,  is  met  with  in  bringing  these  movements

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  G13

wholly  under  control  in  no  wise  tends  to  weaken  our
conviction  of  an  organic  foundation  for  them.  Just  as  the
eyes,  whose  whole  structure  undoubtedly  is  adapted  for  the
regular  uniting  of  the  rays  of  light,  do  not  perform  this  office
immediately  after  birth,  nay,  are  scarce  capable  of  discerning
a  faint  gleam  of  light,  so  probably  the  delicate  perception  of
distinctions  in  tones  and  sounds  is  not  from  the  first  present
in  perfection,  but  is  gradually  developed  out  of  an  indefinite
susceptibility  to  sound  in  general.  In  proportion  as  its
delicacy  increases,  the  instinctive  working  of  its  stimulations
on  the  vocal  organs  also  becomes  more  distinct.

I  close  these  observations  on  the  share  of  the  body  in  the
formation  of  speech  with  a  summary  glance  over  a  field  that
the  wider  scope  of  these  inquiries  does  not  permit  of  my
examining.  That  the  bodily  organization  should  have  a  share
in  the  conditions  of  speech  will  not  seem  unnatural  to  those
who  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  here  dealing  not  so  much  with
an  operation  of  the  mental  energy  itself  as  with  the  manifes
tation  of  this  operation  in  the  form  of  a  physical  phenomenon.
Here  the  mind  is  not  at  home,  and  it  suffers  no  loss  of
dignity  by  having  its  medium  of  expression,  sound,  and  the
power  of  using  this  medium  conferred  on  it  without  any
choice  of  its  own  by  independent  bodily  impulses.  In  tin*
further  development  of  speech  traces  of  this  physiological
influence  may  still  be  discerned  in  some  of  the  phenomena.
Not  merely  the  general  selection  of  the  sounds  utilized  in  tin;
language  of  any  particular  people  may  proceed  from  minute
peculiarities  in  the  structure  of  its  vocal  organs,  again  in  part
perhaps  dependent  on  climatic  conditions  (e.g.  we  find  widely
diffused  among  the  inhabitants  of  mountainous  countries  ft
preference  for  the  harsh  palatal  sounds,  and  among  dwellers
in  islands  for  dental  consonants) ;  but  also  the  modifications
of  vowels  and  consonants  in  the  inflexion  and  composition  of
words  suggest  the  idea  of  their  being  in  part  nt  least  the
result  of  organic  conditions.  But  the  precise  nature  of  these
it  would  be  very  difficult  to  state.  Already  we  tread  on
doubtful  ground  in  asking  whether  the  tendency  to  these

614  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

alterations  in  sounds  is  acoustic  or  phonetic  —  I  mean
whether  they  are  made  in  order  to  offer  the  ear  a  euphonious
balance  in  the  distribution  and  succession  of  heavier  and
lighter  sounds,  in  harmony  especially  with  the  accentuation,
so  that  the  complete  word  may  float  before  the  sense  of
hearing  like  a  correctly  drawn  and  proportioned  figure ;  or
whether  it  is  mainly  the  convenience  of  the  vocal  organs
(which  do  not  slip  with  equal  ease  from  every  position  into
every  other,  and  cannot  repeat  every  movement  frequently
in  succession)  that  leads,  above  all  things,  to  a  construction
of  sounds  that  are  easy  of  pronunciation.  This  last  in
fluence  tells  in  the  vulgar  pronunciation  of  words  correctly
known  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  explanation  of  the  fact  that  in
most  languages  the  words  borrowed  from  another,  especially
the  proper  names,  are  modified  in  accordance  with  native
usage,  is  to  be  found  not  always  in  phonetic  convenience,  but
frequently  also  in  the  need  felt  to  convert  the  foreign  into  the
familiar  structure  of  sounds,  as  if  that  alone  were  normal  and
correct.  Nay,  a  third  cause — of  grammatical  character — may
often  concur.  E.y.  a  sequence  of  sounds  that  in  compound
words  is  avoided  as  disagreeable  by  modification  of  a  primi
tive  vowel  occurs  in  close  juxtaposition  in  the  inflexion  of  a
simple  word,  and  here  does  not  call  forth  the  slightest  effort
at  alteration.  Neither  the  auricular  image  of  it,  then,  is  in
itself  displeasing,  nor  is  the  pronunciation  difficult,  but  it  is
displeasing  in  comparison  with  the  syntactic  value  of  the  one
word,  and  pleasing  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  other.

§  3.  This  last  remark  leads  us  to  the  point  where,  strictly
speaking,  human  speech  begins.  From  what  has  gone  before,
nothing  more  could  be  inferred  than  a  tendency  to  a  musical
exercise  of  the  voice  that  renounced  the  attempt  to  make
use  of  differences  of  pitch,  and  employed  instead  varieties  in
sounds.  Language  begins  with  the  meaning  attached  to  these
sounds,  and  the  peculiar  form  of  thought  into  which  that  mean
ing  is  thrown — a  form  which  is  either  itself  also  expressed  in
sounds,  or,  remaining  unexpressed,  makes  the  significant  sound
into  a  word  capable  of  being  syntactically  combined  with  others.

SPEECH  AKD  THOUGHT.  G  1  5

Of  these  various  elements,  taking  first  into  consideration
the  contained  meaning,  we  know  that  now-a-days  it  is  handed
on  exclusively  by  transmission  from  one  to  another,  and  that
our  sentient  phantasy  is  utterly  incapable  of  divining  from  the
sound  of  the  words  in  a  civilised  language  a  meaning  such  as
shall  necessarily  correspond  to  it.  It  is  supposed  that  in  the
infancy  of  speech  this  was  not  so;  that  then  each  one,  at  least
of  the  simple  sense-perceptions  that  men  first  strove  to  com
municate,  had  a  sound  answering  to  it,  and  that  it  is  possible
in  root  words  to  recognise  the  meaning  attached  by  the  still
unsophisticated  and  fresh  phantasy  of  man  to  each  vowel  and
<-ach  consonant,  and  each  simple  combination  of  them.  Perhaps
it  is  the  fault  of  our  present  artificiality  that  we  have  no  longer
any  feeling  of  this,  and  that — to  be  candid — most  roots  seem
to  us  to  have  come  by  their  meaning  quite  as  a  matter  of
chance  ;  at  all  events  nothing  is  more  precarious  than  any
attempt  now  to  prove  the  inherent  necessity  of  the  connection
between  the  two.  Two  things  we  must,  moreover,  take  into
account.  The  physiological  tendency  with  which  we  have
become  acquainted,  would  in  itself  lead  only  to  the  expression
of  the  particular  kind  and  amount  of  mental  stimulation
produced  in  us  by  an  impression  from  without,  but  it  would
throw  no  light  on  the  nature  of  the  cause  of  this  impression.
According  to  the  varying  degree  of  mental  susceptibility,
partly  individual  and  permanent,  partly  belonging  to  the
moment,  the  stimulation  produced  by  the  same  irritant  would
prove  very  variable,  and  here  one  sound,  there  another  would
with  equal  physiological  necessity  attach  itself  as  a  name  to
the  same  thing.  Tolerably  similar  designations  could  be
expected  only  for  such  objects  or  events  as  exert  an  inlluence
powerful  enough  to  compel  similar  stimulations  in  every  frame
of  mind.  But  we  allow  that  there  is  another  tendency  of  the
phantasy,  whose  office  it  is,  abstracting  from  the  nature  of  the
passive  subjective  state,  to  present  a  copy  of  the  objective
character  of  the  irritant  whence  the  impression  proceeds.  To
this  tendency  we  must  in  great  part  attribute  the  development
of  language,  whicli  even  in  its  beginnings  was  no  mere  collec-

6 1 6  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

tioii  of  emotional  utterances,  but  with  genuinely  human  com
prehensiveness  of  interest  strove  to  communicate  also  the
tranquil  nioods  of  mind  and  the  passionless  results  of  the  train
of  thought.  The  result  of  this  representative  tendency  would,
however,  be  uniform  and  general  only  supposing  our  sentience
found  in  the  single  sounds  with  which  it  had  to  work  a  decided
similarity  to  perceptible  qualities  of  things,  and  to  the  forms
of  events.  A  perfectly  plain  and  directly  intelligible  system
of  symbols  would  then  instruct  every  one  to  associate  with  a
particular  idea  only  one  particular  sound,  with  the  sound  only
that  idea.  But  clearly  this  is  not  the  case,  and  cannot  be  the
case,  because  most  objects  of  perception  present  a  number  of
marks,  and  yet  no  rule  determines  in  what  order  of  sequence
our  attention  is  to  combine  these,  or  which  it  is  to  single
out  and  make  the  basis  of  nomenclature.  After  all,  then,
only  those  words  are  directly  intelligible  which  imitate  an
actual  natural  sound — a  restricted  and  comparatively  unim
portant  part  of  the  stock  of  language.

Let  us  then  be  content  to  leave  undecided  the  origin  of  the
simplest  words ;  there  is  still  a  rich  field  for  a  research  con
fining  itself  to  tracing  the  paths  by  which  the  phantasy  of
races,  out  of  the  few  terms  for  sensibly  perceived  objects  that
doubtless  formed  the  original  amount  of  their  store  of  words,
has  gradually  acquired  expressions  for  the  endless  variety  of
supersensible  ideas  and  their  subtle  and  complex  relationships.
"VVe  shall  find,  if  we  devote  ourselves  to  this  employment,
that  in  the  attempts  to  denote  new  objects  or  new  results  of
reflection  by  judicious  comparison  with  others  already  known
or  named,  there  is  displayed,  not  only  an  exceedingly  vigorous
activity  of  the  comparative  imagination,  but  activity  of  a  kind
that  enters  essentially  into  the  mental  character  of  a  nation
and  ita  mode  of  conception.  The  analogies,  similes,  and  images
which  in  our  developed  languages  only  poetry  still  employs,
in  order  to  replace  the  now  ineffective  diction  of  everyday
life  by  expressions  whose  meaning,  not  yet  worn  threadbare,
again  brings  freshly  home  to  us  the  value  of  what  they  denote  :
all  these  means  belong  naturally  to  the  youch  of  language,

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  617

and  the  flowery  speech  of  many  tribes  not  cultivated  by
reliection  resembles  in  this  respect  not  a  little  the  manner  of
expression  common  to  its  earliest  stages.  Many  a  word  that
now  briefly  and  with  clean-cut  impress  denotes  an  object
indeed,  but  seems  to  tell  nothing  about  its  nature,  contains  in
its  original  full  form — which  etymological  research  can  some
times  trace — a  significant  attempt  at  a  theory,  at  an  explana
tion  of  the  thing  denoted.  Of  course  the  strange  error  is  not
now  to  be  justified  of  seeking  to  determine  the  nature  of
things  from  the  meaning  of  their  names,  and  of  taking  the
notions  deposited  in  these  names  by  the  word-forming  phan
tasy  of  primitive  times  as  a  clue  to  guide  us  in  attaining  a
knowledge  of  the  things  named.  There  is,  however,  a  deep
interest — and  one  not  foreign  to  our  subject — in  observing
what  particular  attribute  of  an  object  most  strongly  attracted
that  phantasy  by  its  novelty  or  its  importance,  hence  causing
the  name  to  be  fixed  with  reference  to  it.  We  should  frequently
find  how  delicate  was  the  comparative  perception  of  these
times  of  which  no  historic  retrospect  can  now  lie  distinct,
with  what  susceptibility  it  often  laid  hold  of  the  most  general
and  not  always  the  most  obvious  resemblances  and  connections
of  pluenomena,  and  how  even  in  languages  of  different  types
the  similar  comparisons  implied  in  their  terms  for  the  same
objects  not  seldom  offer  individual  instances  of  a  surprising
identity  of  procedure  in  the  common  human  phantasy.  But
these  fascinating  researches,  which  become  convincing  and
instructive  only  through  the  collection  of  a  mass  of  details,
lie  outside  the  narrower  path  here  prescribed  to  us.  We  can
take  up  language  again  only  alter  it  has  reached  a  stage  of  its
growth  at  which  the  primitive  meaning  of  these  picturesque
word-formations  has  long  since  been  forgotten.  Most  of  the
syllables  that  at  first,  through  association  with  perceived
pluenomena,  figuratively  expressed  the  character  of  a  notion,
have  passed  into  inflections,  terminations,  and  prefixes,  and
serve  only  to  indicate  sharply,  but  with  colourless  abstraction,
the  formal  setting  that  thought  seeks  to  give  to  the  content
of  the  main  constituent  of  the  earlier  compound.

618  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

§  4.  In  now  entering  on  the  consideration  of  this  relation
between  speech  and  thought,  we  are  about  to  encounter  ques
tions  that  in  themselves  are  not  very  obscure  and  scarcely  to
be  called  equivocal,  yet  which,  in  consequence  of  the  one-sided-
ness  with  which  they  were  formerly  discussed,  have  given  rise
to  much  hot  disputation.  Whatever  more  strict  sense  we
may  give  to  the  term  thought,  at  any  rate  speech  is  not
thought  itself  but  its  expression,  and  further,  the  expression,
not  of  it  alone,  but  also  of  every  other  movement  of  mind —
of  passion  no  less  than  of  tranquil  feeling.  Now  it  is  easy  to
see  that  speech  may  pass  over  much  that  thought,  in  order  to
be  complete,  must  include  ;  as  in  everyday  conversation  many
connecting  members  are  left  to  be  understood  by  the  listener,
so  even  the  typical  forms  of  construction  of  a  language  may
be  an  incomplete,  but  for  all  purposes  sufficient,  expression  of
the  articulation  of  thought.  It  is  then  to  make  a  needless
demand  to  require  that  the  verbal  organization  of  discourse
shall  fully  correspond  to  the  logical  organization  of  thought.
On  the  other  hand,  the  end  of  speech  is  not  merely  to  be  a
brief  communication  of  thoughts  ;  in  order  to  move  the  mind
of  another,  to  persuade,  to  set  forth  his  own  feeling  with
picturesque  clearness,  and  to  reproduce  it  in  his  hearer,  to
indicate  his  own  conviction  or  uncertainty,  to  discriminate  be
tween  the  doubting  query  and  the  assertion,  between  the  direct
demand  and  the  more  modest  wish,  between  indignant  rejection
of  an  idea  and  its  mere  denial — for  all  these  purposes  the
speaker  must  be  able  to  invest  the  content  proper  of  his
thought  in  manifold  forms  that  add  no  material  part  to  the
logical  structure  of  his  sentence,  yet  throw  over  all  its  parts
a  peculiar  colouring  of  merely  psychological  significance.  Of
course  the  sum  of  these  secondary  determinations  might,  if  one
cared  to  take  the  trouble,  be  also  broken  up  into  sentences  of
logical  brevity,  and  in  this  form  be  added  to  the  main  affirma
tion  ;  but  it  is  certainly  not  the  natural  office  of  speech  to  say
ineffectively  and  in  a  prolix  manner  what  it  can  say  shortly
and  emphatically.  On  the  other  hand,  there  can  be  added  with
equal  facility  those  other  qualifications  which  belong  to  the

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  610

thought  in  its  completeness,  but  are  passed  over ;  and  to  do
this  is  of  more  use.  For  very  often  logic,  although  all  it  has
to  do  is  to  inquire  what  is  the  thought  underlying  any  proposi
tion,  no  matter  how  much  of  it  is  expressed,  has  allowed
itself  to  be  led  by  the  incompleteness  of  the  expression  into
needless  and  protracted  questionings.

But  one  thing  must  be  borne  in  mind  :  to  whatever  extent
language  is  designed  to  include  the  subtlest  movements  of  feel
ing,  only  such  exhibitions  come  within  the  province  of  speech
as  are  in  some  way  expressed  under  the  forms  of  thought.
No  more  than  the  modulation  of  the  voice  and  the  accompany
ing  gesture  does  the  mere  sound  of  exclamation  belong  to
language,  even  when  its  meaning  is  unequivocal ;  besides  the
articulation  and  significance  of  the  sound,  there  must  be  further
a  peculiar  form  of  intelligent  conception  that  makes  the  sound
a  word,  and  gives  it  its  syntactical  value.  In  order  to  review
these  relationships,  we  must  enter  at  some  length  into  the
peculiar  nature  of  thought  and  the  very  close  connection
between  it  and  language  that  has  induced  us  to  subject  to  a
common  examination  these  two  characteristic  elements  of
human  culture.

On  a  former  occasion  (supra,  p.  232  sq.)  I  endeavoured  to
illustrate  a  distinction  which  we  have  to  make  between  the
t/iinkiny  that  alone  deserves  that  name  par  excellence,  and  the
train  of  ideas  produced  by  the  universal  laws  of  psychic
mechanism  in  all  animated  beings  in  like  manner,  but  with
very  different  degrees  of  vivacity.  In  the  latter  our  conscious
ness  is  mainly  receptive  and  passive ;  it  receives  the  various
impressions  that  beset  it  from  the  environment  with  or  without
connection,  with  or  without  order,  as  chance  brings  them ;
further,  it  permits  memory,  according  to  the  general  rules  of  the
association  and  recollection  of  ideas,  to  repeat  the  several  impres
sions  in  the  same  combination,  sometimes  significant,  sometimes
meaningless,  in  which  they  were  held  in  the  original  perception.
It  might  seem  that  a  long  continuance  of  this  train  of  ideas
would  gradually  of  itself  eliminate  the  accidental  character  of
its  connection  ;  for  in  the  course  of  things  unconnected  details

620  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

do  indeed  sometimes  occur  together,  but  not  in  constant  con
junction.  When,  therefore,  we  survey  a  considerable  tract  of
our  experience,  we  find  that  the  more  numerous  combinations
of  connected  objects  gain  the  preponderance  over  the  more
rarely  repeated  combinations  of  the  phenomena  brought
together  merely  by  chance.  Thus  are  gradually  formed  fixed
images  of  particular  objects,  which  detach  themselves  as
permanently  coherent  groups  of  attributes  from  other  shifting
perceptions ;  from  the  concatenation  of  events  there  arise
distinct  remembrances  that  lead  us  instinctively  to  expect
from  present  circumstances  those  consequences  which  actually
flow  from  them  with  natural  consistency.  But  however
sufficiently  in  this  manner  the  thus  improved  train  of  ideas
may  qualify  the  soul  of  an  animal  for  finding  its  place
in  the  sphere  of  its  experience  and  attending  to  the  grati
fication  of  its  appetites,  there  is  yet  an  utter  absence  of
one  mental  operation  which,  as  we  have  found,  forms  part  of
human  thought.  We  do  not  at  first  merely  receptively  and  pas
sively  receive  the  partly  correct,  partly  incorrect  combinations
of  impressions  presented  by  perception,  and  later  the  amended
selection  of  these  left  behind  by  the  self-correcting  movement
of  the  psychic  mechanism.  Our  thought,  with  independent
action,  breaks  up  the  accidental  associations  of  ideas,  and,
instead  of  merely  leaving  intact  those  which  are  coherent,
puts  them  through  a  process  of  reproduction,  after  which  they
appear  in  forms  that  at  the  same  time  contain  an  indication
of  the  reason  why  they  are  combined.  Even  animal  con
sciousness  is  right  as  to  the  content  of  its  thought  when,  with
the  image  of  a  burden  about  to  be  laid  on,  it  associates  the
anticipation  of  a  painful  pressure;  the  human  judgment,
The  burden  is  heavy,  adds  nothing  to  this  content,  but,
making  the  burden  the  subject  out  of  which  the  pressure
flows,  it  vindicates  the  combination  of  the  two  conceptions
from  the  nature  of  their  content,  from  the  connection  between
cause  and  effect,  and  explains  the  merely  actual  combination
of  the  two  in  consciousness  by  an  objectively  valid  law,  in
virtue  of  which  they  cohere.  It  is  needless  to  accumulate

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  621

examples  of  this  kind  ;  if  the  mechanism  of  ideation  pro
vides  iiot  only  for  the  bringing  together  of  the  content  of
consciousness,  but  also  to  a  certain  extent  for  the  elimination
of  the  essentially  coherent  from  the  accidentally  combined
yet  it  is  Thinking  alone  that  exercises  on  this  content,  that
constant  criticism  by  means  of  which  our  hypotheses  in
regard  to  the  necessary  connection  of  all  things  and  events
are  worked  up  into  a  perception  of  the  same,  and  the  merely
intuitive  picture  drawn  by  sentience  and  psychic  mechanism,
is  quickened  by  a  discernment  of  the  internal  bonds  that  hold
together  its  several  points.

This  peculiar  activity  of  thought  comes  to  manifestation  in
the  organization  of  language,  and  on  the  other  hand  is  aided
by  the  latter  in  its  operations.  To  consider,  first,  the  first  part
of  this  relationship,  it  is  not  necessary  that  each  several
operation  of  thought  should  have  its  own  special  expression  ;
but  language  must  separate  from  one  another  tliu  simple
elements  of  thought,  by  whose  employment  and  combination
all  the  more  refined  and  elevated  offices  of  thought  are  fulfilled,
in  forms  that  make  such  employment  possible.  It  is  not,  it
appears  to  me,  fitting  to  begin  the  treatment  of  logic,  as  is
usually  done,  with  an  investigation  of  the  simplest  form  of
combination  in  which  thought  unites  heterogeneous  mental
elements.  There  is  a  still  simpler  and  a  prior  task  which  it
has  perforce  to  fulfil ;  it  has  to  give  to  every  simple  element,
in  order  to  make  it  capable  of  combination  with  others,  a
definite  form  through  which,  from  a  mere  impression,  the  raw
product  of  psychic  stimulation,  it  is  transformed  into  an
organically  utilizable  thought-atom.  The  combinations  into
which  thought  strives  to  bring  the  manifold  content  are
distinguished  especially  by  the  prominence  in  them  of  internal
architectonic  structure  from  the  mere  conglomeration  which
the  psychic  mechanism  is  adequate  to  effect.  Stones  can
always  be  piled  in  a  heap,  whatever  their  form,  if  it  does  not
matter  how  they  are  arranged  ;  an  edifice  that  is  to  be  borne
up  and  sustained  by  forces  working  in  diverse  directions
cannot  be  put  together  out  of  merely  spherical  constituent

622  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

parts — for  any  design  and  plan  the  stones  must  be  hewn  into
such  shapes  that  they  may  mutually  strengthen  one  another,
and  offer  notched  surfaces  for  adhesion  and dovetailing. In
like  manner  thought  cannot  directly  make use  of  sensations,
feelings,  moods,  simple  or  complex  images,  as  materials  for  its
structure ;  each  of  these elements,  which are  primarily  but
states  of  stimulation,  it  must  apprehend  in  a  form  that  in  the
subsequent  combination  decides  on  the  manner  of  its  employ
ment  and  the  particular  fashion  in  which  it  is  grouped  with
others. Language  exhibits  this  first  operation  of  thought  in
the  distinction  of  its  parts  of  speech. Inasmuch  as  it  appre
hends  a  content  substantively,  it  recognises  it  as  something
independent,  self-sufficing,  capable  of  acting  as  the starting-
point  of  a  second and  the point  of  destination of a third
content ; complete  in  itself  and  a self  -  sufficing  whole,  the
substantive is the natural form in which the primitive
language  -  builders expressed the notion of a thing, and
which  they  therefore  at  first  used  to  designate  nothing  that
does  not  present  itself  to  the  eye  of  sense-perception  as  an
independent  object. The  content  stamped  with  the  adjective
character  is  thereby  declared to  be not  independent,  to be
something  whose  existence,  definite  quantity,  form,  and  limita
tion  come  from  another  and  a  substantive  content,  on  which
it  is  of  necessity  in  a  perpetual  state  of  dependence ;  and  the
sensible  properties  of  things,  as  exhibited  by  these  in  a  state
of  repose,  are  what  are  first  held  fast  in  this  form  of  adjectivity.
To  these  elements  language  adds  the  third and indispensable
one of  the verb,  in  order  to indicate the  flux  by  which  the
course  of  events  connects  together  these  motionless  images  ;
this  too  is  a  form  at  first  intended  for  the  reflection  of  sensible
changes, but soon employed also to express relationships
between  things  in  repose — from  the  movement  of  our  com
parative  thought,  by  which  alone  we  apprehend  relationships,
being  interpreted  as  reciprocal  movements  of  the  subjects  of
the  relationships.

It  is  enough  to  have  spoken  of  these  three  forms  which  are
indispensable  to  speech ;  let  us  leave  to  philology  not  only

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  623

the  question  which  of  them  is  the  mure  original,  and  prior  to
the  others,  but  also  the  genetic  history  of  other  forms  which,
as  prepositions  and  conjunctions,  by  the  introduction  of
complex  notions  of  relation,  elaborate  language  into  a
perfectly  pliable  medium  of  expression  for  thought.  Let  us
be  content  with  clearly  recognising  that  those  three  forms
present  the  minimum  of  organization  and  division  of  presented
matter  with  which  thought  can  attempt  to  begin  its  operations.
Without  them  our  train  of  ideas  would  be  but  a  silent,
our  speaking  but  an  audible,  strain  of  music;  ideas  airl
tones  might  indeed  refer  to  one  another  and  reveal  their
aflinities  and  antagonisms  to  feeling,  but  all  the  sharply
discriminative  arrangement  would  have  disappeared  that  had
been  established  by  a  definite  form  of  inner  connection.  How
ever  full  of  meaning  the  music  of  a  song  may  be,  it  is  quite
different  in  character  from  the  words  ;  no  note  in  it  is  anything
substantive  waiting  for  an  adjective  attribute  to  be  attached
to  it  ;  none  more  than  the  rest  expresses  action  proceed
ing  from  another  as  its  living  subject,  and  passing  over  to
a  third  as  its  passive  object.  Never  do  two  tones  enter
into  one  of  those  manifold  articulate  relations  which  language
denotes  by  the  cases  of  substantives,  by  the  active  and  passive
voices  of  verbs  ;  the  genitive  that  joins  the  possessor  to  the
possession,  the  accusative  that  connects  with  the  agent  the
result  of  his  action,  musical  harmony  has  no  means  adequate
to  express.  Now  this  is  what  we  signalized  above  as  thu
peculiar  function  through  which  the  significant  sound  really
becomes  a  word  ;  for  it  is  not  made  such  by  its  significance  ;
on  the  contrary,  the  interjections  which  most  purely  and
directly  express  psychic  excitement  form  an  unorganized
residue  of  the  material  of  language.  The  sound  becomes  a
word  by  means  of  the  logical  accessory  thoughts  displayed  in
the  character  of  the  parts  of  speech  ;  they  serve  as  uniting
surfaces  and  joints  for  the  various  contents,  which  thus
become  capable  of  syntactic  combination  in  the  service  ol
thought.

I  do  not  think much  of  the  objection to  this  view  drawn

624  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  ITT.

from  the  fact  that  in  many  languages  the  distinction  between
the  parts  of  speech  is  not  embodied  in  special  sound-forms
answering  severally  to  each.  What  is  of  consequence  is  not
that  the  form  of  our  thought  should  be  reflected  in  that  of  the
sound,  but  only  that  it  should  be  present  as  an  accompanying
act  of  thought.  Whether  or  not  a  language  indicates  its
substantives  by  any  external  mark,  its  syntactically  formless
word  is  nevertheless  made  into  a  substantive  by  the  mind
of  the  speaker  who  utters  it  with  the  thought  of  the  sub
stantiality  of  its  content  Thought  is  not  so  absolutely
dependent  on  language  that  combinations  of  sounds  are  of
necessity  the  medium  through  which  it  expresses  its  formal
conception  of  the  content  of  presentations.  Had  Nature  im
posed  instead  of  speech  some  other  mode  of  expression  on  the
human  mind,  it  would  have  endeavoured  to  express  through
this  other  medium  in  equivalent  forms  the  same  distinctions
which  we  have  in  language  under  the  form  of  parts  of  speech ;
even  had  no  means  of  expression  been  at  its  disposal,  it  would
none  the  less  have  continued  inwardly  to  make  the  same
distinctions,  though  in  this  case  much  hindered  by  the  absence
of  the  reflex  assistance  that  thought  receives  from  its  external
medium  of  expression.  The  grammatical  form  of  language  may
therefore  lag  behind  its  logical  articulation  ;  but  where  it  does  so
the  language  is  in  a  backward  stage,  and  every  language  free
alike  from  primitive  crudeness  and  from  the  disintegration  of
decay  will  express  the  logical  distinctions  of  its  stock  of
words  even  in  their  audible  sound-structure.  To  a  far  greater
extent,  indeed,  the  language  -  forming  phantasy  goes  beyond
the  needs  of  thought,  and  produces  a  great  number  of  gram
matical  forms  and  syntactical  rules  that  with  the  progressive
advance  of  reflection  are  gradually  allowed  to  drop  as
superfluous.  Thus  substantives  and  verbs  have  gradually
lost  the  wealth  of  inflections  that  distinguished  them  in  the
earlier  stages  of  language,  and  thought  has  learned,  by  putting
together  many  auxiliary  words,  to  replace  the  delicate  shades
of  expression  which  they  embodied ;  on  the  other  hand,  the
variety  of  genders  in  substantives  and  adjectives,  and  the

SPEKCII  AND  THOUGHT.  625

obligation  on  the  latter  to  conform  to  the  former,  are  still
retained  in  different  languages  to  different  extents — a  luxury
of  speech  this,  and  an  ingenious  one,  which  yet  forms  merely
a  superfluous  aesthetic  appendage  to  the  logically  necessary
systematization  of  thought.

Superfluous,  that  is,  if  we  choose  to  look  on  language  a*
exclusively  a  reproduction  of  the  must  general  means  of
thought,  through  whose  arbitrary  application  the  knowledge
of  things  is  to  be  attained.  Uut  unquestionably  from  the
first  it  was  meant  to  be  more;  a  great  part  of  the  work  that
had  to  be  done  it  has  already  done  for  consciousness.  Every
object  of  external  perception,  every  event,  every  extended
figure  pictured  by  us  in  imagination,  every  relationship
between  several  things,  may  be  approached  on  different  sides
by  our  reflective  attention.  Almost  every  content,  therefore,
admits  of  more  than  one  notion  being  formed  of  it,  according
as  we  begin  our  construction  with  this  or  that  constituent  or
point  of  relation,  and  add  the  others  in  this  or  that  order  of
succession.  The  names  of  objects  in  a  language  of  long  stand
ing  are  sufficiently  set  free  from  remembrances  of  their  earlier
meaning,  the  forms  of  construction  by  which  relationships  an;
indicated  have  become  sufficiently  detached,  to  leave  freer
scope  to  the  imagination  in  this  affair  of  individual  fancy  ;
former  generations  must  in  this  respect  have  felt  themselves
under  greater  restraint.  From  the  origin  of  their  words  being
still  in  remembrance,  and  the  mode  of  their  combination  being
under  stricter  regulation,  they  must  have  been  surrounded  as
with  an  atmosphere  of  common,  national  thought,  which  had
already  fixed  the  standard  of  conception  in  regard  to  innu
merable  objects  and  relations  of  objects,  and  to  continue  to
think  in  the  spirit  of  this  seemed  naturally  incumbent  on  tin;
individual.  This  is  the  somewhat  uuiiious  gill  of  a  developed
language  that  invents  and  thinks  lor  us.  If,  however,  we
consider  the  inestimable  advantage  accruing  to  each  indivi
dual  from  the  inexhaustible,  boundless  riches  of  the  world  of
thought  thrown  open  to  him,  whit  h  he  Wuiild  be  wholly
unable  to  create  for  himself  by  his  own  powers,  we  lose  sight

VOL  I.  2  K

626  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

of  the  slight  disadvantage  of  his  being  thus  trained  in  certain
one-sided  modes  of  conception.  At  any  rate,  the  effort  to
order  one's  own  thoughts  with  unrestrained  individual  freedom
can  be  made  only  when  it  has  a  point  of  departure  in  this
national  treasure  of  wisdom  handed  down  in  the  language,
and  can  thence  draw  strength  for  progress.  Besides,  in  course
of  time  a  change  takes  place  in  this  relation  between  language
and  thought.  The  more  men  advance  from  simple  conditions
of  life,  in  which  the  poetic  and  genial  phase  of  social  relationships
prevails  for  good  and  for  ill,  to  division  of  labour — set  about
reflecting  on  and  examining  the  nature  of  things,  and  begin
to  speak  more  of  business  than  of  feelings — the  more,  in  a
word,  the  working  prose  of  life  becomes  developed,  so  much
the  more  does  language  drop  the  crude  prejudgments  concern
ing  things  which  it  originally  contained.  By  the  obliteration
of  their  etymology  its  words  become  mere  denotations  by
means  of  sounds ;  the  pleasure  in  sound  and  its  harmonic
varieties  dies  away ;  old  time-honoured  forms  of  construction
perish  in  consequence  of  the  practical  need  of  terse  and
accurate  modes  of  stating  new  relationships.  Hence  at  last
we  find  particular  departments — as  that  of  Mathematics —
advancing  almost  to  independence  of  words,  and  avoiding  the
prolixity  of  speech  by  a  mere  sequence  of  sound-symbols,
whose  visible  connection  as  written  characters  is  often
expressed  merely  by  pauses  and  accentuations  in  speech.
Hence,  in  general,  in  the  course  of  a  vigorous  development,
much  outward  beauty  is  lost,  and  those  nations  do  not  usually
advance  on  this  path,  which  continue  with  much  display  of
sonorous  euphony  to  say  little  in  many  words.

§  5.  In  a  survey  of  the  historical  development  of  nations,
these  relations,  to  which  it  is  here  sufficient  to  refer,  would
naturally  receive  fuller  consideration.  On  the  other  hand,  a
more  general  inquiry  to  which  we  have  here  to  devote
ourselves,  links  itself  on  to  these  remarks  on  the  reaction  of
language  on  the  development  of  Ideas.  As  speech  has  been
called  thinking  aloud,  so  the  converse  proposition  —  that
ihouyht  is  silent  speech — lias  not  failed  to  make  its  appear-

SPEECH  ASD  THOUGHT.  627

nnce.  None  of  the  points  connected  with  this  subject  has
been  the  cause  of  more  disagreement  than  this  one.  On  the
one  side,  the  capacity  of  speech  is  looked  on  as  constitut
ing  the  decisive  superiority  of  human  nature,  and  as  alone
enabling  it  to  develop  veritable  thought  out  of  the  merely
mechanical  train  of  ideas  ;  on  the  other,  though  the  advan
tages  of  speech  are  not  denied,  not  only  is  thought  held  to  be
independent  of  it,  but  it  sometimes  seems  doubtful  whether
they  are  not  outweighed  by  the  disadvantages  entailed  by  the
habit  of  mentally  clothing  all  thoughts  in  words.

In  this  respect  attention  has  often  been  culled  to  the  fact
that,  unknown  to  ourselves,  a  strange  superstition  grows  up
within  us:  how  apt  are  we  to  fancy  that  an  object  whose
properties  we  have  examined  thoroughly,  and  of  which  we
have  formed  a  complete  image,  is  yet  not  fully  known  to  us
*o  long  as  we  are  ignorant  of  its  name  !  The  sound  of  the
name  seems  suddenly  to  dispel  this  degree  of  obscurity,
though  it  adds  nothing  to  the  content — does  not  even  always
bring  the  light  implied  in  indicating  the  particular  place
belonging  to  the  object  in  a  series,  or  within  the  sphere  of
some  wider  notion.  Young  botanists  delight  in  learning  the
Latin  names  of  wayside  flowers,  anxl  go  contented  on  their  way
only  to  be  presently  disturbed  by  a  mountain  that,  strange  to
say,  has  no  name,  and  so  has  properly  speaking  no  right  to  be
there.  Now,  what  do  they  miss  in  the  one  case  ?  "What  did
they  gain  in  the  other?  I  cannot  look  on  this  fancy  as  so
insignificant  as  it  appears — nay,  I  see  in  it  a  counterpart  or
continuation  of  the  genuinely  human  mode  of  conception  on
wliieh  I  dwelt  in  discussing  sentience.  We  are  not  satisfied
with  the  perception  of  an  object ;  its  existence  becomes  legiti
mate  only  when  it  forms  part  of  a  regular  system  of  things
that  has  its  own  significance  quite  apart  from  our  perception.
Now,  if  we  cannot  actually  fix  the  place  occupied  by  a
product  of  Nature  in  the  universe,  the  name,  at  all  events,
allays  our  disquietude  ;  it  at  least  bears  evidence  that  the
attention  of  many  others  has  already  been  directed  to  the
object  at  which  we  are  now  looking ;  it  assures  us  that  the

628  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

general  mind  has  at  least  been  engaged  in  assigning  to
this  object  its  special  place  in  the  connection  of  a  greater
whole.  On  this  account  it  is  that  a  name  given  arbitrarily
by  ourselves  is  no  name ;  it  is  not  enough  that  a  thing  is
called  somehow  by  us,  we  must  have  its  real  name;  the
name  must  be  evidence  of  its  having  been  received  into  the
world  of  the  universally  known  and  recognised,  and  thus
confront  individual  caprice  as  the  peculiar  and  abiding  deter
mination  of  the  thing.  How  little  is  this  attended  to  by
those  who  allow  themselves  to  be  led  by  the  trifling  peculi
arities  of  their  subjective  line  of  thought,  by  the  whims  of
their  imagination,  eager  for  new  and  capricious  paths,  to
clothe  old  thoughts  in  an  unusual  phraseology,  to  overturn
the  established  nomenclature  of  the  sciences,  and  to  perform
the  marvellous  feat  of  calling  all  things  by  other  than  their
names  !  Only  the  first  discoverer  of  an  object,  or  the  first
inventor  of  a  scientifically  efficient  abstraction,  is  entitled  to
bestow  the  name  under  which  he  takes  possession  for  science
«)f  this  newly  won  point.

More  serious  is  the  other  complaint,  that  during  the  long
use  of  speech  a  multitude  of  modes  of  expression  are  accumu
lated,  which,  by  means  of  the  syntactic  pliability  of  language?,
can  be  very  conveniently  combined  together,  but  with  which
thought  cannot  keep  pace.  Much  can  be  done  with  words,
and  as  what  is  evidently  nonsense  must  admit  of  being,
grammatically  and  syntactically,  quite  correctly  and  elegantly
expressed,  even  that  it  may  be  examined  and  denied .  still
more,  by  the  readiness  with  which  a  grammatically  faultless
form  can  be  assumed,  half-true,  confused,  distorted  statements
may  be  made  to  deceive  by  an  appearance  of  perfect  correct
ness.  These  processes  can  be  most  clearly  traced  in  the
combinations  of  mathematical  symbolic  language.  Many
particular  groups  of  signs  bearing  on  one  another,  at  first
devised  for  a  special  case  to  express  a  relation  there  compre
hensible,  may  afterwards  be  made  to  undergo  a  series  of
changes  or  of  applications  that  for  the  moment  have  no
assignable  meaning,  may  frequently  receive  none  even  when

SPEECH  AND  THOCGIIT.  C29

we  continue  to  calculate  with  them,  yet  sometimes  lead  to
the  discovery  of  new  and  veritable  relations,  whoso  meaning
\ve  only  afterwards  begin  to  understand.  The  pliability  of
language  very  rarely  indeed  leads  to  such  favourable  results ;
for  the  most  part  it  only  suggests  modes  of  conception  that
depart  further  and  further  from  the  truth.  We  must  be
content  to  adduce  a  single  but  comprehensive  example  of
this  very  fruitful  source  of  error.  The  substantive  form
belongs  originally  only  to  things,  the  adjective  form  to
qualities,  the  verb  form  to  events.  But,  of  course,
language  could  not  in  its  judgments  always  begin  with
the  thing,  and  annex  qualities  and  action  to  this  as  the
subject ;  it  had  to  make  the  qualities  in  themselves  and
action  in  itself  also  matter  of  its  reflection.  Hence  it  severed
their  connection  with  things,  and  gave  them  a  substantive
form,  either  by  adding  a  peculiar  termination  to  express  this
new  character,  or  by  transforming  the  infinitive  of  the  verb  or
the  neuter  of  the  adjective  into  a  consistent,  complete,  and
independent  whole  by  means  of  a  prefixed  article.  When
we  survey  the  still  continued  controversies  of  scientific  men,
who  are  mainly  occupied  with  general  notions  and  cannot
protect  themselves  from  error  by  the  constant  check  of  regu
lative  perception  of  some  sort,  we  cannot  but  acknowledge
that  nothing  is  more  fatal  than  this  one  case  of  the  pliability
of  language.  Almost  invariably  we  find  a  tendency  to  make
the  newly  acquired  syntactic  dignity  of  words  convertible
with  a  new  metaphysical  dignity  acquired  by  their  matter.
Thus  we  have  almost  ceased  to  speak  of  beautiful  objects,
is.  we  forget  that  what  we  call  beautiful  is  originally  a  mere
adjective  determination  not  existing  apart  from  a  subject;
we  speak  now  of  the  Beautiful,  or  at  the  best  of  liraitty,
and  our  (esthetic  thinkers  are  quite  convinced  that  what  can
exist  only  as  an  attribute  is  correctly  apprehended  only  when
it  has  unnaturally  been  apprehended  as  something  substantive
which  is  everywhere  identical.  Need  we  recall  the  host  of
similar  instances  —  tlic  Infinite,  the  Evil — or  speak  of  the
mischief  wrought  in  ethical  inquiries  by  the  habit  of  speaking,

630  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

not  of  the  freely  willing  mind,  but  of  Freedom,  as  if  it  were
a  power  acting  independently,  whose  energy  and  achievements
could  be  judged  without  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  niind
to  which  it  pertains  ?

In  all  these  cases  language  creates  for  us  a  mythology,
from  which,  of  course,  in  the  use  of  language  we  can  never
wholly  set  ourselves  free  without  becoming  pedantically
precise,  but  against  the  influence  of  which  on  the  moulding
of  our  thoughts  we  ought  to  be  carefully  on  our  guard.  Logic
does  not  always  assist  us  in  this  direction,  nay,  sometimes
in  its  methods  makes  pernicious  concessions  to  this  false
tendency  arising  from  the  use  of  language.  It  requires  that
a  term  to  be  denned  shall  be  subordinated  under  a  higher
general  notion  (which,  of  course,  is  always  put  into  substantive
form),  a  special  mark  being  added.  In  this  way  adjectival
and  verbal  contents  under  the  process  of  definition  lose  their
natural  form  and  position,  which  they  W7ould  retain  if  the
same  plan  were  pursued  as  in  plain  people's  awkward  but
more  correct  attempts  at  definition.  It  may  be  a  matter  of
comparative  indifference  whether  one  says  that  Disease,  is  any
departure  of  the  body  from  its  normal  state,  or  prefers  to  say
that  A  living  body  is  diseased  when  it  is  not  in  this  normal
state;  but  the  latter  definition,  in  which  what  cannot  exist
save  as  the  state  and  quality  of  something  else  appears  as  an
adjective,  and  is  distinctly  annexed  to  the  subject  in  which
alone  it  has  its  being,  is  formally  the  more  correct  and  the
more  suitable.  Though  we  may  aflirm  that  Elasticity  is
that  property  of  bodies  by  which  they  return  to  their  original
form,  the  proposition  A  body  is  elastic  when  it  does  this,  is
unquestionably  to  be  preferred ;  for  the  first  form  plainly
contains  the  germ  of  a  metaphysically  false  conception  sure
to  be  developed  out  of  such  use  of  terms,  namely,  the  con
ception  of  a  property,  which  is  nothing  else  than  the  deno
tation  of  an  effect,  as  the  efficient  cause  or  productive
means  of  that  effect.  Mathematics  and  Physics,  to  which
almost  all  that  still  remains  of  true  and  fruitful  logic  has
betaken  itself,  have  adopted  this  hypothetical  form  of  defini-

SPEECH  AKD  THOUGHT.  631

tion  wherever definition is required by the nature  of  the
subject.

§  G.  But  language  does  not  exist  solely  to  minister  to
thought,  and  to  our  poetically  living  and  sympathetic  appre
hension  of  the  world  and  its  events  that  substantializing
of  dependent  conceptions  is  no  less  indispensable  than  it  is
dangerous  for  thought.  The  same  holds  true  of  another
drawback  of  language  which  is  but  rarely  felt,  yet  when  it  is
plainly  perceived,  is  seen  to  be  of  some  magnitude.  Seeing
that  in  speecli  the  elements  of  thought  are  only  successively
presented,  even  in  the  most  natural  style  of  expression  it  is
impossible  always  to  avoid  an  order  of  words  occurring  that
does  not  answer  to  the  combination  of  the  ideas  denoted  by
them  ;  but  in  a  cultured  style,  witli  its  tendency  to  inter
twine  much  that  in  simpler  speech  is  expressed  in  detached
co-ordinate  clauses,  there  is  often  a  most  striking  perversion
of  the  order  apparently  required  by  the  general  purport  of  the
context.  Undoubtedly  an  awkward  use  of  these  liberties  is
felt  as  cumbrous  obscurity  ;  but  how  much  can  be  tolerated
in  this  respect  by  our  conceptive  and  constructive  imagination,
is  shown  most  plainly  by  the  collocation  of  words  in  Latin
poetry.  Even  where  they  divide  closely  coherent  and
separately  unintelligible  parts  of  the  discourse,  we  yet  can
often  hit  upon  a  manner  of  reading  and  accenting  such  as
even  in  this  situation  enables  us  to  discern  their  connection.
In  general,  however,  it  seems  to  me  a  mistake  to  look  upon
that  which  most  closely  conforms  to  logical  order  as  the  best
arrangement  of  words.  On  the  contrary,  one  of  the  ends  of
language  is  to  supply  the  place  of  perception.  Now,  as  hero
it  very  frequently  happens  that  the  unimportant  comprehensive
background  or  some  striking  detail  first  shows  itself,  and  not  till
afterwards  the  more  important  event,  as  the  obvious  etteet  comes
before  the  hidden  cause,  or  passivity  on  the  one  side  before
compensating  activity  on  the  other  :  so  that  discourse  will  be
most  distinct  in  which  the  several  points  of  relation  are
marshalled  in  an  order  that  brings  them  vividly  before  the
reproductive  imagination,  no  matter  whether  or  not  this  cor-

C32  BOOK  V. CIIATTKU  III.

responds  to  the  logical  order  of  the  relations  involved.  For
as  even  in  perception  our  judgment  in  regard  to  this  inherent
connection  is  little  affected  by  the  order  of  succession  in
which  objects  happen  to  present  themselves,  so  by  thought
we  can  very  easily  add  to  the  given  concrete  image  of  an
event  those  inherent  relations  by  which  it  becomes  intelligible  ;
whereas  the  imagination  has  a  highly  difficult  task  when  it  is
called  on  to  represent  successively  certain  relations  at  the
bidding  of  the  preceding  words,  before  it  knows  the  concrete
concluding  points  towards  which  the  thought  is  tending.

But  if  the  deviation  of  spoken  words  from  the  logical
order  of  thought  creates  no  serious  difficulties,  perhaps  a  more
important  hindrance  is  involved  in  the  amount  of  time  which
\vords  occupy.  JSTot  merely  in  communication,  it  may  be
said,  does  speech  mean  the  extension  of  an  opinion  to  be
expressed,  of  a  brief  sum  of  meaning,  into  a  long  discourse ;
but,  further,  the  habit  of  making  use  of  it  converts  inward
reflection  into  silent  discourse,  and  thus  exerts  a  retarding
influence.  Thinking,  of  course,  itself  requires  some  time  in
order  to  perform  its  task  of  putting  a  variety  of  elements  into
relation ;  but  the  constant  recollection  of  words  needlessly
protracts  this  time  by  its  dependence  on  bodily  conditions
from  which  thinking  could  have  kept  itself  free.

Many  facts  confirm  this  assertion.  In  trying  to  recall  a
melody,  one  finds  oneself  bound  to  a  certain  time ;  one  cannot
imagine  a  series  of  tones  gone  through  in  less  time  than  it
would  take  to  sing  it — well  or  ill.  For  we  involuntarily
accompany  the  auricular  images  of  tones  with  slight  incipient
movements  of  the  vocal  organs,  and  we  cannot  make  the
former  succeed  each  other  more  rapidly  than  the  latter  can
follow  upon  one  another.  The  musical  expert  may  succeed
in  warding  off  this  habit  of  retardation,  and  putting  himself
into  the  position  purely  of  a  listener  with  regard  to  the  tone-
images  that  revive  in  his  memory ;  but  even  he  will  distinctly
recall  no  greater  number  of  these  tone-images  in  the  unit  of
time  than  the  physiologically  limited  capacity  of  his  auditory
nerve  would  have  allowed  of  his  actually  hearing  within  the

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  633

same  unit  of  time.  "We  find  the  same  thing  in  the  recollection
of  words ;  the  many  trifling  difficulties  caused  to  a  speaker
by  the  alternation  of  vowels  and  consonants  retard  the  suc
cession  in  the  word-images  even  in  the  mere  representation
of  discourse.  Not  for  all  to  the  same  extent,  however ;  fur
the  facility  of  muscular  movement  or  of  the  varying  impulses
to  it  is  different  in  different  persons.  It  is  found  frequently,
though  not  without  exception,  that  the  propensity  to  rapid
speech  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  length  of  the  body.
Very  short  people,  just  as  from  the  shortness  of  their  legs
their  pace  is  more  swift  and  in  general  their  heart-beat  more
frequent,  have  a  natural  tendency  to  speak  quickly,  and  this
whether  they  are  also  loquacious  or  whether  they  are  taciturn,
and  only  say  rapidly  the  little  they  have  to  say.  Tall  persons
will  in  general  be  found  to  speak  slowly  and  phlegmatically ;
the  rate  of  their  discourse  corresponds  to  their  longer  stride
and  greater  slowness  of  heart-beat ;  for  the  rest,  sometimes  the
stream  of  their  discourse  flows  without  interruption,  sometimes
they  prefer  to  be  silent  on  most  subjects.  It  is  long  since
these  observations  have  become  the  property  of  the  imitative
imagination  that  moves  in  living  human  knowledge ;  with  the
aid  of  some  exaggeration  it  has  created  out  of  small  stature,
with  its  sanguine  lively  temperament,  a  familiar  comic  type,
in  which  are  embodied  a  ready  wit,  a  disposition  to  become
eager  about  petty  ends,  and  a  tendency  to  rashness  of  all
sorts ;  whereas  the  tall  phlegmatic  form — by  dint  of  the  same-
exaggeration  a  no  less  favourite  character — has  been  taken
by  it  for  the  expression  of  circumstantial  thoroughness  and
tardiness  in  every  respect.

It  is  needless  to  inquire  further  into  the  accuracy  of  these
trifling  observations  ;  even  were  they  perfectly  trustworthy,
they  would  merely  prove  that  our  course  of  thought  cannot,
so  long  as  we  convert  its  content  into  inward  speech,  exceed
a  moderate  limit  of  velocity.  But  when  we  note  the  con
scious  impatience  with  which  our  thought  often  would  fain
hurry  on,  while  yet  it  is  compelled  to  linger  over  a  simple
idea  till  the  compound  term  for  it  has  been  audibly  re-

634  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

called  to  mind,  we  are  enabled  by  this  further  observation
ourselves  to  reduce  within  its  true  dimensions  the  dis
advantage  supposed  to  proceed  from  our  being  habituated  to
language.  For  here  we  have  evidence  that  this  retarding
recollection  of  words  is  not  absolutely  compulsory  on  our
course  of  thought,  which  really  outruns  it,  and  that  with  us,
as  in  the  psychic  life  of  the  animals  destitute  of  speech,  a  small
space  of  time  actually  contains  a  great  multitude  of  ideas
in  the  regular  co-existence  and  the  methodical  sequence  in
virtue  of  which  they  become  the  motive  of  a  present  pur
posive  action.  But  could  this  movement  of  wordless  ideation
by  itself  accomplish  all  that  is  really  achieved,  however
leisurely,  by  the  course  of  our  thoughts  when  shackled  by  a
persistent  remembrance  of  words  ?

This  question,  we  believe,  must  be  answered  in  the
negative  —  those  views  be  rejected  in  which,  under  the
influence  of  an  enthusiasm  for  the  ineffable,  language  is
regarded  as  a  source  of  detriment  to  a  coveted  higher  know
ledge.  All  that  thought  must  of  necessity,  nay  does,  possess
together  in  one  indivisible  moment,  language  breaks  up  into  a
successive  plurality,  developing  discursive  thought  out  of  the
direct  intuition  of  our  representative  faculty.  Thought  running
backwards  and  forwards  moves  between  the  sundered  elements
of  its  content,  which  the  obstinate  temporal  course  of  this  silent
speech  never  allows  of  its  uniting.  That  relative  thinking
to  which  we  have  already  ascribed  the  dignity  of  being  the
germ  of  all  higher  intellectual  development,  we  here  find
censured  as  the  meagre  form  in  which  habituation  to
language  permits  of  our  performing  high  functions  only
inadequately.  For  does  not  all  this  putting  in  relation  defeat
its  own  end  ?  Had  our  imagination  not  already  under  the
guidance  of  slowly  unfolding  discourse  divided  the  points
that  ought  to  be  united,  why  should  it  require  afterwards
laboriously  to  bring  the  scattered  elements  into  relation  ?
This  were  in  vain,  if  in  our  representative  activity  we  have
forgotten  the  first  point  of  relation  by  the  time  we  have  come
to  the  second;  superfluous,  if  it  is  possible  for  us  simul-

SPEECH  AND  THOUGHT.  635

taneously  to  grasp  the  two,  and  also  their  relation,  at  the  same
undivided  moment.

In  the  first  place,  we  must  modify  these  accusations,  fur
they  touch  not  language  alone,  but  even  thought  itself,
nay,  they  touch  our  whole  existence.  Not  only  do  we  think
discursively,  but  we  also  live  so  ;  not  only  do  we  elaborate
perceptions  in  this  fashion,  but  they  present  themselves  in  no
other.  At  no  moment  are  we  both  what  we  were  and  what
we  shall  be,  and  even  of  what  we  are,  we  are  at  any  one
moment  conscious  to  but  a  small  extent.  Objects  present
themselves  alike  fragmentary  to  us  ;  we  do  not  feel  the
pulsation  that  is  the  inmost  life  of  things  going  directly
through  our  heart ;  the  creative  force  that  stirs  in  them,  and
the  Idea  that  binds  their  successive  states  into  a  whole,  all
this  we  must  perforce  seek  to  divine  by  means  of  the  gradual
combination  of  particular  experiences;  what  in  itself  may  be  one,
cannot  but  be  to  us  an  extended  network  of  relations  between
many  things.  If  we  desire,  instead  of  this  separation,  that
bilent  insight  into  things,  not  intuition  of  them,  which  forms
0ur  conception  of  the  omniscient,  toilless  knowledge  of  God,  we
must  be  convinced  that  isolated  moments  of  approach  to  such
a  state  are  granted  to  us,  but  that  our  incapacity  to  combine
them  into  the  permanent  clearness  of  a  thought  without
distinctions  is  the  fault,  not  of  language,  but  of  our  whole
mental  constitution.  When  we  have  listened  to  a  poem
recited,  to  a  melody  sung,  and  forget  the  words  and  the  tones,
while  yet  all  that  was  in  them  lives  on  in  an  abiding  mood  of
our  soul;  when,  after  long  deliberation  and  weighing  of  pro*
and  coiis,  we  have  at  length  come  to  a  resolution,  and  in  tin;
purpose  that  now  animates  us  feel  combined  and  still  eflicient
the  impulses  that  before  were  severally  weighed  by  our
thought ;  when  we  first  send  our  glance  over  the  scattered
details  of  a  landscape,  and  then,  after  the  definite  outlines
have  long  disappeared  from  our  memory,  still  preserve  an
indelible  total  impression:  we  actually  .succeed  in  making
that  combination  and  fusion  of  myriads  of  details  into
tho  whole  of  a  supersensible  intuition,  which  we  but

636  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

reluctantly  again  analyze  into its  constituent  parts  in  order
to  communicate  it  to  others.

In  all  these  cases  we  became  something  ;  the  manifold  did
not  remain  outside  of  us,  but  the  whole  of  its  significant
internal  connection  was  repeated  in  a  new  state  within  ourselves
with  such  perfection  that  we  could  fancy  we  had  transformed
ourselves  into  the  spirit  of  the  phenomena  that  we  admired.
But  only  the  Infinite  Being  that  itself  is  all  that  it  makes  the
object  of  its  thought,  could  in  this  way  enter  into  the  being  of
all  things  and,  while  entering  into  it,  dispense  with  all  divining
inquiry  beginning  from  the  outside.  The  finite  mind  has
no  alternative  but  to  comprehend  the  nature  of  things  by
means  of  analogies  with  its  own.  For  it,  volition  is  not
equivalent  to  accomplishment,  thinking  to  existence ;  for  it  the
active  and  passive  elements  are  separated  from  each  other  as
diverse  points,  and  it  can  apprehend  the  unity  of  what  here
is  and  is  done  only  as  the  transference  of  an  action  from  one
thing  to  another ;  it  does  not  discern  clearly  how  the  mani-
foldness  of  successive  phenomena  is  identical  with  the  unity
of  being,  and  is  forced  to  divide  them  as  predicates  from  their
subject,  to  which  they  are  attached  only  by  the  thread  of  a
relation ;  finally,  for  it,  ends  are  not  spontaneously  achieved,
but  the  one  life  of  the  Idea,  that  is  all  in  all,  is  converted  into
the  co-operation  of  many  means  exhibiting  themselves  as
independent  of  each  other.  All  these  analogies,  these  notions
of  things  and  property,  of  force  and  effect,  of  being  and
phenomenon,  and  all  the  forms  of  relation  into  which  these
incmlra  disjecta  are  combined,  must  be  employed  by  the
human  mind  to  gain  a  knowledge  of  things.  And  so
indispensable  to  it  is  this  putting  into  relation,  that  even
in  any  moment  of  exaltation  in  which  we  actually  find  and
enter  into  a  higher  unity,  we  feel  restless  and  uneasy  till
Ave  have  expressed  its  content  in  some  form  of  the  combina
tion  of  the  manifold  in  which  it  may  be  definitely  fixed  and-
again  participated  in  by  us  in  the  movement  hither  and
thither  of  thought.  In  each  poetic  imagination,  before  it  has
done  its  work,  lies  this  mystic  unity,  and  in  doing  it  each

SPKECU  AND  THOUGHT.  637

seeks  to  escape  from  this ;  the  best  that  we  could  ourselves  bo
would  not  content  us,  because  we  cannot  be  it  otherwise  than
by  spreading  out  its  formless  depth  into  the  surface  of  a
complexly  related  phenomenon.

Language  in  all  its  operations  is  but  the  reproduction,  not
the  cause,  of  this  tendency  of  our  mind,  liut,  after  having
at  such  length  stood  on  the  defensive,  I  can  more  briefly  add
the  positive  assertion  that  even  this  form  of  thinking,  the  only
one  possessed  by  us  finite  beings,  would  actually  remain  very
imperfect,  without  this  reproduction  in  language.  Language,
of  course,  does  not  impart  to  the  mind  the  elements  of  thinking  ;
but  it  is  indispensable  when  the  mind  has  to  combine  these
elements  into  the  spacious  fabric  of  its  culture.  As  we
always  experience  a  refreshing  effect  from  sense-intuition,  and
are  not  convinced  of  the  success  of  any  labour  till  we  have
before  us  some  palpable  result,  so  must  the  auricular  images  of
names  and  the  combinations  of  sounds  that  constitute  gram
matical  and  syntactical  forms  of  speech,  present  to  us  in  a
fixed,  sensible  form,  the  former  the  multiplicity  of  things,  tin;
latter  the  systematic  plurality  of  their  possible  relations.
There  can  be  no  clearness  of  thought  where  the  many
presentations  and  groups  of  presentations  that  in  mutual
relation  are  to  form  a  thought  simultaneously  occupy  our
consciousness  without  names,  and  only  in  their  original
character  of  affections  of  the  soul ;  even  though  thus  they
may  be  not  a  mere  heterogeneous  assemblage,  but  already  held
together  by  relations  corresponding  to  those  subsequently  t«»
In;  formulated,  yet  consciousness  is  not  aware  of  this  internal
organization.  It  becomes  to  us  real  and  true  when  in  tin-
task  of  statement  we  first  bring  one  presentation  into  pro
minence,  and  then,  guided  by  the  syntactical  foim  which  we
have  given  to  its  name,  go  beyond  it  in  a  definite  direction,
and  rejecting  on  the  way  many  others,  succeed  at  last  in
putting  into  special  connection  with  it  the  particular  second
presentation  indicated  by  that  direction.  Xo  thought  is  clear
and  distinct  until  it  has  undergone  this  process  of  analysis
and  recombination,  and  the  simplest  self  scrutiny  may  teach

638  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  III.

any  one  how,  in  proportion  as  the  plastic  form  of  the  Idea
comes  out  into  relief,  the  obscurities  disappear  that  clove  to
it  in  its  earlier  unexpressed  stage.  As  a  work  of  art  cannot  be
a  full  harmonious  truth  until  it  has  been  completed  in  marble  or
bronze,  and  as  a  conception  in  the  artist's  imagination  is  but
a  disjointed  and  fragmentary  beauty,  so  for  mankind  language
is  the  universal  plastic  material  in  which  alone  they  elaborate
their  surging  ideas  into  thought.

I have dwelt at special length on  this point of  view,
which  has  a  close  affinity  with that  which  throughout  forms
the  fundamental  thought  of  these  inquiries,  in  the  conviction
that  what we may take to  be the highest  content  of  the
universe  is  to  be  conceived  by  us  only  as  realized  by  a  regular
mechanism. I  return  but  for  a  moment  to  the  first  form  in
which  language  exhibited  itself  to  us. Originally  designed  as
a  medium  of  communication,  it  expanded  unawares  to  us  into
an  independent  organism,  over  the  development  of  which  we
have no control, and to  whose inherent nature we must
accommodate ourselves. Now,  how much  language  even  in
this  its  primary  function — i.e. how  much  the  possibility of
conversation — contributes  to  high  human  development,  needs
no  more  than  to  be  mentioned. It  is  an  indispensable  instru
ment  not  only  of  the  first  training,  whose absolute necessity
we  shall  subsequently  feel,  but  also  of  the  further  cultivation
of  the  already  vitally  stirring mind. A  course of  thought
solitarily  pursued  by  the  individual,  the  direction  of  which  only
new  external  perceptions would  alter,  meets with salutary
interruptions  from  the  questions  and  answers  of  another  ;  one
sided associations  expand  under the influence of a  foreign
world  of  thought  and  feeling,  which  brings  alike  new  intuitions
and  new  points  for  the  contemplation  of  those  common  to  both.
But  why  refer  here  in  general  to  that  to  which  our  attention
must  subsequently  be  specially  directed  ? Let  us  merely  add
that  language  renders  similar  services  to  the  thought  even  of
the  individual  when  alone. By  the  sound  of  names,  by  their
metrical  rhythm  in  combination,  are  suggested  to  him  attendant
ideas  and feelings,  as  well as  remembrances  of  what  is  not

SPEKCII  AND  THOUGHT.  630

present  that  would  not  in  sucli  abundance  and  distinctness
accompany  the  dumb  course  of  thoughts  without  words.  As
rhyme  sometimes  unexpectedly  suggests  to  the  poet  a  graceful
conceit,  so  words  in  general,  by  means  of  the  manifold  associa
tions  cleaving  to  their  meaning — so  frequently  figurative —
guide  our  imagination  along  many  paths  that  otherwise  would
be  closed  to  it,  that  lead  not  always  to  the  right  goal,  it  is  true,
nay,  often  to  a  wilderness,  but  always  disclose  to  us  a  rich  field
in  which  we  can  pick  out  the  fruits  that  suit  ua.

CHAPTEE IV.

KNOWLEDGE AND T  III' TIL

Progressiveness  of  Human  Nature  — The  Llcal  Nature  of  Mind  and  its
Mechanical  Equivalent — The  Nature  of  Human  Intelligence — The  Stages
of  Reflection — The  Universal  Impulse  to  Volition  and  Action — The  Genesis
of  Special  and  of  General  Notions — Place  of  Generic  Notions  in  Mt-n'.s
Conception  of  the  Cosmos — Innate  Notions  of  the  Understanding  and  tln-ir
Impossibility — The  Origin  of  Universal  and  of  Necessarily  Valid  Notions
— The  Notion  of  Truth — Laws  of  Identity  and  Causation — The  Natural
Metaphysics  of  Life  and  its  Development.

§  1.  T  N  the  foregoing  inquiries  I  liavc  avoided  touching  on
J-  the  question  of  the  origin  of  language — a  question
that  perhaps  would  be  as  fitly  answered  by  a  brief  acknow
ledgment  of  our  ignorance  as  by  the  few  remarks  that  we
shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  make  on  it.  To  the  individual
language  is  part  of  the  tradition  of  education  ;  it  comes  before
him  as  a  completed  whole,  only  in  a  few  points  still  admitting
of  modification  :  the  spirit  of  this  he  makes  his  own,  and  to
it  at  the  best  he  in  return  supplies  slight  impulses  to  further
development  of  no  account  in  comparison  with  the  incalcul
able  amount  of  what  he  has  received.  However  far  back  in
history  we  go,  we  find  everywhere  the  same  tiling  :  even  in
the  most  ancient  times  the  growth  of  language  appears  as
long  since  completed  through  the  united  efforts  of  countless
forgotten  generations.  Now  here  it  was  not  our  purpose  to
examine  the  substantial  possessions  won  for  humanity  by  the
mutually  complementary  efforts  of  all.  Not  having  yet
approached  the  region  of  historic  development,  we  were,  on
the  other  hand,  searching  for  the  capacities,  ever  identical  and
occurring  invariably  in  every  age  and  every  individual,  that
are  the  instruments  of  the  human  mind  for  these  operations.
They  are  far  from  enabling  the  individual  by  his  own  strength
to  reach  the  goal  of  humanity,  but  they  put  him  in  a  position

fAf)

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  G41

alike  to  make  use  of  the  results  of  others'  toil  and  to  increase
this  transmitted  treasure  by  one  of  those  imperceptible  contri
butions  which  accumulated  determine  the  slow  progress  of
general  civilisation.  We  had  therefore  here  to  be  content
with  referring  to  the  impulses  that  lead  each  individual  mind
eagerly  to  seize  upon  language  as  a  satisfaction  of  its  own
cravings,  and  to  take  possession  of  it  with  the  instinctive
rapidity  of  a  sympathetic  understanding  that  would  itself
have  made  precisely  similar  attempts  to  create  it  had  not  the
kindred  activity  of  former  generations  already  brought  it  into
perfect  shape.

It'  we  direct  our  attention  to  the  other  phenomena  of
human  life,  we  find  a  very  similar  state  of  things.  In  our
science  and  in  the  common-sense  judgment  of  tilings,  in  our
moral  convictions  and  in  the  instinctive  ethics  of  conduct,  in
the  extensive  works  of  stupendous  mechanical  production  and
in  the  petty  arrangements  of  retail  trade,  everywhere  we
live  on  an  indefinite  capital  of  work  done  in  the  past.
Xay,  so  universal  is  this  feature  of  our  culture  that  wo
have  been  used  to  contrast  this  power  of  advancing  by  means
of  historical  transmission  with  the  unprogressive  psychic  life
of  the  lower  animals  as  the  distinctive  criterion  of  human
development.  The  attempt  to  pick  out  of  this  atmosphere
of  custom  that  surrounds  us  the  energies  for  work  with
which  each  individual  mind  comes  forward  afresh  to  join  in
the  labour  of  all  in  accordance  with  an  unaltering  disposition
of  our  nature,  is  the  more  difficult  of  accomplishment,  tin-
greater  the  variety  in  the  immediate  results  of  such  energies,
from  the  favourable  or  unfavourable  situation  in  which  eacli
one  is  called  on  to  labour.  There  is  no  less  temptation  on
the  one  hand  to  ascribe  too  much  to  the  natural  capacities  of
the  human  mind,  than  danger  on  the  other  of  overestimating
the  importance  of  historical  development.  In  former  times
men  were  especially  prone  to  the  former  error ;  for  every
great  achievement  in  civilisation  of  mankind  they  imputed  to
the  individual  an  immediate  capacity  directed  towards  this
end,  that,  existing  fully  developed,  only  required  to  be  called

VOL.  i.  2s

642  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

forth.  Such  opinions  are  no  longer  in  vogue  ;  we  know  that
no  direct  voice  of  Nature  teaches  the  individual  in  visions
where  to  find  the  fruits  of  humanity,  but  that  the  long  labour
of  mankind's  development  has  brought  to  maturity  such  fruits
as  the  individual  may  gather.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  are
perhaps  too  much  inclined,  amidst  the  tumult  of  the  historical
actions  and  reactions  to  which  we  find  the  progress  of  civilisa
tion  attached,  somewhat  to  overlook  the  indispensableuess  of
the  definite  capacities  that  must  silently  correspond  to  the
outward  conditions.  I  intend  here  merely  in  a  few  words  to
refer  to  what  I  have  already  said  in  regard  to  this  tendency.

When  in  the  first  part  of  these  inquiries  we  were  dis
cussing  the  general  organization  that  must  be  assumed  to
belong  to  every  form  of  soul-life,  whatever  its  kind,  we  found
that  the  necessary  unity  of  the  soul  could  not  mean  that  in
virtue  of  it  the  soul  is  confined  to  a  single,  everywhere  homo
geneous  fundamental  type  of  action.  ISTo  more  seemed  to  be
implied  in  that  unity  than  that  all  modes  of  psychic  expression,
however  different  and  independent  they  might  originally  be,
yet  as  harmonious  parts  compose  the  whole  of  one  plan,  one
character.  While,  therefore,  the  different  faculties  of  the  soul  do
not  arise  from  one  another,  but,  in  part  only,  co-ordinately  from
the  depths  of  its  nature,  we  noticed  that  together  they  form
a  harmonious  chord,  and  that  in  virtue  of  its  fulness  of  being
the  soul  cannot  develop  one  of  these  energies  without  this  being
accompanied,  as  if  by  a  law  of  poetical  justice,  by  a  greater  or
less  share  of  the  others.  With  this  idea,  which  applies  to  the
psychic  life  of  all  kinds  of  creatures,  we  a  little  way  back,  in  the
plan  of  the  second  part  of  our  considerations,  came  to  the  ques
tion — What  causes  determine  the  various  levels  of  development
reached  by  the  various  races  of  animated  (bcsccltcn)  beings  ?
Now  here  it  was  a  possible  opinion  that  all  souls  are  homo
geneous  in  nature,  and  that  the  combined  influence  of  all  external
conditions,  as  well  those  whose  seat  is  the  organization  of  the
body  as  those  which  supply  the  scene  and  issues  of  life,  is  the
cause  of  the  definite  psychical  development  of  eacli  species,in  one
case  of  the  inferiority  of  the  animal  kingdom,  in  the  other  of  the

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  643

superiority  of  human  civilisation.  We  did  not  feel  ourselves
justified  in  decidedly  rejecting  this  opinion  ;  on  the  contrary,
one  cannot  help  following  its  attempts  at  explanation  with
interest,  for  undoubtedly  they  are  to  a  great  extent  justified.
And  yet  their  results  as  yet  give  the  impression  of  their  conduct
ing  us  almost  to  the  point  where  the  stopping  short  of  animal
psychic  life  and  the  bound  forward  of  human  psychic  life
are  explicable  from  circumstances,  and  then  constantly  leaving
a  remainder  that  is  not  explicable  from  these  circumstances.
We  frequently  come  close  to  the  goal,  and  yet  we  never  reach
it ;  what  is  lacking  is  evidence  whence  the  privileged  human
race  derives  the  general  energy  and  the  good- will  to  make  use
of  all  the  advantages  of  external  conditions,  nay,  to  contend
against  their  disadvantages  ;  and  whence,  on  the  other  hand,
comes  the  spell  that  keeps  the  animal  world  within  certain
bounds,  whose  impassability  for  them  cannot  be  properly
demonstrated  from  the  circumstances  of  their  life.

These  considerations  give  to  the  other  possible  opinion  a
preponderance  that  for  us  it  would  at  any  rate  have  on  more
general  grounds — the  opinion,  namely,  that  in  each  species
external  conditions  are  in  complement  to  a  peculiar  nature  of
the  psychic  life  which  they  have  to  develop.  Without  altering
the  universal  laws  of  the  psychic  mechanism  to  which  eacli
such  life  is  subject,  this  nature  as  a  specific  everywhere  active
co-efficient  alters  the  form  of  the  result  of  the  application  of
those  laws,  and  in  this  way  it  forms  the  basis  of  the  special
direction  and  level  of  the  subsequent  development.  The
etticncy  of  this  basis  can  undoubtedly  be  limited  by  obstacles,
but  where  it  is  lacking  no  favour  of  circumstances  can  be  a
substitute  for  it;  deterioration  of  germs  occurs  in  every
department,  and  even  human  development  does  not  invariably
fulfil  its  design  ;  but  even  in  a  state  of  animal  degradation
the  human  mind  contains  a  capacity  of  improvement  that
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances  the  purely  animal
soul  lacks.  This  is  the  view  which  we  mean  to  pnrsun
further.  I  have  referred  to  it  again  in  general,  not  with
the  intention  of  proving  its  necessary  validity  ;  hut  it  may

644  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

stand  as  the  view  which  I  have  chosen,  my  choice  being
between  two  possibilities,  with  regard  to  which  it  remains
undecided  whether  on  inherent  grounds  one  of  them  will  not
in  the  end  be  found  to  be  impossible.  Concerning  the  further
elaboration  of  this  conception,  however,  and  its  difficulties,  I
intend  to  add  some  remarks.

What  distinguishes  one  from  the  other,  the  psychic  life
of  brutes  from  that  of  men,  is  not  a  single,  separable  form-
constituent  in  addition  to  others  that  remain  unaltered  or  in
the  place  of  one  removed,  but  a  peculiar  colouring  hard  to
define  that  is  diffused  over  the  whole  picture  of  the  inner  life.
Language  itself  shows  this  in  its  denotations  of  internal
events,  at  least  where  these  still  impartially  reflect  the  total
impression  of  observation.  We  must  grant  to  animals,  in
particular,  much  consideration,  much  combining  of  thoughts,
and  many  surprising  traits  of  sagacity  ;  but  understanding  we
are  fain  to  deny  them  ;  they  dream  in  sleep,  and  doubtless
while  awake  think  of  the  past  and  the  future ;  but  we  hardly
care  to  speak  of  their  imagination,  creative  fancy  we  utterly
deny  to  them  ;  they  certainly  have  feelings,  and  these  not
only  rude  sensual  ones,  for  we  speak  of  the  fidelity  of  one,  of
the  nobleness  of  another ;  but,  on  the  whole,  we  reserve  the
emotions  and  the  heart  for  man  ;  we  have  to  admit  that  they
have  fits  of  passionate  excitement,  and  find  that  in  many
species  these  can  by  training  be  to  a  considerable  extent
repressed  and  prevented  from  breaking  out ;  but  free  self-
control  we  ascribe  to  man  alone,  though  we  must  confess  that
it  cannot  be  strictly  demonstrated  that  he  makes  use  of  his
freedom,  the  preponderance  of  one  passion  over  another  and
the  fear  of  consequences  being  for  him,  too,  the  most  common
motives  to  action.  In  all  these  relations  human  mental
life  cannot  be  seen  to  be  favoured  by  the  peculiar  nature  of
the  elements  of  which  it  consists  ;  on  the  contrary,  its  frame
work  is  ultimately  composed  of  the  same  mosaic  pieces  that
make  up  that  of  animal  intelligence  ;  its  peculiarity  consists
in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  combined  and  employed,  in
the  spirit  that  works  with  these  instruments  and  ennobles  all

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TKUTII.  G45

particular  effects  by  the  meaning  with  which  it  fills  them  as
expressions  of  a  continuous  and  connected  plan  of  life.  The
unity  that  consists  only  in  evolving  manifold  activities  as
equally  necessary  results  from  the  basis  of  a  common  nature
undoubtedly  belongs  even  to  the  psychic  life  of  brutes  ;  in
the  human  soul  there  further  appears  the  characteristic  of  a
methodical  pursuit  of  development,  that  gathers  together  very
heterogeneous  means  for  the  realization  of  a  culture  seen  afar
off  as  an  end  and  a  vocation.

£  2.  This  impression  it  is  that  has,  properly  speaking,  always
guided  the  popular  conception  of  psychic  life  ;  by  it  too  is
essentially  governed  the  peculiar  form  of  psychology  that
under  the  special  name  of  a  Theory  of  tlie  mind  seeks  to  dis
tinguish  itself  from  other  systems  in  this  department.  For,
putting  out  of  account  all  errors  caused  partly  by  the  inherent
indistinctness  of  this  view,  partly  by  the  passion  provoked
in  its  opponents,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  its  high  self-
appreciation  and  the  cause  of  the  approval  which  it  will
always  meet  with,  lie  in  its  agreement  with  a  very  obvious
tendency  of  ordinary  opinion.  Left  to  itself,  our  desire  for
knowledge  is  not,  with  regard  to  all  objects,  primarily  directed
towards  the  origination  and  preservation  of  their  single
attributes  and  states,  but  rather  towards  the  harmony  of
this  motley  assemblage.  The;  contemplation  of  mental  life
in  particular  did  indeed  at  an  early  period  suggest  other
questions  as  to  the  mechanism  of  its  working,  but  a  far
livelier  interest  has  always  been  felt  in  the  attempt  to  derive
the  various  faculties,  energies,  and  habits  of  working  which
we  find  within  ourselves  as  mutually  harmonious  functions
from  a  single  comprehensive  tendency.  As  we  trace  the
details  of  a  work  of  art  in  their  necessity  for  the  expression
of  its  one  Idea,  without  in  the  first  place  troubling  ourselves
about  the  technical  method  of  execution  by  which  the
features  were  one  by  one  moulded  in  bronze  or  marble  :  even
so  we  seek  the  true  essence  of  the  mind  in  the  end  at  which
it  aims  in  all  its  activity,  and  we  think  we  understand  it
in  each  of  its  manifold  utterances  we  recognise  an

646  BOOK  V. CIIAPTEK  IV.

expression  of  its  striving,  and  in  the  connection  of  all  the
unity  of  that  striving.  And  further,  \ve  do  not  trouble  our
selves  at  first  with  the  causal  process  by  which  each  one  of
these  phenomena  of  mental  life  is  realized  and  brought  into
effective  connection  with  the  rest.  Somehow,  we  take  for
granted,  this  is  accomplished ;  but  the  true  essence  of  a
particular  form  of  mental  life  does  not  lie  in  the  general  laws
according  to  which  any  other  might  just  as  well  come  into
being  as  itself ;  it  lies  rather  in  the  peculiar  nature  of  the
points  of  application  that  are  here  presented  to  those  uni
versal  laws  otherwise  and  better  than  in  other  instances,  and
that  make  it  possible  for  them  to  determine  these  specially
prominent  results.  These  peculiar  points  of  application  need
not  all  consist  in  special  combinations  of  external  conditions  ;
we  may  assume  that  the  principal  of  them  is  the  special
living  Idea  itself  that  gives  rise  to  the  distinction  between  the
human  mind  and  souls  of  brutes  ;  but  we  must  not  on  this
account  refuse  to  take  account  of  the  process  by  which  this
Idea  itself  can  acquire  effective  power  over  the  mechanism  of
the  psychic  reciprocal  actions  ;  least  of  all  must  we  try,  by
means  of  the  trite  contrast  between  a  higher  and  a  lower
view  of  things,  to  rid  ourselves  of  the  necessity  of  showing
how  the  soul's  ideal  striving  comes  to  co-operate  in  the
development  of  inner  life  everywhere  taking  place  according
to  universal  laws.

We  know  how  a  number  of  concurrent  causes  always  go
to  produce  an  event,  all  equally  indispensable  but  otherwise
varying  in  importance.  It  is  often  possible  to  give  to  one  of
them  the  name  of  cause  par  excellence,  because  by  it  almost
exclusively  the  form  of  the  resultant  effect  is  determined,  and
to  treat  the  others  as  concomitant  causes  that  partly  as
exciting  stimuli  (as  we  suppose)  call  forth  the  matured  but
still  latent  effect,  partly — and  this  is  the  more  correct  state
ment  of  the  other  case  also — supply  lacking  conditions  or
remove  obstacles  to  development.  Thus  the  germ  of  the
plant  needs  many  secondary  agencies  to  make  it  grow  ;
they  all,  however,  merely  help  to  develop  what  is  pre-

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TKUTII.  C47

determined  and  prefigured  by  the  sum  of  all  the  properties
of  the  germ,  not  to  be  particularized  here,  on  which  its  prin
ciple  of  development  depends.  Hut  without  the  stimulus
which  it  receives  from  the  influence  of  these  external  agents
that  tendency  would  remain  inoperative,  and  even  under  such
influence  it  by  itself  determines  only  the  first  momentary
infinitesimal  change  which  the  condition  of  the  germ  must
undergo.  The  various  stages  of  vegetation,  on  the  other  hand,
take  place  only  in  a  fixed  order  of  succession,  and  only
because  at  each  moment  the  influence  of  external  concomitant
causes  is  acting  anew  on  the  actual  state  of  the  germ  and  on
the  velocity  and  direction  with  which  the  motions  then  going
on  in  it  are  seeking  to  drive  it  out  of  that  state.  Not  only
does  the  disposition  to  a  particular  form  of  flowerage  and
fruitage,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  consider  as  already
present  in  the  seed,  become  actual  only  at  a  particular  point
of  its  development,  but  every  tendency  to  the  shaping  of  the,
next  moment  is  developed  only  at  the  present  moment  by
the-  actual  total  state  and  the  sum  of  the  newly  operative
conditions.  15ut  certain  as  it  is  that  each  further  stage  of
development  is  effected  only  by  means  of  the  plastic  germ
offering  itself  anew  as  altered  by  the  preceding  stage  to  the
co-determining  force  of  the  stimuli,  we  yet  are  entitled  to
impute  the  whole  series  of  its  evolutions  to  its  original
nature.  All  that  lias  to  be  provided  for  is  that  the  weight
which,  in  virtue  of  that  nature,  is  thrown  into  the  scale  in
the  fixing  of  the  character  of  the  first  transformation,  be
decisive,  so  that  though  the  force  of  external  stimuli  may
entirely  check  the  development,  it  cannot  so  long  as  that  goes
on  divert  it  into  a  different  course.  The  external  conditions
must  recognise  its  original  state  as  well  as  each  of  its
subsequent  modifications  as  the  main  factor  in  determining
the  form  of  the  next  stage,  and  themselves  take  a  sub
ordinate  place  as  subsidiary  forces  in  the  realization  of  this.
Of  the  total  formative  impulse  of  the  germ,  therefore,  at  each
moment  there  can  only  appear  as  an  efficient  force  a  part  so
yreat  and  of  such  nature  as  is  set  in  motion  and  discharged

648  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

by  the  present  reciprocal  action  between  the  final  state  of
the  preceding  stage  and  the  new  conditions  of  the  present
one ;  but  these  various  forces  will  combine  into  a  series
of  harmonious  energies  of  development,  because  the  original
tendency  of  the  germ  remains  the  determining  force  in  them
all.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  it  happens  that  no  amount  of
tendency  to  growth  in  the  plant  would  be  of  any  avail,  if  it
were  impatient  to  bring  forth  fruits  before  flowers  ;  but,  on
the  other  hand,  it  is  also  due  to  this  principle  that  the  seed
of  the  oak  produces  oaks,  and  is  never  converted  by  circum
stances  into  a  beech.

Now  those  who  like  us  find  the  peculiar  form  of  mental
life  prefigured  in  an  original  tendency  of  the  mind,  know
that  this  is  a  brief  and  incomplete  statement  of  a  relationship
precisely  like  the  foregoing.  They  know  that  the  soul  neither
is  in  miniature  what  it  will  be,  nor,  without  some  external
stimulation,  sets  about  becoming  it ;  they  know,  further,  that
when  it  is  stimulated  its  evolution  does  not  unfold  all  at
once  and  uninterruptedly,  as  if  it  had  only  needed  the  break
ing  down  of  a  barrier  in  order  to  allow  free  vent  to  the
current  of  its  own  spontaneous  tendency  to  growth.  Only
the  unremittingly  renewed  effect  of  concomitant  causes
on  what  the  soul  has  become  through  a  first  stage  of
development,  gives  rise  in  it  at  once  to  the  capacity  and  to
the  necessity  of  entering  into  a  definite  second  stage.  And
should  these  concomitant  causes  consist  not  altogether  in
new  external  stimuli,  but  partly  in  continued  effects  of  its
own  inner  states — parallel  to  the  setting  in  motion  again
of  the  planetary  system  by  means  of  its  own  motion—
the  original  tendency  of  the  soul,  however  high  it  might
soar,  would  not  be  able  to  dispose  even  of  these  its  own
inner  states  with  arbitrary  freedom.  Even  of  its  tendency
to  growth  at  each  moment  only  so  much  is  realized  as  the
total  sum  of  the  excitations  present  in  it,  which  now  in
fluence  it  instead  of  stimuli  from  without,  is  able  to  call
forth  into  activity.  Thus,  while  its  tendency  is  realized  only
in  an  unbroken  mechanical  connection,  it  is  yet  not  a  passive

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TKUTH.  C49

product  of  the  same.  For  though  the  soul  cannot  react  and
respond  until  it  is  acted  on  and  questioned,  yet  the  matter
of  its  answers  is  its  own,  and  at  every  moment  expresses
what  in  accordance  with  the  internal  harmony  of  its  nature
it  has  to  respond  to  these  particular  stimulations,  to  develop
in  this  particular  stage  of  its  development.  The  integral
of  these  successive  expressions  is  the  soul's  original  ten
dency,  only  that  here  we  have  not  merely  to  add  diil'erent
quantitative  values  of  reaction  in  order  to  find  variahle
values  of  the  stimulations,  but,  from  different  momentary
forms  of  action  under  variable  conditions,  must  go  back  to  a
primary  genetic  form  of  function.

The  applicability  of  the  comparison  with  vegetable  life
ends  here,  however.  For  the  germ  of  the  plant  remains
always  a  plurality  of  parts,  whose  mode  of  combination  alone
determines  the  type  of  the  future  vegetation.  Thus  in  the
course  of  reproduction  a  system  of  concatenated  particles  is
produced  from  a  prior  similar  concatenation  of  others ;  but  the
vegetable  tendency  to  growth  never  has  such  a  concentrated
existence  as  to  lie  latent  in  a  single  indivisible  atom  as  its
nature  and  essence.  Hence  the  development  of  the  plant
everywhere  gives  occupation  to  the  explanatory  form  of
science ;  not  only  the  origination  of  the  germ  and  of  its
primary  plastic  tendency  becomes  here  a  fresh  subject  of
inquiry,  but  also  the  basis  of  every  subsequent  peculiar
reaction  which  after  it  has  been  modilied  it  suffers  external
fetimuli  to  wring  from  it ;  for  even  this  reaction  rests  on  a
new  collocation  of  its  various  parts,  and  is  consequently  to
be  judged  according  to  universal  laws  regulating  the  reaction
of  different  parts.  It  is  not  so  witli  the  mind.  Its  primary
tendency  to  growth  lies  not  in  relations  of  distinguishable
parts,  but  in  the  one  and  indivisible  meaning  of  its  ideal
nature ;  the  kind  of  answers  that  in  the  course  of  its
development  it  returns  to  external  stimulations  does,  indeed,
depend  on  a  dislocation  and  rearrangement  that  has  mean
while  taken  place  within,  not,  however,  on  a  dislocation  in
epace  of  mutually  independent  parts,  but.  on  the  altered

650  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

intellectual  relation  and  tension  between  the  actual  form
and  amount  of  the  stimulation  or  expression  and  the  per
manent  ideal  content  of  the  mental  nature,  which  perhaps
does  not  in  the  first  instance  seek  to  express  itself,  but  if
it  is  forced  to  do  so  does  it  completely.  Even  in  these
profoundest  causes,  therefore,  of  mental  development  there
is  the  harmony  of  a  necessary  connection  ;  this  harmony,
however,  bears  the  impress,  not  of  mathematical  regularity,
but  of  an  aesthetic  justice,  different  from  the  former  only  in
its  kind  of  consistency,  not  in  the  imperative  and  durable
nature  of  its  laws.  For  while  mathematical  law  directly
determines  only  the  mutual  effects  of  similar  events,
esthetic  justice  combines  things  that  to  our  notional  com
parison  are  dissimilar,  but  yet  necessarily  belong  to  the  total
of  an  Idea,  In  the  sum  of  human  knowledge  the  discernment
of  this  justice  may  be  looked  on  as  an  untrustworthy  con
jecture,  and  appeal  to  it  as  an  incomplete  way  of  estimating
things,  whose  certainty  is  far  inferior  to  that  which  mathe
matical  thought  attains  in  its  department ;  on  the  other  hand,
in  the  total  of  reality  itself,  its  laws,  primary  and  most
inviolable,  are  those  on  which  the  whole  connection  of  things
rests ;  it  establishes  the  immutable  relations  between  things,
on  which  as  on  a  given  foundation  all  calculation  must  be
based  in  order  that  the  destinies  of  one  element  may  be
deducible  from  those  of  others.  In  the  universe  a  universal
statics  and  mechanics  of  content  precedes  the  other  statics  and
mechanics  which  refer  only  to  the  variations  in  amount  of  that
content.  We  discern  its  laws,  in  the  contemplation  of  Nature,
in  the  shape  of  those  practical  laws  of  action  and  reaction  that
the  mathematical  theory  does  not  make  but  can  only  recognise  ;
they  meet  us  in  mental  life  in  the  general  tendency  which  we
perceive  as  the  driving  wheel  of  its  whole  development.

Now,  however  difficult  it  may  be  to  give  an  exhaustive
statement  of  this  tendency,  however  numerous  are  the  sources
of  error,  however  great  the  risk  of  arbitrarily  and  one-sidedly
estimating  and  interpreting  the  individual  phasnomena  of  this
development,  we  yet,  now  that  we  are  about  to  enter  on  this

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  G51

path,  cannot  allow  that  any  impassable  chasm  prevents  the
theory  of  an  ideal  unity  in  mental  life  from  being  combined
with  the  theory  of  its  mechanical  realization.  Any  one  who
has  attentively  followed  the  remarks  just  made  must  have
recognised  in  them  the  complementary  half  of  a  train  of
thought  against  which  we  formerly  had  to  contend  (supra,  pp.
434  seq.).  Then  we  had  to  point  out  how  a  mental  process
underlies  all  the  outer  calculable  mechanism  of  the  material
world  ;  here  what  we  had  to  dwell  on  was  the  absolute
necessity  with  which  every  mental  process,  however  great
may  be  its  significant  ideal  elevation,  not  only  is  itself  subject
to  law,  but  also  at  once  attaches  itself  to  a  system  of  com
paratively  external  mechanism — one,  i.e.,  that  takes  account
not  of  the  .'esthetic  harmony  of  ideal  moments,  but  only  of
the  amount  of  efficient  force  brought  to  bear  severally
by  each  one.  The  conflicting  views  of  mental  life  are
reconciled  by  ours,  which  neither  makes  the  significant  Idea
float  in  isolation  as  a  boundlessly  shaping  power  above  the
low  sphere  of  the  ordinary  psychic  mechanism,  nor  is  satisfied
with  the  blind  labour  of  the  latter  alone  without  the  assump
tion  of  a  moulding  ideal  impulse.  On  the  contrary,  we  are
inclined  to  regard  the  Idea  itself  as  one  of  the  forces  that
co-operate  in  that  labour,  in  such  wise  that  by  its  nature,  like
every  original  force,  it  proceeds  independently  of  the  mechanism,
yet  becomes  effective  only  in  so  far  as  the  vehemence  of  its
effort  is  wholly  transformed  into  a  mechanical  equivalent  of
the  same  kind  as  other  efficient  forces.  P>ut  the  further
prosecution  of  these  thoughts  belongs  so  much  to  the  future
that  we  must  here  be  content  merely  to  have  vindicated
the  principle  of  our  theory ;  between  it  and  its  detailed
exposition  lies  a  wide  gulf,  which  may  be  consolatory  to
those  who  feel  that  this  repeated  setting  forth  of  convictions
that  have  been  already  indicated  leads  into  too  gloomy
regions.  For  we  ourselves  find  it  now  necessary  to  return  to
the  familiar  spectacle  of  experiences  in  which  the  observing
eye  may  be  able  to  detect  the  primary  moving  spring  of
mental  life.

C52  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

§  3.  That  eye  has  from  the  earliest  times  rested  on  its
object  with  too  lively  an  interest  to  permit  us  to  fear  that  the
oft-made  attempt  to  express  the  essence  of  mental  develop
ment  has  wholly  failed  to  reach  its  end.  Human  life  has
been  contrasted  with  the  dream-like  existence  of  the  animal
creation  —  that  ever  changing  is  mastered  by  changeful  im
pressions — as  a  lucid  waking  state,  which  by  infinitely  varied
processes  of  reflection,  each  one  going  beyond  the  other,  can
make  every  impression  and  every  state  the  object  of  new
knowledge,  and  thus  converts  vague  absorption  in  the  matter
of  the  world  of  thought  into  free,  living  possession  of  it.  In
contrast  with  the  animal's  confused  consciousness  distinguished
from  that  of  others  of  its  species  only  by  the  direct  sense  of
its  existence  and  by  reference  to  its  special,  and  yet  but  little
specialized,  experiences,  was  set  the  self-consciousness  of  human
personality,  with  its  sense  of  confronting  the  world  as  some
thing  purely  individual.  In  all  the  stages  of  human  develop
ment  was  seen  a  distinct  expression  of  the  mind's  vocation
not  only  to  receive  impressions  from  outward  things  and  to
react  on  them,  as  one  thing  is  acted  on  by  and  reacts  on
others,  but  in  this  mutual  relation  to  destroy  the  obscure
semblance  of  a  foreign  and  unintelligible  reality  by  which
animals  are  ever  surrounded.  The  inner  life  of  things  is
revealed  in  distinct  knowledge  to  the  human  mind,  and
it  understands  that  this  whole  Non-ego  of  things  is  but  a
disguised  consciousness  under  the  veil  of  which  it  finds  only
itself  and  the  characteristics  of  its  own  nature.  In  these
expressions  and  in  many  other  similar  ones  we  undoubtedly
feel  that  the  true  nature  of  the  mind  is  touched,  perhaps  with
some  tendency  to  over  -  estimation  of  its  merely  cognitive
activity ;  the  further  elaborations  at  least  of  such  theories
are  not  free  from  the  reproach  of  too  directly  reckoning
advanced  stages  of  culture,  which  under  favourable  conditions
our  development  may  reach,  as  its  natural  results  ;  finally,
perhaps  also  they  are  incomplete  in  so  far  as,  with  an  excusable
preference  for  the  bright  side  of  that  development,  they  took
account  too  exclusively  of  the  germ  of  good  in  the  mind,  and

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TlJtTH.  653

were  not  careful  to  delineate  it  so  as  from  its  natural  disposi
tion  to  render  intelligible  the  low,  perverse  and  evil  element,
whose  existence  experience  does  not  permit  of  our  denying.
These  considerations  cannot,  however,  prevent  us  from  enter
ing  on  the  inquiries  alluded  to,  at  any  rate  here,  where  our
primary  concern  is  with  the  distinction  by  which  human
intelligence,  apart  from  its  nature  in  other  respects,  excels  the
psychic  activity  of  animals.

While  in  inanimate  tilings  the  impression  made  in  the
preceding  moment  forms  one  of  the  causes  that  shape  the
subsequent  moment,  and  consequently  the  past  by  its  effects
lives  on  in  the  present,  undoubtedly  the  inner  life  of  animals
has  the  advantage  that  its  previous  states  not  merely  thus
prepare  the  later  ones,  but  are  frequently  retained  along  with
the  latter  as  conscious  states,  and  that  the  relation  between
the  two,  which  in  the  former  case  was  but  a  blindly  acting
power,  may  here  become  the  object  of  a  new  consciousness.
It  is  useless  to  try  to  determine  to  what  degree  of  delicacy
this  relational  activity  may  be  developed  in  the  lower  animals,
and  we  may  allow  that  it  perhaps  reaches  but  very  low  levels,
though  the  certainty  with  which  this  assertion  is  often  put
forward  rests  far  more  on  the  arrogance  of  human  pride  than
on  real  acquaintance  with  the  psychic  life  of  brutes.  Now
the  increase  which  the  capacity  thus  to  reflect  on  his  own
states  undergoes  in  man  cannot  be  looked  on  simply  a.s
increase  of  strength ;  that  a  relation  between  two  elements
is  more  or  less  carried  into  effect  is  not  a  distinct  thought,
unless  this  more  or  less  is  sought  either  in  the  varying  com
pleteness  of  the  actual  relations  between  all  the  points  of  the
content  that  can  be  brought  into  connection,  i.e.  in  the  many-
sidedness  of  the  action,  or  in  the  multiplied  repetition  of  the
same  act,  which  each  time  it-  is  repeated  becomes  its  own
object,  the  matter  of  a  new  train  of  reflection.

Thinkers  have  often  been  inclined  to  define  the  distinction
in  the  latter  form,  and  to  hold  that  animals  may  know  that
they  have  different  ideas,  and  may  be  aware  of  the  mutual
relation  subsisting  between  these  as  to  content;  but  that  this

654  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

is  the  utmost  extent  of  their  activity  ;  that  man  in  addition  to
this  knowledge  makes  his  ideas  the  subject  of  a  new  knowledge,
observes  himself  in  his  own  energy  of  comparative  thought,
again  observes  that  observation,  and  so  ad  infinitum  he  knows
about  the  knowledge  of  the  knowledge  of  his  knowledge,  till
he  himself  becomes  weary  of  climbing  higher  this  ladder  of
self-examination,  or  we  grow  weary  of  following  him.  Both
are  sure  to  happen  soon,  for  we  soon  become  convinced  that
as  we  rise  the  prospect  does  not  widen.  If  it  is  the  lowest
step  of  the  ladder  to  be  merely  the  scene  of  a  continuance
and  disappearance  of  immediate  impressions  that  controlled  by
mechanical  laws  become  linked  together  in  definite  relations,
unquestionably  the  apprehension  of  these  relations  as  subsist
ing  between  them  and  the  deliberate  combination  of  theiu
into  a  connected  idea  of  the  universe,  is  a  new  event  within
the  soul  and  a  second  step  in  its  development.  If,  further,
this  first  awakening  of  comparative  thought  is  a  movement  of
perception,  active  indeed,  but  confined  to  each  particular  case
and  not  distinctly  conscious  of  its  own  procedure,  the  reflection
that  embraces  in  itself  these  instinctive  efforts  in  their  con
nection  as  energies  of  the  Ego  and  detaches  them  in  their
universal  form  from  the  particular  cases  of  their  application,
undoubtedly  forms  a  new  third  step  of  development.  But  no
higher  round  brings  any  essential  modification  of  the  matter,
or  any  new  attitude  of  the  reflective  soul  in  respect  of  its
direct  states ;  each  successive  reflection  of  this  knowledge  in
higher  knowledge  but  obscures  the  outline  of  its  content,  as
each  repeated  reflection  of  the  same  image  does.  We  reach
further  only  by  making  use  of  the  second  of  the  above-
mentioned  points  of  view.  Conscious  as  we  become  in  the
endlessly  different  cases  of  external  impressions  of  the  ever
various  yet  essentially  similar  relating  activities  to  which  they
give  rise  within  us,  by  this  increasing  many-sidedness  of  our
reflection  we  advance  our  knowledge  both  of  things  and  of
ourselves,  and  then  think  to  have  gained  by  a  higher  point
of  view  what  we  really  owe  to  the  comprehensive  use  of
the  one.  Let  us  now  consider  how  these  three  various  steps

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  655

of  knowledge  are  related  in  the  psychic  life  of  brutes  and
of  men.

The  primary  element  of  all  inner  life,  the  direct  sensations
caused  in  us  by  the  outer  world,  we  have  assumed  to  be  alike
in  all  the  creatures  which  we  can  have  any  interest  in  com
paring  with  ourselves,  and  we  shall  not  here  go  back  upon  the
inquiry  into  them  already  made.  The  second  element  consists
of  those  forms  of  grouping  to  which  the  mechanism  of  the
inner  states  gives  rise,  and  by  which  these  impressions  are
combined  into  the  image  of  a  universe ;  forms  which  are  not
exercised  consciously  or  capriciously,  but  whose  incorporation
into  the  matter  of  sentience  is  an  event  taking  place  unknown
to  consciousness  and  coining  under  its  cognizance  only  as  u
complete  result.  Subsequently  in  scientific  thought  we  may
try  to  guess,  but  we  cannot  directly  perceive,  how  our
psychic  activity  arranges  in  time  and  space  the  manifold  of
impressions  ;  only  the  smooth  already  elaborated  space-image
of  the  world  comes  before  our  eyes,  and  we  fancy  that
we  perceive  directly  time  and  the  movement  of  events  in
it.  With  equally  unconscious  necessity  arise  in  us  ideas  of
tilings  in  general,  and  the  habit  of  adding  something  in
thought  to  every  change  of  the  present,  whence  it  lias  come,
whither  it  will  lead,  much  about  it  with  which  it  stands  in
contrast  as  its  abiding  environment.  Moreover,  all  com
parisons  and  distinctions  begin  with  the  apprehension  of
resemblances  or  differences  given  directly  in  perception.  They
may  become  more  distinct  with  the  aid  of  conscious  reflection;
but  relating  knowledge,  if  it  consists  in  the  consciousness  of
the  change  undergone  by  our  inner  life  in  passing  from  one
impression  to  another,  can  apprehend  the  nature  and  amount
of  this  change  only  as  a  result,  it  must  leave  it  to  the  un
conscious  mechanism  of  our  nature  to  produce  it.  Such
comparisons  as  whether  one  colour  is  like  or  unlike  another,
more  akin  to  a  third  or  to  a  fourth,  no  doubt  do  not  pertain
directly  to  sensation,  and  nevertheless  we  are  right  in  believ
ing  that  we  must  s«  c  relations  of  this  sort  and  cannot  grasp
them  by  thinking.  For  the  reciprocal  actions  by  which  our

656  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

psychic  states  of  excitation  corresponding  to  the  individual
colours  determine  our  judgment  as  to  their  likeness  or  their
degrees  of  affinity,  absolutely  elude  our  consciousness ;  only
the  completed  result,  the  content  of  this  judgment,  stands
before  us  as  a  simple  fact  of  sentience.  In  like  manner  wn
could  never  ascertain  the  proportional  magnitudes  of  two
visible  objects,  if  the  resources  of  calculation,  which  in  more
difficult  cases  one  calls  to  one's  aid,  did  not  always  depend
ultimately  upon  the  fact  that  the  similarity  or  dissimilarity  of
the  parts  of  the  standard  to  which  final  appeal  is  made  is
matter  of  direct  perception.  We  may  thus  say  that  within
the  whole  range  of  this  energy,  the  second  of  the  stages  of
development  which  we  distinguished,  consciousness  merely
coming  in  afterwards  takes  cognizance  of  relations  which  it
did  not  by  its  own  action  originate,  but  which  have  been
prepared  for  it  by  the  unconscious  mechanism  of  the  psychic
states.  And  of  these  relations,  by  which  first  of  all  the
confused  variety  of  continent  impressions  is  arranged  into  a
conception  of  the  cosmos,  not  one  can  be  denied  to  the  lower
animals  without  making  their  everyday  life  incomprehensible.
Apart  from  the  intuitions  of  space  with  which  they  are  as
familiar  as  we  are,  they  show  their  appreciation  of  size  by  their
fear  of  the  large,  their  contempt  of  the  small — their  habit  of
connecting  with  the  idea  of  the  present  that  of  its  immediate
consequence  by  their  understanding  of  threats — the  other
habit  of  seeking  the  quarter  whence  conies  anything  new  by
their  looking  round  on  receiving  unexpected  impressions.
Neither  the  nest  of  the  bird  nor  the  web  of  the  spider,  still
less  the  remedial  regard  to  circumstances  and  accidental
hindrances  displayed  by  both  in  their  construction,  can  be
explained  unless  it  be  granted  that  even  their  intelligence
compares  the  present  with  the  absent,  and  the  defective
reality  with  the  complete  image  of  what  is  sought,  perceives
the  difference,  and  recognises  in  a  third  thing  the  means  of
removing  it.

But  in  the  energy  and  versatility  with  which  these  powers
are  exercised  we  find  a  considerable  superiority  on  the  side  of

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  G57

man.  It  is  remarkable  to  how  great  au  extent  animals  are
roused  to  perception  and  action  moment  by  moment,  through
incidents  that  call  forth  a  selfish  interest — it  may  be  self-
preservation,  or  it  may  be  some  advantage — proper  to  their
species,  and  how  soon  even  just  after  the  first  steps  their  energy
begins  to  Hag,  in  consequence  either  of  the  stimulated  impulses
being  satisfied,  or  of  continued  occupation  with  the  object
producing  the  impression  yielding  no  new  ideas  in  close  con
nection  with  their  vital  necessities.  Thousands  of  phenomena
and  incidents  come  constantly  before  animals  that  not  merely
make  physical  impressions  on  their  organisms,  but  also  un
doubtedly  awaken  ideas  in  them ;  but  very  few  of  these
myriads  exercise  on  their  consciousness  the  stimulating  eil'ect
of  an  interest  such  as  could  excite  and  keep  up  a  continuous
and  gradually  expanding  train  of  thought.  We  would  deceive
ourselves,  no  doubt,  were  we  to  conceive  of  the  whole  psychic
life  of  animals  as  a  mere  instinct  that,  insensible  to  everything
lying  by  the  side  of  its  path,  was  always  making  straight  fur
ends  having  their  foundation  in  the  character  of  the  species;
doubtless  the  animal  soul  too  has  a  range  of  disinterested
activity  susceptible  to  the  manifold  changes  in  the  situations
of  life,  as  on  the  other  hand  human  life  is  not  all  self-
consciousness  without  a  shadow,  and  free  self-determination,
but  is  also  directed  by  many  instinctive  impulses  towards  the
organic  ends  of  the  species.  P>ut  animals  lack  in  their  percep
tion  the  forward  restless  curiosity  that  embraces  the  great  and
the  small,  the  near  and  the  distant,  with  equal  eagerness  and
without  respect  to  particular  advantages  ;  they  lack  also  in
their  practical  relations,  chiefly  in  consequence  of  the  other
deficiency,  any  impulse  towards  progress.  Whether  it  be
true  or  not  that  the  ape  does  not  strike  out  the  idea  of
keeping  up  the  fire  deserted  by  men,  at  which  he  warms
himself,  at  any  rate  we  never  observe  that  it  occurs  to  the
most  capable  of  animals  deliberately  to  apply  to  the  lettering
of  their  condition  the  dexterities  with  which  they  have
been  equipped  by  the  zeal  of  man.  A  universal  desire  after
knowledge  and  a  universal  tendency  towards  complicated
VUL.  i.  2  T

658  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

action are, in contrast to this one  -  sided and resultless
capacity  for  learning,  natural  instincts  of  the  human  mind.

It  would  be  a  mistake  to  ascribe  a  deeper  significance  to
this  original  impulse ;  neither  is  it  primarily  directed  towards
the  truth  of  things,  nor  is  it  aware  of  any  end  which  it  pur
sues  ;  like  the  physical  hunger  that  moves  the  organism,  it  is
the  soul's  unrest  seeking  occupation.  The  unsophisticated
healthy  human  being  is  everywhere  eager  for  impressions ;
first  his  senses  pursue  everything  that  offers  them  satisfaction,
then  his  thoughts  seek  all  that  can  add  to  his  stock  of  ideas
what  is  new,  and  yet  intelligible  through  its  capability  ot
linking  itself  on  to  what  he  already  possesses.  Savage  tribes
have  a  sensuous  delight  in  brilliant  variegated  colours,  in  noise
and  tumult,  in  all  that  yields  something  to  see  and  hear;  and
the  child's  undiscriminating  love  of  sweets  proves,  perhaps,
this  universal  craving  for  impressions,  rather  than  for  the
special  pleasure  of  the  palate ;  both  delight  in  tales  and
fables,  at  first  at  least,  without  asking  more  as  to  the  content
than  that  it  be  diverse  and  highly-coloured,  appeasing  with
its  changes  the  hunger  of  the  imagination.  This  universal
and  vague  pleasure  in  the  variety  of  things  becomes  in  the
course  of  life  limited  and  elevated ;  the  interest  in  particular
impressions  of  sense  that  daily  present  themselves  in  similar
forms,  is  transferred  to  their  varying  modes  of  combination ;
with  increased  personal  experience  of  the  joy  and  sorrow  of
life  those  perceptions  gain  a  preponderant  significance  which,
whether  as  causes  or  effects,  as  offering  resemblances  or
symbols,  recall  past  experience,  and  by  degrees  an  instructive
element  comes  to  be  required  in  impressions  in  addition  to  mere
entertainment.  But  this  restriction  of  the  course  of  thought
seldom  wholly  effaces  the  original  versatile  impressibility ;
partly  it  remains  in  the  unquenchable  curiosity  that  would
fain  be  everywhere  and  have  self  participator  in  or  at  least
spectator  of,  all  events  in  the  world,  partly  it  lives  on  in
nobler  form  in  the  romantic  spirit  of  the  poet,  that  without
seeking  special  knowledge,  without  pursuing  special  ends,
takes  pleasure  in  the  boundless  variety  of  things,  rejoicing

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  659

that  it  is  great  enough  to  supply  ever- fresh  sustenance  to  the
receptivity  of  the  mind.

And  equally  early  with  this  vivid  conception  of  the  world
can  be  traced  the  soul's  energetic  striving  after  alteration  of
and  dominion  over  it.  Our  interest  does  not  cleave  long  to
phenomena  that  never  change ;  only  the  more  highly  culti
vated  mind  can  in  imagination  lose  itself  in  them,  because  it
attaches  to  them  the  fulness  of  its  own  life.  All  that  falls
into  the  child's  hands  he  begins  to  work  at,  first  of  all
destructively,  partly  from  awkwardness,  partly  as  the  simplest
way  of  asserting  himself  in  opposition  to  the  objectivity  that
seems  a  barrier  to  his  own  being ;  but  soon  the  higher  mould
ing  impulse  comes  into  play  and  seeks  to  embody  its  own
fancy  in  a  permanent  and  positive  result.1  We  know  how
dissatisfied  a  child  is  with  a  toy  of  which  he  cannot  move  the
parts,  or,  at  any  rate,  which  he  cannot  move  as  a  whole  in
various  ways ;  and  we  know  how  early  and  how  universally
there  appears  in  children  an  inclination  to  alter  any  arrange
ment  of  things  which  they  happen  to  meet  with,  riot  because
the  arrangement  thwarts  some  want  which  they  feel,  but
because  it  is,  in  a  general  way,  a  thwarting  of  that  self-will
which  would  not  have  anything  arranged  independent  of  it.
And  this  appropriating  grasp  which  self  lays  upon  the  world
is  manifested  in  a  still  plainer  fashion.  For  even  less  than
the  fact  of  having  spent  his  labour  upon  it  is  enough  to  make
a  child  think  himself  entitled  to  the  possession  of  a  thing ,
whatever  his  eye  rests  upon  with  interest  seems  from  that  very
fact  to  belong  to  him  ;  much  more  is  this  the  case  with  anything
which  has  for  some  considerable  time  made  part  of  his  sur
roundings,  which  has  often  served  him  as  a  means  of  amuse
ment,  and  on  which  he  has  produced  and  from  which  he  has
received  impressions.  And  the  grown-up  man  copies  him  in
all  this  ;  the  chance  discoverer  of  some  natural  product  or
some  beautiful  view  feels  himself  an  intellectual  proprietor,
and  often  has  to  fight  against  a  temptation  to  resent  as  tres
pass  the  acquisition  of  like  knowledge  by  other  minds.  In

1  Miss  Hamilton's  translation  ends  here.

6GO  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

this  way,  indeed,  all  material  things — land  and  the  trees  which
grow  upon  it,  moveable  goods  and  animals — first  became  the
property  of  man  ;  and  it  was  only  from  the  conflicting  claims
of  many  to  the  same  thing  that  there  came  to  be  more  definite
forms  of  taking  possession.

All  this  restless  desire  of  action  would  very  soon  in  life
begin  to  put  hindrances  in  the  way  of  many-sided  develop
ment,  if  it  were  to  meet  early  with  objects  of  such  enduring
interest  as  to  fill  and  captivate  the  mind.  And  it  is
true  that  later  in  life  the  choice  of  a  profession  does  lead
to  such  a  narrowing  of  mental  activity  and  the  eventual
development  of  a  one-sided  instinct,  which  turns  away  with
out  sympathy  from  much  in  which  the  unsophisticated  mind
takes  a  genuine  interest.  But  it  has  not  been  left  for  us  to
point  out  how  important  as  the  condition  of  a  better  result  is
the  long  and  helpless  childhood  of  human  beings.  The
restless  mobility  of  a  child  is  hardly  likely  to  meet  with
anything  among  his  immediate  surroundings  to  cause  him
such  lasting  and  specially  intense  pleasure  as  to  become  a  per
manent  end  and  object  of  his  endeavours ;  and  even  were  this
to  happen,  lack  of  strength  would  hinder  him  from  the  ener
getic  and  steady  pursuit  of  such  ends.  Thus  he  accumulates
during  childhood  a  large  store  of  ideas  which  cannot  prompt
at  once  to  definite  actions,  the  carrying  out  of  which  would
occupy  the  rnind  to  the  exclusion  of  other  educative  impres
sions.  So  that  what  the  child  can  accomplish  is  but  formal
and  superficial  alterations  in  his  surroundings,  alterations
which  produce  no  striking  pleasure  of  the  senses,  no  satis
faction  of  pressing  wants,  and  but  little  apparent  result,  yet
are  all  the  more  productive  of  an  enormous  number  of  new
perceptions  of  things  and  new  ideas  of  the  connection  between
their  varying  states.  Human  childhood  is  not  merely,  like
the  sportive  youth  of  animals,  a  merry  holiday-time  of  sense-
enjoyment,  it  is  also  a  time  of  learning  and  of  poetry ;  poetry
that  is  childish  indeed,  but  yet  genuine  poetry,  which  with
wonderful  flexibility  and  absence  of  any  profound  sensuous
interests,  enters  into  the  relations  of  things  with  heart  as

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TKUTII.  6G1

•well  as  intellect,  and  sheds  a  radiance  upon  succeeding  life,
the  brightness  of  which  fades  but  slowly  into  "  the  light  of
common  day."

vj  4.  The  multifarious  knowledge  so  acquired  seems  at  first
sight  to  have  no  value  except  as  a  store  of  means  which  may
be  used  for  the  attainment  of  ends  in  later  life.  lUit  if  we  look
away  for  a  moment  from  the  fact  that  the  distinctive  glory  of
man  does  not  consist  in  his  superior  cleverness,  in  mere  cognition
no  matter  what  its  content,  but  depends  to  a  very  great  extent
upon  the  worth  and  the  many-sided  significance  of  the  content
of  our  philosophy — if,  I  say,  we  look  away  from  this  fact,  we
shall  see  that  the  acquisition  of  a  wide  and  varied  store  of
ideas  is  obviously  advantageous  to  the  mere  formal  perfecting
of  human  intelligence.  It  is  an  idle  superstition  to  imagine
that  man  would  be  raised  to  a  degree  of  infinite  superiority
above  the  brutes  simply  by  his  innate  faculty  of  combining
perceptions,  even  if  the  circumstances  of  his  life  should  bu
such  as  to  make  his  perceptions  most  meagre  and  monotonous  ;
it  is  only  by  exercise  on  the  materials  of  experience  that
these  very  modes  of  combination  are  themselves  developed,
and  when  it  seems  as  though  the  poverty  of  external  percep
tions  did  not  much  hinder  their  unfolding,  there  is  a  large
amount  of  compensation  by  means  of  education,  which  we
are  apt  to  overlook,  and  this  supplies  innumerable  traditional
starting-points  for  reflection  which  tin;  external  life  does  not
furnish.  Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  for  a  short  time  to
this  gradual  development  of  intelligence.

The  earliest  stages  of  this  development  are  almost  alike
in  man  and  brute.  As  long  as  the  many-coloured  surface
presented  in  the  field  of  vision  remains  motionless  and
unchanged,  it  can  furnish  no  occasion  to  an  intuiting  mind
to  break  up  the  picture  into  a  multiplicity  of  single  figures.
And  this  would  be  the  case  even  though  the  mind  should  !>.•
predisposed  to  analysis — unguided,  however,  as  yet  by  any
previous  experience.  It  is  movement  which,  disturbing  the
previous  outlines  and  arrangement,  first  directs  the  eye  to
some  individual  form  that,  with  ail  its  parts  continuing

662  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

unchanged,  detaches  itself  from  its  surroundings,  and  whilst
the  eye  follows  it,  gains  in  clearness  as  a  steady  identical
object,  compared  with  the  changing  and  mutually  obscuring
backgrounds  over  which  it  passes.  Thus  arise  images  of
things,  in  brutes  as  well  as  in  men ;  but  the  latter,  in  dis
tinguishing  them  by  names,  express  a  concomitant  feeling
occurring  at  an  early  stage,  the  existence  of  which  in  brutes
we  doubt — the  feeling  that  not  only  does  the  manifold  in
every  such  image  exist  together  as  a  matter  of  fact,  but  also
that  the  parts  belong  to  each  other  by  virtue  of  the  internal
unity  of  a  whole  made  up  of  parts,  not  through  the  mere
external  unity  of  a  heap  which  simply  contains  a  quantity.
Now  the  perceptible  world  consists,  not  of  innumerable
isolated  objects  which  cannot  be  compared  one  with  another,
Lut  of  manifold  combinations  of  impressions  which  fall  into
a  small  number  of  groups,  none  of  which  can  be  expressed  in
terms  of  any  other.  Even  immediate  perception,  indeed,  in
some  cases  distinguishes  only  imperfectly  between  two  very
nearly  related  members  in  such  a  group  or  series,  for  instance
between  two  shades  of  the  same  colour  or  two  tones  of  nearly
the  same  pitch,  and  the  distinction  is  more  difficult  to  seize
when  some  time  has  elapsed  between  the  iirst  and  the  second
of  two  such  sensations,  and  we  have  to  trust  to  memory.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  regards  many  related  members  of
any  one  of  these  series,  their  likeness  stands  out  with  unmis-
takeable  clearness  in  intuition,  this  likeness  being,  at  the  same
time,  inseparable  from  an  equally  obvious  unlikeness  between
the  two.  What  is  common  to  red  and  blue,  that  in  virtue  of
which  they  are  both  colours,  cannot  be  separated  from  that
which  distinguishes  the  one  from  the  other,  making  red  to  be
red,  and  blue  to  be  blue  ;  but  though  such  a  separation  be
impossible,  our  vivid  sense  of  the  likeness  which  exists
between  the  two  is  shown  by  their  common  designation  of
colour.  And  as  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  case  of
sounds,  tastes,  smells,  and  the  sensations  of  touch,  groups  of
general  ideas  are  formed,  and  the  content  of  each  of  these  is
not  produced  by  the  combining  activity  of  thought,  and  can  be

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  603

intuited,  not  in  a  condition  of  isolation,  but  only  as  belonging
tu  those  various  examples  of  which  it  is  directly  felt  to  be  the
unconipoundod  and  common  feature.  Simultaneously  with
such  groups  and  favoured  by  the  easy  coalescence  of  related,
though  not  exactly  similar,  features  in  the  production  of  one
impression,  there  is  formed  that  other  kind  of  general  images
in  which  the  parts  of  a  manifold  remain  distinct  although
bound  up  together.  These  images  are  of  objects  such  as  have
been  repeatedly  presented  by  perception  in  a  variety  of
examples,  and  the  individual  outlines  of  which  seem  to  have
combined  (through  the  cancelling  of  slight  differences  and
the  accentuation  of  features  common  to  all)  in  the  formation
of  a  kind  of  generic  image.  In  all  this  considered  in  itself
there  is  nothing  by  which  human  intelligence  may  be  dis
tinguished;  there  is  no  doubt  that  similar  general  images
occur  among  the  ideas  of  which  a  brute  is  percipient ;  some
such  it  must  have  in  order  that  it  may  be  able  to  recognise
its  enemies  or  the  means  by  which  it  may  satisfy  its  wants ;
for  the  examples  of  both  which  occur  in  its  experience  are
only  similar,  not  exactly  alike,  and  in  that  fear  of  the  future
which  brutes  sometimes  betray,  it  certainly  can  l»e  only  such
indefinite  general  images  of  either  enemies  or  wants  that  hover
before  them.  There  is  one  single  feature  here  which  may  be
peculiar  to  human  ideation  ;  that  is,  the  new  impression  not
only  calls  up  again  in  our  remembrance  as  an  accompaniment
th»»  general  image  which  it  resembles,  but  this  general  image
may  be  looked  upon  by  us  as  a  lawgiving  type,  which  points  out
how  the  characteristics  of  any  perception  are  to  be  combined,
or  as  the  abiding  and  essential  nucleus  to  which  at  different
times  different  definite  properties  may  be  attached.

In  this  lies  the  only  differentiating  characteristic  which  dis
tinguishes  the  concepts  of  human  thought,  that  is,  the  concepts
which  actually  arise  in  our  unsophisticated  intuitions  of  the
world,  independent  of  that  higher  elaboration  which  disciplined
thinking  seeks  to  give  them,  and  often  erroneously  imagines  to
exist  in  them  already.  There  are  many  words  to  which  in
ordinary  usage  there  is  attributed  a  meaning  even  cruder  than

664  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

that  of  the  unsophisticated  mode  of  thought  \ve  have  referred
to.  He  who  speaks  of  Nature,  or  Life,  or  History,  brings
together  under  each  name  an  indefinite  multitude  of  individual
events  with  which  he  is  but  very  imperfectly  acquainted.
He  is  aware  at  the  same  time  that  each  multiplicity  is  also  a
unity,  but  still  he  does  nothing  consciously  to  determine  the
form  of  this  unity  by  any  method  which  he  can  specify.  And
even  where  this  does  happen,  as  in  using  the  proper  names  of
persons  (in  which  case  we  think  of  the  generic  image  of  man
as  the  type  according  to  which  the  characteristics  of  the  in
dividual  are  combined),  this  enlightening  and  form-determining
activity  of  ideation  is  nowhere  complete  or  susceptible  of
completion.  For  this  image  of  man,  by  which  we  here  seek
to  introduce  clearness,  wants  a  fresh  elucidation,  in  order  that
it  may  be  shown  how  its  own  constituent  parts  are  bound
up  into  a  whole.  We  furnish  this  explanation  by  bringing
forward  the  still  more  general  image  of  animal,  according  to
which  the  characteristics  of  man  are  combined.  We  see
how  this  process  is  carried  still  farther  ;  if  a  definition  seeks
to  determine  by  its  own  inner  law  of  formation  that  which  is
immediately  given,  referring  from  this  law  to  the  more  general
species  or  genus,  it  merely  pushes  aside  the  greater  part  of
the  work  to  be  done  as  if  it  had  been  done  already.  What
it  relies  upon  is  that  the  natural  mechanism  of  the  train  of
ideas  will  have  already  produced  in  every  consciousness
intuitional  and  intelligible  images  of  this  more  general  species
or  genus,  from  which  the  definition  may  now  start,  completing
the  special  image  of  that  particular  kind  which  happens  to  be
in  question,  by  the  addition  of  its  own  distinguishing  marks.
It  is  clear,  meanwhile,  that  the  further  removed  general  ideas
are  from  immediate  perception  of  an  individual  object,  the  less
can  we  reckon  upon  their  completeness  and  clearness,  and
upon  general  agreement  concerning  their  content ;  on  the
other  hand,  in  unartificial  modes  of  thought,  every  notion  will
be  clearest  when  it  only  appeals  to  that  generic  image  which
is  one  degree  more  general  than  itself,  and  the  essential
features  of  which  are  present  to  every  mind  with  tolerable

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TliUlII.  GG5

completeness  and  accuracy.  Now  it',  taking  this  more  g
image  as  our  basis,  we  are  to  till  in  the  particular  features  of
the  individual  object,  each  of  the  general  characteristics  of  the
first  would  require  a  special  and  particular  modification  before
it  could  be  regarded  as  a  characteristic  of  the  second  ;  fur
instance,  every  feature  of  the  general  type  of  animnl  would  in
the  particular  species  man  have  a  special  human  character.
]>ut  instead  of  this  task,  which  even  science  could  never  fulfil,
both  logical  definition  and  ordinary  thinking  must  be  content
to  lay  stress  on  one  or  a  few  characteristic  features  of  man,
which  distinguish  him  from  other  kinds  of  animal,  leaving  the
combination  of  these  features  with  the  other  properties  to  be
effected  by  a  kind  of  vague  general  impression,  in  just  the
same  way  as  the  significance  of  the  higher  concept  aninud  was
originally  left  to  be  settled  by  another  such  vague  impression.
So  little  is  it  the  case  that  we  can  extract  from  our  ordinary
concepts  a  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  they  have  been
formed;  they  even  seem  to  be  adapted  rather  to  distinguish
their  object  from  what  it  is  not,  than  to  teach  what  it  really
is,  since  for  the  most  part  they  merely  combine-  with  some
wholly  unanalysed  general  impression  the  vague  remembrance
of  a  universal  to  which  it  is  subordinate,  and  some  few  dis
tinctive  marks  which  prevent  its  being  mistaken  for  something
else.  That  even  this  is  at  any  given  time  dependent  upon  the
then  existing  condition  of  knowledge,  that  as  experience  grows,
on  the  one  hand  some  marks  formerly  regarded  as  distinctive
are  dropped,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  universal  becomes
differently  and  more  precisely  determined  —  that,  finally,
pressed  by  the  special  needs  of  investigation  and  of  everyday
reflection,  these  ordinary  concepts  are  forced  to  attempt  an
ever  deeper  search  into  and  explanation  of  the  unanalysed
fulness  of  their  own  meaning  —  all  this  no  more  needs  to  be
supported  by  proofs  than  does  the  oft-repeated  observation
that  this  task  of  remodelling  is  one  that  can  never  l>e  com
pleted,  and  that  thus  our  concepts  must  remain  the  ever-
changing  and  ever-developing  creatures  of  thought

liut not only  do they,  in  the course of this progressive

666  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

development,  at  last  reach  a  degree  of  perfection  which  is
permanently  denied  to  the  thought  of  brutes  ;  they  are  also
unequivocally  distinguished  from  general  images  (which  are
lor  brutes  what  concepts  are  for  us)  by  this  essential  feature,
noticed  above,  that  in  our  thought  the  universal  is  related
to  the  particular  as  its  formative  law.  This  habit  of
thought  may  be  difficult  to  carry  out  in  individual  cases,  and
perilous  in  many  of  its  applications.  Still,  if  taken  in
conjunction  with  the  simpler  thought  of  whole  and  parts  by
which  the  idea  of  a  number  of  things  happening  to  exist
together  is  changed  into  the  idea  of  their  belonging  to  one
another,  the  habit  appears  as  a  fresh  expression  of  the
mind's  tendency  always  to  seek  for  connection  and  order  in
phenomena,  although  perhaps  not  always  seeking  them  in
quite  the  right  way.  But  this  feeling  after  unity  attaches  as
powerfully  to  the  most  obscure  as  to  the  most  developed
concepts,  and  the  assumption  that  the  world  and  all  that  is  in
it  can  only  be  understood  by  means  of  a  comprehensive  and
ordered  system  of  genera,  species,  and  sub-species,  is  so  far
from  being  an  artificial  product  of  disciplined  reflection  that  it
has  become  as  it  were  a  part  of  men's  everyday  life.  I  am
not  referring  to  the  charm  which  the  very  name  of  a  thing
exercises,  and  the  way  in  which  the  mere  pronouncing  of  its
name  seems  to  make  that  known  which  was  before  unknown,
simply  because  an  assurance  is  thereby  given  that  the  thing
has  its  place  in  relation  to  some  universal.  I  only  wish  to
remind  the  reader  of  the  ease  with  which  a  thirst  for  know
ledge  is,  to  its  own  injury,  often  satisfied  by  being  merely
taught  how  to  bring  a  particular  case  under  its  universal ;  of
the  ineradicable  desire  to  make  events  and  conditions  intel
ligible  by  reference  to  their  place  in  some  system  of
classification,  even  when  it  happens  that  their  true  nature  can
only  be  understood  by  reference  to  the  co-operation  of  their
special  conditions  ;  of  the  whole  mass  of  timid  or  presumptuous
logic  which  has  introduced  such  a  variety  of  sophisms  into
the  treatment  of  Nature  and  of  life,  at  one  time  being
brought  to  a  stand  by  the  most  insignificant  distinctions  of

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  667

objects,  and  even  demanding  different  treatment  for  different
kinds  of  relations,  at  another  time  passing  lightly  over
innumerable  differences,  and  requiring  a  similar  treatment  of
everything  which  may  by  some  remote  possibility  be  brought
under  the  same  generic  concept.

And  these  phenomena  in  the  region  of  knowledge  have  an
important  counterpart  in  matters  of  practice.  We  require
that  all  actions  should  conform  to  some  rule,  belong  to  some
kind  or  order ;  the  very  terms  disorderly,  irregular,  testily
(quite  apart  from  moral  considerations)  our  disapproval  of
everything  which,  as  nondescript  and  aberrant,  refuses  to  fit
into  our  scheme  of  things.  The  egotism  of  individuals  bears
witness  to  the  importance  of  this  notion  of  classifiableness  by
the  very  contradiction  in  which  it  involves  itself;  no  one
likes  to  be  described  as  a  kind  of  man,  his  individuality  rises
in  lively  revolt  against  the  compulsion  of  a  standard  valid  i'or
all,  which  is  thus  applied  to  him  ;  but  t-very  one  is  willing
enough,  when  he  wants  to  justify  his  claims,  to  appeal  to  the
fact  not  only  that  he  is  a  man,  but  that  he  belongs  to  a
definite  and  favoured  kind  or  class  of  men.  Although  the
savage  tyranny  of  self-will  may  perhaps  in  dumb  actions  some
times  go  so  far  as  to  make  demands  upon  another  which  are
founded  solely  and  wholly  upon  individual  caprice,  it  is  very
rarely  indeed  that  such  demands  are  made  in  outspoken
terms,  and  not  explained,  on  some  sophistical  pretext,  as
deducible  from  something  universal  in  kind,  as  regards  man,
or  Nature,  or  circumstances.  It  was  not  when  moral  laws,
concerned  primarily  with  men's  deeds  and  dispositions,  wen*
supreme  over  all  alike,  but  under  the  influence  of  notions  of
kind,  of  class  and  rank,  that  the  first  foundations  of  the  social
fabric  were  laid.  The  first  thing  was  to  settle  each  one's
caste  and  status,  and  then  by  reference  to  these  to  determine
the  several  rights  and  duties  pertaining  to  him  as  a  man  ot
this  or  that  kind  and  condition.  How  widespread  is  even
now  the  deplorable  custom  of  letting  accidental  differences
of  social  position  harden  into  ineradicable  notions  of  class
distinction  and  difference  of  kind,  and  then  deducing  conse-

668  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

quences  from  them !  One  need  only  glance  at  the  great
stream  of  history  in  order  to  see  that  whenever  a  recasting  of
social  relations  has  been  in  question,  the  bent  of  mankind
towards  Doctrinairism  has  never  failed  to  come  to  the  front,
even  in  conjunction  with  absolutely  brutal  savagery.  One  of
the  most  important  results  of  civilisation,  is  a  capacity  for
distinguishing  between  the  cases  in  which  a  return  to  general
principles  is  necessary,  and  all  half-measures  disastrous,  and
those  in  which  we  are  just  as  clearly  required  to  put  up  with
irregularity,  to  regard  existing  circumstances  as  the  result  of
special  conditions,  and  to  remedy  their  defects  by  special
changes,  by  temporary  measures,  by  exceptional  treatment.
The  insight  that  can  do  this  is  rare ;  generally  the  more
uncultivated  a  man  is,  and  the  more  unfamiliar  the  new
vocation  to  which  he  may  be  called,  the  more  he  will  discover
an  all  -  systematizing  formalism,  a  soulless  preference  for
symmetrical  schemata ;  the  more  he  will  cling  to  paltry
symbols  destitute  of  poetry  or  depth  of  meaning,  and  tend  to
treat  everything  individual  as  nothing  more  than  an  instance
to  be  ranged  under  some  category.  But  a  pervading  sense  of
order  is  the  essential  feature  of  human  thought,  and  we  may
look  upon  all  the  one-sided  procedure  to  which  we  have
referred  as  an  effort  to  infuse  this  order,  in  its  simplest  and
crudest  form,  into  subjects  which  for  the  most  part  are  only
susceptible  of  a  much  more  refined  application  of  it.

§  5.  It  is  not  our  intention  to  pursue  those  further
transformations  of  the  forms  of  concepts  which  belong  to
science  and  not  to  everyday  life.  We  have  only  to  remember
that  the  general  image?  or  concepts  ot  events,  connections,
and  circumstances  arise  in  the  same  way  as  those  of  objects,
though  to  some  extent  with  the  greater  obscurity  and
uncertainty  which  the  less  independent  and  intuitional  nature
of  the  former  would  lead  one  to  expect.  But  we  cannot
admit  that  besides  these  concepts  produced  by  experience,
there  exist  in  the  mind  others  which  belong  to  it  previous  to
all  experience — innate  notions,  the  original  possession  of
which  endows  it  from  the  very  beginning  with  a  clear

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TKl'TII.  669

consciousness  of  the  rules  by  which  perceptions  are  elaborated
in  thought.  "We  have  already  decided  that  the  much-abusea
name  of  Innate  Ideas  can  apply  to  nothing  but  habits  of
action  which  are  a  necessary  product  of  our  mental  consti
tution,  but  are  primarily  unaccompanied  by  a  consciousness
of  their  object  and  of  their  own  significance,  and  that  it  is
subsequent  reflection  on  its  own  action  which  tir.st  makes
known  to  the  understanding  those  impulses  which  it  has
already  obeyed  in  innumerable  instances.  Much  has  been
said  of  pure  concepts  of  the  understanding,  which  the  human
mind  applies  as  its  own  original  possession  to  the  impressions
of  perception,  but  it  lias  not  been  pointed  out  in  what  way
they  could  be  thus  originally  contained  in  it,  since  it  may  be
easily  proved  that  neither  in  the  consciousness  of  a  child  mu
ni  that  of  the  uneducated  are  they  to  be  found  already
formed  as  distinct  ideas.  1'eople  have  hoped  that  it  would
be  possible  to  exhibit  the  whole  number  of  these  all  complete
either  in  a  tabular  scheme  or  in  a  consecutive  series,  and  yet
there  have  always  been  differences  of  opinion  as  to  what  are  to
be  reckoned  among  the  number  of  these  innate  necessities  of
thought ;  disputes  which  never  could  have  arisen  if  in  point  of
fact  this  body  of  truths  had  been  originally  implanted  in  every
mind,  instead  of  our  being  obliged  to  search  it  out  in  a  course
of  development  which  is  liable  to  error  and  uncertainty.

And,  finally,  we  may  remark  that  if  we  had  succeeded  in
finding  these  truths,  we  could  not  apply  to  them  any  phrase
which  would  be  less  happy  than  the  traditional  one  of  innate
ideas.  If  there  is  in  us  some  primitive  germ  of  truth  by
means  of  which  we  could  make  our  manifold  perceptions
essentially  coherent,  this  germ  must  be  given  in  the  form  of
judymcnts  showing  us  how  to  pass  with  correctness  and
inherent  necessity  from  the  content  of  one  perception  to  that
of  another  ;  such  a  germ  would  be  quite  useless  if  given  in
the  form  of  simple  notions,  with  regard  to  which  we  could
not  tell  what  use  we  ought  to  make  of  them.  And  even
in  the  form  of  judgments  (or,  more  properly,  prcjutlgmtnt*)
concerning  the  necessary  coherence  of  all  possible  experience,

670  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

the  majority  of  the  maxims  appealed  to  do  not  appear  as  known
and  recognised  standards  of  judging.  On  the  contrary,  they
influence  us  in  all  cases  as  unspoken  and  unconscious  presup
positions,  under  the  influence  of  which  we  do  as  a  matter  of
fact  carry  on  the  further  combination  of  perceptions  in  indivi
dual  instances,  doing  this,  however,  without  any  knowledge  of
the  maxims  themselves  and  their  essential  import.  Only  when
we  are  expressly  questioned  concerning  the  grounds  on  which
our  instinctive  judgment  about  things  depends,  as  well  as  our
conviction  of  the  truth  of  our  own  views  and  the  falsity  of  those
which  are  opposed  to  them,  only  then  is  it  that  these  pre-
judgments,  which  had  before  worked  unseen,  break  forth  into
the  light  of  consciousness.  And  then  we  find  that  some  few
of  them  press  themselves  upon  us  with  the  unmistakeable
clearness  of  necessary  truth  ;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  many,
when  we  attempt  to  express  them,  lose  the  undoubted  cer
tainty  with  which  as  unexpressed  prejudgments  they  had  led
us  ;  and  finally,  that  with  regard  to  many  others,  as  soon  as
we  seek  to  detach  them  from  the  objects  to  which  they  are
usually  applied,  and  to  express  them  generally,  they  stand
confessed  as  errors  the  falseness  of  which  could  not  have
remained  undetected  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  special  and
peculiar  properties  of  those  objects.

A  second  careful  glance  will  further  teach  us  that  even
those  maxims,  the  convincingness  of  which  is  not  so  evanes
cent,  are  of  very  various  origin.  Only  very  few  of  them  are
independent  of  all  definite  content  of  experience  in  such  a
way  as  to  appear  as  necessary  laws  of  any  imaginable  universe,
and  therefore  as  indispensable  conditions  of  thought  in  general ;
many  others  have  only  a  mediate  certainty,  and  seem  to  us  of
unquestionable  authority  merely  because  our  world  is  such  as
it  is.  In  these  cases  it  is  the  great  and  universal  forms  of
reality  that  have  impressed  us,  and  accustomed  us  to  regard
as  self-evident  and  necessary  that  which  as  a  matter  of  fact
•we  meet  with  always  and  everywhere.  And  finally,  we  may
easily  see  that  often  the  apparent  necessity  of  some  definite
behaviour  of  things  (which  we  find  expressed  in  other

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  G*71

maximsj  is  by  no  means  confirmed  by  the  inconceivability
ut  the  opposite,  and  thus  expresses  not  something  that
cannot  be  otherwise,  but  something  which  in  our  opinion
ourjht  to  be  thus,  and  would  be  absurd  if  it  were  otherwise.
In  these  cases  aesthetic  and  moral  activities  of  the  mind  have
been  working  secretly,  and  have  caused  us  to  look  upon
relations  which  correspond  to  our  ideal  of  a  perfect  world  as
necessary  laws  of  thought  in  any  actually  existing  world.
The  laws  of  Identity  and  Causation  may  serve  as  examples  of
the  first  of  these  groups  ;  the  idea  that  mass  is  necessarily
constant  and  matter  indestructible,  and  numerous  other
assumptions  that  we  make  concerning  natural  phenomena,
ure  illustrations  of  the  second  ;  men's  longing  for  soni'j
world-embracing  unity,  and  in  especial  their  reverence  for
the  notion  of  this  unity,  plainly  belong  to  the  third.  In
all  these  things  it  is  scarcely  ever  pure  intelligence,  whether
we  call  it  understanding  or  reason,  that  dictates  to  us  those
assumptions  which  we  regard  as  inviolable  ;  it  is  everywhere
the  whole  mind,  at  once  thinking,  feeling,  and  passing  moral
judgments,  which,  out  of  the  full  completeness  of  its  nature,
produces  in  us  those  unspoken  first  principles  to  which  our
perception  seeks  to  subordinate  the  content  of  experience.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  these  presuppositions  in  our  judg
ment  of  things  are  not  given  to  us  as  finished  instruments
which  we  owe  to  this  mind,  with  all  its  capacities,  but
untouched  as  yet  by  experience — in  which  case  they  would
be  us  it  were  the  result  of  a  harmony  produced  by  mind
among  all  the  demands  of  its  intelligent  (esthetic  and  moral
elements.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  actual  experiences
themselves  which  stimulate  the  mind  gradually  to  unfold  its
nature,  and  in  its  encounter  with  things  to  learn  those  modes
of  action  which  it  finds  necessary.  All  those  systems  which
have  imagined  that  they  could  exhibit  the  body  of  necessary
truth  as  an  isolated  and  complete  series  of  maxims  of
similar  origin,  have  instead  of  doing  this  made  a  collection
of  reflections,  the  production  of  very  various  periods,  which
the  human  mind  in  the  historical  course  of  its  develop-

C72  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

merit  had  learned  to  attach  to  the  material  of  external
perception  and  to  the  events  of  life.  Among  these  reflections
there  are  but  few  principles  to  be  found  which  can  be  re
garded  as  truths  that  originally  belonged  to  the  mind  as
truths,  that  is,  which  are  so  early  and  so  invariably  developed
in  every  mind  that  all  other  knowledge  is  acquired  by  their
help  and  influence.

Even  if  our  view  were  different,  we  should  be  constrained
to  limit  ourselves  to  a  small  number  of  examples,  since  our
present  object  is  not  to  set  forth  all  attainable  truth,  but  to
describe  the  manner  in  which  a  part  of  that  truth  is  attained
in  the  natural  course  of  human  development.  The  Law  of
Identity,  according  to  which  any  simple  object  of  thought  is
identical  with  itself,  and  the  Law  of  Causality,  according  to
which  every  change  must  have  a  cause,  both  belong  to  the
small  number  of  principles  referred  to  at  the  end  of  the  pre
ceding  paragraph.  Although  they  are  certainly  not  innate
in  the  mind  so  far  as  consciousness  of  them  goes,  yet
every  one  may  easily  be  brought  to  the  point  of  affirming
them,  however  awkwardly,  and  of  recognising  them  as
principles  of  knowledge  which  he  has  hitherto  unconsciously
followed,  and  which,  since  they  are  necessary,  he  will  still
continue  to  follow,  but  now  consciously.  Whence,  then,  are
these  principles,  and  whence  the  feeling  of  their  necessity  ?
Has  external  experience,  by  showing  us  that  things  continue
quietly  unchanged  as  long  as  they  are  lei't  to  themselves,  and
that  changes  frequently  accompany  their  conjunction,  accus
tomed  us  to  join  to  the  idea  of  every  individual  simple  object
an  expectation  that  it  will  remain  identical  with  itself,  to  the
idea  of  conjunction  an  expectation  of  change,  and  conversely
to  every  perception  of  change  the  thought  of  a  preceding
cause  ?  But  external  experience  presents  us  with  a  multitude
of  contradictory  cases  ;  cases  of  things  apparently  left  to
themselves  which  yet  do  not  remain  identical,  and  of  changes
of  which  the  causes  and  the  results  escape  us  ;  from  experi
ence,  therefore,  there  could  not  arise  a  necessary  law  of
thought,  by  which  modes  of  operation  that  (as  far  as

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  673

experience  goes)  belong  only  to  a  part  of  present  reality,
should  be  extended  to  the  whole  of  it,  and  to  every
imaginable  future.  But  if  we  employ  experiment  as  well
as  observation,  and  in  every  case  find  that  when  we  have
brought  about  certain  conditions  a  definite  result  follows,
have  we  not  here  at  once  the  inner  connection  between
condition  and  conditioned,  and  that  similarity  of  result
which  proceeds  from  similarity  of  conditions  ?  This,  how
ever,  would  only  justify  us  in  affirming  connection  between
those  pairs  of  events  between  which  our  experiment  showed  a
connection  ;  it  would  nut  justify  us  in  assuming  that  a
similar  connection  obtains  universally.  If,  therefore,  external
phaenomena  cannot  furnish  that  of  which  we  are  in  search,
let  us  turn  again  to  internal  phaenomena,  and  try  if  we  can
succeed  in  thinking  some  simple  definite  object  as  at  once
what  it  is  and  what  it  is  not,  or  as  changing  without  any
cause  of  change.  There  is  no  doubt  that  in  every  individual
attempt  of  this  kind  we  shall  fail,  whatever  may  be  the
simple  object  on  which  we  experiment  ;  but  in  itself  this
failure  at  any  given  moment  and  in  the  case  of  any  given
object,  by  no  means  proves  that  any  similar  attempt  at
another  moment  and  in  the  case  of  another  object  must  also
fail,  unless  there  is  something  which  justifies  us  in  regarding
every  single  one  of  these  cases  as  a  guarantee  for  all  imagin
able  cases.

Now  such  a  something  there  is,  and  it  is  nothing  else  than
the  very  Law  of  Identity  itself.  The  true  import  of  this
principle  must  be  grasped  and  trusted  by  consciousness  as  an
absolute  unconditioned  primary  and  necessary  truth,  before
there  can  be  any  question  of  our  being  impressed  with  the
universality  and  necessity  of  any  other  special  mode  of  com
bining  impressions,  resulting  from  the  mechanism  of  our
mental  constitution,  and  carried  out  at  first  unconsciously,  and
afterwards  with  conscious  perception.  The  necessity  of  the
principle  of  identity  cannot  be  proved  for  us  from  the  con
sideration  that  it  was  first  valid  in  us,  and  that  we  afterwards
became  conscious  of  it  in  the  attempt  to  act  in  opposition  to

V<>L.  i.  2  u

674  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

it.  On  the  contrary,  in  order  that  we  should  be  able  to
conclude  to  the  necessary  failure  of  all  such  attempts,  from
the  fact  that  they  have  failed  in  those  individual  cases  in
which  only  we  can  make  any  such  attempt,  with  this  or  with
any  other  necessary  law  of  thought,  \ve  must  presuppose  the
immediate  certainty  of  this  very  principle.  We  must  assume
it  to  be  certain  that  one  case  is  as  good  as  innumerable
similar  cases,  that  everywhere,  where  similar  conditions  recur,
similar  results  are  attached  to  them ;  we  must  be  certain  that
in  the  whole  constitution  of  our  own  mind,  as  wrell  as  in  that  of
the  things  which  are  its  objects,  there  is  a  truth  and  constancy
which  makes  everything  to  be  what  it  is,  which  produces  the
persistence  of  that  which  persists,  the  changeableness  of  that
which  changes,  the  contrariety  of  that  which  is  contrary  ;  a
truth  which  is  the  primary  condition  of  the  universality  and
necessity,  and  indeed  of  the  very  possibility  of  any  other
connection.  How,  in  fact,  could  we  imagine  a  connection  of
any  kind  between  two  things,  if  these  two  things  did  not,  by
the  fact  that  they  are  what  they  are,  or  become  what  they
become,  afford  to  the  relation  stretching  between  them,  as  it
were  fixed  points  of  support,  or  enable  it  to  follow  the  move
ment  of  the  things  in  any  definite  direction  ?  How  could  any
conclusion  of  ours,  or  any  result  in  Nature,  be  established,  if
that  which  is  or  which  becomes,  that  from  which  conclusion
or  result  must  flow,  at  the  same  time  were  or  became  some
thing  other  than  that  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  conclusion
or  of  the  result  ?

It  is  vain  to  hope  that  upon  the  assumption  of  universal  and
necessary  laws  actually  governing  the  mechanical  course  of  our
inner  life,  any  psychology  could  succeed  in  deducing  from  this
course  alone  the  unavoidable  recognition  of  their  necessity,  and
the  rise  in  our  minds  of  a  conscious  notion  of  necessity  ;  and
just  as  little  can  we  believe  that  the  soul  of  a  brute  is  fitted  to
produce  this  notion.  Kathcr  it  is  distinctive  of  the  mind  of  man
to  be  able,  by  reflecting  on  the  cognitive  acts  it  has  mechani
cally  executed,  to  discern  in  them  the  presence  of  laws  that  reach
out  indefinitely  beyond  the  particular  cases  in  which  internal

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TKUT1I.  C75

experience  finds  them  fulfilled.  l>y  such  reflection  it  is  that
we  become  aware  that  there  is  anything  at  all  to  be  called
Truth,  not  in  the  sense  of  an  agreement  between  our  mental
representations  ami  what  is  represented,  but  as  significant  of
a  logical  coherence  and  consequence  without  which  then*
would  be  nothing  to  represent  at  all,  but  only  a  confused
stream  of  disjointed  impressions,  with  no  ascertainable  connec
tion.  It  is  Truth  in  this  sense  that  secures  to  every  condition
its  legitimate  consequence,  to  every  phenomenon  the  coherence
and  fixity  of  reality  in  place  of  the  baseless  changefulness
of  a  shifting  dream  ;  and  in  general  to  every  question  of
the  inquiring  spirit  a  stable  standpoint  from  which  to  work.
In  the  fact  that  this  confident  certainty  of  the  existence  of
Truth  is  stirred  in  the  human  mind  when  it  reflects  upon  that
which  passes  within  it,  lies  one  of  the  earliest  manifestations
of  its  nature,  that  nature  by  which  it  is  fitted  for  Truth,  and
enabled  to  transform  a  mere  succession  of  ideas  into  Knowledge.
This  manifestation  is  one  which  has  indeed  a  correspondence
with  mechanical  action,  but  which  cannot  be  produced  by  it.
If  we  presuppose  this  one  characteristic,  we  can  understand
how  the  mind  is  afterwards  roused  by  experience  to  search  for
and  discover  individual  truths.  The  mind  takes  offence  at
every  phenomenon  of  both  inner  and  outer  experience  which
appears  to  contradict  that  steadiness  and  constancy  which  it
regards  as  the  very  essence  of  truth.  Hence,  by  combination
of  isolated  perceptions,  of  what  is  given  with  what  is  not  given,
of  what  is  present  with  what  is  past,  the  mind  gradually
learns  to  discover  the  more  definite  of  those  significant
universal  laws  which  must  be  of  supreme  authority  in  our
world  with  its  existing  characteristics,  as  soon  as  they  are
found  to  stand  the  test  of  that  all-important  standard  of  truth
above  referred  to.

§  6.  The  path  of  this  gradual  development  is  long,  and  the
goal  unattainable.  Ordinary  culture  often  deviates  from  it
by  tacking  its  reflections  on  to  fragments  of  experience  which
we  have  accidentally  encountered,  without  taking  any  com
prehensive  view  of  experience  as  a  whole,  and  by  carrying  on

676  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

disconnected  trains  of  thought  with  short-lived  interest  and
for  but  a  little  way,  undisturbed  by  any  idea  of  ultimately
harmonizing  them.  And  not  only  is  this  the  case,  but  science
itself  commits  many  errors  in  the  attempt  to  group  together
in  a  systematic  fashion  all  that  which,  through  the  medium
of  reality  and  in  virtue  of  the  unconditional  truth  already
referred  to,  has  become  for  us  a  necessity  of  thought.  Still
less  does  common  life  possess  the  universal  truths  ready
for  use,  and  least  of  all  has  it  a  thorough  consciousness  of
them.  Yet  a  haunting  conviction  of  the  existence  of  truth
pursues  men  everywhere,  and  even  where  there  is  no  abstract
notion  of  truth,  is  efficacious  as  the  unconscious  power  which
guides  the  workings  of  consciousness.  But  as  to  the  applica
tion  of  this  notion  which  should  be  made  in  the  case  of
individual  phsenomena,  we  are  only  too  often  deceived  by
the  complexity  of  the  pluenomena,  and  not  many  examples
are  needed  to  show  how  the  most  contradictory  ideas  are
associated  together  in  our  ordinary  consciousness,  because  of
our  misapprehension  of  what  it  is  that  we  are  really  seeking
for.

If,  in  order  to  avoid  confusing  complexity  in  any  given
content,  we  consider  something  which  is  quite  simple,  we
are  fully  justified  in  asserting  the  Law  of  Identity  with  refer
ence  to  it,  and  in  affirming  that  blue  is  always  blue,  and  red
never  anything  but  red.  But  alongside  this  conviction  there
go  on  undisturbed,  ideas  of  things  which  are  changed,  and
though  changed  remain  what  they  were,  of  substances  which
are  transformed  without  ceasing  to  be,  of  a  being  that  appears
and  that  both  is  this  appearance  and  is  distinct  from  it ;  in
fine,  of  subjects  which  are  sometimes  active  and  sometimes
passive,  without  being  deprived  of  their  identity  by  this
variety  of  predications  concerning  them.  I  do  not  exactly
mean  that  human  intelligence  errs  in  representing  things  thus,
but  that  moved  by  the  unanalysed  impressions  of  perceptions,
it  plainly  applies  the  principle  of  Identity  in  a  confused  and
contradictory  way,  without  justifying,  by  analysis  of  given
material,  the  appropriateness  of  the  expressions  which  it  uses

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  677

and  their  compatibility  with  that  principle.  And  when  rising
reflection  Incomes  conscious  of  these  contradictions,  it  often
falls  into  the  opposite  error,  and  seeks  in  the  general
principle  information  concerning  the  nature  of  things,  which
the  principle  itself  does  not  contain,  and  can  only  procure  on
condition  of  being  thoughtfully  and  justly  applied.  When
reflection  makes  this  mistake,  it  may  deny,  as  contradictory,
all  possibility  of  becoming,  of  change,  and  of  action  ;  as  if
the  law  of  Identity  forbade  that  anything  should  become,  or
that  what  is  changeable  should  be  permanent,  when  all  that
it  maintains  is  merely  that  of  what  is  becoming,  as  long  as  it
is  becoming  we  can  predicate  only  that  it  is  becoming,  and  not
that  it  z'.s,  and  that  it  is  not  appropriate  to  regard  the  change
able  as  unchangeable.  And  however  immediately  these  very
simple  applications  may  spring  from  the  original  significa
tion  of  the  law,  they  yet  require  a  special  justification  which
ordinary  thinking  for  the  most  part  does  not  trouble  about.

K<jually  crude  are  our  ideas  of  the  Causal  Connection.
Sometimes  they  develop  to  the  contradictory  thought  that
everything — not  only  the  change  of  that  which  exists,  but
also  original  existence  itself — must  have  a  cause,  and  this
cause  another  cause,  and  so  on  to  infinity.  Sometimes  we
find  associated  with  them  the  idea  of  Chance,  which  permits
individual  events  to  occur  causelessly.  On  the  whole,  the
ordinary  notion  of  Cause  and  Effect  is  but  a  clumsy  ex
pression  of  the  necessary  law  which  requires  us  to  connect
changes  with  conditions,  and  is  plainly  enough  derived  from
experience  of  our  own  activity,  and  the  contrast  of  the  living
nature  that  acts  and  the  lifeless  thing  that  suffers.  In  cases
where  we  feel  sure  that  we  cannot  presuppose  any  internal
activity,  \ve  seek  external  causes  of  change ;  but  where  we
suspect  such  activity,  we  do  not  look  for  any  external  cause,
for  here  what  happens  seems  to  need  no  explanation.  And
since  the  inner  nature  of  tilings  is  to  a  great  extent  unknown
to  us,  we  are  in  most  cases  at  liberty  to  accept  this  solution.
The  great  number  of  intransitive  and  reflective  verbs  which  we
possess  is  a  speaking  proof  of  the  extent  to  which  our  ordinary

678  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

notion  of  cause  has  beeii  developed.  We  say,  for  instance,  that
plants  grow  and  clouds  gather,  that  it  is  getting  cold,  that  the
wind  blows  (bcwtgt  sich),  that  mists  fall  (scnken  sich).  So  for  us
this  kind  of  neutral  action  which  explains  itself,  this  emanating
and  appearing,  goes  on  unquestioned,  until  other  experiences
make  plain  to  us  its  dependence  upon  external  influences,
and  then  just  as  one-sidedly  there  corne  to  the  front  the
contrasted  ideas  of  causes  and  forces  by  which  change  is  made
apparent  or  produced  in  things.  Here,  as  before,  the  thought
in  question,  which  is  linked  too  directly  to  intuition,  is  not
followed  by  analysis.  Ordinary  thought  is  thus  very  far
removed  from  such  a  notion  of  a  law  of  Causation  as  may  be
taken  up  and  used  by  science ;  even  a  regularity  of  recurrence
of  some  natural  phenomena  does  not  lead  easily  to  its  develop
ment,  but  is  often  overlooked,  from  its  extreme  familiarity.
The  wants  of  man,  by  forcing  him  to  mechanical  contrivances,
are  much  more  efficacious  in  producing  insight  into  the  true
nature  of  causal  dependence,  and  from  a  consideration  of  the
rough  instruments  which  he  makes,  man  advances  gradually,
till  even  in  investigating  the  organic  world  and  the  workings
of  his  own  mind,  he  brings  in  this  question  as  to  the  ground
of  the  uniformity  among  effects,  and  of  their  quantitative
variations.

We  cannot  here  follow  the  development  of  man's  natural
Metaphysics,  which  is  at  first  very  untrustworthy  ;  the  progress
of  science  and  the  development  of  its  fundamental  Ideas  are
reserved  for  later  consideration,  because  they  require  to  be  pre
ceded  by  a  notice  of  the  historical  conditions  under  which  they
unfolded  arid  progressed.  If  we  would  seek  for  an  example
of  the  average  height  to  which  in  a  general  way  refinement
of  knowledge  may  attain  in  the  development  of  the  human
mind,  in  cases  where  it  is  stimulated  by  nothing  beyond  the
influences  of  ordinary  life,  we  may  find  one  in  the  organization
of  language.  I  am  not  here  referring  to  the  wealth  of  words
and  the  multitudinous  expressions  for  abstract  thoughts  with
which  the  reflection  of  individuals  has  enriched  lanima^e,  and

O O *

which  as  far  as  the  unlettered crowd are concerned either

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  6V  9

remain  wholly  unknown,  or  become  current  in  common  use
only  after  degradation  of  their  meaning ;  what  I  refer  to  is
the  grammatical  and  syntactical  organization  of  language.  "\Ye
find  that  this  presents  from  the  earliest  times  and  among  the
most  various  peoples,  on  the  one  hand  just  as  decidedly  ;i
certain  agreement  in  the  way  of  apprehending  things,  as  on
the  other  hand  many  national  peculiarities  to  which  scope  is
given  within  the  lines  of  this  agreement.  That  there  can  be
words  at  all  which,  as  names,  denote  some  particular  content,
is  only  made  possible  by  a  consciousness  that  every  such
content  is  something  that  remains  the  same,  that  is  constant,
and  therefore  nameable.  If  there  are  everywhere  forms  for
substantives,  verbs,  and  adjectives,  this  shows  that  the
mind  must  have  developed  everywhere  the  notions  of
Tiling,  of  Incoming  —  i.e.  of  relating  activity  —  and  of
(Duality,  and  that  it  is  accustomed  to  connect  among  them
selves  those  objects  which  it  has  apprehended  under  the  form
of  these  notions.  The  article  or  pronoun  shows  moreover
that  the  content  referred  to,  whether  it  be  thing,  or  event,  or
quality,  is  apprehended  in  the  unity  of  a  cohering  whole,  and
neither  Nominative  and  Accusative,  nor  any  other  forms
which  are  of  similar  importance  in  syntax,  would  be  possible
unless  they  had  been  preceded  in  consciousness  by  tin-
contrast  between  the  Subject  and  Object  of  actions  —  tin-
usual  form  of  the  common  notion  of  Cause.  If  we  follow
further  the  significations  of  words,  and  see  how  the  terms  lor
inner  dependence  and  abstract  relations  go  back  to  intuitions
of  movement,  and  are  borrowed  from  relations  in  Space  and
Time — if  we  see,  further,  how  far  the  symbolizing  activity
of  language  has  gone  by  its  subtle  instinct  in  discovering
analogies  in  the  region  of  perception  for  every  content  of
thought  which  transcends  experience — if  we  do  this,  we  shall
be  convinced  that  that  struggle  of  the  untrained  intelligence
towards  knowledge  which  is  embodied  in  language,  and  <»n
account  of  which  man  regards  himself  as  a  born  philosopher,
consists  chiefly  in  the  refen-nc •«•  of  multitudinous  cases  to  s\
small  number  of  comprehensive  typical  examples.  The

680  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  IV.

elucidation  of  one  example  by  another  that  lies  nearer  to
intuition,  long  remains  a  favourite  resource  of  the  undisciplined
understanding ;  the  elucidation  of  all  examples  by  their  common
law  is  first  attempted  by  science.  Now  in  this  respect  the
stock  of  knowledge  embodied  in  language  is  altogether  above
the  level  of  the  untutored  intelligence  of  the  individual ;  the
clumsy  use  which  an  uneducated  person  makes  of  the  words
which  he  finds  ready  to  his  hand,  shows  that  instead  of  his
comprehending  their  logical  and  syntactical  value  with  intelli
gent  insight,  he  is  himself  being  moulded  by  them.  On  the
other  hand,  language  is  often  a  hindrance  to  the  cultivated
understanding,  because  it  does  not,  with  sufficient  pliability,
follow  thought  in  dealing  with  abstractions  not  capable  of
being  intuited  ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  higher  too  than
even  such  a  mind,  because  of  the  infinite  wealth  of  connections
which  it  has  observed  and  distinguished,  to  think  out  and
analyse  all  of  which  would  be  a  task  that  the  individual  must
despair  of  accomplishing.

Thus  there  arises  in  us  the  dawn  of  a  Knowledge  of  Truth,
partly  through  the  attempt  to  attain  ends  by  the  help  of
tilings,  partly  through  the  stimulus  which  we  receive  from  the
educative  influences  of  speech.  This  dawn  may  grow  to
fuller  day  under  favourable  conditions — if,  after  the  satisfac
tion  of  the  most  pressing  wants  of  existence,  the  desire  to
beautify  and  enrich  life  leaves  time  for  the  quieter  impulse  of
investigation  to  work — to  lose  itself  in  the  course  of  events
in  the  most  various  ways,  arid  to  become  conscious  how  com
prehensive  and  inevitable  is  the  network  of  relations  which
embraces  all  things.  Then  as  our  search  elucidates  things,  we
find  that  a  chain  of  proof  may  travel  far  and  wide  from  its
point  of  departure  in  sense,  i.e.  from  a  fact  of  perception,
and,  guided  by  universal  laws,  may  be  carried  on  within  the
mind,  and  yet  that  its  conclusion  (like  a  projectile  which
describes  a  wide  curve)  may  correspond  exactly  and  certainly
with  some  new  fact  of  sense-perception.  Though  the  road
which  our  thought  took  was  different  from  that  along  which  the
event  travelled,  yet  both  finally  converged,  and  it  seems  to

KNOWLEDGE  AND  TRUTH.  <>81

us  as  though  the  connection  between  all  parts  of  the  world
were  so  intimate  that  every  point  may  be  reached  from  every
other  in  a  thousand  ways,  the  dominion  of  this  all- pervading
connection  being  nowhere  interrupted.  Human  culture  dues
not  everywhere  advance  so  far,  but  at  however  low  a  stage
it  may  be  arrested  by  unpropitious  circumstances,  yet  at
least  as  Nemesis  or  Fate,  or — lower  .still — in  the  distorted
forms  of  superstition,  clinging  to  ghosts  and  magic,  this  heri
tage  of  the  human  mind,  the  inborn  certainty  that  necessity
reigns,  comes  to  light  somewhere  or  other  in  the  course  of
reflection,  just  as  it  did  too  throughout  sense- perception,  as
we  previously  noticed.  Thus,  then,  the  difference  between
human  intelligence  and  tin-  idention  of  brutes  is  very
striking  in  respect  of  the  immeasurably  wider  intellectual
horizon  of  the  former,  but  there  are  no  .special  forms  of
connection  which  are  peculiar  to  human  thought.  Unites,
however,  in  the  succession  of  their  ideas  are  simply  coerced
by  those  laws  which  we,  while  also  governed  by  them,  yet
recognise  as  necessarily  true,  and  ourselves  make  use  of  for  the
extension  of  our  knowledge,  and  for  the  establishment  of  science.
Nor  could  it  be  otherwise,  Unites  destined  to  live  in  the  same
n-orld  as  ourselves,  obliged  to  accommodate  themselves  to  it,
exposed  to  the  influence  of  the  same  outward  conditions,  and
reacting  upon  them  with  not  dissimilar  activity,  require  that
the  connection  of  impressions  and  the  consequences  flowing
therefrom  should  in  them  follow  the  same  laws  as  in  us,  and
lead  to  corresponding  results,  and  that  hence  in  their  minds
thought  should  work  in  the  same  way  as  in  ours.

CHAPTER V.

CONSCIENCE AND MORALITY.

The  Philosophy  of  the  Feelings — The  Meaning  of  Conscience— Pleasure  and
Pain  as  Actual  Motives  to  Action— Pleasure  and  the  Good — The  Notion  of
Worth  and  its  Connection  with  the  Notion  of  Pleasure — Pleasure  as  an
Ethical  Principle — Emotions  of  St-nse — Emotions  of  Self — Egoism  and
Universalism — Development  of  Morality — Basis  and  Content  of  Morality —
Capacity  of  Becoming  Conscious  of  the  Infinite  the  Distinguishing
Characteristic  of  the  Human  Mind.

§  1.  TT OWEVER  vast  maybe  the  body  of  truth  which
-•— *-  men,  stimulated  by  a  thirst  for  knowledge,  may
have  acquired — to  whatever  degree  of  refinement  insight  into
the  connections  between  phenomena  may  have  developed,  and
though  under  favourable  conditions  it  may  have  risen  to
scientific  consciousness  of  the  laws  of  those  phenomena —
yet,  after  all,  the  genuinely  human  character  of  our  philo,
sophy  consists  much  less  in  the  extent  and  clearness  of  its
intellectual  horizon,  than  in  the  warmth  of  colouring  com
municated  to  it  by  the  unceasing  interest  of  our  feelings  in  its
development.  The  soul  receives  joy  and  sorrow  through
impressions  from  the  outer  world,  and  finds  its  expectations
and  efforts  at  one  time  deceived  and  hindered  and  at  another
time  satisfied  and  favoured  by  circumstances  ;  hence  there  is
nothing  upon  which  it  can  reflect  with  more  sustained  interest
than  on  the  power  for  good  or  ill  of  this  world  of  things  in
which  it  finds  itself,  and  on  its  own  place  therein.  While  a
brute  only  notices  and  remembers  individual  cases  of  the
hostility  or  friendliness  of  things  which  have  immediately
concerned  himself,  the  human  mind  is  led  by  its  greater
mobility  of  imagination  to  take  a  more  comprehensive  view.
Guided  by  the  idea  of  those  active  impulses  which  he  feels  in
himself,  man  at  first  ascribes  the  hindrance  or  furtherance
which  he  receives  from  circumstances  to  similar  purpose

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  083

iu  the  outer  world,  in  which  he  thinks  he  sees  the  multi
farious  action  of  a  living  will,  that  moves  all  things  to
reciprocal  activity.  And  as  good  or  ill  befalls  us  when  wu
meet  the  waves  of  this  broad  stream  of  circumstances,  so  we
imagine  that  its  course  brings  pain  and  pleasure  to  things,  and
that  everything  feels  the  special  fortune  or  misfortune  of  all
the  relations  which  subsist  between  it  and  other  tilings.  As
experience  grows,  the  living  colours  of  this  world-picture
gradually  pale,  without  however  quite  weaning  us  from  the
thoughts  which  produced  it.  We  discover  absence  of  purpose
in  most  of  the  occurrences  in  which  inanimate  things  are  con
cerned,  and  we  iiml  no  unambiguous  token  that  they  are
conscious  of  the  impressions  which  they  receive  from  one
another.  Hut  we  would  fain  believe  still  that  vague  sensibility
and  desire,  and  unconscious  inclination  and  aversion,  are
activities  to  be  found  everywhere  in  Nature.  At  last  we  con
tent  ourselves  with  the  modest  conviction  that,  at  any  rate,
the  variety  of  the  universe  is  to  be  understood  as  but  tin-
many-sided  expression  of  a  single  Idea,  and  we  insist  on  tin;
unity  of  this  Idea  not  so  much  because  it  oilers  to  our
scientific  thirst  for  knowledge  an  explanation  of  the  coherence
of  pluenomena,  as  because  it  permits  us  to  refer  to  it,  as  t<>
their  source,  all  the  joy  and  all  the  misery  of  existence,  and  to
ivjard  them  as  preordained  developments.  For  the  fact  that
besides  all  which  exists  and  which  happens  according  t<>
settled  laws,  there  is  also  enjoyment  of  both,  also  pain  and
pleasure,  this  fact  cannot,  it  seems  to  us,  be  regarded  as  a  men-
addendum  to  the  order  of  the  world;  all  necessary  connection  uf
things  would  be  to  us  incomprehensible  if  we  could  not  regard
it  as  simply  the  foundation  upon  which  to  build  up  a  world  of
joy  and  sorrow.

In  this  fashion  do  we  philosophize,  agreeing  or  dissenting,
enthusiastic  or  despairing,  according  as  the  circumstances  of
life  may  have  made  our  mood  bright  or  overcast.  On  one
hand  is  the  joyous  enthusiasm  which  thinks  that  it  In-hoMs  tin;
all-beneficent  harmony  of  the  universe  spread  open  before  it  ;
on  the  other  hand,  the  melancholy  reflection  to  which  as  it

684  BOOK V. CHAPTER  V.

closes  its  consideration  of  human  affairs  "  all  things  here  seem
out  of  joint."  Both  views  imply  the  natural  assumption  that
reality  has  no  meaning  except  as  it  is  productive  of  happiness  ;
but  the  one  regards  this  expectation  as  satisfied,  to  the  other  it
appears  to  have  been  unjustly  disappointed.  And  finally,  when
poetry  brings  before  us  with  picturesque  profusion  of  thought
the  hoarse  tones  of  pain  or  the  ecstatic  utterances  of  joy,  and
seeks  far  and  wide  for  illustrations  of  its  own  experience,  it
always  aims  at  connecting  the  fate  which  it  describes  with  the
order  of  the  world's  events,  either  as  something  which  fits  into
it  without  any  incongruity  or  as  presenting  a  contradiction
which  the  course  of  events  is  certain  to  explain  ;  this  course  of
events  being  conceived  as  really  tending  ever  towards  the
realization  of  universal  and  justly  apportioned  happiness,
whatever  may  be  the  apparent  direction  of  the  mere  surface
of  the  stream.  And  in  whichever  way  we  may  at  last  quiet
this  imagination  of  ours,  that  will  pry  into  the  heart  of
things,  it  is  certain  that  in  all  cases  our  view  of  the  relation  of
the  course  of  events  to  the  requirements  of  feeling  has  an  in
comparably  greater  influence  upon  the  character  of  individual
human  lives  than  the  results  of  science,  which  few  seek
and  few  understand.  And  this  holds  good  whether  our  view
be  plaintive  or  gloomy,  desponding  or  enthusiastic.

§  2.  Not  only  our  enjoyment  of  life,  but  also  our  mode  of
action — here  vigorous  enterprise,  there  passive  submission  to
fate — is  subject  to  the  same  influence.  The  opinion  which
we  form  of  the  worth  of  things,  and  of  the  tendency  of  the
course  of  events,  inevitably  determines  also  our  opinion
of  our  own  worth  and  significance  as  individuals,  of  the
pretensions  which  we  are  ei^-led  to  make,  of  the  ends  which
we  may  hope  to  attain,  of  the  duties  which  are  incumbent
upon  us.  Now,  on  the  one  hand,  the  course  of  human  life
is  distinguished  by  this  far-reaching  reflection  from  the  life  of
brutes  which  follows  unreflectingly  the  influences  of  the
moment,  and  is  guided  by  experience  in  the  choice  of  means
but  hardly  at  all  in  that  of  ends  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  an
ancient  tradition  has  assigned  to  man  an  innate  Moral  Law

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  683

which  rules  his  sentiments  and  a  Spiritual  Revelation  which
determines  his  ends,  as  two  steady  points  of  support  for  his
naturally  irresolute  endeavours.  What  original  foundation
for  both  we  have  to  seek  in  the  human  mind,  or  whether  it
is  the  teaching  of  life  that  first  product's  these  fruits,  an*
considerations  that  will  occupy  us  for  the  remainder  of  this
Book.

We  found  that  in  the  case  of  our  knowledge  of  the  work!,
not  only  is  an  acquaintance  with  particulars  left  to  he  gained
by  the  labour  of  experience,  but  also  that  the  small  number  of
universal  and  legislative  truths  by  which  this  labour  must
be  guided,  are  not  innate  in  their  detailed  completeness  ;  we
only  possess  originally  a  single  germ  of  higher  insight  which,
according  to  the  varying  favour  of  circumstances,  may  be
developed  to  a  more  or  less  orderly  or  more  or  less  tangled
growth.  We  feel  a  tacit  conviction  that  as  regards  the
foundations  of  morality  the  case  is  similar.  If  it  is  the
destiny  of  man  that  only  by  his  own  active  effort  can  he
realize  the  requirement  of  his  own  tin  night,  it  follows  that  be
will  not  find  in  himself  as  an  endowment  of  his  organization,
a  finished  and  complete  ideal  of  action,  but  that  he  will  have
in  the  course  of  his  development  to  work  his  way  to  the  pos
session  of  this  ideal.  It  has,  indeed,  been  thought  that  ju>t
in  this  respect  man's  moral  nature  is  more  favoured  than  his
intellectual  nature — that  he  is  furnished  by  the  latter  with
but  few  unambiguous  principles  of  judgment,  and  that  even
these  cannot  without  many  errors  be  carried  out  in  the  face  of
contradictory  appearances;  while  to  the  most  poorly  endowed
human  mind  (no  matter  what  may  be  the  condition  and
extent  of  its  merely  intellectual  acquirements)  Conscience
presents  the  inviolable  rule  of  conduct  and  the  supreme
objects  of  faith  with  unvarying  clearness.  15ut  a  comparison
of  different  stages  of  culture  in  human  life  has  already  fur
nished  a  warning  against  trusting  incautiously  to  this  view.

We  must  give  up  the  attempt  to  base  belief  in  the  existence
of  God  upon  the  agreement  of  mankind.  Moods  and  presenti
ments  that  point  to  something  unknown  and  invisible  are

686  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

indeed  developed  in  every  human  soul  under  the  influence
of  the  experience  of  life  ;  but,  except  under  favourable  con
ditions  of  development,  they  hardly  produce  more  than  a  state
of  objectless  fear,  to  which  brutes  also  would  be  subject  it'
they  were  not  too  devoid  of  thought  to  collect  into  a  per
manent  group  the  individual  frights  which  they  experience.
It  may  indeed  well  be  that  the  unerring  voice  of  conscience
is  not  altogether  silent  in  any  one ;  but  what  are  its  atlir-
mations  and  commands  ?  These  vary  widely,  according  as
men's  circumstances  vary,  and  as  they  have  been  differently
moulded  by  events.  It  is  common  for  a  limited  and  one
sided  round  of  experience  to  accustom  us  to  particular  ways
of  looking  at  things  which,  because  they  meet  with  no  contra
diction  within  our  own  narrow  experience,  assume  for  us  all
the  appearance  of  indubitable  evidence.  It  is  wTell  known
how  victoriously  such  prejudices  can  withstand  the  truth,  even
when  this  is  presented  to  us  ready  found,  and  we  have  not
the  trouble  of  discovering  it  for  ourselves.  The  practical  pre
judices  to  which  we  are  accustomed  by  education,  nationality,
custom,  calling,  and  the  spirit  of  the  age  are  no  less  tenacious
of  life,  and  we  cannot  deny  that  under  their  influence  many  an
indifferent  action  and  many  an  unimportant  rite  is  regarded  as
a  sacred  duty  ;  indeed,  many  things  are  so  regarded  which
the  culture  of  other  times  and  other  places  would  condemn  as
inhuman  barbarism,  and  the  violation  of  these  so-called  duties
is  attended  by  the  same  mental  disquiet  which  we  think
ought  to  result  only  from  the  transgression  of  truly  moral
laws.  As  human  knowledge  is  animated  by  faith  in  the
existence  of  truth,  but  must  leave  it  to  investigation — which
often  blunders — to  discover  in  what  this  truth  consists,  so
we  may  almost  say  that  the  second  essential  characteristic  of
human  nature  is  that  it  everywhere  carries  about  with  it  the
thought  of  Duty  and  of  Obligation ;  but  what  it  is  that  corre
sponds  to  these  notions,  and  what  kind  of  action  they  require,
it  has  to  find  out  by  degrees  in  the  course  of  its  development.
I  need  not  insist  upon  the  twofold  character  of  that  which  we
here  affirm :  on  the  one  hand,  the  power  of  experience  to

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  C87

develop ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  and  just  as  important,  the
original  presence  of  the  germ  upon  which  this  power  operates.
Satisfactory  results  will  never  be  readied  by  the  attempt  to
show  that  a  consciousness  of  obligation  can  be  produced  in
a  soul  which  is  wholly  blank,  by  the  mere  impressions  of
experience.

jj  3.  If  we  attempt  to  mark  oil'  the  sphere  of  what  we  </<>
—  a  sphere  difficult  to  define  —  from  that  which  merely
happens  in  us  or  throuyh  ux,  we  seem  to  find  the  first  ground
of  division  in  the  feelings  of  pleasure  and  aversion  which  some
times  do  and  sometimes  do  not  accompany  mental  events.  If  a
manifestation  necessarily  results  from  the  action  of  impressions
upon  us,  without  the  worth  of  these  impressions  being  measured
by  our  own  feeling  of  good  or  ill,  we  do  not  in  such  a  case
find  cause  to  distinguish  the  manifestation  from  other  effects,
as  an  action  of  our  own.  And  this  holds  even  though  the
disturbance  produced  in  us  by  the  stimulus  should  be  accom
panied  by  ideas  of  which  we  are  conscious,  and  though  the
final  reaction  should  be  called  forth  by  the  intervention  of
a  train  of  thought.  The  manifestation  would  then  indeed
have  a  more  complex  origin,  but  it  would  still  be  essentially
similar  to  the  results  which  might  be  expected  from  tin-
mechanical  excitation  of  any  machine  of  very  complicated
construction.  In  the  mere  acquaintance  with  and  represen
tation  of  things,  it  is  only  a  part  of  our  nature  of  which  we
are  conscious,  and  a  mere  chain  of  ideas  that  passes  through
our  mind  seems  to  occupy  but  a  limited  portion  of  our  being,
and  to  leave  the  condition  of  the  rest  unaffected  ;  the  mani
festation  which  is  attached  to  such  a  chain  of  ideas  is  regarded
by  us  merely  as  an  event  that  has  its  origin  in  the  Kgo  and
not  as  an  act  of  the  Ego.  It  is  in  feelings  of  pleasure  and  of
pain  that  the  Ego  is  first  conscious  that  all  its  individual
states  belong  to  it  and  that  its  whole  nature  i.s  affected ;
whatever  proceeds  from  pleasure  or  pain  appears  to  us  as  a
reaction  of  our  whole  nature.  We  consider  that  suffering  in
the  true  sense  is  not  present  in  cases  where  a  creature  merely
undergoes  disturbance  of  its  condition,  but  only  in  cases

688  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

\vhere  there  is  in  addition  a  painful  consciousness  of  this
disturbance  ;  we  do  not  predicate  action  merely  on  account
of  some  manifestation  which  a  creature  makes,  but  only  when
we  consider  the  manifestation  to  have  been  produced  by
feelings  of  pain  or  pleasure.  I  do  not  mean  that  among  the
reactions  which  are  really  due  to  feeling,  we  cannot  dis
tinguish  from  the  purposed  action  many  involuntary  move
ments  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  by  simple
antecedence  of  will  and  endeavour  that  we  can  mark  off
actions  from  mere  operations.  Will  and  desire  themselves
are  what  they  are  only  by  their  consciousness  of  relation
to  something  worthy  in  their  objects.  If  the  efforts  of  an
intelligent  being  could  be  divorced  from  every  shadow  of
pleasurable  and  painful  interest  in  their  object,  they  would
be  transformed  into  that  lifeless  impulse  towards  activity
which  produces  indeed  physical  events,  but  certainly  not
actions.

If  therefore  our  first  inquiry  has  regard  not  to  the  ideals
which  ought  to  determine  action,  but  to  the  powers  which  do
everywhere  as  a  matter  of  fact  give  rise  to  it,  we  cannot  deny
that  the  effort  to  hold  fast  pleasure,  or  to  regain  it,  and  to
avoid  pain,  are  the  only  springs  of  all  practical  activity.  To
what  various  stages  of  development  this  common  tendency
shall  conduct  the  different  families  of  living  creatures
depends  on  two  conditions.  It  depends  first  upon  the  variety
of  means  which  the  delicacy  of  its  bodily  and  mental
organization  furnishes  to  the  pleasure-needing  creature  for  the
attainment  of  its  end ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  depends  also
on  that  peculiarity  of  its  nature  which  determines  what  it  is
that  shall  be  pleasurable  or  painful  to  it,  and  which  limits
one  being  to  a  monotonous  round  of  enjoyment,  and  opens  to
another  a  rich  choice  of  attainable  good  things,  among  which
it  can  attempt  to  contrast  the  greater  with  the  less,  the
nobler  with  the  baser,  the  holy  with  the  unholy.  It  is  not
our  intention  to  consider  more  particularly  here  the  first  of
these  conditions,  and  the  degree  of  prudence  and  perseverance
in  human  effort  which  result  from  it,  because  the  discussion

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  689

of  historical  development  will  bring  us  back  to  this  task  by
and  by ;  but  it  is  clear  that  the  second  condition  includes
considerations  from  which  we  must  seek  for  an  explanation
of  the  distinction  between  human  morality  and  the  impulse
of  brutes ;  and  this  is  a  question  tho  universal  significance
of  which  now  demands  our  attention.

It  is  a  familiar  and  often  hazarded  observation  that  liking
and  disliking  cannot  attach  to  a  simple  impression,  but  only
to  a  relation  between  several  impressions.  I  doubt  the  truth
of  the  observation  from  our  present  point  of  view.  Whatever
may  be  the  relation  between  two  impressions,  its  being
apprehended  not  with  indifference,  but  with  a  feeling  of  its
pleasantness  or  unpleasantness,  cannot  proceed  from  the  fact
that  the  relation  is  what  it  is,  but  only  from  this,  that  being
what  it  is,  it  is  in  harmony  or  discord  with  the  creature  by
which  it  is  apprehended.  It  is  not  what  passes  between  two
objects  unconnected  with  us,  but  what  passes  between  each
one  of  them  and  ourselves,  that  constitutes  the  spring  of  our
pleasure  and  pain ;  and  either  pleasure  or  pain  may  be
awakened  by  any  simple  impression  according  as  it  disturbs
the  conditions  and  activities,  the  impulses  and  habits  of
working  which  it  encounters  in  us,  and  seeks  to  divert  them
from  their  natural  direction,  or  maintains,  enhances,  or  favours
their  progress  in  this  direction.  Xow,  doubtless  among  the
causes  which  produce  such  effects  in  us,  we  must  reckon
connections  between  several  related  impressions,  and  we  may
even  admit  that  it  is  by  such  that  those  feelings  are  aroused
which  are  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  are  the  most
significant  in  human  civilisation.  But  in  no  case  can  we
imagine  that  the  worth  of  even  such  impressions  as  these
depends  merely  on  the  reciprocal  objective  relation  of  the
various  objects  concerned,  independent  of  any  estimation  of
the  worth  of  the  relation  by  reference  to  its  harmony  either
with  us  who  apprehend  it,  or  with  some  other  relation,  with
regard  to  which  the  question  of  worth  has  already  been
determined  by  the  standard  here  required.  Unquestionably,
that  which  only  corresponds  to  a  momentary  and  accidental

VOL.  I.  2  X

690  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

condition,  or  some  individual  peculiarity  of  the  mind  which  it
affects,  is  of  less  worth ;  and  that  is  of  more  worth  which
harmonizes  with  the  general  and  normal  features  of  the
organization  by  which  the  mind  is  fitted  for  the  fulfilment  of
its  destiny.  That  would  be  of  supreme  worth  which  caused
satisfaction  to  an  ideal  mind  in  its  normal  condition,  a  mind
which  had  been  purified  from  all  tendency  to  diverge  from  it.s
proper  path  of  development.  Beyond  this  summit  there  is  no
foothold,  and  the  idea  of  an  object  possessing  worth,  which
is  altogether  unconditioned,  which  does  not  show  its  worth
by  its  capacity  to  produce  pleasure,  shoots  beyond  the
mark.

There  is  no  doubt  something  to  praise  in  the  austerity  with
which  practical  philosophy  has  sought  to  free  moral  precepts
from  indirect  reference  to  the  personal  interest  of  the  agent  ;
but  this  austerity  was  wrong  in  seeking  to  undo  the  plain  and
indissoluble  connection  between  the  notion  of  Pleasure —
despised,  and  in  most  of  its  applications  despicable — and  the
notion  of  Worth  in  general.  When  Kant  believed  that
he  had  found  a  universal  formula  for  moral  action,  in  opposi
tion  to  the  aims  of  self-interest,  lie  was  candid  enough  to
admit  that  lie  had  not  discovered  in  it  the  precise  ground  cf
its  binding  authority  over  us.  And  why,  in  fact,  do  we
consider  it  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  maxims  of  our
action  must  fit  into  a  general  system  of  law  ?  And  which
are  the  maxims  which  do  not  thus  fit  in  ?  Plainly  those
which,  if  generally  followed,  would  produce  general  disorder
and  the  frustration  of  all  effort.  But  what  is  this  acknow
ledgment  of  the  importance  of  order,  and  of  the  possibility  of
carrying  out  our  intention,  if  it  is  not  either  (a)  a  grand  and
comprehensive  utilitarian  principle  taking  the  place  of  special
and  narrower  ones,  or  (&)  the  confession  that  innxims  different
from  those  demanded  would  lead  to  general  misery,  and  are
therefore  to  be  rejected  ?  Other  systems,  while  eschewing  all
pleasure,  assure  us  that  the  moral  law  is  the  one  important
thing,  that  the  relation  of  a  finite  being  to  the  Absolute,  like
that  of  any  point  of  the  periphery  to  its  centre,  is  a  relation  of

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  C91

subordination,  that  human  will  runs  parallel  to  the  develop
ment  <>f  the  infinite  Idea,  and  works  for  it.  Uut  how  if  the
Absolute  should  not  desire  such  a  relation  ?  If  the  submission
of  the  periphery  caused  only  vexation  to  the  centre,  could  it
be  still  maintained  that  this  relation  was  notwithstanding  to
be  maintained  as  unconditionally  worthy  in  itself  ?  This  ques
tion  should  remind  us  that  the  sacredness  of  the  command
depends  upon  the  will  of  the  Supreme  lit-ing,  upon  His
capacity  of  receiving  pleasure  or  pain  from  our  obedience  or
disobedience,  and  upon  that  relation  of  ourselves  to  Him  in
virtue  of  which  we  find  our  own  blessedness  in  His  pleasure.
If  we  eliminate  from  our  conception  of  the  Supreme  Being
every  trace  of  feeling,  and  transform  our  conception  into  that
of  inflexible  physical  force,  a  power  which,  though  intelligent,
is  devoid  of  feeling,  we  see  at  once  that  the  subordination
above  referred  to  is  altogether  without  worth.  We  should,  in
fiict,  in  such  a  case  follow  with  sympathy  the  course  of  each
finite  being  which  broke  the  tedium  of  this  eternal  and  mono
tonous  development,  and,  choosing  the  better  part,  sought  to
"  work  out  the  unconditioned  freedom  and  independence  of  its
own  personality."  Why  this  autonomy  should  itself  be  of
unconditioned  worth,  may  indeed  at  first  seem  obscure,  but  not
for  long.  We  recognise  in  it  the  pleasure  of  a  generous  pride,
just  as  we  recognise  in  self-sacrificing  love  the  real  power
which  impels  any  point  in  the  periphery  to  revolve  about  its
centre  (as  hinted  above).  If  we  are  further  told  that  conflict
is  in  itself  displeasing,  we  reply  by  a  simple  and  unqualified
denial ;  but  we  allow  that  quarrelsomeness  being  displeasing,
the  quarrelsome  element  in  conflict,  namely,  the  ill-will  of
opposing  factions,  must  be  displeasing.  The  abstraction  of
this  element  would  leave,  in  each  contest  of  two  wills,  nothing
more  than  a  living  drama  in  which  we  should  feel  interested  ;
ill-will  being  left  out  of  account,  such  a  contest  would  be  only
very  indirectly  displeasing  to  us ;  it  would  be  displeasing  not
in  itself,  but  because  of  the  unavoidable  although  undesigned
displeasure  which  it  would  rouse  on  both  sides,  or  because  of
the  wasteful  expenditure  of  powers  in  cancelling  one  another

692  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

when  they  might  have  been  used  to  produce  a  common  stock
of  enjoyment.

What  is  the  meaning  of  saying  that  there  may  be  certain
relations  between  different  wills  which  merit  unconditional
approbation  ?  Is  such  a  relation  to  be  found  anywhere  in  the
world  ?  Are  there  anywhere  \vills  which,  apart  from  all
feeling,  actually  exist  and  can  enter  into  relation  with  one
another  ?  And  if  it  were  so,  if  the  world  consisted  of  beings
that  were  merely  intellectual  and  volitional,  and  of  which
none,  whether  finite  or  infinite,  could  anyhow,  or  at  any  time,
be  capable  of  feeling  pain  or  pleasure,  in  such  a  case  what
could  be  the  significance  of  those  ideals  of  action  which  then
would  have  no  one  by  whom  they  could  be  approved  ?  As  a
matter  of  fact,  would  it  be  an  absolute  moral  requirement
that  one  existing  condition,  which  caused  neither  pain  nor
pleasure  to  any  one,  should  be  replaced  by  another  condition
which  would  likewise  produce  no  increase  of  wellbeing  to  any
one  in  the  wrorld  ?  Must  wre  believe  that  the  universe  is  so
taken  up  with  ceremony  that  it  is  concerned  with  nothing  but
the  realization  of  formal  conditions  ?  The  too  stern  morality
to  which  \ve  have  referred,  may  easily  conceal  from  itself
these  final  results,  the  transformation  of  all  moral  action  into,
as  it  were,  a  mere  mechanical  putting  together;  for  certainly
no  one  is  likely  to  set  up  individual  moral  laws  in  which
there  does  not  lurk  some  hidden  reference  to  the  pleasure
which  is  so  much  despised ;  in  other  departments  of  life  these
extreme  consequences  do  occasionally  appear.  For  instance,
it  has  become  the  fashion  to  depreciate  the  emotional  effect  of
beauty,  and  to  seek  its  essence  exclusively  in  various  formal
relations  of  Ideas  to  each  other ;  hence  result  works  of  art  the
worth  of  which  may  be  proved  to  demonstration,  but  which
cause  pleasure  to  no  one.  And  in  attempted  political
constructions,  too,  how  widespread  do  we  find  this  idol-
worship  of  formal  principles !  It  seems  to  many  that  every
thing  necessary  has  been  done  if  only  some  form  of  political
organization  has  been  reached,  no  matter  whether  the
ingenious  construction  produces  a  modicum  of  real,  genuine

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  COS

happiness,  or  whether  all  its  members  lead  a  life  of  tedium
and  misery.

These  errors  are  wholly  foreign  to  the  unsophisticated
mind.  To  such  it  seems  natural,  but  not  morally  meritorious,
that  a  man  should  be  concerned  for  his  own  welfare ;  and  that
to  do  good  to  others  and  increase  the  sum  of  general  happiness
is  the  one  task  the  fulfilment  of  which  comprises  all  his
moral  obligations.  We  do  not  here  intend  any  laudation  of
merely  thoughtless  good  nature,  or  of  that  weakness  which
can  never  say  no,  and  buys  the  present  thanks  of  him  whom
it  inconsiderately  gratifies  with  future  reproaches  for  its  too
ready  compliance.  As  in  Xature  it  does  not  happen  that  each
individual  creature  is  immediately  produced  and  developed  by
an  exercise  of  power  directed  expressly  to  that  end,  but  carries
on  its  growth  in  accordance  with  the  general  laws  of  the
universe,  from  which  it  draws  its  support,  so  happiness  that
is  allotted  to  all  the  members  of  a  compound  whole  will  need
a  system  of  production  and  distribution,  the  general  rules  of
which  cannot  be  transgressed  without  hindering  the  attainment
of  the  end.  On  this  the  mind  relies,  and  when  we  iind  that
conscience  prescribes  to  us  practical  laws,  the  conduciveness
of  which  to  our  highest  happiness  we  do  not  directly  see,  wo
yet  do  not  doubt  that  such  conduciveness  is  there,  and  that
all  the  harshness  of  the  laws  which  obtain  in  the  world  exists
not  for  its  own  sake,  but  for  the  sure  guidance  which  it  may
afford  to  the  desired  and  gracious  end.  We  ourselves  would
be  the  last  to  depreciate  these  laws,  seeing  that  we  have  so
often  maintained  the  indispensableness  of  an  ordered  mechanism
for  the  realization  of  all  that  is  good  and  beautiful,  and  this
in  just  those  cases  where  it  seemed  to  others  that  everything
was  accomplished  directly  through  the  unregulated  goodwill
of  an  Idea,  But  just  as  little  are  we  inclined  to  over-estimate
these  same  laws.  As  long  as  we  hold  fast  the  opinion  that
no  mere  mechanism  exists  simply  for  its  own  sake,  it  cannot
be  that  for  us  all  reality  exists  only  for  tin;  sake  of  existing,
and  that  all  action  is  merely  for  the  sake  of  producing  some
thing  which  did  not  exist  before.  Somewhere  or  other,  this

694  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

external  apparatus  and  all  its  orderly  sequence  of  events
must  find  its  goal  in  an  inner  world  of  pleasure  and  of  finite
enjoyment.

§  4.  We  should,  however,  be  much  deceived  if  we  con
sidered  moral  laws  to  have  only  a  derivative  worth  as  necessary
maxims  of  a  system  for  the  production  of  general  happiness;  the
majority  of  these  laws,  even  of  those  which  prescribe  a  kind
of  action  that  has  reference  to  special  conditions,  and  which
are  not  of  universal  validity,  are  much  more  directly  related
to  the  production  of  objects  of  enjoyment.  No  one  will
venture,  for  instance,  to  set  up  pleasure  in  any  form,  or
pleasure  at  any  price,  as  an  allowable  end  of  action ;  but  it  is
not  conscience  only,  but  also  its  own  logical  absurdity,  that
would  hinder  the  adoption  of  such  a  maxim.  Pleasure  in
itself  is  an  incomplete  thought  so  long  as  we  are  not  also  told
what  it  is  that  is  enjoyed.  I  do  not  refer  to  the  external
impression  from  which  it  arises,  but  to  the  specific  content  of
the  pleasure  itself  when  it  has  arisen.  Just  as  it  is  impossible
to  feel  in  general  without  feeling  something,  or,  to  speak
more  correctly,  without  feeling  in  some  particular  way,  as  e.g.
in  the  ways  which  we  call  red  or  sweet,  hard  or  warm ;  just
as  it  is  also  impossible  to  imagine  a  sensation  as  merely  greater
or  less  in  degree;  so  is  it  out  of  the  question  to  talk  of
pleasure  which  is  simply  pure  enjoyment,  and  not  the  enjoy
ment  of  something,  of  pleasure  which  is  merely  greater  or  less
in  amount,  merely  more  or  less  evanescent,  but  without  quali
tative  content.  And  as  red  is  no  copy  of  the  ether  waves
which  cause  it  to  be  perceived,  the  sensation  being  a  transla
tion  of  this  special  stimulus  into  the  language  of  the  soul,
and  every  other  stimulus  having  some  other  such  translation
corresponding  to  it ;  just  so  the  special  pleasure  which  we
receive  from  any  individual  impression,  or  any  relation  between
several  impressions,  is  no  copy  of  these  impressions,  merely
followed  by  a  sense  of  wellbeing  connected  with  it,  and
qualitatively  alike  in  all  cases ;  the  specific  feeling  is  in  every
case  rather  the  immediate  indivisible  transference  into  the
language  of  sensibility  of  the  worth  peculiar  to  this  particular

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  695

case  of  excitation.  We  speak  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  general,
just  as  we  do  of  movement  in  general;  we  can  abstract  from
the  direction  and  velocity  of  the  latter,  but  no  movement  can
occur  without  having  velocity  and  direction  ;  in  the  same  way
pain  or  pleasure  can  never  occur  in  this  formless  and  colourless
generality,  but  must  always  have,  or  rather  must  always  be,
something  definite  in  form  or  colour,  as  in  fact  we  should  say
that  movement  is  velocity  which  has  some  given  direction,
and  not  that  it  has  velocity  and  direction.  People  are
theoretically  mistaken  as  to  what  is  best  in  pleasure  when
they  think  that  it  consists  in  a  person's  finding  his  pleasure
or  his  happiness  in  something,  according  to  the  common
phrase.  It  is  not  at  all  the  case  that  we  first  recognise
excellence  unmoved,  and  then  bring  forth  in  response  a
definite  quantity  of  our  pleasure,  giving  this  in  exchange
fur  the  worth  of  impressions  in  greater  or  less  quantity  as  if
it  were  a  kind  of  intellectual  small  change  used  indifferently
for  all  purposes.  It  is  rather  the  case  that  we  are  constrained
by  the  inherent  worth  of  things;  and  though,  of  course,  our
pleasure  must  in  some  degree  depend  upon  our  own  nature,
from  the  fact  that  we  can  only  feel  those  impressions  of  which
we  are  susceptible,  yet  the  special  differences  between  our
pleasurable  feelings  (which  have  their  foundations  in  our  own
capacity  of  reception)  can  by  no  means  be  reduced  to  merely
quantitative  differences  of  a  uniform  feeling  of  subjective
wellbeing.

AVith  the  surrender  of  this  inappropriate  mode  of  repre
sentation  there  would  fall  away  many  a  complaint  which  one
is  accustomed  to  hear  brought  against  pleasure.  It  would
no  longer  wear  the  invidious  aspect  of  a  kind  of  egoism
which  uses  the  things  of  the  world  and  all  thuir  rarest
qualities  merely  as  fuel  to  keep  up  its  own  temperature ;  it
would  be  seen  that  pleasure  itself  is  rather  the  light  in  which
existing  reality  first  shows  forth  all  its  objective  excellence
and  beauty.  And  there  could  not  justly  be  repeated  the  old
reproach,  that  the  notion  of  pleasure  is  wanting  in  an  inner
principle  of  judgment  from  which  we  might  learn  to  distin-

606  HOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

guish  its  higher  and  nobler  from  its  baser  forms,  or  to  distin
guish  some  one  form  as  the  highest  of  all.  If  we  would  but
get  rid  of  a  useless  scientific  affectation,  we  should  be  forced  to
acknowledge  that  no  system  of  morality  which  has  attempted
to  derive  the  circle  of  duties  or  of  moral  ideals  from  one
supreme  principle,  has  accomplished  more  than  a  comprehen
sible  logical  subordination  under  this  principle  of  that  which
is  said  to  be  derived  from  it.  But  the  certainty  that  this
derived  system  really  contains  ideals  which  are  of  binding
authority  for  us,  and  that  some  of  these  are  of  more  worth
than  others,  these  are  results  that  were  never  deduced  from
the  principle,  but  from  the  direct  teaching  of  conscience,  to
which  special  reference  was  made  at  every  step  of  the
deduction.  Though  other  views  base  our  moral  convictions
upon  certain  relations  between  wills,  which  are  regarded  with
absolute  approval  or  disapproval,  yet  they  are  as  far  as  pos
sible  from  maintaining  that  we  can  from  the  idea  of  such  a
relation  discover  what  particular  actions  are  to  be  approved
or  disapproved ;  they  refer  to  conscience  for  a  decision.  I
know  not  why  the  notion  of  pleasure  should  be  under  any
obligation  to  furnish  more  than  other  principles.  And  yet
perhaps  it  does  in  a  certain  sense  really  do  so,  but  we  will
for  the  present  be  satisfied  with  bringing  in  expressly  that
appeal  to  conscience  which  the  non-hedonistic  moral  systems
can  only  nominally  do  without.  It  is  the  fact  that  individual
forms  of  pleasure  are  different  in  kind,  that  one  is  super-
ordinate  or  subordinate  to  another,  that  each  while  positive
in  itself  may  become  negative  in  comparison  with  others,  and
that  only  the  satisfaction  of  conscience  itself — that  is,  pleasure
in  the  agreement  between  any  individual  pleasure  and  this
supreme  legislation — is  exempted  from  such  fluctuations  of
value.  We  have  now  only  to  add  some  remarks  on  the  way
in  which  these  impulses  to  action  and  the  consciousness  of
their  worth  have  their  origin  in  the  natural  constitution  of
the  human  mind,  and  in  those  beginnings  of  its  development
which  are  universally  met  with.

§  5.  The  pleasure  of  sense  is  not  only  the  goal  towards

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  697

which  all  the  activity  of  living  creatures  originally  moves,
but  we  find  that  in  civilised  life  also  it  is  the  hidden  spring
of  the  most  various  actions.  Living  creatures  do  not  by
nature  endeavour,  independent  of  external  stimulation,  to
increase  their  sum  of  enjoyment ;  they  do  not  know  by
instinct  in  what  direction  the  greater  good  lies.  It  is  experi
ence  that  first  shows  them  this,  and  that  arouses  partly  a
desire  for  the  renewal  of  pleasure  that  has  once  been  tasted,
and  partly  a  longing  for  enjoyment  not  yet  experienced.  The
only  consideration  capable  of  restraining  the  mind  from  im
plicit  obedience  to  these  impulses,  is  a  knowledge  either  of  the
disadvantages  attached  to  their  immoderate  gratification,  or  of
the  greater  happiness  the  attainment  of  which  this  gratifi
cation  would  hinder.  But  the  natural  course  of  things  lessens
the  danger  of  this  excess,  and  leads  to  an  acquaintance  with
the  greater  good.  At  least  at  a  very  early  stage  it  has  done
so  much  towards  this  that  a  far  larger  proportion  of  our  efforts
is  directed  towards  the  more  refined  pleasure  of  the  inner
sense  than  towards  mere  bodily  enjoyment.  In  simple  modes
of  life  not  yet  complicated  by  civilisation,  there  are  a  large
number  of  wants  which  men  have  to  provide  for  by  their  own
individual  exertions  ;  moreover,  the  moments  of  supreme  bodily
delight  are  very  brief,  and  in  the  long  pauses  between  them
the  active  receptivity  of  the  mind  is  not  in  abeyance.  Thus,
passionate  devotion  to  one  particular  kind  of  enjoyment  meets
with  but  little  encouragement;  while  the  mind  in  the  mere
search  for  means  stumbles  upon  many  impressions  by  which
it  is  insensibly  attracted  and  enchained.  It  cannot  help
lingering  over  them,  and  giving  itself  up  partly  to  the  charm
which  they  have  for  scientific  curiosity,  and  partly  to  the
moods  awakened  by  their  importance  and  meaning.  So  it
comes  to  pass  that  from  many  causes  we  hasten  but  slowly
towards  the  goal  of  enjoyment,  and  in  the  intervals  of  sen
suous  fruition  the  impressions  thus  got  by  the  way  come
back  to  the  mind,  which  gradually  becomes  accustomed  to
prefer  that  more  equable  and  moderate  pleasure  afforded  to
it  by  steady  and  beneficent  employment  of  the  inner  sense.

698  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

The  pleasures  of  a  rhythmical  though  objectless  play  of
impressions,  of  social  amusement,  and  of  exercising  one's
own  strength  and  skill,  occupy  in  the  most  primitive
condition  of  peoples,  as  well  as  in  advanced  civilisation,
a  far  larger  space  than  the  desire  for  immediate  physical
enjoyment.  And  even  when  we  do,  with  a  shock  of  dis
agreeable  surprise,  see  men  struggling  for  this,  we  find  that
their  effort  is  seldom  directed  towards  the  bare  gratification
itself;  that  which  is  desired  seems  desirable,  not  so  much  for
its  own  sake  as  for  the  sake  of  a  host  of  thoughts  which
are  connected  with  its  importance  in  reference  to  the
deeper  life  of  the  mind.  The  worth  of  the  original  end,
poor  in  itself,  is  enhanced  by  the  special  various  and  refined
interest  of  the  preparations,  accessories,  and  recollections
belonging  to  it.  Graceful  surroundings,  harmoniousness  of
external  impressions,  aesthetic  adornment  of  life,  and  an  un
disturbed  pleasing  kind  of  existence  are  the  requirements  of
this  refined  sensuousness.  Its  satisfaction,  both  in  the  most
cultivated  conditions  and  in  the  most  primitive  and  unorgan
ized  societies,  is  sought  by  men  in  modes  of  action  which
seem  rather  to  express  delight  in  the  production  of  pleasant
and  graceful  objects  than  the  craving  to  reap  some  pleasure
arising  from  them.

Both  corporeal  life  and  spiritual  life  are  in  all  cases
ultimately  subordinate  to  the  general  laws  appropriate  to  each,
yet  both  pulsate  in  various  individuals  with  various  degrees
of  strength,  and  not  without  special  variations  of  susceptibility.
It  is  only  with  reference  to  the  most  violent  and  powerful
impressions  that  we  can  calculate  upon  their  producing  in  all
subjects  similar  amounts  of  pain  or  discomfort.  On  the  other
hand,  stimulations  of  medium  strength,  which  are  too  intense
for  one,  are  felt  by  another  to  be  too  insignificant  and
monotonous  to  keep  attention  awake ;  and  more  than  this,
there  may  exist  in  one  case  unaccountable  aversion  towards  a
stimulus  which  in  another  case  is  passionately  desired.  These
differences  concern  not  only  the  objects  of  external  sense,  but
also  the  formal  relation  of  impressions  by  which  our  aesthetic

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  699

feelings  are  excited.  Great  variety  of  impressions,  the  shock
of  surprise,  the  constant  tension  due  to  uniform  mood  or
orderly  sequence  of  Ideas,  any  of  these  may  be  to  the  tempera
ment  of  one  a  necessity,  to  that  of  another  torture  ;  a  mode  of
combining  impressions,  or  a  trick  of  manner,  which  to  one  is
an  agreeable  ingredient  of  life,  may  be  regarded  by  another
with  a  distinct  feeling  of  contemptuous  aversion.  To  be
tolerant  in  such  matters,  and  to  acknowledge  that  no  mode  or
fashion  can  command  universal  acceptance,  and  that  one's
own  fashion  is  no  better  than  others  which  differ  from  it,  this
is  decidedly  a  result  of  education,  and  but  seldom  the  natural
endowment  of  a  happy  disposition.  We  are  essentially  tyranni
cal  in  such  things,  and  we  cannot  deny  that  we  feel  a  tinge  of
contempt  for  him  who  does  not  like  our  favourite  dish,  ami
that  nascent  hatred  of  a  mild  kind  is  stirred  within  us  by  the
man  who  obstinately  differs  from  us  on  this  point.  Of  course
these  inclinations  and  aversions  become  much  stronger  when
they  are  connected  with  many  points  of  agreement  or  conflict ;
they  become,  when  so  related,  the  more  inexplicable  to  him
who  feels  them,  for  as  the  complexity  increases  there  becomes
less  and  less  possibility  of  clearly  surveying  all  those  separate
causes  which  coalesce  to  form  a  strong  instinctive  feeling.  As
long  as  all  the  individual  members  of  a  society  are  bound
together  by  strongly-marked  uniformity  of  tribal  character,  the
phenomena  to  which  we  here  refer  are  not  of  frequent  occur
rence,  but  they  certainly  afford  a  foundation  for  national  hatred,
by  which  we  early  see  individual  races  of  men  separated  from
one  another  just  as  much  as  the  different  species  of  animals.
The  higher  development  of  civilisation  entails  a  greater  variety
of  individual  character,  and  with  it  a  greater  susceptibility  to
offence  from  the  peculiarities  of  others,  but  also  at  the  same
time,  as  a  kind  of  compensation,  a  proportionate  increase  in
the  intensity  of  love  and  friendship  towards  chosen  objects.
Thus  between  the  persons  associated  together  in  a  civilised
society  there  arise  strong  ties  independent  of  any  express
relation  between  them,  and  many  and  important  indeed  are
the  results  which  these  give  rise  to,  working  by  an  unwritten

700  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

law,  and  never  wholly  to  be  explained.  Before  moral  re
flection  has  put  a  curb — never  quite  effectual — upon  the
caprices  of  individuals,  these  caprices  have  introduced  a
manner  of  thinking  which,  whether  openly  or  secretly,  has
always  been  at  the  foundation  of  men's  conduct  to  one  another,
and  often  enough  has  been  candidly  avowed  as  a  rule  of  action,
the  adoption  of  which  is  a  matter  of  course.  I  mean  the
principle  of  goodwill  to  friends  and  hatred  to  enemies.  Both
dispositions  are  strengthened  when  to  the  effect  upon  us  of
that  which  another  is,  there  is  added  the  impression  produced
by  his  behaviour  towards  us.  If  we  look  at  a  child  beating
the  stone  against  which  it  has  bruised  itself  and  caressing  the
pillow  on  which  it  rests,  we  see  in  its  behaviour  an  example
of  the  way  in  which  gratitude  and  revenge  are  developed  as
the  great  natural  springs  of  action  which  have  moved  men  in
their  conduct  to  each  other  from  the  earliest  times.  Hovf
little  man  is  raised  above  the  brutes  in  all  this  is  plain
enough,  but  it  would  serve  no  useful  purpose  to  attempt  the
concealment  of  those  impulses  which  stir  so  strongly  within
us.  Before  the  human  mind  has  found  that  there  are  in  it
other  inviolable  laws  of  its  action,  it  has  no  choice  but  to
follow  these  natural  inclinations — without  which,  indeed,  the
good  in  us  would  have  little  warmth,  the  conquest  of  evil
little  merit.

The  real  business  of  all  our  efforts  is  to  maintain  our
natural  disposition  against  whatever  is  adverse  to  it,  and  to
seek  whatever  suits  it.  But  each  man  is  not  only  an  individual
specimen  of  the  general  type  of  his  kind,  he  also  develops
by  the  aggregation  of  his  special  experiences  into  an  individual
personality,  presenting  a  new  standard  by  which  to  judge
impressions,  a  standard  by  which  their  worth  for  us  has  to  be
estimated.  From  the  excitation  of  this  part  of  our  nature
there  arise  personal  feelings,  the  general  character  of  which
results  from  the  fact  that  they  are  the  feelings  of  a  Person,
but  which  wear  a  different  aspect  in  the  case  of  each  indi
vidual  ;  for  the  number  and  position  of  sensitive  and  vulner
able  points  always  depend  upon  the  original  or  acquired

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  701

idiosyncrasy  of  the  personal  being  who  happens  to  be  in
question.  Xow  absolutely  naked  Egoism  must  be  regarded  as
the  only  motive  power  of  our  activity,  until  a  higher  develop
ment  has  discovered  better  ideals  of  action.  In  actual  life,
however,  it  is  everywhere  counterworked  by  the  most  various
excitations  of  our  many-sided  human  nature,  so  that  there  has
never  been  a  time  in  which  there  has  prevailed  a  general  reign
of  self-will,  carried  out  with  blind  disregard  of  anything
extraneous  to  itself,  after  the  fashion  of  the  great  powers  of
physical  Nature.  It  is  inconceivable  that  any  being  that  lives
and  moves  could  get  rid  of  the  receptivity  in  virtue  of  which
it  is  subject,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  involuntary  inclinations
and  aversions  which  we  have  indicated,  and  on  the  other  hand,
to  the  unwilling  recognition  of  that  which  is  foreign  to  its
nature.  There  is,  moreover,  in  egoism  an  internal  contradic
tion  which  acts  as  a  remedy  against  the  consequences  of  the
principle  itself.

Our  unrellective  self-consciousness  reckons  without  more  ado
RS  part  of  our  own  personality  all  the  bodily  and  mental  powers
which  we  have  received  as  an  endowment  of  nature.  Even
before  the  encounter  of  individuals  who  have  conflicting
claims  to  the  same  object,  each  one  compares  and  measures
himself  with  others ;  and  with  an  easy  freedom  which  would
seem  natural  and  just  were  the  relation  in  question  one
between  two  natural  forces,  we  pass  from  a  perception  of  our
own  superiority  to  another  in  power  of  work,  to  that  pride  of
the  stronger  and  that  contempt  for  all  that  is  weak  and  ugly
which  we  find  vigorously  expressed  in  all  early  stages  of
civilisation,  and  never  quite  inoperative  even  in  conditions  of
more  advanced  development.  For  certainly  we  are  much
more  inclined  to  measure  our  duties  and  performances  accord
ing  to  what  we  are  and  what  others  are,  than  to  set  out  in
the  first  place  from  universally  binding  types  of  disposition
which  do  not  mention  any  individuals,  and  which  one  must
acknowledge  before  one  can  classify  in  subordination  to  them
the  distinctive  circumstances  of  any  particular  case,  so  as  to
show  grounds  for  an  unequal  division  of  personal  rights  and

702  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

duties.  But  I  doubt  if  there  is  not  in  this  very  pride  itself
an  indestructible  germ  of  higher  human  development.  We
never  compare  ourselves  with  what  is  not  of  our  own  kind,
or  at  least  with  what  cannot  be  easily  classed,  as  of  kin  with
us,  under  the  same  general  notion.  "We  do  not  desire  to  be
tougher  than  a  rock,  or  mightier  than  the  powers  of  Nature ;
if  we  exalt  ourselves  above  our  kind,  the  pleasure  of  this
pride  is  not  separable  from  an  attendant  feeling  that  we  have
accomplished  with  superior  individual  capacity  some  task
common  to  us  all,  that  thus  measured  by  some  well-estab
lished  standard,  on  some  well-established  ground  of  natural
comparison,  we  are  found  to  excel  others  and  thereby  earn
the  right  to  a  better  opinion  of  ourselves.  From  this  point
of  view  pride  in  bodily  perfection  is  justifiable  and  natural,
as  well  as  the  haughtiness  of  intellectual  superiority.
Civilised  peoples  and  wild  tribes  may  look  down  upon
one  another  with  reciprocal  contempt  ;  in  doing  this  the
judgment  of  each  is  in  fact  one-sidedly  right.  We  may
also  carry  out  a  similar  comparison  between  ourselves  and
the  brutes ;  they  can  be  comprehended  under  the  common
notion  of  living  creatures  moved  by  internal  activity,  not  only
on  account  of  their  similarity  in  organization  and  mobility,
but  chiefly  because  their  life  touches  ours  at  a  thousand  points
of  conflict  and  reciprocal  service.  There  is  an  intelligible  self-
satisfaction  in  surpassing  in  cunning  and  strength,  creatures
which  Nature  seems  to  have  intended  to  compete  with  us  for
enjoyment  and  for  the  spoils  of  life.  Man's  pride  cannot  dis
pense  with  an  unspoken  appeal  to  these  grounds  of  justifica
tion  for  his  self-exaltation,  and  it  is  just  when  he  recognises
the  authority  of  a  general  notion  that  he  makes  the  first  step
towards  self-conquest.

We  may  go  further  and  add  that  it  is  also  a  secret  necessity
of  egoism  that  the  very  preference  which  the  egoist  assumes  for
himself  on  the  ground  of  a  general  notion,  should  itself  come
under  some  other  general  and  valid  notion,  and  thus  that  he
should  regard  himself  not  simply  as  preferred,  but  as  partaking
of  a  superiority  which  is  intelligible  in  itself,  and  which,  though

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  703

it  belongs  to  many,  is  yet  comparatively  rare.  A  man  may  be
very  proud  of  being  the  only  one  of  his  class  whom  fate  ha.s
spared  among  a  whole  people  ;  remembrance  of  the  past  would
then  make  clear  the  worth  of  the  position,  all  the  honour  and
dignity  of  which  would  now  concentrate  in  this  one  individual.
But  it  is  incomprehensible  that  any  person  should  aim  at  being
the  only  one  of  his  kind  who  has  ever  existed  ;  every  great
ambition  seeks  the  name  of  power  as  well  as  power  itself,  and
titles  that  are  wholly  unknown  do  not,  as  might  be  expected,
exercise  more  but  less  influence  than  others  over  men's  minds.
Any  wholly  unique  superiority,  however  great  it  may  be,  is
unintelligible ;  hence  it  is  natural  that  self-regard  should
always  seek  association  with  a  class  to  which  many  belong,
and  that  which  is  anywhere  regarded  as  supreme  has  always
begun  by  being  susceptible  of  comparison.  The  same  depend
ence  of  self-regard  on  Universals  appears  also  in  intellectual
development  We  are  proud  of  having,  by  our  own  indi
vidual  acuteness,  penetrated  to  the  hidden  truth  of  complicated
phenomena,  and  jealously  regard  this  gain  as  the  achievement
of  our  own  effort.  But  we  are  miserable  if  others  do  n*>t
recognise  it ;  for  as  long  as  this  is  the  case  it  remains  truly  our
view  and  ours  alone,  in  a  sense  that  we  do  not  desire.  In  order
that  our  acquisition  may  be  valuable  even  to  ourselves,  it
must  necessarily  be  recognised  as  separable  from  our  own
individuality,  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself,  as  universal
truth.  In  this  is  to  be  found  the  one  respectable  excuse  l«r
fanaticism,  the  eagerness  of  which  to  gain  acceptance  for
individual  views  is  greater  the  less  these  views  are  merely
superficial  commonplaces,  and  the  more  profoundly  their
content  appeals  to  the  many-sided  whole  of  human  life.
Therefore,  however  odious  fanatical  zeal  may  be  in  any
department,  one  must  admit  that  it  does  not  proceed  from  the
mere  desire  to  enforce  subjective  opinions,  but  that  what  a
man  fights  for  in  such  cases  is  the  honour  of  something  which,
though  of  universal  validity,  has  been  discovered  by  him,  and
the  non-recognition  of  which  torments  him.  So  that  fanaticism
ia  an  extuniely  natural  activity  of  the  mind,  and  its  iicixe

704  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

zeal  exists  in  even  the  most  morally  developed  societies.  For
how  prevalent  is  the  superstitious  belief  that  it  is  a  duty  not
only  not  to  act  contrary  to  one's  conviction,  but  also  to  carry
it  out  at  any  price  where  there  is  no  obligation  upon  one  to
act  at  all !  Then,  this  misunderstanding  being  met  by  an
admiration  which  is  just  as  much  a  misunderstanding,  there
arises  the  worship  of  those  great  men  who  are  at  bottom  the
slaves  of  their  own  humour,  and  who,  at  the  very  time  when
they  think  that  they  are  serving  only  the  cause  of  universal
truth,  are  seeking  to  impose  upon  the  world  the  forms  acci
dentally  taken  by  their  own  fancy.  They  are  to  be  excused,
for  we  all  err  after  the  same  fashion.

The  hidden  shackle  which  egoism  carries  about  with  it  in
its  inevitable  dependence  upon  the  justification  of  a  universal
is  very  soon  transformed  into  an  external  bond ;  pride  requires
for  its  own  satisfaction  that  others  should  know  too,  and  give
their  recognition.  The  lust  of  rule,  even  in  its  coarsest  form,
cannot  be  content  with  mere  physical  submission,  or  with
absolutely  destroying  an  opposing  will ;  it  desires  that  the
will  should  still  exist,  and  even  that  it  should  be  so  far  free
that  it  can  at  least  recognise  the  ruler's  strength.  The  intoxi
cation  of  power  is  impossible  in  absolute  solitude ;  it  would
not  be  enough  even  for  the  most  savage  negro  chief  that  the
head  of  an  offender  should  fall  at  his  nod,  if  there  were  not
at  least  somebody  there  to  chop  it  off,  and  by  his  obedience
to  the  nod  to  recognise  it  as  an  exercise  of  power.  And
though  all  should  obey  in  total  silence,  yet  the  potentate
would  know  that  the  slaves,  as  they  obeyed,  must  observe
one  another ;  there  would  be  no  pleasure  in  such  an  exercise
of  power  if  the  factual  obedience  of  one  could  not  be  exhibited
to  others.  This  deep  need  which  egoism  feels  for  justification
by  the  recognition  of  others,  explains  the  extraordinary  restrain
ing  power  which  the  judgment  of  public  opinion  everywhere
has  over  our  efforts.  Continual  reference  to  what  will  be
thought  of  us  by  others  who,  for  us,  represent  the  universal  as
contrasted  with  our  own  individuality,  takes  the  place  of  men's
own  conscience — more  or  less  successfully  and  completely — in

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  705

the  earliest  historic  times  as  well  as  in  the  early  stages  of
individual  development  and  in  those  low  conditions  of  culture
in  which  a  part  of  our  race  is  always  found.  This  dependence
upon  the  opinion  of  others  becomes  at  once  stronger  and
nol»ler  in  cases  where  natural  relations  give  direct  authority
to  some  individuals,  and  this  authority  is  strengthened  by
countless  bonds  of  benefits  bestowed  and  grateful  remembrance.
TIence  the  most  barbarous  people  has  never  undertaken  an
egoistic  war  of  all  against  all,  but  has  always  distinguished
friends  and  kinsfolk  from  enemies  and  strangers.  Especially
natural  is  the  awe  of  children  for  those  who  bring  them  up,
and  that  obedience  towards  protecting  power  and  wisdom
which  is  the  beginning  of  all  other  virtues.

And  here  we  must  not  forget  that  not  only  is  there
implanted  in  man's  nature  the  rebellious  pride  which  revolts
against  what  is  alien,  but  that  likewise  our  unconquerable
impulse  towards  imitation  shows  that  at  the  very  time  when
we  are  struggling  not  to  let  another  surpass  us,  we  do  in  fact
acknowledge  his  actual  superiority.  Indeed,  the  less  distant
and  many-sided  are  the  ends  for  which  the  uncivilised  man
strives,  the  more  is  lie  inclined  to  admire  the  strength  and
grandeur  of  others  and  to  submit  his  own  power  to  theirs.  It
it  were  not  for  the  fortunate  existence  of  this  characteristic,
the  possibility  of  social  life  would  be  hardly  conceivable.
This  capacity  of  self-subordination  develops  into  a  faith  and
devotion  towards  chiefs  and  leaders  in  which  there  is  no  doubt
a  germ  of  genuine  moral  evolution.  But  this  morality  is  not
regulated  by  general  laws  of  feeling,  but  is  grounded  on  the
personal  worth  of  those  whom  the  actions  in  question  affect.
Here  evil  means  wounding  the  soul  of  him  whom  we  love,
and  whilst  towards  such  an  one  all  the  virtues  of  benevolence
may  be  developed,  even  to  the  point  of  refined  tenderness,
fierce  hatred  and  revenge  towards  all  enemies  may  go  on
undisturbed.  And  children  too,  up  to  a  certain  point,  only
understand  punishments  which  an-  given  in  anger,  and  in
which  the  parent's  pain  is  plainly  shown  ;  chastisement  calmly
given  seems  to  them  merely  a  groundless  and  exasperating

VOL.  L  '2  v

706  BOOK  V. CILUTEli  V.

infliction  of  suffering.  It  is  only  later  that  they  learn  to
know  that  there  are  general  rules  of  action  which  are  binding
even  when  their  transgression  is  not  accompanied  by  any
perceptible  disturbance  of  the  comfort  of  others.

S  6.  The  authoritative  precepts  which men  received  from
their  teachers  in  the  early  stages  of  civilisation  did  not  con
tain moral  instruction  in  the form  in  which  we,  who  live
under  the  influence  of  Christianity,  are  accustomed  to  receive
it. These  precepts  were  at  first  indications  which  had  refer
ence  rather  to  commercial  relations  and  the  status  of  persons
than  to  mental  dispositions. They  concerned  moral  ceremonies,
and required a particular attitude of mind towards every
object,  and  a  particular  demeanour  in  every  relation,  without
giving  general  principles  by  which the  will  might  be  guided
in  the multiplicity  of  possible cases. The content of  this
traditional morality itself  had not  grown out of  universal
principles, but was the product of  experience, which had
taught men that  in certain  conditions  of life,  in  a  certain
temper of  society, in cases where certain occupations and
immediate  aims  were  made  necessary  by  circumstances,  there
was  some  particular  form  of  reciprocal  behaviour,  and  some
particular  code  of  individual  rights  and  duties  which  would  go
furthest  towards  the  general  satisfaction  of  the  claims  of  all.
The  structure  of  such  a  system  of  traditional  morality  will  be
the  more  solid,  the  less  its  formation  resembles  that  of  the
statutes  of  a  society  which  is  of  mushroom  growth  ;  that  is,
the  less  arbitrary  it  is,  and  the more  gradually  it  has  grown
up  through the efforts of individuals  who  felt  themselves
oppressed  to  improve  their  condition  ;  and  the  system  will  last
on  unquestioned  as  long  as  men's  circumstances,  temperament,
and  intellectual  horizon  continue  unchanged. What  every  one
finds  already  accepted,  what  he  sees  obeyed  by  others,  and  is
himself  called  upon  to  obey  by  a  thousand  warnings,  partly
articulate,  partly  the  voiceless  warnings  of  circumstances,  all
this  seems  to  him  as  self-evident  as  those  intellectual  assump
tions  in  the  belief  of  which  he  has  grown  up. Every  infraction
of  this  traditional  code,  be  it  what  it  may,  is  punished  by  that

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  707

uneasiness  of  spirit  and  remorse  which  attends  any  breach  of
long-established  habit

We  must  acknowledge  that  a  very  powerful  consciousness
of  duty  and  of  moral  obligation  may  exist  under  such  con
ditions  of  life  ;  but  the  moral  worth  of  such  morality  may
vary  to  an  infinite  degree.  It  depends  upon  the  mental
and  physical  constitution  of  the  members  of  any  society
whether  wise  or  preposterous  rules  shall  hold  the  place  of
absolute  binding  moral  commands.  In  our  judgment  oi
things,  all  depends  upon  the  notions  which  we  form  of  the
significance  of  our  own  being,  of  the  dignity  proper  to  man.
and  of  the  ends  which  he  should  attain.  When  an  Indian
tortures  his  captured  enemy,  this  is  no  proof  that  he  is  not
guided  by  some  Idea  of  right ;  by  so  acting  he  affords
the  conquered  man  ;in  opportunity  of  upholding  his  honour
by  that  silent  endurance  and  contempt  of  pain  which  seem
to  him  the  ideal  of  manly  perfection ;  and  he  himself,  if
the  same  unlucky  fate  should  befall  him,  endures  as  great
suffering  with  equal  fortitude.  In  his  willingness  to  be
measured  by  the  same  standard  by  which  he  measures
another,  he  is  no  doubt  led  by  a  sentiment  of  savage  justice
which  fails  of  attaining  its  true  end.  When  the  dignity  of
human  eil'ort  is  depressed  by  physical  want  and  a  monotonous
existence,  bare  of  all  wealth  of  thought,  wln-ii  each  sees  in
the  other  only  a  creature  with  capacities  of  animal  enjoyment,
and  not  an  intelligent  being  everv  hour  of  whose  existence
should  be  devoted  to  the  accomplishment  of  a  sacred  task,  it
is  not  surprising  that  the  estimation  of  the  worth  of  human
life  should  fall,  and  that  one  man  should  sacrifice  another  to
his  own  ends  and  caprices,  with  little  hesitation,  and  without
demanding  that  he  should  be  treated  by  a  third  person  in  any
but  the  same  fashion.  When  we  shudder  at  the  thought  ot
the  atrocious  cruelty  with  which  many  savage  tribes  treat
their  own  kindred,  we  may  also  reflect  on  the  stupidity  of
the  submission  with  which  it  is  all  enduivd.  What  if
evidenced  by  both  the  cruelty  and  the  submissiveness  is  not
the  total  absence  of  any  sentiment  of  justice,  but  only  a  failure

708  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

to  understand  the  worth  of  life.  And  not  only  the  depravity
of  the  South  Sea  islanders,  but  also  the  advanced  civilisation
of  classic  antiquity,  shows  much  moral  hardness  arising  from
this  defective  insight  into  the  significance  of  human  life.

From  instinctive  obedience  there  is  a  gradual  progress  to
conscious  principles  of  action,  due  partly  to  the  conflict  which
any  individual  mind  always  finds  between  its  own  impulses
arid  prevailing  moral  customs,  partly  to  changes  in  the  circum
stances  in  which  the  customs  originated,  partly,  in  fine,  in  the
restlessness  of  reflection  when  it  has  once  been  awakened —
reflection  which  even  without  the  stimulus  of  personal  interest
will  not  be  withheld  from  the  consideration  and  investigation  of
all  objects  with  which  human  life  is  concerned,  including  even
the  binding  obligation  of  morality.  It  is  remarkable  that  of
the  two  directions  which  this  reflection  may  take,  the  one  is  at
first  entered  upon  only  as  it  were  by  stealth.  For  usually
thought  does  not  aim  primarily  at  determining  the  general
views  which  should  guide  us  in  all  cases  in  which  we  are
likely  to  be  called  upon  to  act,  and  yet  language  at  a  very
early  stage  contains  names  for  virtues  and  vices  which  show
us  that  the  merit  and  demerit  of  such  general  modes  of
thought  and  action  have  not  remained  either  unobserved  or
unestimated.  But,  as  a  rule,  reflection  first  fastens  upon  the
notion  of  the  acting  subject,  and  seeks  to  find  in  the  nature
of  the  human  creature  reasons  for  the  kind  of  action  which
are  appropriate  to  this  nature.  Thus  it  happens  either  that
reflection  turns  to  the  investigation  of  natural  desires,  of  the
necessities  of  life  coarse  or  refined,  and  of  those  forms  of
human  effort  which  have  grown  up  of  themselves,  and  seeks
so  to  order  life  that  all  these  may  have  an  equal  opportunity
of  development  and  satisfaction  ;  or  the  dignity  of  man  is
regarded  as  the  all-important  consideration,  and  refined  reflec
tion  requires  that  sentiments  and  actions  should  be  in  corre
spondence  with  it.  The  national  and  historical  differences
which  we  see  in  men's  notions  of,  e.g.,  honour,  depend  upon
the  various  stages  of  development  attained  by  their  view  of
tliis  dignity  of  man,  this  worth  of  human  personality.  Henco,

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  709

whenever  a  society  wants  to  get  rid  of  some  tradition  of
morality  and  habit,  it  generally  bethinks  itself  of  laying  down
afresh  the  universal  rights  of  man  ;  a  proceeding  that  is
extremely  unpractical,  since  nothing  is  more  diilieult  to
formulate  than  these  rights  in  any  case  in  which  there  is
wanted  some  guidance  for  action  under  existing  circum
stances,  but  that  is  at  the  same  time  an  evidence  of  men's
predominant  inclination  to  seek  the  supreme  rule  of  life  and
conduct  in  the  nature  of  the  agent,  and  not  directly  in  the
intrinsic  worth  of  the  actions  themselves.

Kef  lection,  however,  comes  at  last  to  believe  that  it  cannot
discover  what  man  is  merely  from  a  consideration  of  his  factual
nature;  or  perhaps  rather  the  truth  is,  that  by  this  very  con
sideration  our  attention  is  drawn  to  many  strivings  to  which
his  nature  prompts,  and  the  object  of  which  is  not  mere  .self-
preservation,  but  the  attainment  of  some  end  existing  in
imagination.  It  is  impossible  for  the  mind  which  has  been
roused  to  reflection  to  consider  human  existence  without  a.sk-
ing,  What  is  its  origin,  what  its  place  and  significance  in  tin-
world,  what  will  be  its  end  or  what  its  future  life  !  Then-
have  indeed  been  philosophic  schools,  but  never  nations,  that
(without  connecting  human  life  witli  religious  views  of  the  plan
of  the  universe)  have  imagined  themselves  to  possess  such
complete  insight  into  human  nature  that  they  could  deduce
from  it  the  code  of  moral  duties.  AVe  believe  that  we  are
called  to  be  workers  together  in  the  construction  of  a  spiiituul
order,  and  however  obscure  its  plan  and  the  import  of  our
own  share  in  the  work  may  be,  still  we  feel  that  everything
which  seems  to  us  to  be  a  duty  has  its  final  ground  of  obliga
tion  in  its  correspondence  not  with  the  conception  of  our
nature  as  it  is  in  fact,  but  with  the  end  to  which  it  is
destined.  And  this  destined  end  consists  not  in  mere  self-
development,  the  impulse  to  which  works  through  the  germ
and  as  it  were  from  the  past  into  the  future,  but  in  movement
towards  a  goal  which  is  set  before  us.

Meanwhile  religious  views  may  contain  as  serious  error
as  any  ether  department  of  human  knowledge,  and  although

710  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

the  ordering  of  men's  actions  in  accordance  with  the  will  of
God  is  a  great  formal  principle,  we  know  of  nothing  which
can  guarantee  us  from  misconstruing  this  will.  The  only  way
indeed  in  which  we  can  interpret  it  is  by  combining  our
speculative  philosophy  with  our  moral  sentiments  ;  and  it  is  a
piece  of  good  fortune  which  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of  course,
if  the  one-sided  views  of  both  prove  to  be  mutually  counter
balancing  and  do  not  produce  a  mere  summation  of  error.  In
fact  we  can  ascribe  to  heathen  religions  little  more  than  this,
that  they  did  by  the  assignment  of  divine  origin,  consecrate
those  significant  institutions  of  social  life,  the  indestructible
worth  of  which  is  not  at  all  times  of  equally  convincing  clear
ness  to  the  untutored  mind  ;  and  also  that  they  infused  into
the  whole  of  life  a  pervading  sense  of  dependence  upon  a
divine  order.  On  the  other  hand,  they  did  not  altogether
neglect  to  indicate  the  dispositions  on  which  the  worth  of  the
individual  person  depends — still  they  left  this  task  for  the
most  part  to  the  judgment  of  living  feeling,  which  is  led  by
reflection  to  the  approval  of  one  mode  of  action  and  the  dis
approval  of  another  principally  by  a  representation  of  the
pleasure  or  displeasure  which  such  action  would  cause  to  us
if  we  were  the  persons  affected  by  it.  And  it  was  just  here
that  the  natural  dispositions  of  different  nations — in  some
cases  good  nature  that  was  without  merit,  in  others  guiltless
barbarity — had  greatest  scope  for  producing  the  most  various
moral  constructions,  the  result  sometimes  of  delicate  suscepti
bility  for  noble  feelings,  sometimes  of  a  wild  inclination  to
savage  and  cruel  conduct ;  and  there  run  through  all  certain
ideas  of  right  and  duty,  which,  however,  are  connected  with
individual  actions  after  the  most  illogical  fashion,  sometimes
justly  and  sometimes  in  a  wholly  perverted  way.

§  7.  The  hasty  survey  of  the  history  of  culture  to  which
we  have  been  led,  and  of  the  variety  of  moral  development
which  we  still  see  existing  in  the  different  branches  of  the
human  race,  will  have  corroborated  the  presupposition  which
we  have  already  ventured  concerning  the  foundation  of  ethical
life  in  our  mental  nature.  As  knowledge  arises  unperceived

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  711

from  the  excitations  of  experience,  it  develops  a  host  of
prepossessions,  partly  true,  partly  erroneous ;  if  it  takes  to
self-examination,  it  finds,  as  the  one  thing  of  which  it  is  imme
diately  certain,  belief  in  the  existence  of  Truth  in  general  ;
hut  what  the  content  of  truth  is  for  us,  and  how  much  of  it
u-e  can  discover,  depends  partly  upon  the  content  of  our
experience,  partly  upon  the  attention  and  acuteness  with
which  we  are  moved  to  observe  the  processes  of  our  own
minds.  Just  in  the  same  way  there  arise  from  the  original
nature  of  the  mind  and  the  silently  working  influences  of  cir
cumstances  many  prepossessions,  some  true  and  some  erroneous,
concerning  what  we  ought  to  do  ;  if  we  examine  ourselves,  we
rind  that  at  first  it  is  only  belief  in  Duty  in  general  and  in
binding  laws  of  action  that  stands  out  with  clearness  and  self-
evidence  ;  but  what  these  laws  are,  and  how  far  we  can
comprehend  them  in  their  purity,  depends  partly  upon  the
influence  of  external  conditions  of  life,  which  moderate  or
excite  our  blind  impulses,  partly  upon  the  accuracy  with
which,  in  reflection,  we  separate  the  general  commands  of  Con
science  from  the  individual  forms  in  which,  as  applicable  to
the  particular  circumstances  of  our  own  life,  they  first  press
themselves  upon  us.  From  the  earliest  times  the  human  race
has  observed  external  Nature,  has  used  the  materials  and
powers  thereof,  and  reflected  on  its  modes  of  action — it  has
early  explained  many  individual  points,  and  early  succeeded  in
many  applications  of  natural  products,  and  even  in  many  a
forecast  of  the  future.  But  all  this  was  only  a  hasty  scaffold
ing  full  of  instability,  made  faulty  everywhere,  both  in  theory
and  practice,  by  the  inexactness  of  but  half-true  analogies  ;
the  dominion  of  Thought  over  Nature,  and  the  subduing
of  Nature  by  means  of  a  trustworthy  science  of  practical
arts  first  became  possible  when  an  intellectually  well-endowed
people  succeeded  in  discovering  Mathematics,  that  is,  succeeded
in  combining  into  a  scientific  whole  particular  truths  which
had  been  already  instinctively  known  and  comprehended  by
many.

It  is  somewhat  similar  in the moral  world. There  have

712  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

always  been  good  and  bad  impulses  in  the  human  heart,  and
always,  too,  such  a  rule  of  conscience  that  at  any  rate  on  the
whole  human  life  has  been  preserved  from  the  wholly  blind
unreason  of  animal  desire,  and  sensual  passion  has  at  least  been
kept  in  check  by  some  fixed  landmarks  of  recognised  rights
and  duties;  many  a  region  of  moral  life  has  been  early
illuminated,  and  the  worth  of  many  a  good  disposition  and  cf
many  an  ethical  institution  has  become  plain  betimes  to  the
minds  of  men ;  in  all  ages  we  encounter  numerous  features  of
moral  sensitiveness.  But  all  this  morality,  such  as  it  was,
continued  to  be  as  fluctuating  as  the  imperfect  knowledge  of
Nature  above  referred  to ;  the  way  in  which  men  applied  the
precept,  that  we  should  do  to  others  as  we  would  they  should
do  to  us,  depended  on  the  strength  or  weakness  of  their
nerves,  and  on  the  ardour  or  apathy  of  their  sensuous  nature.
Justice  and  fidelity  and  faith  may  in  a  certain  sense  be  formally
exercised  in  blood  and  cruelty  and  outrage,  as  well  as  in  the
greatest  effeminacy  of  peaceful  enjoyment,in  voluptuousness  and
uncleanness.  One  part  of  our  conscience,  that  which  speaks  oi
our  reciprocal  duties,  is  soon  satisfied,  and  this  the  more  easily
in  proportion  as  the  claims  on  life  and  enjoyment  of  all  con
cerned  are  the  less.  But  that  other  part  of  conscience  which
enjoins  upon  us  to  make  very  large  claims  on  existence,  can
only  raise  its  voice  in  proportion  as  insight  into  the  destiny
of  man  and  his  place  in  Nature  increases.  This  nobler
morality  is  never  attained  without  the  most  active  co-opera
tion  of  the  intellect,  indeed  never  wholly  without  the
co-operation  of  really  scientific  reflection,  yet  indeed  never  by
these  alone,  the  experience  of  life  itself  is  indispensable — life
that  in  the  increasing  multiplicity  of  its  ethical  relations  is
ever  bringing  into  consciousness  fresh  distinctions  which
before,  to  a  blunter  sense,  seemed  indifferent,  but  now  to  the
growing  moral  sensibility  seem  as  if  they  ought  to  be  included
in  the  science  of  human  nature.  Although  it  may  be,  and
certainly  in  our  opinion  is,  the  case  that  an  indestructible  core
of  good  is  innate  in  men's  consciences,  and  that,  moreover,  the
goodness  of  men's  natural  disposition  prevents  this  universal

CONSCIENCE  AND  MORALITY.  713

formal  feeling  of  IJight  from  generally  arid  directly  sanctioning
relations  which  are  contrary  to  the  true  work  of  humanity —
though  all  this  may  be  so,  still  we  must  hold  to  our  conviction
that  the  untutored  mind  of  man  is  by  no  means  capable  of  pro
ducing  the  clear  insight  into  all  mural  commands  which  seems
to  us  so  natural  because  it  Hows  forth  to  us  from  the  fountain
of  Christian  education  without  any  effort  on  our  part.

5  8.  If  we  cast  a  comprehensive  glance  over  the  foregoing
considerations,  we  are  led  back  to  the  question  with  which  we
set  out.  Every  animal  in  the  wild  state  lives  through  the
whole  course  of  development  possible  for  creatures  of  its  kind,
unless  it  suffers  untimely  removal  through  natural  circum
stances  ;  and  even  where  domestication  at  the  hand  of  man
produces  in  animals  a  more  marked  development  of  certain
capacities  than  would  have  resulted  from  their  natural
surroundings,  yet  they  never  diverge  noticeably  from  the
sphere  of  ideas  and  aims  proper  to  their  species.  In  the
mental  life  of  the  human  race  there  are  such  immense
differences  that  one  might  almost  doubt  whether  amid  the
variety  there  really  were  at  bottom  any  common  measure.
Yet  we  believe  that  there  might  be  found  certain  definite
features,  characteristic  modes  of  working,  which,  occurring  in
all  human  souls,  bring  them  together  into  a  common  class,  but
by  infinite  differences  in  the  degree  in  which  they  are  present
in  difl'erent  persons,  cause  all  the  variety  of  individual
character.  We  have  tried  to  show  that  this  common  and
indestructible  feature  of  the  human  mind  consists  in  the  Idea
of  valid  and  binding  Truth  and  the  sense  of  Universal  Kight
and  a  Universal  Standard  by  which  all  reality  must  be  tried.
We  have  also  sought  to  indicate  the  greater  or  less  height  of
development  which  these  may  attain  in  the  course  of  life.
We  believed  that  we  could  perceive  even  in  the  merely
sensitive  life  an  inclination  to  assign  to  every  content  of
sensation  its  proper  place  among  others,  to  find  in  every  tasted
pleasure  that  there  was  some  intrinsic  excellence  in  the  thing
enjoyed,  to  seek  experience  in  all  directions;  not  merely  in
order  to  procure  for  self  the  advantage  of  a  pleasant  enlarge-

714  BOOK  V. CHAPTER  V.

ment  of  life,  but  to  seek,  in  inseparable  connection  with  this,
to  provide  in  one's  very  enjoyment  a  place  where  the  worth
of  things  and  events  may  have  existence  for  conscious
ness.  The  same  impulse  appears  again  in  language  which,
however  poor  it  may  be.  is  never  a  mere  collection  of
exclamations  in  which  disturbance  of  mind  has  sought  an
outlet.  All  language  bears  the  impress  of  a  universal  and
sovereign  order,  according  to  which  the  relations  of  things
have  inherent  connection.  So  language  prepared  the  way  for
knowledge,  or  was  its  earliest  and  most  natural  expression ;
for  we  also  found  that  a  clear  consciousness  of  the  existence
of  universal  and  necessary  Truth  raises  the  cognition  of  the
human  mind  above  such  trains  of  ideas  as  occur  in  the  psychic
life  of  brutes.  Finally,  we  found  that  we,  like  all  other  living
creatures,  have  part  in  pain  and  pleasure,  in  a  natural  impulse
to  seek  the  one  and  avoid  the  other.  But  the  self-judging
Conscience,  and  the  ineradicable  Idea  of  binding  Duty  which  in
us  accompanies  action  and  feeling,  distinguish  human  creatures,
as  members  of  a  realm  of  Mind,  from  brutes  whose  vital
activity  depends  upon  feeling  merely.  If  we  choose  to  sum
up  under  the  name  of  the  Infinite  that  which  stands  opposed
to  particular  finite  manifestations,  we  may  say  that  the
capacity  of  becoming  conscious  of  the  Infinite  is  the  dis
tinguishing  endowment  of  the  human  mind,  and  we  believe
that  we  can  at  the  same  time  pronounce,  as  a  result  of  our
considerations,  that  this  capacity  has  not  been  produced  in  us
by  the  influence  of  experience  with  all  its  manifold  content,
but  that  having  its  origin  in  the  very  nature  of  our  being,
it  only  needed  favouring  conditions  of  experience  for  its
development.

EXD  OF  VOLUME  I

[VOLUME II]

MICEOCOSMUS:

AN  ESSAY  CONCERNING  MAN  AND  HIS
RELATION  TO  THE  WORLD.

BT

HERMANN LOTZK

ITransIateD  from  tbe  ©erman

BT

ELIZABETH  HAMILTON  and  E.  E.  CONSTANCE  JONES

lEifix^  fEBttton.

IN  TWO  VOLUMES.

VOL. IL

EDINBURGH:

T. & T. CLARK, 38 GEORGE STREET.

1888.

.--"^.^>

^8TEj>

NOTE.

The  whole  of  this  vohime  lias  been  translated  by  Miss
E.  E.  Constance  Jones.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

BOOK VI.

THE  MICROCOSMIC  ORDER ;  i  OR,  THE  COURSE  OF
HUMAN  LIFE  (Der  Weltlauf).

CHAPTER I.

THE IKFLXJENCES OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE.
3  EC.

1.  History,  and  the  Microcosmic  Order,

2.  Effects  of  Cosmic  and  Terrestrial  Influences  upon  the  Human

Soul — Parallelism  between  the  Macrocosm  and  the  Micro
cosm,  ......

3.  Natural  Features  of  a  Country,  and  Character  of  the  Inhabitants

— Life  with  Nature, .....

4.  Relation  of  Man  to  Nature, ....

PAOD

3-6

6-13

13-20

20-23

CHAPTER II.

THIS NATURE OF MAN.

1.  Temperaments — The  Meaning  of  Temperament,  .  .

2.  Differences  of  Temperament — The  Successive  Stages  of  Human

Life — Connection  between  the  Vital  Feelings  which  have  a
Corporeal  and  those  which  have  a  Mental  Origin,

3.  Differences  between  the  Sexes — General  Mental  Peculiarities  of

Women,  .......

4 .  Hereditj',  and  Original  Difference  of  Endowment, .  .

24-26

26-39

39-47
47-49

CHAPTER III.

MANNERS AND MORALS.

1.  Conscience  and Moral Taste — Untrustworthiness  of  Natural

Disposition, .......

2.  Food — Cannibalism — Cruelty  and  Bloodthirstiness,

.10-55
5.'i-6l

Cf.  Book  YI.  ch.  i.  §  1,  especially  pageis  4,  6.

VI

CONTENTS.

3.  Cleanness  of  Body  and  of  Mind,  •  .  •  •

4.  Modesty — Disparagement  and  Exaltation  of  Nature — Eealisra

of  Individual Perfection,  and Idealism  of Work — Social
Customs, .  .  .  .  .  •  •

PAOH

61-65

65-75

CHAPTER IV.

THE  ORDER  OF  EXTERNAL LIFE.

1.  Nature  and  Culture — Home  {die  Heimat), .  ,  .  76-81

2.  The  Life  of  Hunters — Of  Sliepherds— Permanent  Occupation  of

Land,  and  Agriculture — Home  {das  Haus),  .  ,  .  81-88

3.  FamUy  Life, 88-91

4.  Society — Division  of  Labour — Callings  of  Individuals — Simple

and  Complex  Structure  of  Society — Civilisation, .  .  91-96

5.  Civilisation— History, ......  96-100

CHAPTER  V.

THE INNER LIFE.

1.  Doubts  concerning  the  Ends  and  Aims  of  Human  Life,  .

2.  Man  as  a  Transitory  Natural  Product— Spontaneous  Judgments,

and  Reflections  upon  them — Connections  with  the  Super-
sensuous  World, ......

3.  Superstition, .......

4.  Religiousness — Unsteadiness  and  Incoherence  of  Human  Eflfort,
Conclusion, .......

101-103

103-112
112-115
115-118
119-121

BOOK VIL
HISTORY.

CHAPTER  L

THE  CREATION  OF  SIAX.

1.  Obscurity  of  the  Beginnings  and  of  the  Future  of  Man's  Life,  . 125-127

2.  Nature  and  Creation, ...... 127-130

8.  Steadiness  of  Development  in  Nature,  and  Arbitrary  Divine

Interference— The Sphere of  Nature and the Sphere of

History, 130-137

4.  The  Genesis  in  Nature  of  Living  Beings  and  of  Man — Impossi-
bility of  setting  this  out  in  Detail, .... 187-143

CONTENTS,

VU

CHAPTER II.

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.

1.  "What  is  History?  .....  ^

2.  History  as  the  Education  of  Humanity,

3.  History  as  the  Development  of  the  Idea  of  Humanity— Con-

ditions necessary  to  make  such  a  Development  valuable —
Concerning  Reverence  for  Forms  instead  of  for  Content,

4.  History  as  a  Divine  Poem,  .....

5.  Denial  of  any  Worth  in  Historical  Development — Condition  of

the  Unity  of  Humanity  and  of  the  Worth  of  its  History,

PAOK

144-145
145-154

154-168
168-169

169-176

CHAPTER III.

THE FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.

1.  Theories  as  to  the  Origin  of  Civilisation,  .  .  .  177-179

2.  Theories  of  a  Divine  Origin, .....  179-183

3.  Organic  Origin  of  Civilisation — Instance  oi  Language,  .  183-188

4.  Importance  of  Individual  Persons, ....  188-192

5.  Laws  of  the  Historic  Order  of  the  World — Statistics — Deter-

minism and  Freedom,  ..... 192-202

6.  Uniformities  and  Contrasts of  Development — The  Decay of

Nations — Influence  of  Transmission  and  Tradition,  .  . 202-209

CHAPTER IV.

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF DEVELOPMENT.

1.  Common  Origin  of Mankind — Assumption of  Plurality  of

Origin,  ..,.-.

2.  Variety  of  Mental  Endowment,

3.  Guidance  of  Development  by  External  Conditions,

4.  Geographical  and  Climatic  Furtherances  and  Hiudrances,
6.  Examples  of  Peoples  in  a  State  of  Nature,  .  .

210-218

218-

-222

222-

-230

230-

-238

238-

-244

CHAPTER  V.

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

1.  Stationary  Civilisation  and  Nomadic  Life  in  the  East,  . .  24?^-255

2.  Semitic  and  Indo-Germanic  Nations, ....  255-257

3.  Ancient  Greece,  . . . . . • .  257-263

4.  Ancient  Rome, .......  263-267

5.  The  Hebrews  and  Christianity,  .....  267-273

6.  Character  and  Early  History  of  the  Germanic  Nations, .  274-277

7.  The  Germanic  Nations  in  the  Middle  Ages, . . .  277-286

8.  9.  The Characteristics,  the Problems, and  the  DilBculties  of

Modern  Times, 286-301

vm

CONTENTS.

BOOK VIIL
PROGRESS

CHAPTER I.
TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE  {das  Wissen).

1.  Stages  of  Philosophic  Thought — Mythologic  Fancy,

2.  Cultured  Reflection, ......

3.  Development  of  Greek  Thought,  ....

4.  5.  Science — Over- Estimation  of  Logical  Forms  and  Confusion  of

them  with  Matter-of-Fact, .....

6.  Philosophic  Problems  of  Christian  Thought  —  Limitation  of

Thought  to  the  Elaboration  of  Experiences  —  The Exact
Sciences, .......

7,  8.  The  Principal  Standpoints  of  Philosophy,  and  its  Efforts  in

trying to  reach  a  Knowledge  of  the  Nature  of  Things —
Idealism  and  Realism,  .....

805  311
811-314
314-318

318-835

335-345

345-360

CHAPTER IL

WOKK  AND HAPPINESS.

1.  Pleasure  and  the  Means  to  Pleasure — The  Patriarchate,  , 861-36S

2.  The  Adventures  of  the  Heroes — The  Liberal  Culture  of  A  uti-

quity — Slavery,  ...... 868-376

3.  The  Growth  and  Preponderance  of  the  Industrial  Classes,  . 376-380

4.  Economic  Character  of  the  Present  Time,  and  its  Causes  and

Effects,  ....... 380-885

5.  The  Modern  Forms  of  Labour  and  their  Social  Consequences, . 385-397

CHAPTER  in.

BEAUTY  AND  AKT.

1.  Art  as  an "Organism,"  and  as  the Expression  of  Human

Feeling,  .......  398-399

2.  Eastern  Vastness — Hebrew  Sublimity,  ....  399-404

3.  Greek  Beauty, .......  404-416

4.  Roman  Elegance  and  Dignity, .....  416-424

5.  The  Individuality  and  Fantasticalness  of  the  Middle  Ages-

Romance, .  .  .  .  .  .  . 424-432

6.  Beauty,  Art,  and  iEslhcticism  in  Modem  Life,  .  , 432-443

CHAPTER IV.

THE BELIGIOUS LIFE.

1.  Comparison  of  Eastern  with  Western  Life  and  Thought,  . 444-448

2,3.  Nature  and  Social  Life  as  Sources  of  Religious  Ideas,  .^ ..a  Aar

8,  4.  Preponderance  of  the  Cosmological  Element  in  Heathendom,  J

CONTENTS.

IX

5,  6.  And  of  the  Moral  Element  in  Judaism  and  Christianity,

7.  Christianity  and  the Church  —  Returning  Preponderain'o

Cosmology  in  the  New  Philosophical  Dogmatism, .

8.  Life  and  the  Church, .....

of

PAGE

4(55-476

'J76-488
<l{J8-494

CHAPTER  V.

POLITICAL  LIFE, AND SOCIETY.

1.  The  Family,  and  Tribal  States— The  Kingdoms  of  the  East

Paternal  Despotism,  .

2.  The  Political  Constructions  of  the  Greeks,

3.  Civic  Life  and  Law  in  Rome,

4.  Political  Life  and  Society  in  the  Middle  Ages,

5.  The  Autonomy  of  Society,

6.  National  and  Historical  Law,
Practicable  and  Impracticable  Postulates  : —

7.  Duty  of  Society  as  regards  its  Members,

8.  State  and  Society,

9.  Constitutional  Government — Socialism,
10. International  Relations,

495-505
505-520
520-529
529-532
532-540
540-541

544-548
549-560
560-564
564-5C7

BOOK IX.
THE UNITY OF THINGS.

CHAPTER L

OF  THE BEING  OF THINGS.

1.  Introiluction, ....... 571-574

2.  Three  Elemental  Forms  of  Knowledge  and  the  Problem  of  tlieir

Connection, .......  574-578

3.  The  Being  of  Things  a  State  of  Relatedness, .  .  .  578-587

4.  Comparability  of  the  Natures  of  Things,  .  .  .  587-594

5.  Necessity  of  the  Substantial  Connection  of  Finite  Multiplicity

in  the  Unity  of  the  Infinite, ..... 594-599

6.  Summary,  ....... 599-601

CHAPTER IL

THE SPATIAL  AND SUPERSENSUOUS WORLDS.

1.  The  Doctrine  of  the  Ideality  of  Space, ,  .  .  602-610

2.  The  Correspondence  of  the  Real  Intellectual  and  of  the  Apparent

Spatial  Places  of  Things, 611-617

3.  Removal  of  even  the  Intellectual  Relations  between  Things  ;

Sole  Reality  of  Reciprocal  Action — Notion  of  Action,  . 617-623

4.  Summary,  ....... 624-625

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER II.

THE  BEAL  AND  THE IDEAL.
INC.

J.  Contradictions  in  the  Notion  of  Things  and  in  their  Formal
Determinations,  ......

2.  Idealistic  Denial  of  Things— All  that  is  Real  is  Mind,  .

3,  4.  "What  it  is  that  we  must  seek  to  Construct,  and  What  it  is

that  we  have  to  recognise  as  immediately  given, .
5.  Summary,'  .....••

626-636
636-647

647-657
667-658

CHAPTER IV.

THE  PERSONALITY  OF GOD.

1.  Faith  and  Thought, .....

2.  Evidence  of  the  Existence  of  God,  ...

3.  Impersonal  Forms  of  the  Supreme  Being,

4.  Ego  and  Non-Ego — Objections  to  the  Possibility  of  tht  l^srsoii

ality  of  the  Infinite, .....

5.  Somiuary,  ......

659-663
663-671
671-678

678-687
687-688

8.

CHAPTER V.

GOD  AND  THE WORLD.

Didiculties  in  this  Chapter, .....  689-690

The  Source  of  the  Eternal  Truths  and  their  Relation  to  God, .  690-699

The  Creation  as  Will,  as  Act,  as  Emanation, .  .  .  699-707

Its  Preservation  and  Government ;  and  the  Idealitj'  of  Time, .  707-713

6.  The  Origin  of  Real  Things— Evil  and  Sin, .  .  .  713-719

Good, Good  Things,  and  Love  —  The Unity  of  the llirce

Principles  in  Love, ......  719-726

Conclusion, .......  727-729

■  I  have  tried  to  make  plain  the  antithesis  in  this  Chapter  between  (1)  real,
Reale,  Realitdt,  and  (2)  wirklich,  Wirkliche,  Wirklichkeit,  by  writing  Eeal,
Realneas  in  the  text  for  (1).  As  this  way  of  marking  the  difference  did  not
occur  to  me  until  the  Chapter  was  in  print,  the  question  of  making  previous
Chapters  correspond  could  not  be  considered.

BOOK VI.

THE  MICEOCOSMIC  OEDER

VOL.  II

CHAPTEE  I

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTEKNAL  NATURE.

History,  and  the  Microcosmic  Order — The  Effects  of  Cosmic  and  Terrestrial
Influences  upon  the  Human  Soul — Parallelism  between  the  Macrocosm  and
the  Microcosm — Natural  Features  of  a  Country,  and  Character  of  the
Inhabitants — Life  with  Nature — Relation  of  Man  to  Nature.

S  l_~r>YGONE  times  which  are  beyond  the  reach  of  our
-»~-^  own  recollection  seem  to  imagination  extremely
obscure.  All  the  serious  interests  of  life  and  all  the  trifling
and  folly  by  which  we  ourselves  are  stirred,  are  so  closely
bound  up  with  clear  and  definite  images  of  our  surroundings,
that  we  feel  perplexed  and  astray  when  we  would  picture  to
ourselves  the  same  varied  wealth  of  existence  in  times  divided
from  the  present  by  an  infinite  series  of  changes  by  which  the
background  and  accessories  of  life  have  been  transformed
We  almost  fancy  that  in  those  olden  days  the  sun  must  have
shone  with  a  different  radiance,  that  the  voices  of  Nature
must  have  spoken  in  different  tones,  and  the  world  have  lain
in  twilight  as  contrasted  with  our  present  life  of  noontide
brightness.  History  indeed  depicts  for  us  on  this  sober  back-
ground great  deeds  and  mighty  events,  but  is  for  the  most
part  silent  concerning  the  small  causes  which  combined
to  produce  them.  How  the  heroes  of  classic  times  were
housed  and  clothed,  what  was  their  manner  of  speech,  and
how  they  filled  up  the  blank  intervals  of  time  between
their  mighty  deeds,  is  left  for  the  most  part  to  be  determined
by  our  own  wandering  fancy.  There  are  but  few  periods  of
human  history  which  have  left  us,  in  works  of  art,  speaking
monuments  from  which,  besides  the  glory  of  heroic  deeds,
we  also  learn  something  of  the  stirrings  of  men's  minds,  the

philosophic  views,  the  conflict  and  the  joy  from  which  sprang

s

4  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  L

those  great  results.  But  however  truly  and  naturally  poetry
may  reproduce  for  us  many  of  the  features  of  everyday  life,
it  must  naturally  leave  many  gaps,  and  it  is  most  difficult
for  us  to  ascribe  to  the  thoughts  of  such  far-off  personage.3
in  their  treatment  of  common  things  that  familiarity  and
supple  ease  upon  the  vividness  and  completeness  of  which  our
own  sense  of  life  principally  depends.  Every  delineation  of
long  past  times  which  we  attempt  seems  to  us  true  in  propor-
tion as  it  emphasizes  particular  points  of  importance,  jumping
from  one  to  another — and  this  not  only  because,  on  account
of  our  lack  of  historical  knowledge,  we  are  unable  to  clothe
the  skeleton  of  narrative  with  the  flesh  and  blood  by  which
its  different  parts  were  connected  in  reality,  but  also  because
it  is  extremely  difficult  for  us  to  get  rid  of  the  notion  that  in
those  old  days  everything  was  said  and  done  after  a  stilted
fashion  that  would  'have  suited  the  immobility  of  marble
statues.  If  in  the  writings  of  antiquity  we  come  across  some
graceful  trait  instinct  with  life,  some  touch  of  unaffected  fun,
some  vivid  description  of  scenery  sketched  in  a  few  careless
strokes,  how  great,  even  now,  is  the  concourse  of  wondering
interpreters  calling  upon  us  to  admire  this  classical  revelation  of
genuine  human  nature  !  As  if  we  could  have  expected  anything
else — as  if  we  might  not  have  supposed  that  a  cultivated  people
of  antiquity  would  be  susceptible  to  all  the  minor  charms  and
beauties  of  life,  and  would  have  found  expressions  for  their
emotions  as  adequate  as  those  which  are  familiar  to  the  mouth
of  every  modem  booby !  No  doubt  the  course  of  history  has
by  degrees  produced  variations  of  colouring  in  human  imagi-
nation, and  greatly  widened  its  scope  by  increasing  know-
ledge of  men's  earthly  abiding-place,  by  intercourse  between
nations,  and  by  gradually  enlarging  acquaintance  with  the
world  of  Ideas ;  but  not  the  wliole  of  life  is  included  in  this
forward  movement ;  there  is  a  region  of  human  existence  in
which,  at  all  times,  the  same  ends,  motives,  and  customs  recur
without  any  alteration.  All  the  generations  that  have  passed
away  have  dreamed  and  observed,  loved  and  hated,  hoped  and
despaired,  worked  and  played,  just  as  we  do,  and  those  who

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTEKNAL  NATUEF*  5

come  after  us  will  do  the  same.  The  same  passions  which
move  us,  the  same  intriguing  calculations  of  greed  and  ambi-
tion, the  same  hidden  motives,  or  the  same  unreserved  devotion
of  affection,  which  we  praise  or  blame  in  one  another — all
these  have  from  the  earliest  times  worked  in  human  hearts.
And  though  external  results  exhibit  various  forms  and  dimen-
sions according  to  the  direction  and  degree  of  culture  at  any-
given  time,  there  is  still  no  doubt  that  we  are  mistaken  if,
putting  faith  in  a  foolish  analogy,  we  imagine  that  we  can
find  among  primitive  men  nothing  but  the  inconsiderateness
and  empty-headedness  of  children.

This  it  is  that  we  mean  by  the  Microeosmic  Order — ■
the  impulses  ever  fresh  and  ever  the  same,  out  of  which
have  sprung  the  many-hued  blossoms  of  history,  the  eternal
cycle  in  which  human  fates  revolve.  It  is  indeed  true  that
this  order  may  not  be  strictly  a  cycle,  but  that  the  apparent
recurrence  may  include  some  hidden  progress.  Still  even  we,
who  live  in  times  in  which  at  any  rate  the  outward  splendour
of  progress  is  unfolded  more  vividly  than  ever  before  our  eyes,
even  we  may  say  to  ourselves  that  the  true  value  of  our  inner
life  is  but  slowly  if  at  all  increased  by  all  this.  There  arise
no  fresh  springs  of  enjoyment  which  had  not  flowed  before,  or
if  indeed  the  springs  are  new,  yet  that  which  they  distribute  is
still  but  the  old  pleasure  for  which  our  nature  is  designed;  our
cognition  may  be  enlarged  boundlessly,  but  the  results  almost
always  lead  us  back  to  thoughts  which  men  have  had  long
ago.  It  seems  as  though  former  ages  had  extracted  from
different  and  perhaps  poorer  material  those  same  treasures  of
happy  or  exalted  feeling  which  we  with  far  greater  expenditure
of  scientific  and  technical  power  imagine  we  are  discovering
anew.  In  the  ordinary  view  all  our  labour  is  for  the  most
part  only  a  more  extensive  preparation  for  life  and  not  itself
a  fuller  life,  though  indeed  we  frankly  confess  that  this  is  not
altogether  true.  Progressive  culture  is  not  unlike  a  majestic
waterfall  which,  seen  from  a  distance,  seems  to  promise  great
things,  and  which  yet  when  we  look  nearer  does  not  appear
to  shower  upon  the  soil  of  life  a  greater  amount  of  refreshing

6  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  I.

and  really  fertilizing  spray  than  was  afforded  for  the  refresh-
ment and  satisfaction  of  the  quieter  life  of  antiquity  by  the
more  modest  stream  of  a  less  splendid  civilisation.

We  cannot  renounce  the  hope  that  in  this  flux  and  reflux
of  human  development  there  may  be  found  a  tendency  towards
some  finite  goal ;  but  before  we  attempt  to  trace  a  plan  of
historic  progress  and  training  of  the  human  race,  we  would
linger  for  a  while  over  the  stationary  aspect  which  is  at  first
presented  to  us  by  the  struggles  and  the  destiny  of  men.
The  spectacle  is  one  which  may  be  regarded  with  very
various  feelings.  We  cannot  without  an  emotion  of  melan-
choly see  the  same  evil,  the  same  passions,  the  same  seeds  of
all  wickedness  recurring  in  every  age ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,
it  is  a  consoling  thought  that  every  age  has  also  had  access  to
everything  in  which  men's  hearts  can  find  real  and  ^^ssential
happiness,  and  that  every  age  in  its  own  fashion — a  fashion
which  satisfied  it — had  part  in  that  higher  world  which  has
indeed  become  clearer  to  us,  but  is  not  on  that  account
grasped  more  strongly  by  our  minds.  Our  intention  for  the
present  is  to  seek  in  the  nature  of  human  intelligence,  and  in
the  ever-recurring  conditions  of  man's  life,  the  ready-made
instruments  with  which  Providence  works  in  history ;  to  seek
out,  that  is,  the  natural  order  of  the  world,  regarding  which
we  may  in  a  later  chapter  ask.  To  what  end  does  the  Supreme
Will  bend  the  course  of  its  uniform  progress  ?

§  2,  Such  being  our  aim,  attention  is  in  the  first  place
attracted  to  the  conditions  of  external  Nature  under  which  we
are  placed,  and  their  varied  influence  upon  us,  whether
obvious  or  unobserved.  In  so  far  as  these  circumstances
affect  our  corporeal  life  or  provide  us  with  means  for  the
satisfaction  of  our  wants,  their  action  is  on  the  whole  plain,  and
in  a  more  detailed  consideration  than  we  can  here  attempt,
nothing  more  would  be  required  than  to  establish  in  special
cases  the  relative  worth  for  civilisation  of  each  one  of  these
influences.  But  reflection  is  very  commonly  disposed  to  take
a  more  profound  view  of  the  relation  between  man  and  Nature,
and  instead  of  measuring  the  gain  or  harm  which  we  receive

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE,  7

from  the  latter,  or  seeking  to  find  the  direction  which  it  gives
to  our  action,  people  prefer  to  speak  of  an  immediate  and
more  mysterious  sympathy  which  binds  man  to  Nature,  and
especially  to  his  dwelling-place  the  earth.  Indeed,  they  prefer
to  speak  of  the  earth  as  not  merely  his  dwelling-place,  but
compare  the  relation  between  him  and  it  to  the  intimate
relation  subsisting  between  mother  and  child,  or  between  a
parasite  and  the  organism  which  supports  it ;  they  speak  of
the  powers  and  tendencies  to  development  which  are  inherent
in  the  earth  as  being  repeated  under  more  significant  forms  in
the  bodies  of  men ;  of  every  internal  fluctuation  of  telluric
life  as  finding  an  echo  in  changes  of  human  organization ;  and
say  that  what  earth  herself  vainly  struggles  to  express,  receives
a  spiritualized  manifestation  in  the  constitution  of  conscious
beings.

We  have  already  remarked  at  length  upon  the  great  extent
to  which  the  character  of  organic  beings  inhabiting  the  surface
of  a  planet,  is  determined  by  the  special  nature  of  the  planet
itself — in  respect,  that  is,  of  the  materials  which  compose  it,
and  the  conditions  of  mobility  and  capacity  of  combination
which  it  prescribes  to  them.  We  have  referred  to  a  view  accord-
ins  to  which  the  connection  between  the  earth  and  man  is
different  from  that  now  indicated ;  a  view  according  to  which
not  only  is  man  forced  by  the  nature  of  his  material  abiding-
place  to  use  particular  means  for  the  attainment  of  his  own
ends,  not  only  is  he  provided  by  its  continual  influences  with
fresh  material  which  the  organism  appropriates  and  elaborates
after  its  own  fashion,  but  moreover  the  whole  of  this  human
life  is  after  all  only  a  mystical  repetition  of  the  life  of  the
earth,  and  of  its  internal  tremors.  This  view  seems  to  owe
its  convincing  power  to  the  strange  inclination  which  men  so
often  have  to  regard  what  is  unintelligible  and  indemonstrable
as  having  pre-eminent  truth  and  profundity,  especially  in
cases  where  the  unintelligibility  is  such  that  a  sort  of
mysterious  awe  may  attach  to  it.  There  is  no  occasion  to
deny  any  one  of  the  actual  facts  which  are  usually  brought
together  with  reference  to  the  reciprocal  relation  which  we

8  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  I.

are  discussing,  but  we  may  be  sure  that  it  is  only  a  capricious
liking  for  obscurity  which  requires  that  they  should  be  judged
from  this  particular  point  of  view.

How  often  do  such  perverse  considerations  begin  with  a
reference  to  that  alternation  of  sleep  and  waking  in  men,
which  is  in  sympathy  with  the  day  and  night  of  the  world,
and  to  that  emotion  of  dread  when  darkness  sets  in  from
which  no  one  is  altogether  free !  What  in  fact  are  night  and
day  for  the  earth  ?  Is  it  anything  more  than  an  arbitrary
play  of  fancy  to  call  the  earth  asleep  because  the  noise  ceases
which  we  and  the  other  animals  are  accustomed  to  make
during  the  day-time  ?  Or  because  there  are  no  longer  those
oscillations  of  ether  which  by  day  make  it  light  to  our  eyes,
but  affect  the  earth  merely  by  causing  a  rise  of  temperature
which  extends  only  a  few  inches  below  the  surface  ?  What
other  activities  are  there  which  rest  during  the  night  ?  Or
what  dread  and  fear  is  there  in  Nature  itself,  with  which  we
are  in  sympathy  ?  It  is  in  us  that  there  is  light  or  darkness,
in  us  that  there  is  serenity  or  fear,  and  neither  the  one  nor
the  other  results  from  our  being  affected  by  some  pervading
condition  of  the  earth,  but  from  the  fact  that  alterations  of
outward  circumstances,  indifferent  in  themselves,  are  at  one
time  favourable,  at  another  time  unfavourable  to  the  require-
ments of  our  active  nature.  Such  circumstances  act  upon
the  sensitive  constitution  of  our  mind,  which  feels  not  only
how  much  but  also  in  what  way  they  aid  or  hinder  us,  and
is  able  to  connect  all  this  with  various  trains  of  thought ;
and  these  circumstances,  so  acting,  produce  mental  condi-
tions which  are  our  own  property,  and  are  not  mere  participa-
tions in  a  universal  life  such  as  Nature  is  certainly  not  capable
of.  How  often,  too,  is  it  said  that  with  the  changing  seasons
of  the'  year  the  bodies  and  souls  of  individuals  suffer  from  sym-
pathetic affections,  and  even  that. in  the  course  of  geologic  ages
the  very  nature  of  men  rejoices  and  mourns  with  the  youth  and
age  of  the  earthly  sphere  itself;  that  convulsions  of  Nature  cor-
respond to  all  the  revolutions  of  human  history ;  that  the  tem-
perament and  national  fancy  of  the  inhabitants  of  any  country

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE.  9

are  directly  affected  by  the  conformation  of  its  land  and  the
prevailing  hue  of  its  sky  !  We  would  not  deny  that  these  state-
ments have  a  certain  basis  of  fact ;  but  it  would  be  better  to
try  and  find  in  each  individual  case  the  means  by  which  any
natural  circumstances  have  produced  in  organic  life  an  impres-
sion or  an  echo  of  themselves.  One  gains  little  more  than  the
weird  charm  of  a  ghost  story  by  exaggeratingwith  devout  admira-
tion what  is  incommensurable  and  irrational  in  these  circum-
stances, instead  of  trying  to  remove  it  by  close  investigation.

One  cannot  think  without  serious  regret  of  this  perversion
of  thought  which  has,  as  it  were,  taken  up  the  mantle  of
astrology.  It  has  not  merely  delayed  the  commencement  ot
more  exact  research,  but  has  moreover  introduced  a  general
fashion  of  romancing  about  phsenomena  which  is  supposed,
with  but  little  show  of  reason,  to  involve  some  specially  pro-
found understanding  of  them.  It  would  no  doubt  be  interest-
ing to  investigate  historical  fluctuations  in  the  bodily  and
mental  condition  of  mankind  in  their  relations  to  the  physical
alterations  of  the  surface  of  the  earth.  The  history  of  epidemics
teaches  us  that  every  visitation  of  any  pestilence  encounters
different  receptivity  and  various  modes  of  reaction  in  living
bodies,  and  we  can  mark  out  considerable  periods  of  time
within  which  the  human  frame  has  a  special  predisposition  to
sickness  of  some  one  particular  type.  It  is  probable  that  the
same  combination  of  inner  and  outer  conditions  which  causes
this  striking  one-sided  susceptibility  produces  also  in  persons
who  are  in  a  healthy  state  some  peculiar  modification  of  general
condition  and  tone.  The  higher  mental  interests  of  mankind
might  thus  at  different  times  be  modified  bv  various  emotional
conditions,  sometimes  by  a  relaxed  apathetic  state,  sometimes  by
a  state  of  great  and  anxious  excitability,  and  it  may  possibly
be  the  fact  that  the  peculiar  influences  of  outward  Nature  upon
man  in  every  age  have  left  their  traces  in  the  productions  of
that  age,  in  the  colouring  of  its  poetry,  in  the  nature  of  its
favourite  superstitions,  in  the  general  direction  oi  its  mtel-
lectual  powers.  But  the  most  necessary  rule  of  such  inves-
tigations would  be  not  to  try  and  find  what  is  not  there  and

10  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  L

not  to  over-estimate  these  influences  of  Nature  as  compared  with
the  much  more  obvious  influences  which  are  to  be  sought  in
the  uninterrupted  transmission  by  education  of  the  same  wants,
problems,  interests,  and  sorrows  from  one  generation  to  another,
and  in  the  solidarity  of  social  life.  The  assertions  of  paral-
lelism between  natural  and  spiritual  revolutions  are  for  the
most  part  innocent  of  any  such  cautious  procedure.  It  is  as
easy  to  understand  how  widespread  and  devastating  disease  is
developed  on  the  direct  path  of  immediately  causal  influence,
by  a  great  social  upheaval  with  all  its  train  of  unusual  bodily
and  mental  exertion,  privations,  and  wretched  substitutes  for
the  ordinary  means  of  subsistence,  as  it  is  to  understand  how,
conversely,  striking  natural  events,  earthquakes,  inundations,
or  epidemics  have  caused  social  movements  to  result  from
physical  necessities.  Accounts  of  plagues  in  times  most
remote  from  one  another  unite  with  melancholy  unanimity
in  showing  us  how  quickly  all  the  moral  obligations  of
order,  duty,  and  affection  are  dissolved  under  the  influence
of  terror,  how  excited  and  terrified  imaginations  become
incapable  of  any  sober  judgment,  and  the  wildest  super-
stition, alternating  with  the  densest  folly,  rages  unchecked.
Yet  it  can  hardly  be,  that  any  great  historical  revolution  has
arisen  entirely  from  such  a  source ;  if  it  were  so,  the  storm  of
revolt  would  be  allayed  by  the  alleviation  of  the  physical
distress  which  aroused  it.  To  seek  here  for  any  more
mysterious  connection  between  cosmic  and  human  life  is
but  to  follow  a  will-o'-the-wisp.  It  is  easy  to  bring  for-
ward the  facts  that  the  downfall  of  Grecian  civilisation  in
the  Peloponnesian  war,  the  last  struggles  of  the  Eoman  empire,
the  rise  of  Mohammedanism,  the  Crusades,  the  discovery  of
America,  and  the  Eeformati<)n  were  contemporaneous  with  de-
vastating epidemics ;  but  when  these  coincidences  are  adduced,
it  is  forgotten  that  at  many  other  periods  of  less  historical
importance,  and  in  countries  not  included  in  the  great  stream
of  historical  development,  similar  plagues  have  sometimes
raged  under  like  conditions,  and  sometimes,  having  first
arisen  under  unknown  conditions,  have  spread  by  means  of

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTEENAL  NATURE. 1 1

the  ordinary  channels  of  communication  to  districts  with  the
social  circumstances  of  which  they  had  originally  nothing  to
do.  Plague  and  yellow  fever  have  continued  their  ravages  in
their  native  haunts  down  to  recent  times  without  any  con-
nection with  great  political  events,  and  it  is  hardly  credible
that  an  outbreak  of  cholera  in  India  should  have  been  in
necessary  correspondence  with  contemporaneous  revolutionary
movements  in  Paris.

The  same  insecurity  hovers  about  our  views  as  to  the
influence  of  climate  upon  the  character  of  a  people.  We
cannot  seriously  decide  offhand  that  the  backward  civilisation
of  negroes  is  due  to  the  blazing  sun  that  beats  down  upon
their  heads  and  makes  it  impossible  for  them  to  gaze  upwards,
and  by  heating  their  blood  to  fever  point,  inspires  them  with
ungoverned  passions.  Even  at  the  equator  the  sun  is  not  in  the
zenith  day  and  night ;  and  when  we  think  of  the  relaxing  and
yet  exciting  effect  which  our  own  greatest  summer  lieat  has  upon
ourselves,  we  forget  that  in  consequence  of  the  long  acclima-
tization of  the  negro  this  effect  may  for  him  have  become  so
modified  as  to  be  merely  one  of  those  pleasures  of  existence
which  are  regarded  as  matters  of  course,  and  are  certainly  not
self-evident  barriers  to  the  progress  of  development.  The
monotony  of  the  tropical  year  in  contrast  to  our  changing
seasons,  has  also  been  adduced  as  another  hindrance  in  the
way  of  advanced  civilisation.  There  are  undoubtedly  present
vital  changes  which  we  as  certainly  feel,  changes  produced  by
the  transitions  of  the  seasons  that  cause  alterations  in  our
bodily  economy,  but  these  changes  are  little  known  to  us  in
detail.  The  mental  effect  of  these  natural  circumstances  is
to  be  found  rather  in  the  facts  which  they  present  for  our
observation  than  in  the  impressions  which  our  senses  imme-
diately receive  from  them.  We  learn  abundantly  from  the  songs
of  poets  how  significant  for  our  emotional  life  are  these  great
periodic  alternations  of  decay  and  resurrection  to  life,  with  all
the  hopes  and  remembrances  that  attach  to  their  different
phases.  Not  only  do  we  here  see  our  own  destiny  symbolized  in
a  thousand  images  appealing  to  the  senses,  but  also  a  deeper

12  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  I.

feeling  for  the  slowly  passing  phases  of  human  life,  and  the
characteristic  advantage  of  each  may  certainly  be  connected
with  this  clear  marking-off  of  time  into  divisions.  Such
occasions  for  thoughtful  and  self-examining  reflection  no  doubt
occur  less  effectively  where  blossoms  and  fruit  are  always
^rowing  and  blooming  and  ripening  at  the  same  time  as  the
fresh  shoots  are  budding  forth ;  but  even  with  ourselves  the
impression  of  human  transitoriness  is  softened  by  the  way  in
which  the  gaps  left  by  death  are  unobtrusively  filled  up
every  moment  by  creatures  newly  born  into  the  world.  How
different  it  would  be  if  the  human  race,  like  the  vegetable
life  of  these  climates,  all  together  growing  old,  or  blooming
in  fresh  youth,  were  to  die  ofif  completely  in  fixed  periods
and  be  replaced  by  a  new  growth !  But  in  such  a  case,  who
could  deduce  the  absence  of  historical  recollection  and  his-
torical progress  among  the  black  races  from  the  absence  of
clearly-defined  seasons  of  the  year  ?

The  character  of  the  African  continent,  its  isolation  and
inaccessibility,  without  bays  or  gulfs,  has  seemed  to  many
to  be  mirrored  in  the  mental  constitution  of  the  negro.  We
cannot  deny  the  influence  of  this  conformation  of  the  land,
though  we  may  not  hold  that  it  consists  in  this  inexplicable
mirroring.  It  is  to  be  found  in  the  material  hindrances  to
intercourse  between  nations  presented  by  a  wide  extent  of
continent  without  a  corresponding  supply  of  navigable  rivers,
and  the  obstacles  to  a  clear  comprehension  of  their  position
and  proximity  to  one  another  presented  by  the  absence  of  any
large  gulfs  and  of  numerous  and  well-distributed  mountain
ranges.  In  comparing  views  of  scenery,  we  feel  directly  that
in  the  simultaneous  presentation  of  a  wide  extent  of  country
there  is  something  that  does  one  good  and  seems  to  enlarge
the  soul,  and  that  there  is  a  keen  pleasure  in  being  able  to
comprehend  in  one  view  a  multitude  of  different  but  con-
nected objects,  enclosed  as  it  were  in  a  firm  network  of
relationships.  The  notion  of  being  able  to  reach  any  place  by
a  given  amount  of  movement  in  a  given  direction  can  never
be  a  substitute  for  the  peculiar  impression  of  clearness  which

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTEKNAL  NATUEK 13

we  receive  from  actually  seeing  its  position  with  reference  to
other  places.  The  dweller  in  the  wilderness  has  at  any  rate
a  boundless  horizon  spread  before  him ;  in  the  interior  of  a
continent  where  there  are  no  mountain-tops  from  which  one
may  survey  the  country,  which  is  otherwise  impenetrable  to
the  view  on  account  of  its  luxuriant  vegetation,  permanent
obscurity  invests  even  adjoining  districts,  and  fancy  here  could
never  look  with  such  a  far-seeing  and  penetrating  glance  into
the  comprehensive  connectedness  of  human  life,  as  it  has  done
since  ancient  times  from  the  favoured  shores  of  the  Mediter-
ranean Sea.  Many  points  could  be  found  there  upon  the
mountains,  the  level  coast,  and  the  sea  itself,  from  which  one
could  behold  at  once  numerous  countries  and  islands  like  a
wreath  of  many-coloured  flowers,  and  could  watch  the  busy
traffic  which  connected  them  all  together.  In  every  case  where
anything  complex  falls  into  well-defined  groups  distinctly
marked  off  from  one  another,  a  clearer  and  more  intelligible
picture  is  presented  than  where  immeasurable  continuity
offers  no  fixed  points  of  support  to  the  imagination;  in  this
way  it  is  that  the  alternation  of  land  and  water  in  the
Mediterranean  region  has  much  facilitated  geographical  appre-
hension, and  also  at  the  same  time  aided  a  part  of  our  know-
ledge concerning  the  relation  of  man  to  the  universe.  But  we
cannot  regard  these  influences  nor  the  hindrances  offered  to
commerce  by  great  unbroken  extents  of  continent  as  being  in
themselves  sufficient  explanation  of  the  backwardness  of  the
negro  races ;  we  ourselves  look  at  these  latter  circumstances
chiefly  as  hindrances  to  the  eager  zeal  of  discoverers ;  but
they  could  not  present  really  formidable  barriers  to  a  steadily
progressive,  long-continued  struggle  of  native  tribes  unless
reinforced  by  other  causes.

§  3.  If  the  other  condition  which  must  be  added  to  the
favour  or  disfavour  of  geographical  situation  in  order  to
explain  a  small  or  great  degree  of  progress  be  sought  in  the
character  of  the  country  which  is  reflected  sometimes  usefully,
sometimes  detrimentally  in  the  mental  dispositions  of  its
inhabitants,  we  get  upon  still  more  slippery  ground,  and  the

14  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  I.

observations  on  tins  point  which  we  fancy  we  make  do
certainly  contain  an  extraordinary  amount  of  sesthetic  self-
deception.  We  are  justified  in  expecting  that  extreme  cold-
ness and  severity  of  climate  will  produce  dispositions  deficient
in  quickness  and  activity,  and  that  greater  warmth  and
uniformity  will  cause  a  boundless  development  of  all  bodily
and  mental  capacities ;  and  when  our  conclusions  go  no  further
than  this,  they  are  confirmed  by  a  comparison  of  different
nations  and  the  countries  which  they  inhabit.  But  when  we
go  beyond  this  and  think  that  we  find  men's  special  pecu-
liarities of  imagination,  civilisation,  and  mode  of  thought  to  be
in  direct  and  perceptible  harmony  with  the  countries  in  which
they  dwell,  we  are  led  astray  by  the  circumstance  that  a
country  and  its  inhabitants  are  ever  presented  to  us  in
conjunction  as  making  one  picture,  having  therefore  that
appearance  of  intrinsic  aesthetic  connection  which  comes  to  be
assumed  by  any  fact  which  is  continuously  presented  to  us.
The  Dutchman  in  Holland  seems  to  us  to  be  suited  only  to  his
own  flat,  fertile,  lowland  home,  the  North  American  Indian  we
imagine  to  be  the  only  fitting  denizen  of  his  forests  and
steppes ;  but  if  we  see  Mynheer  in  the  Sunda  Islands,  or  the
Anglo-Saxon  ■  pioneer  in  the  far  west  of  North  America,  we
can  hardly  say  that  either  the  one  or  the  other  is  in  irrecon-
cilable contradiction  with  his  new  surroundings,  unlike  as
they  are  to  those  of  his  native  place — unless  indeed  we  look
with  an  eye  prejudiced  by  recollection.  The  same  ground
which  the  ancient  Greeks  once  trod  is  now  pressed  by  the
foot  of  the  Turk,  and  it  seems  to  us  that  the  one  race  matches
the  physical  background  just  as  naturally  and  harmoniously
as  the  other.  The  physical  nature  of  any  country  is  a  whole
composed  of  very  varied  parts,  and  the  nature  of  its  inhabit-
ants is  equally  complex.  The  comparison  of  two  pictures  both
so  many-sided  and  composite  is  sure  to  furnish  him  who  is
seeking  to  establish  a  relationship  between  them  with  some
evidence  in  support  of  his  view,  if  he  has  a  capacity  for
skilful  combination ;  it  will  also  furnish  without  much
difficulty,  to  him  who  seeks them,  points  enough in  which

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE. 15

there  exists  an  inexplicable  contrast  between  the  two.  The
creative  power  of  Nature  which  produced  in  India  the  colossal
elephant,  produced  there  also  a  race  of  men  by  no  means
equally  colossal,  but  on  the  contrary  surprisingly  feeble ;  one
might,  however,  fancy  the  cunning  and  incalculable  fierceness
of  its  beasts  of  prey  to  be  repeated  in  the  dispositions  of  the
human  inhabitants,  as  some  have  thought  that  they  saw
reproduced  in  them  the  slender  grace  of  various  native  plants.
Often  the  only  effect  that  magnificent  scenery  has  upon
the  minds  of  the  inhabitants,  results  from  the  hindrance
which  features  of  great  natural  beauty  present  to  the  ordinary
occupations  of  life ;  the  dweller  in  the  Alps  owes  to  the
character  of  his  home  an  unusual  development  of  bodily
strength,  and  also  of  conscious  worth  fostered  by  the  necessity
of  continual  self-reliance,  but  he  does  not  receive  from  it  the
freedom  and  breadth  and  fulness  of  spiritual  interests  which  it
seems  to  us  would  fitly  correspond  with  the  boundless  horizon
stretched  out  before  him.  The  false  notions  which  people  so
often  have  of  the  connection  between  a  country  and  the
dwellers  in  it,  result  from  neglecting  to  investigate  the  actual
means  by  which  Nature  really  comes  to  operate  in  mental
life.  That  any  object  has  a  definite  form  and  position,  is  no
sufficient  reason  for  our  necessarily  perceiving  that  it  has  that
form  and  position,  or  even  for  perceiving  it  at  all ;  our  doing
so  depends  upon  whether  its  form  and  position  and  all  its
qualities  are  presented  to  our  eye  and  our  mind  through  the
effects  which  it  has  upon  us.  And  it  is  not  enough  that  the
vault  of  heaven  should  stretch  above  us  in  various  degrees  of
blueness  and  purity  and  brightness,  that  we  should  be  sur-
rounded with  bolder  mountains  and  more  luxuriant  vegetation;
in  order  to  understand  the  educative  influence  of  Nature  upon
us,  we  ought  to  know  first  what  circumstances  make  a  notice-
able physical  impression  upon  us ;  secondly,  for  how  much  of
the  £esthetic  worth  of  these  spectacles  we  have  the  capacity
of  reception  which  is  a  condition  of  feeling  this  worth  and  of
assimilating  it  for  the  needs  of  general  development;  and
lastly,  how  much  of  it  all  is  lost  upon  us  because  it  is  obscured

16  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  I.

in  our  consciousness  by  other  influences  which  are  responded
to  by  more  pressing  natural  interests.  In  so  far  as  mental
character  depends  upon  external  Xature,  it  does  not  depend
upon  what  this  Nature  is,  but  upon  how  it  affects  the  as  yet
untutored  minds  of  men  who  are  habitually  surrounded  by  it.
The  effect  of  external  Nature  is  not  to  be  directly  estimated
by  considering  the  impression  that  it  makes  upon  a  mind  that
is  already  educated,  and  that  comes  to  it  merely  as  a  spectator
and  not  as  dwelling  with  it  and  in  the  midst  of  it.

On  the  whole,  one  hears  much  said  of  those  happier  times
when  there  was  more  intimate  communion  between  man  and
Nature,  and  we  wish  that  we  could  return  to  that  transparently
simple  existence  and  leave  the  clouds  of  sophistication  in
which  our  modern  life  is  wrapped.  This  longing  may  be
justified  if  what  it  desires  is  social  arrangements  a  little  more
in  accordance  with  the  natural  impulses  of  humanity,  and  free
from  the  excess  of  traditional  trammels  by  which  we  are  at
present  hemmed  in;  but  it  is  certainly  wrong  if  it  expects
that  a  fuller  enjoyment  of  external  Nature  as  contrasted  with
social  life,  would  produce  more  exalted  happiness  and  a  truer
development  of  humanity.  When  a  man  exhausted  by  the
interminable  distractions  of  his  daily  occupation  hastens  to
open  the  great  book  of  Nature  and  to  read  therein,  he  scarcely
notices  that  which  is  the  only  redeeming  touch  of  truth  amid
all  the  pedantry  and  folly  of  the  fancy  picture  to  which  we
have  referred ;  the  admission  that  Nature  has  a  permanent
charm  only  for  the  mind  accustomed  to  dwell  on  some
great  connected  system  of  interests,  whether  scientific  or  social,
or  for  the  soul  that  having  been  thus  exercised  now  finds  in
external  phsenomena  innumerable  reminders  of  the  experience
of  his  life,  living  solutions  of  his  doubts,  refutations  of  his
prejudices,  confirmations  of  his  hopes,  and  incitements  to
further  investigation.  It  is  the  culture  of  the  heart  and  the
understanding  developed  by  the  relations  between  man  and
man  which  first  makes  us  capable  of  receiving  further  culture
at  the  hand  of  Nature ;  a  man  who  has  always  lived  and  who
continues  to  live  alone  with  Nature,  would  be  hardly  more

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE.  17

Stirred  by  her  influences  than  the  wild  animals  who  live  on
umLdst  all  this  glorious  beauty  without  being  softened  or
ennobled  by  it.

One  may  be  enthusiastic  about  the  life  which  a  hunter
leads  who  wanders  through  the  American  forests  and  prairies
alone  with  Nature ;  but  the  intelligent  glance  that  can  take  in
and  enjoy  the  changing  phsenomena  of  his  surroundings  he
owes  to  his  early  education  and  to  the  (perhaps  long  unheard)
language  of  his  own  people,  which  calls  up  along  with  every
fresh  thought  a  thousand  remembrances  of  the  home  and  the
civilisation  which  he  has  left ;  and  the  intellectual  dower
which  he  has  received  from  these  is  just  as  indispensable  to
him  as  are  the  material  aids  of  civilisation.  How  the  young
romance  over  adventurous  wanderings,  and  think  that  they
could  plunge  with  full  satisfaction  into  the  lonely  enjoyment
of  ligature !  And  they  do  not  remark  what  a  large  share  of
their  pleasure  is  due  to  the  sociability  of  travel,  and  how  little
the  continuous  absence  of  friendly  intercourse  with  men  could
be  supplied  even  by  the  countless  occasions  of  far-reaching
trains  of  thought  which  Nature  furnishes  to  the  instructed
mind.  The  continued  view  of  some  striking  natural  beauty,
operates  upon  the  mind,  if  we  are  alone,  as  a  gradually  in-
creasing pressure,  as  an  impulse  which  fails  to  find  its  object.
This  tension,  half  pleasant,  half  painful,  is  lessened  but  not
quite  removed  by  the  consciousness  that  others  share  it  with
us ;  for  it  arises  not  only  from  the  need  for  sympathy,  but
also  from  our  feeling  that  we  really  do  not  know  exactly
what  this  beauty  of  Nature  should  prompt  us  to  do.  For  it
is  in  human  nature  to  be  prompted  to  some  action  by  any-
thing which  interests  it ;  it  cannot  remain  long  in  a  condition
of  passive  enjoyment  without  feeling  the  inner  restlessness  of
unsatisfied  activity.  But  it  is  into  such  a  position  that  Nature
always  forces  us  at  first ;  all  its  visional  splendour,  however
clearly  it  may  be  spread  before  us,  is  yet  something  of  which
in  itself  we  can  have  no  intimate  comprehension.  It  is  indis-
putable that  the  light,  and  the  sunset  glory,  and  the  fresh
green  of  spring,  and  the  wonderful  outlines  of  hill  and  valley,

VOL.  II.  B

1 8  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  L

take  our  spirit  captive  with  their  charm ;  but  all  this  glorious
beauty  is  voiceless,  nor  do  we  know  aright  what  we  would
have  of  it ;  we  can  never  get  nearer  to  any  of  these  phsenomena,
and  though  the  light  should  shine  for  ever,  and  the  woods  be
ever  green,  our  enjoyment  of  these  living  pictures  would  never
be  heightened  or  increased  in  significance  if  we  did  not
supplement  them  by  thoughts  of  our  own.  What,  indeed,  are
they  to  us  ?  The  answer  would  be  easy  if  we  could  embrace
the  sunset  glow,  or  feed  upon  the  green  beauty  of  the  woods ;
or  if  it  were  possible,  in  any  way,  to  probe  somewhat  deeper,
and  with  a  more  active  exercise  of  our  own  powers,  the  "  open
secret"  of  Nature — open  and  yet  so  close — to  sound  this
seeming  depth,  which  on  nearer  inspection  is  ever  seen  to  be
for  us  a  mere — and  yet  impenetrable — surface.  Since  however
this  cannot  be,  our  interest  in  a  riddle  which  seems  insoluble
dies  out ;  we  always  indeed  retain  a  capacity  of  being  freshly
roused  by  it,  but  it  cannot  occupy  the  mind  continuously  and
alone.  Suppose  we  have  reared  some  plant  with  the  greatest
care  and  pains,  when  at  last  the  blossoms  appear,  a  sort  of
helplessness  comes  over  us,  as  if  we  did  not  know  what  to
do  next;  our  interest  is  momentarily  re-awakened  when  we
show  it  to  others  ;  but  to  look  at  it  for  long  together,  makes  us
inclined  to  ask.  What  is  the  use  of  it  ?  We  should  not  wish
to  see  the  most  charming  prospect  spread  out  before  us  for  ever
without  alteration ;  there  is  not  enough  meaning  in  it ;  all
these  things  suffice  only  to  make  a  pleasing  background  for  life
itself;  they  are  graces  of  existence  which  we  lay  aside  and
return  to  again.  A  day  of  lonely  enjoyment  of  Nature,
although  enriched  by  all  the  intellectual  delight  that  may  be
derived  from  solitary  reading,  secretly  seems  to  us  incomplete
and  half-wasted,  unless  a  word  with  some  fellow-creature
crowns  the  day,  reminding  us  of  that  community  of  human
life  in  which  we  are  included.  I  believe  that  such  emotions
occur  in  every  one  who  observes  himself,  and  they  explain  the
profound  sense  of  discord  and  the  discomfort  produced  in  us
by  the  laboured  attempts  of  a  good  deal  of  feeble  poetry  to
entertain  us  by continual immersion in the mystery and

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTEENAL  NATURE.  19

romance  of  natural  phsenomena,  whilst  our  heart  is  hun^erin*^
not  for  mere  symbols  and  analogies  but  for  the  full  pulse  of
life  itself,  and  thirsting  for  reality.

These  are  feelings  which  belong  to  civilised  life.  He  who
thinks  that  life  is  spoiled  by  such  sentiments,  and  glorifies  the
primitive  condition  of  mankind  as  if  Nature  liad  been  then
less  impenetrable  to  human  intelligence,  indulges  fancies
which  are  extremely  improbable.  We  find  that  the  under-
standing of  Nature  among  those  who  still  have  the  advantage
of  living  in  closer  contact  with  her,  is  not  greater  but  less
than  that  of  those  who  come  to  her  fresh  from  social  life ;  the
former  are  just  those  to  whom  that  which  is  useful  and  the
handiwork  of  men  seems  decidedly  more  valuable  than  the
poetry  of  Nature.  And  even  in  the  present  day  we  can  see
by  reference  to  those  socially  undeveloped  peoples  who  inhabit
tracts  of  land  as  fertile  and  beautiful  as  Paradise,  how  little
immediately  educative  power  there  is  in  the  unelaborated
influences  of  Nature.  Isolated,  and  deprived  of  even  the
imperfectly  organized  community  with  their  fellows  which
these  tribes  enjoy,  men  would  only  feel  with  still  more  force
that  enervating  influence  which  is  exercised  by  natural  sur-
roundings, however  full  of  sensuous  beauty,  as  long  as  they  do
not  arouse  either  the  keenness  of  scientific  search,  or  that
practical  faculty  of  the  mind  which  takes  delight  in  laborious
transformations  of  material  objects.  But  in  fact  Nature  does
arouse  both,  when  she  creates  wants  and  at  the  same  time
affords  the  means  of  gratifying  them.  It  has  been  long  main-
tained, and  with  truth,  that  higher  development  is  hindered  not
only  by  the  extreme  disfavour  of  Nature  but  also  by  that
excess  of  bounty  which  enables  men  to  supply  the  needs  of
life  without  exertion  on  their  part.  Human  culture  began
when  men  began  to  regard  the  earth  as  a  fruitful  field  of
labour ;  but  the  beauty  and  ideal  meaning  of  natural  scenery
has  of  itself  produced  no  culture ;  it  has  in  fact  only  become
intelligible  in  proportion  as  the  school  of  work  has  trained
human  thought  to  form  plans  and  to  appreciate  the  worth  of
success,  that  is,  the  worth  of  the  harmony  established  among

20  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  I.

disconnected  beginnings  by  their  joint  contribution  to  one  final
result.  Man  learns  to  know  and  to  estimate  the  great  value
of  truth  and  of  faithful  law-abiding  constancy  on  which  one
can  depend,  when  he  finds  that  the  soil  with  unfailing  regu-
larity causes  the  seed  entrusted  to  it  to  spring  up  and  ripen,
or  when  a  successful  result  crowns  some  simple  attempt  in
which,  relying  upon  the  teaching  of  his  own  experience,  he
seeks  to  make  an  artificial  arrangement  of  natural  powers
serviceable  to  his  own  ends.  By  this  time  there  has  crept
into  his  consciousness  by  imperceptible  degrees  the  conviction
of  a  connection  between  things  which  in  a  general  way
guarantees  some  conclusion  to  every  beginning,  some  result  to
every  experiment,  to  every  like  cause  a  like  effect,  to  all  events
the  possibility  of  ordered  harmony,  to  every  individual  thing
in  the  world  a  certainty  of  not  being  isolated  or  in  vain,  but
of  ever  finding  some  way  open  by  which  its  longing  and  its
activity  may  be  added  to  the  sum  of  the  universe,  and  in  the
end  make  its  worth  felt.  Under  whatever  forms  early  mytho-
logic  fancy  may  have  pictured  the  life  of  Nature,  it  was  in
truth  a  perception  of  the  ordered  mechanism  of  the  external
world  which  educated  mankind,  and  it  was  the  steady  immuta-
bility of  this  mechanism  which  first  impressed  man's  sense.
He  only  learnt  to  understand  tlie  frank  beauty  of  Nature  in
proportion  as  he  became  able  on  the  one  hand  to  rejoice  in
the  pervading  order  of  the  universe,  and  on  the  other  hand  to
feel  the  bitterness  of  temporary  discord  between  it  and  his
own  individual  wishes — becoming  able,  with  the  help  of  such
experience,  to  find  the  meaning  of  natural  phaenomena.

§  4.  Our  sceptical  observations  have  up  to  this  point  been
directed  partly  against  the  opinion  that  the  peculiarities  of
the  planet  to  which  we  belong  reappear  in  the  general  features
of  the  human  mind,  or  that  particular  peoples  present  a  kind
of  spiritualized  reflection  of  the  character  of  their  native  land ;
they  are  also  partly  directed  against  the  belief  that  these
mysterious  influences  of  cosmic  life  further  the  development
of  humanity.  In  making  these  observations  we  are  renewing
a  warfare,  begun  long  ago,  against  the  inclination  to  see  in

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE.  21

every  individual  department  of  reality  merely  an  imitative
echo  or  a  prophetic  indication  of  some  other  department,  and
in  the  whole  great  circle  of  phsenomena  nothing  more  than  a
continuous  shadowing  forth  of  the  higher  by  the  lower,  and  of
the  lower  by  the  higher.  The  life  of  the  soul  does  not  appear
to  us  as  an  image  of  the  life  of  the  body,  does  not  seem  to  us
to  be  bound  to  develop  some  inner  activity  as  a  counterpart  of
every  individual  function  of  the  body ;  on  the  contrary,  we
hold  that  all  which  is  material  is  but  a  system  of  means
which  the  mind  uses  for  other  than  material  ends,  and  with
the  useful  results  of  which  it  is  concerned,  without  asking  by
what  system  of  activities  the  body  has  secured  this  net  produce
of  available  stimulation.  Again,  man  is  not  a  mere  copy  of
external  Nature,  but  is  a  living  product,  unique  in  kind —
receiving,  indeed,  innumerable  impressions  from  Nature,  yet
not  in  order  that  he  may  reflect  them  back  in  the  form  in  which
they  were  received,  but  that  he  may,  in  accordance  with  his
nature,  be  roused  by  them  to  reactions  and  developments,  the
explanatory  cause  of  which  lies  in  himself,  and  not  in  what  is
external.  We  are  not  here  denying  out  and  out  any  deter-
mination of  man  by  Nature ;  we  even  admit  that  kind  of
dependence  in  accordance  with  which  fluctuations  of  natural
circumstances  tinge  our  inner  life  with  changing  hues.  We
may  and  do  admit  that  our  organic  feelings  depend  upon  the
weather,  our  moods  upon  light  and  air,  the  tone  of  our  thought
upon  season  and  climate.  But  on  the  one  hand,  it  is
mere  superstition  to  lay  extravagant  emphasis  upon  conditions
80  difficult  to  calculate,  whilst  clear  and  imperative  motives
of  our  reciprocal  action  are  seen  much  more  obviously  in
human  passions  and  circumstances ;  on  the  other  hand,  that
which  is  thus  subject  to  the  influences  of  Nature  is  only  our
moods,  those  vague  states  of  mind  which  may  indeed  hinder
or  further  an  impulse  to  development  which  has  originated
elsewhere,  but  which  could  never  of  themselves  have  guided
•  human  progress  in  any  definite  direction.

When,  however,  from  these  considerations  we  turn  to  the
question,  By  what  definite  ideas  of  action  could  Nature  favour

22  BOOK  VI, CHAPTEE  I

the  moral  development  of  mankind  ?  the  beginning  of  all
human  culture  seems  still  more  wonderful.  For  it  is  clear
how  fruitless  must  be  any  attempt  to  borrow  from  soulless
reality  rules  which  have  an  unconstrained  and  natural  relation
to  our  action  with  its  totally  different  motives  and  aims.  To
a  mind  already  alive  to  the  worth  of  law  and  order,  the  fact
of  their  universal  prevalence  is  a  point — and  the  only  point —
in  Nature  which  it  can  recognise  as  presenting  some  similarity
to  the  constitution  of  its  own  conscience,  and  as  affording  a
clear  lesson  for  its  own  guidance ;  but  to  attempt  to  model
the  duties  of  creatures  that  have  mind  and  the  arrangements  of
their  social  intercourse  after  the  particular  forms  in  which  the
phaenomena  of  the  external  world  depend  on  one  another,  is  one
of  the  most  grievous  and  barren  blunders  of  that  sentimental
symbolism  which  we  are  opposing.  What  suits  stars  and
flowers  need  not  on  that  account  suit  us ;  the  most  we  could
expect  would  be  that  the  sure  instincts  which  guide  those
creatures  nearest  to  us  in  the  scale  of  creation  might  perhaps
furnish  a  true  and  unsophisticated  indication  of  what  Nature
requires  of  man,  and  whereto  she  has  destined  him.  We
know  the  ideals  with  which  this  department  of  life  can  furnish
us.  Beside  the  strength  and  grace  of  one  animal  we  see  the
sloth  and  stupidity  of  another,  beside  isolated  moments  of  self-
sacrificing  love  and  fidelity  the  treachery  of  the  most  blind
and  inconsiderate  selfishness,  and  in  some  creatures  dainty
grace  and  timid  beauty,  combined  with  a  cruelty  that  delights
in  tormenting  prey ;  and  the  whole  of  this  motley  picture  in  a
perpetual  ferment,  one  part  cancelling  another.  What  sort  of
conviction  of  an  intelligible  connection  of  the  world,  and  what
sort  of  a  consciousness  of  our  own  duties  could  result  from
such  observations  as  the  foregoing?  It  is  unquestionable
that  he  who  takes  the  nature  of  brutes  as  his  pattern  will
attain  a  development,  not  of  humanity  but  of  bestiality.  He
however  who  begins  to  distinguish  between  the  indications  of
universal  validity  which  Nature  affords  us  even  in  the  life  of
brutes  and  the  impulses  prompted  by  blind  instinct,  though  he
refuses  to  recognise  a  higher  law  of  conscience,  has  already

THE  INFLUENCES  OF  EXTERNAL  NATURE. 23

reached  a  stage  of  criticism  at  which  any  worth  of  natural
impulses  considered  as  furnishing  a  standard  of  right  must
disappear  altogether.  For  he  will  not  be  able  to  deny  that  in
his  own  nature  also,  many  of  these  condemned  impulses  occur,
and  that  too  with  all  the  force  of  importunate  attraction,  and
he  will  then  perceive  that  physical  Nature  cannot  teach  right
or  duty  until  its  indications  have  been  approved  by  the  higher
law  which  is  in  man  himself,  and  until  they  have  become  part
of  the  intelligible  connection  of  a  supersensuous  rule  of  life.

CHAPTER 11.

THE NATUEE OF MAK

Temperaments — The  Meaning  of  Temperament — Differences  of  Temperament —
The  Successive  Stages  of  Human  Life — Connection  between  the  Vital
Feelings  which  have  a  Corporeal  and  those  which  have  a  Mental  Origin
— Differences  between  the  Sexes — General '  Mental  Peculiarities  of  Women
— Heredity,  and  Original  Difference  of  Endowment.

S  1.  nrr  from external  Nature,  the influence  of  which  we

A could  neither  deny,  nor  admit  without  qualification,

we  turn  back  to  ourselves,  we  find  that  the  original  peculiarity

of  our  own  nature  sets  numerous  limits  to  the  development

of  our  individuality. In  temperament,  in  innate  capacities,  in

those  changes  of  the  whole  background of  our mental  life

which  are  inevitably  caused  by  changes  of  age,  in  difference

of  sex,  in  the  varieties  of  susceptibility  and impulse  which

mark  different  nationalities,  are  to  be  found  rules  and  limits

from  which  our  development  cannot  escape. And  from  which,

indeed,  in  many  respects  it  ought  not  to  escape. The  ideal

of  humanity  may  find  in  these  natural  endowments  more  or

less  hindrance  to  its  realization  ;  but  it  is  not  of  the  essence

of  this  ideal  to  require  a  uniformity  from  which  every  tinge

of  individuality  has  been  expunged. It  is  only  among  brutes

that  such  conformity  to  the  type  is  regarded  as  a  perfection ;

among  men  it  is  more  in  accordance  with  the  ideal  that  the

special  nature  of  each  individual  should  impart  to  his  conduct

(of  which  the  general  outlines  are  the  same  for  all  men)  its

characteristic  tone  and  colour.

We  are  little  acquainted  with  the  circumstances  upon  which

these  varieties  of  human  endowment  depend. They  may  be

for  the  most  part  conditioned  by  bodily  constitution,  or  they

may  result  froia  the  gradual  summation  of  innumerable  similar

u

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  25

impressions;  whether  it  he  that  these  continued  influences
have  become  as  it  were  to  a  certain  extent  fixed  as  tendencies
to  development  in  the  hodily  constitution,  or  whether  it  be  that
the  mental  development  of  our  ancestors  has  been  transmitted,  as
innate  capacity,  to  their  descendants,  after  a  spiritual  fashion
which  is  still  less  comprehensible  to  us.  However  this  may
be,  the  differences  exist,  and  we  cannot  altogether  neglect  a
consideration  of  their  consequences,  though  we  may  leave  the
question  of  their  origin  undecided.

Varieties  of  Temperament,  as  of  all  other  innate  natural
capacities,  appear  to  us  to  be  most  marked  under  conditions
of  advanced  civilisation.  This  may  result  from  our  imperfect
knowledge  of  the  more  simple  forms  of  life,  the  distant  view
making  their  uniformity  seem  greater  than  it  is,  or  it  may  bo
that  only  high  culture  affords  scope  for  any  great  development
of  the  characteristic  talents  and  dispositions  of  individuals.
Clear  as  these  differences  themselves  may  be  in  many  cases,
the  signification  of  the  name — temperament — by  which  they
are  distinguished,  continues  vague.  The  original  meaning  of
the  word  seems  to  indicate  that  we  should  understand  tem-
perament to  signify  general  characteristics  of  the  course  of
mental  life  which  do  not  of  themselves  exclusively  predetermine
either  a  fixed  degree  or  a  fixed  direction  of  culture,  but  which
certainly  promote  or  hinder  in  various  ways  the  development
of  intelligence  and  of  moral  character.  These  we  cannot
pronounce  to  be  either  altogether  unconnected  with,  or  indis-
solubly  attached  to,  special  varieties  of  bodily  constitution
and  predispositions  to  particular  forms  of  disease.  Under  the
head  of  temperaments  comes  a  consideration  of  the  throng
of  ideas  which  pass  through  consciousness  together,  the  swift-
ness with  which  one  succeeds  another,  and  the  force  with
which  thought  works,  either  in  one  direction  specially,  or
several  simultaneously,  calling  up  a  more  or  less  numerous
and  harmonious  association  from  the  ranks  of  previous  impres-
sions ;  of  the  fidelity  with  which  previous  perceptions  are
retained,  or  the  rapidity  with  which  they  melt  into  vague
general  images;  of  the  constancy  with  which  an  idea  once

26  BOOK  VI, CHAPTER  U.

taken  up  with  interest  is  held  fast  in  the  midst  of  numerous
changes,  or  the  ease  with  which  sympathy  and  attention  are
diverted  from  their  original  object  to  a  host  of  importunate
accessories ;  of  the  general  degree  of  feeling  roused  by  impres-
sions, and  the  permanence  or  transiency  of  this  feeling ;  of  the
concentration  of  effort  at  certain  points  of  enduring  interest,
or  the  inclination  to  jump  from  one  occupation  to  another,
and  of  the  various  strength  of  the  impulse  to  express  one's
feelings  in  movements,  words,  and  gesture.  Differences  of
temperament  are  just  like  those  differences  in  the  movement
of  a  current  which  are  due  to  the  original  nature  of  its  source
and  channel;  according  to  the  original  density  of  the  fluid,
according  to  the  direction  of  its  fall  and  the  nature  of  its  bed,
the  various  obstacles  with  which  it  meets  cause  it  to  be
disturbed  in  some  cases  by  deep,  slow  movements,  in  others
by  waves  which  merely  fret  its  surface.

§  2.  If  out  of  the  innumerable  varieties  of  individual
temperament  which  we  must  recognise  in  experience,  we
would  emphasize  some  striking  forms  in  which  the  distinctive
features  we  have  noticed  are  grouped  with  most  coherence,  we
shall  naturally  recur  to  the  quaternion  ( Vierzahl)  to  which  anti-
quity, combining  groundless  theory  with  sound  observation,  gave
names  which  are  still  retained.  But  nothing  would  be  gained
by  painting  here  over  again  these  oft-presented  pictures ;  we
shall  be  better  occupied  in  considering  how,  in  the  individual
and  in  society,  temperaments  akin  to  these  do  to  some  extent
naturally  occur,  and  how  to  some  extent  they  should  occur  in
a  regular  course  of  development.

The  health  of  the  body  depends  a  good  deal  upcn  its
different  parts  not  being  so  intimately  connected  as  to  cause
every  shock  received  by  one  to  be  communicated  to  the  others.
It  is  a  sign  of  morbid  weakness  of  nerve  when  the  whole-
some resistance  to  diffusion  which  prevents  the  spread  of
excitation  is  so  far  diminished,  that  every  slight  irritation  affects
the  whole  frame,  and  when  disturbances  of  organic  feeling
which  are  by  no  means  immoderate  immediately  call  forth  a
variety  of  secondary  sensations,  produce  convulsive  movements,

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  27

and  accelerate  secretions,  or  change  their  character.  On  the
other  hand,  one  might  ask  whether  this  general  sensitiveness
to  stimulation  is  not  the  right  state  for  a  mind  to  be  in  prior
to  experience.  Minds  are  not  of  course  destined  to  remain
permanently  in  such  a  state,  but  the  task  of  educating  one-
self, and  of  gradually  establishing  one's  own  character,  can
only  be  satisfactorily  carried  out  when  it  is  unhindered  by
any  original  rigidity  or  sluggishness  of  constitution.  Permanent
excess  of  this  general  capacity  of  reciprocal  excitement  among
all  psychical  states  and  general  sensitiveness  of  the  soul  to  all
outward  stimuli,  distinguish  that  temperament  which  with  a
tinge  of  disapprobation  we  designate  the  sanguine.  We
think  that  to  be  easily  disturbed  and  so  pass  easily  from  one
mood  to  another,  is  natural  and  fitting  in  childhood,  an  age  of
which  the  proper  business  is  to  collect  impressions  by  which
it  may  build  up  its  mental  life  without  prejudice  or  special
preference,  and  in  fact  it  is  generally  where  this  volatility
exists  without  lasting  too  long  that  a  child  develops  most
rapidly.  The  liveliness  of  the  sanguine  temperament  seems  to
us  to  be  also  natural  among  uncivilised  tribes,  the  differences
of  whose  interests  in  life  are  generally  too  slight  and  shallow
to  call  forth  such  a  one-sided  pursuit  of  definite  ends  as  to
weaken  men's  original  receptivity  for  impressions  of  all  kinds.
Only  it  must  be  remembered  that  favourable  conditions  of
external  Nature  are  necessary  for  the  simultaneous  develop-
ment of  quickness  of  mind  and  joyous  activity  of  body.

But  while  this  temper  of  mind  is  advantageous  at  the  out-
set of  development,  it  presents  many  hindrances  to  the  later
development  of  intelligence,  as  well  as  of'  the  emotional  and
moral  nature.  Great  rapidity  in  the  succession  of  ideas,  which
is  made  possible  by  the  short-lived  interest  awaked  by  each
one,  is  to  a  certain  extent  necessary  for  a  child.  This  rapidity
produces  knowledge  of  a  multitude  of  individual  facts,  and
moreover,  by  means  of  the  many-sidedness  of  ideas  which  supple-
ment and  correct  one  another,  it  prevents  the  establishment
of  narrow  notions  and  attachment  to  ideas  accidentally  got
and  not  of  universal  validity  —  faults  whici  men  are only

28  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  II.

too  apt  to  fall  into  in  later  life  in  consequence  of  the  monotony
of  their  particular  occupations.  But  on  the  other  hand,  this
rapidity  of  change  hinders  the  fixation  of  that  which  has  been
acquired,  and  a  sharp  demarcation  of  the  regions  within  which
easily  attained  generalities  are  valid  but  beyond  which  they
cease  to  be  applicable.  It  is  further  necessary  for  a  child
that  feeling  should  be  easily  roused  by  slight  impressions  and
unimportant  perceptions,  and  also  that  the  fluctuations  of  such
feeling  should  be  as  rapid  as  the  fluctuations  of  its  various
occasions.  It  would  be  ill  if  in  children  laughter  did  not
follow  in  the  wake  of  tears,  and  if  instead  of  their  happy
forgetfulness  of  sorrow,  and  even  to  a  certain  extent,  of
salutary  punishment,  a  tenacious  memory  for  all  evil,  for
injustice,  afironts,  and  pain,  were  to  occasion  moods  of  con-
siderable duration  during  which  their  ready  receptivity  would
be  disturbed.  This  characteristic  again,  which  is  an  advantage
in  the  beginning,  becomes  a  disadvantage  later  on.  The  quick-
ness with  which  feeling  that  is  continually  on  the  qui  vive
responds  to  every  momentary  impression,  together  with  the
small  amount  of  effort  which  the  excitation  is  capable  of  call-
ing forth,  leads  to  the  instability  which  must  mark  a  course  of
conduct  prompted  by  motives  not  derived  from  comprehensive
reflection,  or  from  the  combined  tendencies  of  a  formed
character,  but  borrowed  hastily  and  fragmentarily  from  isolated
and  transient  occasions.  Every  human  life  starting  with
infinite  possibilities  of  varied  development,  has  the  task  of
limiting  itself  to  the  finitude  of  some  definite  characteristic  form
which  leaves  a  thousand  early  hopes  unfulfilled,  but  by  way
of  compensation  evolves  from  the  few  impulses  which  it  really
develops  a  thousand  wonderful  and  characteristic  results,  the
rich  variety  of  which  could  never  have  been  suspected  in  the
beginning.  The  man  whose  sanguineness  of  temperament  has
outlived  its  natural  term,  gives  us,  not  inappropriately,  the
impression  of  being  a  grown-up  child,  and  the  social  charm
which  we  readily  grant  to  his  general  responsiveness  and  easy
adaptation  to  all  circumstances,  does  not  make  up  for  the  want
of  trustworthiness,  and  does  not  rouse  that  interest  which  we

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  29

take  in  every  individuality  that  has  actually  worked  out  its
natural  potentialities  to  some  definite  reality.

To  correct  such  faults  without  sacrificing  what  is  attractive
in  such  a  temperament  should  be  the  aim  of  subsequent
development.  The  mind  ought  to  retain  all  its  receptivity,
for  both  great  and  small,  and  for  the  most  various  kinds
of  stimulation ;  but  it  should  at  the  same  time  learn  to  dis-
criminate between  that  which  is  of  great  and  that  which  is
of  little  worth,  and  to  regulate  the  amount  of  responsive  re-
action according  to  the  significance  that  each  impression  has
for  the  interests  of  human  life,  which  gradually  stand  out
more  and  more  clearly  as  forming  a  coherent  whole.  The
natural  course  of  development  begins  the  accomplishment  of
this  task,  the  sentimental  temperament  of  youth  displacing  the
sanguine  temperament  of  childhood.  I  choose  this  name  in
order  to  avoid  an  inexactness  which  is  involved  in  the  ordinary
designation  of  the  melancholic  temperament,  an  expression
which  makes  us  think  of  sadness  and  dejection  of  mind,  and
though  this  unhappy  humour  may  cast  its  gloom  over  the
whole  of  a  man's  mental  life,  in  consequence  of  bodily  disease
or  of  long-continued  misfortune  and  the  memories  which
succeed  it,  yet  it  is  not  itself  one  of  those  general  types  of
inner  life  to  which  the  name  of  temperament  can  be  properly
applied.  Indeed,  the  fact  is  that  this  humour,  like  every  other,
is  compatible  with  any  temperament,  although  one  may  be
more  conducive  to  it  than  another ;  while  what  we  mean  by
the  sentimental  temperament  is  not  one  humour  which  out  of
the  many  that  we  may  experience  has  become  predominant,
but  a  general  propensity  to  give  oneself  up  to  humours,  to  as
it  were  lay  oneself  out  for  them,  and  to  entertain  them  in
greater  force  and  to  a  greater  extent  than  occasion  warrants.
Children  do  not  pick  and  choose  among  impressions  those  that
they  will  attend  to ;  their  curiosity  is  easily  excited  by  facts
of  any  liind  which  can  furnish  them  with  ideas.  If  we  some-
times find  them  disinclined  to  learn,  we  should  remember  how
very  uninteresting  to  them  those  objects  must  be  in  which  we
are  only  interested  because  of  our  knowledge  of  their  signifi-

30  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IL

canca  If  we  consider  this,  we  shall  admit  that  there  is  in
the  child  a  disinterested  readiness  to  appropriate  the  most
various  material,  and  that  the  results  of  this  during  the  early-
years  of  life  far  exceed  what  is  acquired  in  any  equal  space
of  time  in  after  life.  It  is  natural  that  this  undiscriminating
receptivity  should  diminish,  the  more  the  task  of  thoroughly
organizing  the  acquired  material  of  knowledge  comes  into
prominence.  The  youth  therefore  is  more  discriminating  than
the  child  in  his  reception  of  impressions ;  much  seems  to  him
indifferent  or  repulsive  which  the  mental  digestion  of  the
child  readily  assimilated.  But  in  proportion  as  there  have
not  yet  arisen  definite  objects  in  life  in  connection  with  which
all  particular  experience  may  be  steadily  systematized,  the
interest  of  the  soul  will  become  centred  in  the  emotional  worth
of  impressions  ;  it  will  withdraw  from  all  which  does  not
promise  satisfaction  to  its  inclination  for  this  kind  of  excite-
ment, or  conversely  will  use  every  imaginable  impression
merely  as  the  peg  on  which  to  hang  a  succession  of  feelings,
treating  its  intellectual  content  with  unsympathetic  neglect.
Thus  is  formed  the  sentimental  temperament  which  naturally
gives  the  tone  to  mental  life  during  the  period  of  youth ;  and
if  it  does  not  outlast  its  due  time  much  that  is  valuable  and
noble  in  our  development  is  due  to  it.  Being  specially
capable  of  appreciating  the  harmony  or  discord  which  belongs
to  the  formal  relations  of  impressions,  it  is  given  to  the
dreamy  repetition  of  all  that  is  rhythmical  and  in  ganeral  of
all  aesthetic  impressions ;  little  inclined  for  real  hard  work,
but  driven  by  restlessness  of  feeling  to  imaginative  activity,
it  seeks  an  outlet  partly  in  artistic  creation  and  partly  in
framing  ideals  of  a  better  state  of  things  than  that  which
actually  obtains.  But  while  susceptible  to  the  emotional
worth  of  perceptions,  it  is  at  the  same  time  disposed  to
theoretical  vagueness,  in  consequence  of  not  having  a  suffi-
ciently firm  grasp  of  the  definite  points  between  which  those
relations  extend  which  are  themselves  of  so  much  conse-
quence. Thus  it  becomes  unpractical,  wishing  indeed  to
reproduce  by  its  own  activity  the  moods  which  it  values,  but

THE  NATUEE  OF  MAN.  31

having  no  sympathy  for  the  uninteresting  details  of  appro-
priate means  ;  and  just  as  often  it  is  unjust,  resenting  the
indifference  or  opposition  of  others  to  its  own  aesthetic  pre-
judices with  a  bitterness  which  excludes  all  fair  judgment
and  all  toleration  of  divergent  culture.

It  is  a  happy  peculiarity  of  our  nature  that  past  suffering
does  not  live  as  vividly  in  our  memory  as  past  joy ;  but  any
pain  at  the  moment  when  it  affects  us,  stirs  the  spirit  more
powerfully,  and  produces  a  greater  mental  turmoil  of  thoughts
seeking  for  utterance.  Sometimes  a  man  does  not  for  the
moment  know  what  to  make  of  pleasure,  and  often  he  has  to
wait  until  time  shall  have  revealed  all  the  individual  happy
consequences  which  some  present  good  fortune  involves,  find-
ing only  then  a  fitting  expression  for  his  joy.  This  explains
how  it  is  that  men  are  disposed  to  seek  dissonances,  or  to
exaggerate  them  when  they  exist,  in  order  that  by  doing  so
they  may  as  it  were  gain  mediately  a  clearer  consciousness
of  the  harmonies  which  are  actual  or  possible,  and  the  worth
of  which  stands  out  the  more  clearly  in  the  contrasted  pre-
sence of  impending  danger.  Therefore  sensitive  souls  love
the  gentle  melancholy  which  is  spread  like  a  grey  background
behind  the  rainbow  glory  of  isolated  moments  of  delight,  and
the  old  view  was  not  altogether  wrong  in  giving  to  the  senti-
mental temperament  the  designation  of  melancholy,  with
which  humour  that  temperament  is  in  fact  thus  naturally
connected.

The  great  defect  which  attaches  to  this  temper  of  mind  is
the  ease  with  which  the  development  or  establishment  of  a
sense  of  duty  may  be  hindered  by  excitability  of  feeling.
However  indispensable  this  temperament  may  be  not  only
for  artistic  genius  but  also  for  the  truly  humane  ordering  of
practical  life,  yet  if  it  continues  in  isolated  predominance  it
leads  both  in  art  and  practice  to  mere  skill,  which  amuses  itself
but  acknowledges  no  obligation  to  serious  work.  We  need
not  refer  to  that  repulsive  form  of  sentimentality  which  turns
all  the  circumstances  of  life  to  account  in  no  other  way  than  as
occasions  of  emotional  excitement ;  we  may  also  trace  the  ill

32  BOOK  VI. chapti:k  il

effects  of  the  sentimental  temper  both  in  science  and  in  art.
It  is  shown  in  the  latter  by  its  way  of  dealing  with  the
isolated  lyric  movements  of  emotion  which  naturally  arise  in
men  and  have  received  a  pleasing  formal  expression  either  from
some  gifted  individual  or  from  the  cultivated  general  mind ;
these  it  is  incapable  of  grasping  and  bringing  together  into
a  coherent  whole  in  such  a  way  as  to  attain  to  higher
truth.  It  is  shown  in  the  scientific  region  by  the  numerous
examples  of  men  who,  with  great  natural  gifts,  can  be  content
to  spend  their  ingenuity  in  constantly  devising  some  new
dress  for  the  knowledge  they  have  already  acquired,  in  giving
it  a  finer  point  and  more  exquisite  arrangement,  without  ever
honestly  doing  their  part  towards  the  final  solution  of  any
problem.  A  good  deal  also  of  apparently  earnest  effort  has
to  be  set  down  to  this  less  emotional  form  of  sentimentality ;
but  what  is  great  in  life  and  in  science  has  always  been
the  result  of  concentrated  energy,  which,  without  denying
the  worth  of  other  impressions,  yet  passes  them  by  on  the
other  side,  as  it  presses  towards  its  own  goal,  busying  itself
all  the  more  eagerly  about  the  means  of  attaining  to  it,
though  these  being  indifferent  in  themselves,  are  despised  by
the  excited  temper  of  youth  in  its  search  after  worthy  ends.

The  choleric  temperament  is  plainly  that  which  we  must
desire  to  see  developed  in  the  time  of  manhood,  as  the
natural  successor  of  the  sentimental  temperament ;  its  too
early  appearance  would  be  as  contrary  to  the  perfection  of
human  development  as  its  not  appearing  at  all.  The
diminished  susceptibility  to  excitement  which  is  ascribed  to
this  temperament,  together  with  the  great  force  and  endurance
of  its  reaction,  when  feeling  has  once  been  aroused,  are  doubt-
less often  the  effect  of  a  moral  steadiness  of  character,  which
having  chosen  definite  ends  refuses  to  be  lured  from  its  path
by  irrelevant  attractions ;  or  it  may  be  that  they  are  the  effect
of  a  narrow  range  of  ideas  produced  by  the  monotony  of  life,
and  in  many  cases  blunting  the  interest  which  would  naturally
be  felt.  But  that  obstinate  perseverance  in  a  path  once
entered upon,  which  hindrances only  serve  to  spur on  to

THE  NATURE  OB  MAN.  33

greater  activity,  often  occurs  even  in  children  ;  we  are  tliere-
fore  fully  warranted  in  designating  this  state  of  mind  as  a
particular  temperament.  Its  essential  features  are  to  be
found  in  its  unreceptiveness  for  incidental  attractions  which
lie  out  of  the  beaten  track  of  its  thought ;  in  the  narrow  scope
afforded  to  new  impressions,  these  sufficing  only  to  call  up
the  recollections  most  closely  associated  with  them  in  one
particular  groove ;  and  lastly  in  the  small  degree  of  feeling
which  can  be  aroused  by  any  perceptions  but  those  which  fall
in  with  the  prevailing  current  of  feeling.  But  when  interest
is  once  awakened,  it  affects  with  equal  steadiness  the  train
of  ideas  and  the  efforts  of  the  will;  thus  this  is  the  pre-
eminently practical  temperament,  both  on  account  of  the
definiteness  of  the  ends  which  imagination  presents  to  it,
and  also  because  its  less  exacting  and  less  touchy  temper
does  not  shrink  from  the  employment  of  indifferent  or  irksome
means  which,  while  destitute  of  intrinsic  worth,  are  indispens-
able for  the  attainment  of  the  desired  end.  But  the  frequent
confusion  of  this  temperament  with  what  we  call  simple
wilfulness  shows  that  it  has  drawbacks  which  are  closely
related  to  its  advantages.  In  fact  its  practical  efficacy
is  often  impaired  by  a  gradually  increasing  narrowness  of
mental  life,  which  having  chosen  some  one  exclusive  end,
not  infrequently  fixes  with  equal  exclusiveness  and  obstinacy
upon  some  one  definite  kind  of  means,  and  even  sometimes,
reflecting  itself  as  it  were,  seems  as  a  final  stage,  to  reject  all
reference  to  intrinsically  worthy  ends,  and  develops  into  that
conscious  stubbornness  which  is  the  caricature  of  rigid  consist-
ency. It  is  not  in  such  results  that  the  progress  of  development
which  we  desire  is  to  be  found.  Later  life  ought  to  inherit
a  fair  share  of  that  passion  for  everything  which  has  emotional
worth  which  is  characteristic  of  the  sentimental  temperament,
as  well  as  of  the  mobility  and  sensitiveness  of  the  sanguine
temperament,  and  the  group  of  characteristics  which  best
becomes  the  ideal  of  human  excellence  is  not  to  be  found  in
the  unsympathizing  or  contemptuous  disposition  which  a
narrow-hearted  devotion  to  definite  ends  exhibits  towards
VOL.  n.  c

•54  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  II.

all which lies out of  the track of its own particular

e&urt

I  shall  perhaps  be  regarded  as  the  advocate  of  a  strange
thesis  when  I  say  that  I  regard  the  phlegmatic  tempera-
ment as  the  natural  temper  of  advanced  age,  and  at  the  same
time  as  an  improvement  on  the  choleric  temperament  with  its
prejudices  and  narrowness.  A  description  of  the  different
temperaments  so  naturally  presents  each  one  as  an  exaggera-
tion of  its  special  characteristics,  that  at  the  very  name  of
phlegmatic  we  are  accustomed  to  think  of  a  sort  of  mental
lethargy  very  far  from  suggestive  of  advance  in  human
development — a  state  in  which  susceptibility  to  impressions,  as
well  as  any  pleasure  in  responding  to  them,  has  been  almost
wholly  lost.  But  in  this  representation  vacuity  of  mmd  is
confounded  with  a  form  of  activity  which  may  belong  to  a
full  as  well  as  to  an  empty  mind.  A  state  of  steady
equanimity  would  be  intolerable  and  repulsive  in  a  soul
whose  capacities  were  as  yet  only  partially  unfolded,  and
whose  best  development  yet  remained  to  be  won  among  the
manifold  changes  and  chances  of  life  ;  but  such  calm  is  to  be
reverenced  in  a  mind  which  has  passed  victorious  through
chance  and  change,  and  has  learnt  by  wide  experience,
neither  to  be  carried  from  one  mood  to  another  by  every
changing  impression,  nor  to  give  exclusive  and  one-sided
approval  to  some  one  particular  form  and  direction  of  human
effort.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  as  long  as  we  understand  by
temperament  only  a  natural  disposition  as  contrasted  with  any
acquired  attitude  of  mind,  the  immovability  of  the  phlegmatic
temperament  must  seem  to  us  the  least  pleasing  of  any  human
character.  And  yet  even  in  this  we  are  often  unjust ;  w©
conclude  too  hastily  that  disinclination  to  bodily  movement
indicates  an  equal  sluggishness  of  thought,  that  the  absence
of  foolish  outbursts  of  emotion  and  omission  of  useless  expres-
sions of  feelings  are  due  to  coldness  of  heart.  Hence  we  are
often  surprised  to  see  such  minds  stirred  up  by  a  great  and
impressive  stimulus  to  some  energetic  passion,  producing
vigorous  and  long-sustained  efforts; such  an  occurrence  we

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  35

have  often  enough  seen  "  writ  large  "  in  the  history  of  races
whose  national  temperament  is  decidedly  phlegmatic.  We
learn  from  such  cases  that  it  is  unjust  to  attribute  the
immovability  and  incapacity  of  mere  stupidity  to  that  solid-
ness  of  mental  life  which  is  hardly  affected  by  individual
passing  impressions,  but  slowly  stores  them  up  until  the  time
arrives  for  some  supreme  effort — or  at  any  rate  if  no  occasion
for  action  arises  is  not  haunted  by  a  mental  unrest  which
prompts  the  search  for  such  an  opportunity.  Like  all  rest,
this  equanimity  of  soul  is  a  phsenomenon  that  may  have  many
significations,  and  its  worth  is  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of
dormant  power  which  it  holds  in  suspense.  We  blame  the
unreceptiveness  which  remains  unmoved  because  it  is  wanting
in  all  intelligence  and  sympathy ;  but  we  all  seek  that  peace
which  is  not  immoderately  excited  by  anything,  because
nothing  is  any  longer  wholly  new  to  it ;  which  has  experienced
every  kind  of  emotion,  but  has  long  ago  learned  to  assign  to
every  passionate  impulse  its  proper  value  in  the  whole
intricate  chain  of  human  interests,  appealing  to  this  from  any
accidental  strength  of  feeling  which  may  be  due  to  the
circumstances  of  the  moment ;  which  finally  has  ceased  to
have  any  part  in  the  heat  and  hurry  of  self-willed  effort,
because  it  has  learnt  that  the  vicissitudes  of  destiny  are  too
great,  and  the  field  of  human  activity  too  circumscribed  to
admit  of  our  attributing  absolute  and  unconditioned  worth  to
any  single  work  or  any  single  performance  of  ours.  We  hope
for  this  frame  of  mind  as  the  natural  temperament  of  old  age,
but  we  certainly  do  not  see  that  it  is  generally  attained  ;  on
the  other  hand,  however,  we  find  that  by  innate  favour  of
spiritual  organization,  some  few  happy  souls  have  all
through  life  this  fine  balance  of  mental  temper.  They  receive
with  pure-hearted  and  ever  fresh  interest,  impressions  of  all
degrees  of  importance  ;  they  are  not  indifferent  to  any  class  of
feelings,  but  on  the  other  hand,  none  carries  them  away  into
the  tangled  paths  of  a  one-sided  and  narrow  humour ;  with  clear
vision  and  patient  hand,  they  quietly  compass  the  means  to
some  steadfastly  pursued end, without the  unsympathizing

30  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  II.

harshness  which  refuses  to  endure  any  interruption  of  its  work,
and  without  that  contempt  for  other  paths  which  is  natural  to
him  who  knows  none  but  his  own.  It  is  not  of  the  great
names  ot  history  that  we  are  thinking  now,  but  of  those  gentle
and  blessed  natures  who  pass  noiselessly  through  life,  seeming
as  it  were  the  very  embodiment  of  our  ideal ;  those  who  have
had  a  strongly  marked  effect  upon  the  course  of  history,  have
much  oftener  been  men  whose  minds  were  not  thus  finely
balanced,  and  who  owed  their  influence  to  the  one-sided
harshness  with  which  they  have  succeeded  in  forcing  their
own  views  upon  the  world,  undisturbed  by  any  acute  sense
of  the  comparative  worth  of  conflicting  opinions.

Observation  does  not  show  us  that  more  than  a  distant
approach  to  this  gradation  of  human  development  actually
exists.  In  order  to  go  through  it  completely,  and  to
let  each  of  the  temperaments  run  its  whole  course  in  full
and  unmixed  current,  unusually  favourable  conditions  both  of
natural  disposition  and  of  outward  circumstances  would  be
required.  It  is  only  when  culture  has  advanced  rather  far
that  it  can  furnish  the  different  periods  of  life  with  that
variety  of  interests  from  which  each  particular  phase  of
character  can  draw  material  for  vigorous  development ;  hence
the  monotony  of  a  very  simple  mode  of  life  would  weaken  the
characteristic  differences  of  temperament.  But  on  the  other
hand,  the  multifarious  complications  of  life  may  hinder  regular
development  by  events  which  press  with  such  a  weight  upon
the  soul  that  completeness  and  spontaneity  of  further  develop-
ment becomes  impossible.  And  finally,  the  more  thorough-
going has  been  the  development  of  mind  and  character  in  any
generation  by  a  life  of  varied  culture,  the  more  are  the  natures
of  the  next  generation  likely  to  diverge  from  one  another,
exhibiting  characters  of  striking  individuality,  the  course  of
development  of  which  often  differs  strangely  from  that  of  the
ordinary  type.  Then  there  are  numerous  diseases  which  have
a  powerful  effect  on  temperament  and  humour,  and  numerous
bodily  disorders  which,  before  they  declare  themselves  as
disease, appear in disturbances of organic feeling which,

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  37

inexplicable  even  to  him  who  suffers  them,  imperceptibly  give
a  tone  to  the  totality  of  his  views  and  feelings.  It  would  be
extremely  interesting  if  it  were  possible,  to  investigate  the
causes  of  these  phsenomena.  But  it  is  indeed  impossible  to
discriminate  in  them  between  what  has  its  origin  in  the
region  of  mind,  in  the  impenetrable  windings  of  every
individual  development,  and  to  some  extent  reacts  upon  the
bodily  organization,  and  what  on  the  other  hand  is  due  to
organic  development  and  its  disturbances,  and  has  a  share  in
influencing  the  growth  of  the  inner  life.  Perhaps  too  much
weight  is  sometimes  attributed  to  the  last  factor,  but  still  there
IS  no  doubt  that  it  does  have  a  very  important  effect.  We
see  tardiness  or  precocity  of  bodily  development  accompanied
by  a  like  tardiness  or  precocity  of  the  mental  dispositions
corresponding  to  these  stages  of  physical  growth ;  and  on  the
whole  nothing  is  more  natural  than  the  assumption  that  the
full  tide  of  organic  feeling  receives  at  different  times  a  different
colouring  in  proportion  as  this  or  that  organ  or  department  of
the  bodily  economy  makes  its  influence  more  or  less  felt  by
innumerable  constant  excitations,  singly  imperceptible,  which
vary  according  to  the  rapidity  or  backwardness  with  which
the  organ  or  department  in  question  develops  its  activity.
But  while  the  time  is  gone  by  for  explaining  such  matters  by
reference  to  the  black  bUe  and  the  yellow  bile,  the  time  is  not
yet  come  when  we  may  have  recourse  to  exact  observation
for  an  explanation  of  the  importance  of  different  functions  at
different  times,  and  for  trustworthy  information  as  to  their
influence  on  mental  life.

How  intimately  permanent  bodily  conditions  may  be  con-
nected with  permanent  mental  dispositions,  is  shown  by
observation  of  cases  in  which  their  reciprocal  influence  is
temporary.  It  has  been  said,  and  not  without  truth,  that  we
think  differently  when  we  are  lying  down  and  when  we  are

1  standing  up ;  a  constrained  and  cramped  position  of  the  body
has  a  depressing  effect  upon  the  spirits;  again,  we  find  it
difficult  to  be  devotional  in  a  comfortable  and  careless  attitude;

38  BOOK  VI. CHA.PTER  II.

to  get  a  furious  man  to  sit  down  in  an  easy-chair ;  and  the
Jiand  which  smooths  the  wrinkles  from  one's  brow,  smooths
away  trouble  too.  It  may  be  asked  whether  aesthetic  and
moral  judgments  or  our  thoughts  about  future  joy  and  sorrow
do  not  primarily  receive  their  vividness  and  intensity  from
accompanying  sensations  in  which  that  which  is  of  intrinsic
worth  appears  to  us  as  harmonizing  with  the  innermost  con-
ditions of  our  own  individual  existence.  There  are  plenty  of
apathetic  states  in  which  these  attendant  feelings  are  wanting
— in  which  we  may  see  as  plainly  as  before  the  objective
excellence  of  one  kind  of  conduct,  and  the  blameworthiness  of
another,  and  recognise  the  just  claims  of  others  on  our  love
and  sympathy  without  being  in  the  slightest  degree  capable  of
conjuring  up  that  glow  of  feeling  which  we  know  would  be
appropriate  to  the  occasion.  How  often  does  the  same  thing
happen  in  our  enjoyment  of  beauty !  Appreciation  of  it  is
not  mere  abstract  delight  in  harmonious  relations ,  delight  in
general  is  not  a  merely  mental  process,  but  something  by
which  our  whole  being  seems  to  be  exalted  and  carried  away,
something  which  makes  us  breathe  more  fully  and  freely^
which  quickens  our  pulse  and  gives  elasticity  to  our  muscles ;
remorse  for  what  is  past  is  not  the  mere  moral  sentence  of
condemnation  which,  pronounced  by  conscience,  is  simply
apprehended  by  the  soul;  the  relaxedness  of  the  limbs,  the
oppression  of  the  heart,  perhaps  in  anger  an  actual  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  throat  and  rising  of  the  gorge  which  prevent
our  swallowing  the  morsel  already  in  our  mouth — these  show
the  sympathy  of  the  bodily  organization,  and  as  it  were
eymbolize  the  attempt  to  get  rid  of  some  detested  burden
under  the  pressure  of  which  we  suffer.  Even  devotional
feeling  is  not  a  purely  mental  exaltation  ;  but  whilst  it  makes
us  unconsciously  forego  the  careless  haste  of  our  ordinary
gait,  and  causes  our  movements  to  be  slower  and  more  self-
restrained,  and  our  attitude  to  take  a  peculiar  stamp,  not  of
relaxedness,  but  of  strength  which  voluntarily  submits,  there
flows  back  into  consciousness  from  all  these  bodily  effects  an
echo  of  feeling  strengthening  the  intellectual  mood. We  can

TUB  NATURE  OF  MAN.  39

understand  what  a  difference  it  must  make  if  the  body  return
this  echo  imperfectly  or  with  a  tone  altered  by  disease,  and
how  in  fact  similar  moods  of  some  special  individuals  can
never  be  quite  comparable  one  with  another.  It  is  in  the
bloom  of  youth  that  we  find  this  correspondence  between  mental
life  and  its  material  vesture  developed  in  the  most  attractive
and  perfect  form ;  in  later  life  the  gradual  increase  of  obstacles
and  of  friction  causes  the  imperfections  and  incoherences  in
the  connection  between  the  two  orders  of  affection  to  become
more  and  more  prominent.  We  can  no  longer  read  the  whole
soul  in  movement,  gait,  and  carriage ;  ordinary  daily  actions
are  got  through  with  unsympathetic  dispatch,  eating  and
drinking  often  with  ugly  and  soulless  eagerness;  and  it  is
always  a  sign  of  profound  culture  of  the  heart  when  the
thoughts  of  a  man  advanced  in  years  do  not  meet  the  sensuous
warmth  of  any  passing  event  with  the  uninterested  and
unsympathetic  coldness  of  age.

§  3.  We  feel  afresh  the  want  of  trustworthy  knowledge
concerning  the  psychical  importance  of  the  bodily  organs  and
their  connections,  now  that  we  are  come  to  that  difficult  part
of  our  task,  a  consideration  of  the  mental  differences  of
the  two  sexes.  I  will  not  stay  to  compare  the  undulating
outlines  of  the  woman  with  the  more  angular  build  of  the
man ;  it  may  be  that  there  is  foundation  for  the  idea  that  the
latter  indicates  the  preponderance  of  some  impulse  towards
characteristic  individualization,  and  that  the  perhaps  really
greater  bodily  likeness  among  women  is  to  be  regarded  as
evidence  of  their  greater  mental  conformity  to  some  general
type.  Even  here  where  the  outward  form  is  to  others  indica-
tive of  the  inner  life,  I  find  myself  able  to  lay  little  stress
upon  the  merely  symbolical  significance  of  the  bodily  form ;
it  would  be  much  more  interesting  to  show,  if  one  could,  what
particular  organic  feeling  the  body  comes  to  have  in  conse-
quence of  its  functions  and  of  the  particular  proportions  of  its
parts.

Of  all  this  we  know  but  little.  The  relations  of  the  different
parts  of  tfie  skeleton  and  of  the  muscular  system  show  that

40  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IL

there  is  less  power  of  work  in  the  frame  of  the  woman,  the
shoulders  and  chest  are  not  adapted  for  lifting,  carrying,  and
moving  heavy  weights  and  obstacles,  nor  are  the  hips  and  legs
framed  for  swift  running,  or  for  walking  firmly  under  a  heavy
burden;  the  muscles  seem  less  fitted  to  endure  continuous
strain,  great  as  may  be  their  capacity  of  work  when  they  have
frequent  alternations  of  activity  and  rest.  These  circumstances
can  hardly  fail  to  influence  organic  feeling,  a  very  important
part  of  which  always  depends  on  a  consciousness  of  the  ease,
elasticity,  and  peculiar  security  of  our  position,  attitude,  and
mode  of  progression.  The  fact  that  a  man's  body  forms  an
oval  with  its  greatest  diameter  through  the  shoulders,  and  a
woman's  body  an  oval  which  is  widest  across  the  hips,  is  in
itself  indifferent ;  but  it  may  be  that  on  the  man  the  preponder-
ant weight  of  the  upper  part  of  his  body  may  have  the  effect
of  a  burden  which  demands  to  be  carried  forward  swift  and
sure  in  opposition  to  all  obstacles,  while  the  woman,  feeling
more  fettered,  most  naturally  finds  her  sphere  of  work  nearer
home,  and  expects  it  to  come  to  her  thither  from  the  dim
distance.

This  inferiority  in  strength  is  compensated  by  a  greater
capacity  of  adaptation  to  the  most  various  circumstances.  The
bodily  wants  of  women  are  much  less  than  those  of  men ;  they
eat  and  drink  less,  they  breathe  less  air,  and  are  said  to  be
less  easily  suffocated  ;  with  regard  to  hardships — at  least
those  which  are  continuous  and  of  gradual  gi-owth — and
privations,  they  bear  them  to  some  extent  more  easily  than
men,  and  in  some  respects  with  less  of  ill  effect  than  might
have  been  expected  from  their  degree  of  bodily  strength.
They  endure  great  loss  of  blood  and  continuous  pain  better  ;
and  even  the  greater  irritability  of  their  nervous  system,  on
account  of  which  many  unimportant  disturbances  have  a
great  effect,  seems  to  favour  the  rapid  and  harmless  dispersion
of  any  shock  that  may  be  experienced.  Hence  even  under
unfavourable  circumstances,  they  often  reach  a  great  age,
although  the  examples  of  extreme  old  age,  lasting  on  far  into  a
second  century,  are  to  be  found  almost  exclusively  among  men.

I

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  41

Tliey  are  naturally  disinclined  to  very  vehement  sensuous
gratifications,  and  often  have  only  a  sort  of  emotional  aversion
for  disagreeable  impressions  in  cases  where  a  man  would  be
almost  overcome  by  absolute  physical  disgust ;  the  work  of
restoring  cleanliness  is  always  in  itself  uncleanly.  The  same
capacity  of  accommodation  is  shown  in  the  various  circum-
stances of  life.  It  is  an  old  and  true  remark  that  women  can
much  more  easily  suit  themselves  to  new  conditions  of  life,
to  a  different  rank  in  society  and  changes  of  fortunes,  whilst
it  is  hardly  possible  for  a  man  to  efface  the  signs  of  his  early
training.  Acquired  habits  also  have  a  stronger  hold  on  him,
and  when  accustomed  order  is  interrupted  or  the  usual  hour
for  work  or  food  comes  round  empty-handed,  his  general  com-
fort is  much  more  greatly  disturbed.  With  the  above  charac-
teristics of  women  there  is  naturally  combined  a  mixture  of
that  liveliness  proper  to  the  sanguine  temperament  and  that
warmth  of  heart,  belonging  to  the  sentimental  stage,  the
absence  of  which  we  regret  in  any  woman,  counting  it  an
imperfection.  In  her,  varieties  of  education  hide  much  ;  but
even  in  the  most  extreme  cases  we  shall  hardly  fail  of  finding
a  propensity  (akin  to  inquisitiveness)  to  talk  for  the  sake  of
talking,  and  some  trace  of  pleasure  in  beautiful  and  harmonious
arrangements.

But  the  question,  How  is  the  higher  mental  life  of  both
sexes  characteristically  distinguished,  with  reference  either  to
these  natural  features  or  to  any  others  ?  is  one  which  it  seems
hardly  possible  to  answer.  The  innumerable  observations,
partly  ingenious  and  partly  also  at  the  same  time  true,  to
which  this  question  has  given  rise,  have  seldom  been  con-
cerned to  distinguish  between  what  is  to  be  regarded  as
original  disposition,  and  what  as  a  remote  result  of  the
circumstances  of  life  and  educational  routine  which  have
affected  the  two  sexes  very  differently,  although  in  harmony
with  their  natural  dispositions.  However  often  the  attempt
may  be  made  to  reduce  to  simple  intelligible  expression  the
multitude  of  these  particular  characteristics,  which  only  a
life's experience  can  teach,  and  only  the  plastic  creations  of

42  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  II.

poetry  can  reproduce,  it  will  always  be  found  that  such
attempts  must  be  content  to  give  merely  an  extremely
colourless  outline  of  that  which  in  its  boundless  wealth  of
colouring  furnishes  the  philosopher  of  common  life  with  an
inexhaustible  field  of  interest.

I  do  not  believe  that  the  intellectual  capacity  of  the  sexes
differs,  except  in  so  far  as  the  special  emotional  interests  of
each  have  prescribed  the  course  of  their  intellectual  life.
There  is  perhaps  no  subject  which  a  woman's  mind  could
not  understand,  but  there  are  very  many  things  in  which
women  could  never  learn  to  be  interested.  Though  it  is
often  said  that  in  knowledge  a  man  is  attracted  by  the
universal,  a  woman  by  the  particular,  yet  in  very  many
cases  we  should  find,  that  it  is  just  the  individualizing
power  of  women  which  is  inferior,  and  their  delicate  instinct
for  the  universal  which  is  superior ;  and  besides,  this  division
of  the  work  of  knowledge  to  which  we  have  just  referred  is
inconsistent  with  the  current  attribution  of  egoistic  effort  to
the  masculine  will,  and  of  subordination  to  universal  rules  to
womanly  self  -  suppression.  There  would  perhaps  be  more
truth  in  the  opinion  that  the  knowledge  and  will  of  men  aim
at  generality,  those  of  women  at  completeness.  It  is  masculine
philosophy  to  analyse  striking  phsenomena  and  to  find  out  from
what  complication  of  general  conditions  each  of  them  inevitably
and  necessarily  resulted,  however  much  it  may  seem  to  be  some
arbitrary  and  chosen  product  of  Nature ;  it  is  characteristic  of
women  to  hate  analysis  and  to  enjoy  and  admire  the  beauty  and
intrinsic  worth  of  any  whole  that  may  be  presented  to  them  iu
finished  completeness.  All  mechanical  inventions  have  been
made  by  men,  and  to  men  belongs  delight  in  the  mediate  pro-
duction of  effects  by  the  application  of  general  forces  according
to  general  laws  ;  while  the  actual  manipulation  belongs  rather
to  women,  and  to  them  also  the  desire  to  find  that  the  warmth
of  living  feeling  is  being  as  it  were  transferred  immediately  to
the  product  of  their  activity.  Characteristic  of  masculine
thought  is  the  deep  conviction  that  all  which  is  greatest  and
most  beautiful  in  the  world  has  its  mechanical  conditions,  and

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.  .43

tliat  no  result  which  is  premature  and  which  evades  this
fixed  order  of  realization  can  he  permanent  and  stable ;  it  is
to  this  thought  that  is  due  the  order  by  which  life  is  organized,
an  order  that  is  everywhere  dependent  on  the  principle  of
law,  that  is  on  the  belief  that  the  universally  valid  con-
ditions of  truth  must  be  satisfied  before  there  can  be  any
question  of  a  result  that  may  be  desirable  in  some  particular
case.  On  the  other  hand,  the  faith  of  women — which  is  both
just  in  itself  and  as  necessary  as  the  other  to  the  happiness
of  life — is  that  no  general  principle  and  no  form  can  ever
have  an  independent  and  unconditioned  value,  but  that  such
v^alue  belongs  exclusively  to  the  living  reality  which  may  be
founded  on  them ;  from  this  faith  flow  all  the  beauty  and
compensations  of  life,  for  it  is  a  faith  which  is  everywhere
dependent  on  that  principle  of  equity,  which  makes  men
feel  bound  to  soften  the  harshness  of  law  by  unowed  love
and  kindness ;  the  misfortune  is  that  this  desire  to  show
kindness  is  often  in  danger  of  hastily  and  unjustly  breaking
through  forms  of  law  which  hinder  the  fulfilment  of  its
intention.

All  masculine  effort  depends  upon  profound  reverence  for
general  principles  ;  a  man's  pride  even  and  ambition  are  not
satisfied  by  groundless  homage,  but  he  founds  his  claim  upon
the  sum  of  generally  recognisable  superiority  which  he  believes
himself  to  possess ;  he  feels  that  he  is  undoubtedly  something
more  than  a  mere  example  of  the  universal,  and  he  demands
to  be  compared  with  others  by  means  of  some  common
standard.  Just  as  devout  is  the  sentiment  of  the  feminine
mind  towards  completeness ;  a  woman  no  more  desires  to  be
considered  as  an  example  among  others  than  the  beauty  of
one  flower  requires  to  be  compared  with  that  of  others  accord-
ing to  some  standard  of  comparison ;  and  while  a  man
cheerfully  joins  himself  to  others  who  are  like-minded  and
cheerfully  perishes  with  them  for  the  sake  of  some  general
principle,  a  woman  would  rather  be  sought  and  loved  as  some-
thing fair  and  complete  in  herself,  and  for  the  sake  of  her  own
individuality,  which  is a  thing that  is not  susceptible of

44  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IL

comparison,  nor  explicable  by  reference  to  otber  individuals.
For  certainly  in  the  feeling  with  which  we  regard  such  a
whole,  love  in  the  strict  sense  is  more  prominent  than  esteem,
but  it  is  pre-eminently  esteem  and  not  love  which  a  man
requires  in  the  feeling  with  which  he  is  regarded ;  he  is  not
merely  willing  that  his  worth  should  be  measured  by  a
common  standard,  but  he  demands  that  it  should  be  so
measured.  No  one,  of  course,  will  so  misunderstand  this
contrast  as  to  imagine  that  we  mean  that  a  woman's  nature
has,  like  the  unanalysable  fragrance  of  a  flower,  no  pretensions
to  call  forth  the  sentiment  of  esteem,  which  is  in  fact  aroused
in  a  very  high  degree  by  particular  virtues  which  appear  in
women,  and  which  are  susceptible  of  comparison.

We  only  need  to  look  about  us  as  we  go  through  life  in
order  to  find  a  thousand  traits  which  bear  witness  to  this  general
dissimilarity.  The  business  communications  of  men  are  brief,
those  of  women  are  wordy,  and  generally  abound  in  repetition  ;
it  is  plain  that  they  have  little  faith  in  the  trustworthiness  of
a  promise  which  is  guaranteed  merely  by  the  general  obliga-
tion to  truth  and  good  faith,  and  is  not  clenched  by  a  variety
of  small  considerations  drawn  from  a  comprehensive  survey  of
the  case  in  hand.  Men  lay  less  stress  upon  the  harmonious
arrangement  of  their  spatial  surroundings,  except  in  as  far  as
these  secure  the  immediate  and  ready  applicability  of  means
to  desired  ends  ;  but  they  value  punctuality  as  regards  time,
which  is  in  a  much  higher  degree  a  mechanical  condition  of
all  success;  women  have  the  happy  knack  of  arranging  a
multitude  of  objects  in  space  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  a
pleasant  effect  on  the  whole  without  any  rigid  adherence  to
system ;  but  they  show  less  management  with  regard  to  time,
which  is  something  that  cannot  be  seen.  When  men  and
women  speak  of  regard  to  form  they  generally  mean  very
different  things ;  the  womanly  nature  is  concerned  to  round
off  into  a  graceful  and  consistent  whole  the  final  product  of
any  activity ;  her  skill  lies  in  knowing  what  is  appropriate  to
the  case  in  hand,  which  very  often  is  exactly  that  which  the
man's  judgment  disapproves ;  for  the  forms  which  he  would

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN,  4SJ

choose  to  have  observed  are  general  rules  of  orderly  procedure,
which  must  be  carried  out  even  at  the  cost  of  producing  some
isolated  discords.  With  the  above  is  closely  connected  the
well-known  unjudicial  character  of  women.  Tt  does  not
consist  in  an  incapacity  to  sacrifice  individual  claims,  for
nothing  could  exceed  the  cheerfulness  with  which  women
make  such  sacrifices,  as  soon  as  they  have  actually  set  before
them  that  good  of  others  for  the  sake  of  which  the  sacrifice  is
to  be  made.  But  they  feel  aggrieved  because  very  often  the
law  in  considering  any  given  case  does  not  regard  it  as  a
whole,  but  brings  it  under  some  general  definition  in  virtue  of
some  special  characteristics,  the  selection  of  which  seems  to
the  woman's  mind  to  be  arbitrary ;  the  definition  itself  seeming
to  be  not  less  arbitrary,  because,  being  a  general  rule  of  pro-
cedure, the  ultimate  good  which  it  seems  to  secure  is  not
directly  presented.  A  man  does  not  rebel  against  undertaking
things  of  which  he  cannot  see  the  result,  if  the  carrying  out
of  some'  general  principle  is  concerned  ;  women  require  to
have  the  future  results  set  plainly  before  their  eyes,  they  want
to  anticipate  beforehand  the  final  form  of  the  whole,  to  know
in  what  shape  the  unrest  of  action  will  be  embodied  in  the
end.  This  disposition,  this  happy  faith  that  there  is  some
answer  to  every  puzzle,  some  mode  of  reconciling  every  con-
flict, some  way  of  gathering  up  in  the  end  the  loose  threads  of
broken  effort,  has  unquestionably  an  injurious  as  well  as
beneficial  effect  on  the  masculine  mind,  women  being  able  to
produce  this  effect  in  consequence  of  the  share  which  they
have  in  education.  That  consideration  of  possible  results  which
holds  men  back  from  action  at  moments  when  inevitable  duty
is  in  question,  is  generally  due  to  maternal  influence.

A  man  generally  regards  his  property  as  what  it  really  is,
as  a  collection  of  usable  and  divisible  means  to  various  ends,
and  his  liberality  is  not  disturbed  by  the  idea  of  breaking  into
some  imaginary  completeness  which  attaches  to  it  as  a  whole ;
when  women  are  extravagant,  their  extravagance  generally
consists  in  making  purchases  for  which  they  will  not  them-
selves pay  the  money. On  the  other  hand,  property  which  they

46  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  U.

have  once  acquired  and  actually  have  in  possession  often  seems
to  them  a  kind  of  sacred  deposit,  all  the  parts  of  which  belong
to  one  another,  and  which  it  would  therefore  be  wrong  to  disturb.
What  draws  down  upon  their  management  the  suspicion  of  a
leaning  to  avarice,  is  not  exactly  an  unwillingness  to  impart
to  others,  but  certainly,  to  some  extent,  that  reverence  for  the
intrinsic  coherence  of  things,  which  is  expressed  equally  in
their  horror  of  disturbing  some  treasured  remembrance,  break-
ing up  some  possession  with  which  the  whole  of  life  seems  to
be  entwined,  and  in  their  mysterious  satisfaction  in  exacting
"  good  measure."

Finally,  I  would  venture  the  assertion  that  to  the  soul  of
a  woman  truth  does  not  mean  the  same  thing  that  it  does  to
a  man's  mind.  For  women  everything  is  true  which  is  justified
by  a  capacity  of  fitting  in  harmoniously  and  significantly  into
the  rest  of  the  world  considered  as  a  whole,  with  all  its  system
of  relations ;  they  do  not  care  so  much  about  its  being  at  the
same  time  a  reality.  Hence  they  are  inclined  not  to  lying  but
to  making  a  fair  show,  and  if  something  presents  the  appear-
ance they  desire  in  some  connection  which  they  regard  as
important,  they  care  little  whether  or  not  it  would  prove  on
investigation  to  be  something  which  has  any  right  to  present
that  appearance.  To  wish  to  seem  what  one  is  not,  is  indeed
a  failing  common  to  all  humanity,  but  a  man  is  accustomed  to
require,  at  any  rate  in  the  goods  which  he  possesses,  solidity
and  genuineness ;  among  women,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a
widespread  predilection  for  shams.  Having  such  leanings,  they
are  not  given  to  scientific  labours,  and  their  mode  of  thought
is  artistic  and  intuitive.  As  a  poet  does  not  create  characters
by  analysis  and  calculation,  but  is  assured  that  they  are  true
to  nature  if  he  can  himself  in  his  own  mind  follow  their  whole
action  with  natural  and  spontaneous  sympathy,  so  women  love
to  put  themselves  in  imagination  in  the  place  of  things,  and
as  soon  as  they  have  succeeded  in  getting  some  idea  of  what
it  is  like  to  exist  and  move  and  develop  in  the  way  in  which
any  given  thing  exists,  moves,  and  develops,  they  think  they
understand  it  thoroughly. That  the  possibility  of  things  being

THE  NATUEE  OF  MAN.  4t

and  liappening  as  they  do  involves  a  scientific  riddle,  is
something  which  it  is  hard  to  make  a  woman  understand.  It
13  easy  to  see  the  connection  between  all  this  and  some  of  the
great  goods  of  life,  for  instance,  firmness  of  religious  belief,
and  calm  assurance  of  moral  feeling ;  but  we  also  find  this
preponderance  of  living  tact  over  scientific  analysis  in  many
small  and  inconspicuous  traits.  Women  employ  a  thousand
delicate  technical  devices  in  their  daily  work ;  but  they  can
with  difficulty  describe,  they  can  only  show,  that  which  they
have  skilfully  accomplished.  Analytic  reflection  upon  their
own  movements  is  so  little  familiar  to  them  that  one  may
afBrm,  without  fear  of  being  very  far  wrong,  that  such  expres-
sions as,  to  tJie  right,  to  the  left,  across,  reverse,  express  in  the
language  of  women,  not  any  mathematical  relations,  but  certain
particular  feelings  which  one  has  when  in  working  one  makes
movements  in  these  directions.

§  4.  But  I  am  in  danger  of  trying  to  exhaust  that  which
is  inexhaustible;  and  I  am  the  more  bound  to  avoid  this
because  a  consideration  of  life  in  the  concrete  shows  us  every-
where the  part  taken  by  both  sexes  in  the  whole  constitution
of  life  and  its  enjoyments.  Still  a  brief  indication  of  the  limits
imposed  on  each  sex  by  its  own  special  nature,  may  guide  us
in  a  special  consideration  of  the  divergent  developments  which
we  see  arise  from  the  national  character  of  diflferent  tribes  and
races.  We  often  find  among  the  people  of  one  nation  that
many  mental  as  well  as  bodily  peculiarities  are  transmitted
with  great  persistence  from  parent  to  child  for  several  genera-
tions, especially  talents  for  those  arts  which  are  concerned
with  combinations  of  many  elements  that  can  be  intuitively
apprehended.  Examples  of  the  inheritance  of  mathematical,
musical,  artistic,  and  technical  capacity  are  not  rare,  and  with
these  are  connected  primarily  the  transmission  of  similar
temperaments,  in  which  we  have  already  recognised  general
formal  peculiarities  of  mental  life.  Parents  are  often
astonished  at  seeing  reproduced  in  their  children  the  same
faults  and  the  same  little  tricks  of  which  they  are  conscious
in  themselves ;  in  civilised  life,  indeed,  where  persons  of  the

48

BOOK  VL CHAPTER  IL

most  dififerently  developed  characters  unite  to  form  new
families,  the  very  reverse  of  this  is  often  seen,  or  at  least  we
cannot  trace  the  nature  of  the  child  to  any  mixture  of  the
qualities  of  the  parents ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  among  un-
civilised tribes  not  only  is  a  considerable  constancy  of  such
transmission  to  be  expected,  but  the  expectation  is  confirmed
by  actual  experience.

We may  try  to derive  all the national differences of
civilised  people  from  the  influence  of  the  peculiar  conditions
of  their  civilisation,  which  are  to  a  great  extent  dependent  on
geographical position and  the  vicissitudes of history,  this
influence  being  of  overpowering  importance,  and  pervading
the  whole  of  life ;  but  we  cannot  by  so  doing  remove  the
general  impression  received  from  observation,  that  nowadays
at  least  every  new-bom  life  comes  into  the  world  with  some
innate  and  inevitable  national  stamp,  quite  independent  of  its
later  contact  with  the  civilisation  of  its  nation. It  would  bo
useless  to  try  and explain  this  phgenomenon,  as  observers
differ  so  much  in  their  opinion  of  the  extent  to  which  it
occurs. We cannot decide finally whether  all  races are
capable  of  an  equal  degree  of  civilisation,  but  we  find  that  the
most  favoured  nations  share  in  the  development  of  humanity
in  unequal  measure,  and  in  ways  peculiar  to  themselves,  and
we  see  that  individuals  of  the  same  nations  are  very  differently
endowed  with  mental  energy  and  activity;  finally,  we  have
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  savagery  in  which  we  find
the  coloured  races  of  men  is  by  no  means  a  condition  abso-
lutely inseparable  from  their  nature. Our  primary  deduction
from  these  considerations  is  the  conviction  that  to  attempt  to
deny  all  original difference of  endowment  is  a  superfluous
undertaking,  for  when  we  have  denied  it  of  the  great  divisions
of  the  human  race,  it  infallibly  recurs  in  individuals,  and  such
a  connate  limit  can  be  no  more  oppressive  for  the  former  than
for  the  latter. The  only  question  is,  whether  all  races  of  men
have  in  common  those  capacities  which  are  necessary  to  lead
them  to  a  participation  in  the  moral  inheritance  of  mankind,
and  to  unite  them  in  human  fellowship. It  is  not  now  our

THE  NATURE  OF  MAN.

49

intention  to  give  an  answer  to  this  question,  wLich  belongs  to
the  Philosophy  of  History,  but  we  shall  find  a  preparation  for
the  answer  in  a  consideration  of  the  general  way  in  which
the  inborn  nature  of  men  is  stirred  up  by  the  educative
influences  of  Nature  and  of  social  relations  to  the  production
of  all  that  is  most  essential  to  life.

vor,.  11.

CHAPTEE III.

MANNERS AND MORALS.

Conscience  and  Moral  Taste— Untrustworthiness  of  ITatural  Disposition— Food
—Cannibalism— Craelty  and  Bloodthirstiness— Cleanness  of  Body  and  of
Mind— Modesty— Disparagement  and  Exaltation  of  Nature— Realism  of
Individual  Perfection,  and  Idealism  of  Work— Social  Customs.

R  1,  XTTHEN  we  sought  in  the  human  mind  for  the  germ
▼  » of  moral  development,  we  did  not  seem  to  find
there  any  complete  revelation  directly  enabling  it  to  bring  the
relations  of  life,  or  even  those  parts  of  human  conduct  which
are  of  most  universal  concern,  into  harmony  with  undoubted
precepts  of  moral  order. Even  in  an  educated  conscience,  a
lively  conviction  of  the  worth  of  an  ideal  by  no  means  guarantees
the simultaneous presence either of that sensitiveness of
judgment  which  is  necessary  for  discriminating  instances  of
its  genuine  realization  from  spurious  imitations,  or  of  that
creative  imagination  which  can  apply  the  well-known  general
type  to  particular  cases  without  distortion  or  misapprehension.
Many  a  man  whose  soul  was  deeply  stirred  by  thoughts  of
the  supremely  good  and  beautiful,  but  who  found  in  his  own
age  no  artistically  perfect  expression  of  his  ideal,  has  fancied
that  he  saw  it  realized  in  forms,  the  sorry  poverty  of  which
calls  forth  the  astonishment  of  a  later  and  more  developed
age. Forced  to  satisfy  its  longing  with  something  which  it
has,  the  mind easily over-estimates those  meagre outlines
which  it  invests  with  the  life  and  colour  of  its  own  feeling ;
and thus accustomed  to take the will for the deed,  it
becomes  unreceptive,  timid,  and  perverse  towards  that  fuller
beauty  which  reality presents,  and  which  if  it only  were
intelligible  would  much more effectually  satisfy  the soul's
needs. This  has  been  very  much  the  case  with  moral  de-

MANNERS  AND  MOEALS,  51

velopment.  We  may,  indeed,  certainly  ascribe  to  the  human
mind  the  possession  of  innate  general  ideas  of  Eight,  of  what
ought  to  be ;  but  the  moral  skill  which  enables  us  to  find,  in
every  individual  case,  the  special  form  in  which  this  Right
should  be  realized,  is  decidedly  a  product  of  progressive
civilisation,  and  happy  traits  of  natural  disposition  are  not  a
full  and  sufficient  but  only  an  extremely  imperfect  and  frag-
mentary substitute  for  it.

This  will  appear  to  be  self-evident  with  regard  to  all  those
more  important  human  institutions,  such  as  the  State,  or  the
organization  of  civil  society,  which,  in  as  far  as  they  are  the
intentional  product  of  human  skill,  can  only  be  founded  on
a  knowledge  of  the  thousand-fold  relations  which  bind  the
members  of  a  society  both  to  one  another  and  to  the  con-
ditions of  external  life  which  they  have  in  common  ;  and  this
knowledge  can  only  be  attained  and  gradually  perfected  by
the  actual  experience  of  life.  But  where  man  is  related  to
his  fellow  in  a  way  that  does  not  involve  any  of  these  com-
plicated relationships,  or  where  he  dwells  alone  face  to  face
with  external  Nature,  one  might  suppose  that  his  conduct
would  be  guided  more  unambiguously  by  the  innate  voice
of  Conscience,  prescribing  to  him  not  only  fitting  ethical
sentiments  but  also  the  manners  and  morals  corresponding  to
these  as  their  natural  expression.  However,  a  comparison  of
the  different  modes  of  human  life  teaches  us  the  very  contrary.
What  it  is  fitting  a  man  should  do  or  leave  undone,  in  what
way  it  is  becoming  that  he  should  order  his  surroundings  and
his  social  behaviour,  what  he  should  esteem  and  what  he
should  avoid,  and  what  things  are  without  claims  upon  him,
and  of  no  importance  to  him — finally  how  he  ought  to  dis-
pose all  his  conduct  and  every  detail  of  his  action,  so  that
his  life  may  be  a  harmonious  whole — all  this  must  be  learnt
in a  long  course of  development, and  never  can  be fully

I  learnt. The  innate  goodness  of  mankind  is  very  far  indeed
irom  leading  directly  to  such  a  development  of  morality.
Many  a  simple  custom  of  peoples  who  are  yet  uncivilised
pay  well  compare  favourably  with  the  distorted  growths  of
I

52  BOOK  VT. CHAPTER  HI.

our  civilisation ;  the  unsophisticated  manifestation  of  isolated
traits  of  natural  nobility  may  well  have  a  charm  for  us ;  but
around  these  bright  spots  the  shadows  lie  all  the  deeper,  and
the  general  character  of  this  life  of  Nature,  and  of  every
people  that  is  in  a  state  of  Nature,  exhibits  the  instability,  the
incoherence,  and  the  incalculable  inconsistency  with  which,
side  by  side  with  attractive  manifestations  of  particular  moral
feelings,  inhuman  crime  and  the  most  astounding  perver-
sity of  conduct  flourish  in  rank  luxuriance.  We  are  struck
by  some  advantages  of  a  state  of  Nature  which  are  for  the
most  part,  though  never  necessarily,  sacrificed  by  civilisation
for  the  sake  of  higher  ends,  and  we  long  to  return  to  the
simplicity  of  such  a  life — forgetting  that  it  is  civilisation  itself
which  has  sharpened  our  appreciation  for  it  as  presenting  a
pleasing  contrast  to  the  conditions  that  are  evil  in  our  own.
state,  and  that  with  the  charm  of  such  an  existence  there  is
associated  a  poverty  which  neither  knows  nor  can  produce
a  large  proportion  of  the  best  goods  of  life.  In  such  moods
we  are  but  too  apt  to  lose  courage,  and  it  is  this  which  so
often  makes  us  turn  back  from  the  complication  of  great  and
not  altogether  successful  undertakings  to  refresh  ourselves  with
the  complete  success  of  more  insignificant  works,  rather  than
push  forward  with  a  good  courage  notwithstanding.  A  little
flock  is  soon  counted ;  and  he  who  shrinks  from  venturing  on
the  open  sea  and  steering  his  course  among  the  thousand  con-
flicting claims  of  a  civilised  life  which,  as  regards  all  mental
interests,  is  stirred  to  its  very  depths,  can  easily  construct  an
idyl  on  which  the  eye  may  dwell  with  momentary  satis-
faction, but  only  to  turn  away  from  it  wearied  after  a
very  brief  space.  A  fine  climate,  inherited  excellence  of
bodily  organization,  and  absence  of  hard  work,  develop  among
men,  as  among  beasts,  the  greatest  beauty  and  suppleness  of
form,  and  a  natural  gracefulness  of  carriage,  independent  of
any  deep  spiritual  life ;  kindliness  and  good  nature  which  we
would  gladly  count  among  innate  human  qualities  are  very
likely  to  brighten  life  and  beautify  it  by  traits  of  social  refine-
ment in  cases  where  simple  relations  exist  which  "ive no

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.

53

occasion  to  lasting  and  deep-rooted  conflict ;  but  untutored
spirits  are  not  accustomed  to  take  a  comprehensive  view  of
human  life ;  they  know  not  its  significance  and  the  aims  which
are  set  before  it,  aid  hence  they  find  only  too  many  barren
spots  in  life,  too  many  moral  difficulties  which  receive  no
decided  answer,  too  many  practical  questions  which  may,  it
seems,  be  answered  indifferently  this  way  or  that — and  which
consequently  are  frequently  decided  in  accordance  with  the
impulse  due  to  temperament  and  external  circumstances,
leading  often  to  an  extreme  of  inhumanity  and  a  barbarism
which  are  in  the  most  violent  contradiction  to  the  amiable
traits  that  promised  so  much.

This  moral  untrustworthiness  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to
uncivilised  peoples  in  their  natural  condition.  Even  in  our
own  highly  civilised  state,  many  an  evil  disposition  is  kept
under  only  by  the  unremitting  pressure  exercised  on  all  sides
by  the  authority  of  systematised  social  forces ;  and  not
only  so,  but  narrowness  of  moral  insight,  want  of  a  delicate
perception  of  the  way  in  which  the  moral  ideal  should  include
and  animate  even  the  simplest  relations  of  life,  and  all  the
rudeness  of  mere  selfish  subjectivism  might  appear  at  any
moment,  even  among  us,  with  most  confusing  effect  if  past
centuries  had  not  preserved  and  matured  mighty  spiritual
forces  of  objective  validity  which  they  have  handed  down  to
us  in  the  treasures  of  science,  art,  law,  and  religion.  It  is
these  which  help  the  nobler  minds  to  recognise  that  close
connection  between  all  the  most  sacred  spiritual  possessions
of  men  which  the  individual  could  not  discover  unaided,
whilst  they  keep  baser  natures  within  bounds  as  a  system  of
institutions  which,  though  uncomprehended,  happen  to  have
the  authority.  And  finally,  at  no  time  can  we  say  either
that  this  vast  fabric  of  human  civilisation  is  completed,  or
that  all  its  parts  are  at  the  same  stage  of  advancement.  In
all  societies  there  are  departments  of  life  which,  though
susceptible  of  thorough  moral  cultivation,  are  yet  given  over
to  individual  caprice  arising  from  temperament,  as  though
they  were  subject  to no law  or  rule;  on  the  other  hand,

54  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  III.

there  are  customs,  really  indifferent  in  themselves,  which  have
become  established  as  having  the  force  of  absolutely  binding
commands,  much  to  the  detriment  of  progress.  Finally,  our
morality  as  a  whole  suffers  from  a  deficiency  which  it  never
will,  and  indeed  never  ought  to,  surmount  wholly;  a
deficiency,  namely,  of  perfectly  clear  theoretic  insight  into
the  grounds  of  the  binding  validity  of  its  demands — such  an
insight  as  would  be  capable  of  making  faith  in  the  dignity  of
moral  institutions  independent  of  any  change  of  mood,  and
hence  out  of  the  reach  of  that  scepticism  which  passion  and
the  sharp  troubles  of  our  earthly  lot  only  too  easily  arouse.

In  saying  that  this  deficiency  ought  not  to  be  wholly
surmounted,  what  we  mean  is  that  it  would  not  be  advan-
tageous for  moral  development  if  the  binding  truth  of  all
particular  moral  commands,  and  the  indissoluble  connection
between  them,  were  presented  to  individual  minds  with  the
theoretical  certainty  of  an  arithmetical  proof,  and  if  it  were
not  left  for  every  soul  to  fight  its  way  through  the  battle  of
life,  by  living,  believing  action  and  effort,  to  this  clearness  of
comprehensive  moral  intuition.  As  a  possibility  of  doing  ill
is  everywhere  a  condition  of  the  realization  of  what  is  good,
so  this  peculiarity  of  moral  cultivation  makes  possible  both
original  divergence  to  barbarism  and  a  relapse  into  it.  The
dignity  of  any  moral  custom  or  ceremony  can  very  seldom  be
convincingly  shown  when  it  is  regarded  in  isolation  and  not
in  its  connection  with  the  whole  spiritual  significance  of
human  life ;  having  a  thousand  roots  entwined  in  this,  it  is
generally  wholly  incapable  of  a  concise  syllogistic  proof  that
does  not,  in  its  turn,  require  to  have  its  own  presuppositions
supported  by  an  infinite  series  of  proof.  Just  on  this  account
every  moral  command  is  exposed  to  the  destructive  sophistry
which,  taking  anything  that  appears  an  abomination  to  our
civilised  ideas,  can  so  separate  it  from  its  relations  with  the
whole  of  life  as  to  make  it  seem  merely  an  innocent  matter
of  fact.  And  not  only  so,  but  we  also  learn  how  impossible
it  is  for  the  untutored  reflection  of  a  so-called  state  of  Nature
io  avoid  developing  what  is  crooked  and  barbarous,  side  b;'

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.  55

side  with  those  elements  of  personal  merit  to  which  a  good
disposition  prompts.

§  2.  It  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  recall  some  instances
both  of  the  dawning  Moral  Taste  which  led  men  gradually  to
seek  emancipation  from  the  guidance  of  mere  natural  instinct,
and  also  of  the  mistakes  to  which  reflection  was  exposed  in
this  progress.  If  we  begin  with  a  consideration  of  the  bodily
wants  which  first  roused  men  to  barter,  and  to  the  adoption
of  some  simple  rules  of  life,  we  observe  that  no  people  have
ever  had  any  moral  scruple  with  regard  to  the  consumption  of
vegetable  food.  The  whole  course  of  vegetable  life  is  so
unlike  our  own  that  the  ripening  fruits  seem  expressly  fitted
for  our  use  as  mere  means,  equally  removed  from  the  unser-
viceable toughness  of  inorganic  material,  and  from  that
animal  life  which  checks  the  longing  of  appetite  by  a  kind
of  natural  repulsion.  The  pious  anchorite,  feeding  on  roots
and  fruit,  or  at  the  outside  on  honey — the  product  indeed  of
animal  activity,  but  itself  inanimate — and  the  tribes  who,  in
primitive  innocence,  support  existence  on  the  produce  of  the
bread-fruit  tree  and  the  date-palm,  are  pictures  which  are
harmonious  in  themselves,  and  with  which  our  fancy  is
familiar.  But  dawning  civilisation  soon  grows  ashamed  of
such  an  unsophisticated  use  of  Nature's  raw  products;  it
seems  not  altogether  becoming  to  live  so  directly  from  hand
to  mouth,  and  the  fruits  of  the  trees  and  of  the  fields  come
to  be  at  least  gathered  together  and  stored  up,  before  they
are  wanted  for  use.  It  is  as  though  the  mere  lapse  of  time
between  the  moment  when  Nature  matures  them,  and  the
moment  when  we  enjoy  them,  had  loosened  their  connection
with  the  outer  world,  or  as  though  they  had  become  more
assimilated  to  our  own  nature  through  being  in  our  posses-
sion for  a  time.  But  it  is  seldom  that  we  stop  here.  The
inventions  of  cookery  may  indeed  be  chiefly  intended  to
enhance  a  pleasure  of  sense,  but  we  may  certainly  find
another  and  less  obvious  motive  of  culinary  activity  in  the
obscure  impulse  which  urges  us  to  disturb  the  form  given  by
Nature's  o\\n  hand, to  alter  the  raw  condition  of  nutritive

56  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  III.

material,  and  to  give  to  this  before  we  use  it,  as  far  as
possible,  the  character  of  a  product  of  our  own  fancy.  It
would  be  a  mistake  to  object  in  answer  to  this  that  when
we  escape  from  the  ceremonious  propriety  of  our  civilised  life,
we  delight  to  climb  the  trees  and  eat  the  fruit  as  we  pluck
it  from  the  bough ;  it  is  just  because  our  sense  of  civilised
existence  is  so  strong  that  we  take  pleasure  in  divesting  our-
selves for  a  moment  of  that  which  we  can  always  resume  at
will,  and  in  dwelling  for  a  moment  with  satisfaction  on  the
consciousness  that  our  life  is  a  life  of  sense,  and  in  close
connection  with  Nature.  The  truth  of  this  will  be  readily
seen  if  we  imagine  how  odd  it  would  look  for  man,  the
thinking  creature,  to  go  out  daily  at  meal-time  into  the  fields
to  devour  a  turnip  on  the  spot,  just  as  he  had  pulled  it  out
of  the  ground.

But nearly  every  dawning civilisation  has had  scruples
concerning  the lawfulness and propriety of  eating animal
food. Man  has  such  a  deep  horror  of  consuming  the  dead
bodies  of  those  animals which have died  a  natural  death,
that  he  has  always  preferred  to  undertake  the  intentional
killing  of  beasts,  this destruction being  to  a  great  extent
made  less  repulsive  to  him  by  the  excitement  of  having  to
defend  himself  against  their  attacks. But  in  the  choice  of
what  we  use  for  food an unquestionably  moral taste  has
gradually  prescribed limits,  the worth and significance  of
which  it  would  be  hard  to  reduce  to definite  notions. By
civilised  peoples  it  is  almost  exclusively  vertebrate  animals
that  are  used  for  food,  and  even  among  these  amphibia  at  any
rate  have  never  been  generally  used ;  among  the  invertebrate
animals,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can  mention  a  few,  and  but
a  very  few,  such  as  the  oyster  and  the crab,  which  people
venture  to  consume  in  their  natural  state,  whilst  some  others,
as  snails,  are  only  endured  as  disguised  ingredients  of  pre-
pared dishes. It  may  be  easy  for  the  doctrinaire  mind  to
prove  that at  bottom  meat  is  flesh,  if  indeed  it  does  not
succeed  in  establishing  the still  more  remarkable  discovery
that  the  range  of  our  natural  appetite  is  coincident  with  that

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.  "67

of  albuminous  material  in  the  animal  kingdom,  and  that  it
ceases  when  we  come  to  the  lower  orders  of  animals  where
these  materials  are  replaced  by  others  of  different  composition
and  more  heterogeneous  to  us ;  but  spite  of  all  reasoning,  the
natural  taste  of  civilised  men  adheres  obstinately  to  the
opinion  that  animals  do  certainly  differ  from  one  another  in
being  some  clean  and  others  unclean.  To  eat  insects  and
worms,  leeches,  maggots,  and  vermin,  will  always  be  regarded
as  a  mark  of  hideous  barbarism,  however  great  their  nutritive
value  may  prove  to  be.

It  is  partly  the  shapelessness  of  these  living  objects  which
disgusts  us,  partly  the  numerous  disagreeable  qualities  attach-
ing to  their  exterior — ^as,  for  instance,  slimy  coldness — partly
the  strangeness  of  their  appearance,  and  even  their  small  size :
for  though  we  may  take  animal  food,  eating  of  meat  which
comes  before  us  in  pieces  of  considerable  size,  there  seems
something  repulsive  in  the  idea  of  consuming  whole  organisms
with  all  their  vital  apparatus,  something  revolting  in  swallow-
ing an  object  that  comprises  in  itself  the  variety  of  a  complete
though  minute  anatomy,  that  we  cannot  disjoint.  We  thus
seem  impelled  by  a  natural  instinct  to  the  consumption  of
creatures  which  are  of  a  higher  order,  and  whose  organization
is  more  akin  to  our  own.

How  dangerous  this  indication  may  be  in  itself  does  not
need  to  be  specially  emphasized;  it  is  plain  that  logically
followed  out  it  leads  to  Cannibalism.  And,  indeed,  it  is
hardly  to  be  doubted  that  men  in  a  paradisiacal  state  of
I^ature  have  often  enough  in  all  innocence  followed  it  out  to
this  result,  seeing  no  evil  in  it — indeed,  even  when  the  dawn
of  reflection  had  broken,  they  were  by  no  means  at  a  loss  for
pretexts  which  should  invest  with  the  semblance  of  tender
consideration  a  custom  we  regard  as  the  very  extreme  of
inhuman  barbarism.  What  could  be  a  more  appropriate
fate  for  the  organic  remains  of  beloved  persons  than  to  be
converted  forthwith  into  the  living  flesh  and  blood  of  their
descendants,  instead  of  being  consigned  to  the  horrors  of  cor-
ruption ? A  man  may  be  absorbed  in  tender  recollection  of

58  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  III.

the  friend  whom  he  has  eaten,  as  he  plays  with  the  bleached
knuckle-bones  of  the  dead,  and  he  may  listen  in  amaze  to  the
horror  expressed  by  a  civilised  stranger  at  such  proceedings.
It  may  be  objected  that  even  cannibalism  revolts  from  devour-
ing the  bodies  of  those  who  have  died  a  natural  death,  and
that  therefore  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  feast  of  a  cannibal
must  always  be  preceded  by  murder.  But  what  is  there  that
could  effectually  restrain  men  who  are  in  a  state  of  Xature
from  killing  their  enemies,  or  even  neighbours  to  whom  they
are  otherwise  quite  amicably  disposed  ?  We  should  remember
how  fond  we  ourselves  grow  of  the  domestic  animals  which
we  feed  for  human  consumption,  and  how,  without  feeling
any  particular  moral  contradiction,  we  give  them  a  final
caress  the  evening  before  they  are  to  be  slaughtered.  So
much  that  is  contradictory  finds  room  in  our  minds,  that  we
ought  hardly  to  feel  boundless  astonishment  at  hearing  of
wild  tribes  who  invite  their  parents,  when  becoming  aged,
to  let  themselves  be  killed  and  eaten,  and  when  we  find
that  the  soft,  natural  grace  and  friendly  deportment  of  the
South  Sea  islanders  hides  a  craving  for  human  flesh.

If  one  thinks  how  easy  it  would  be  for  an  ingenious  mind
to  bring  forward  whole  series  of  reasons,  plausible  and  hard
to  be  refuted,  in  justification  of  such  atrocious  customs,  one
sees  the  more  what  a  vast  moral  effect  civilisation  produces
by  merely  holding  fast  the  opposite  conviction,  and  by  its
unhesitating  and  energetic  refusal  of  such  sophistry.  The
real  positive  grounds  of  this  civilised  conviction  will  probably
not  be  alleged  ordinarily,  for  they  do  not  lie  on  the  surface
of  our  civilisation  as  isolated  maxims  which  can  easily  be
collected  thence,  but  are  bound  up  with  the  very  foundation
of  our  whole  philosophic  view.  The  deeper  our  insight  into
human  destiny  becomes,  the  more  sacred  does  every  individual
human  being  seem  to  us,  and  the  more  unconditionally  do  we
refuse  to  attempt  to  take  the  measure  of  his  relative  worth,  with
a  view  to  determining  whether  he  has  already  accomplished  his
task  and  tasted  his  share  of  happiness,  and  may  now  be  treated
as  mere  matter  devoid  of  rights,  which  we  may,  if  we  choose

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.

69

consign  to  destruction — finally,  the  more  intolerable  becomes
the  thought  that  the  body,  which,  as  the  vesture  of  a  human
soul,  belonged  to  that  soul  in  an  unique  sense,  should  be
disintegrated  in  any  other  way  than  by  those  natural  forces
to  which  it  owed  its  formation,  or  that  its  substance  should
be  used  by  others  as  a  mere  means  for  the  support  of  animal
life.  The  spirit  of  civilisation  has  set  upon  human  personality
that  seal  of  inviolability  which  the  perversity  of  a  state  of
Nature  sometimes  sets  upon  external  objects ;  and  wherever
our  conduct  is  not  actuated  by  this  sentiment,  wherever  Law
and  Society  still  treat  individuals  as  though  they  were  things,
there  our  civilisation  is  marred  by  a  remnant  of  barbarism,
and  there  we  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  vanquishing  the
principle  of  barbarism  altogether.

Even  to  have  vanquished  it  in  essentials  has  not  been  easy,
and  a  glance  at  very  various  periods  of  history  is  sufiicient  to
convince  us  that  the  task  is  not  yet  completed — ^that  a  con-
siderable degree  of  so-called  civilisation  is  not  incompatible
with  a  sanguinary  background  of  cruelty,  sometimes  proceeding
from  natural  savagery,  sometimes  from  cold-blooded  bigotry.
We  very  often  see  in  children  a  disposition  to  torment
animals ;  and  it  is  said  that  the  North  American  Indian
never  passes  a  bird's  nest  without  destroying  it.  Among
barbarous  tribes  it  is  often  found  that  not  only  the  physical
courage  which  they  have  in  common  with  the  beasts,  but
also  many  a  trait  of  weak  voluptuousness  is  combined  with
deliberate  cruelty ;  and  if  thirst  for  blood  is  not  a  prime
characteristic  of  human  nature,  neither  is  there  implanted  in
it  anything  like  such  a  horror  of  bloodshed  as  many  an
optimist  thinks.  In  the  early  stages  of  almost  all  civilisa-
tions we  find  the  custom  of  avenging  blood  by  blood ;  and
the  fact  that  we  meet  with  it  as  a  custom,  as  an  established
duty,  shows  that  this  wild  impulse  of  revenge  was  passed  on
from  a  state  of  barbarism  to  ordered  societies,  which  were
incapable  of  repressing  it.  The  East  Indian  Thugs  and  the
Assassins  I  will  merely  mention,  for  we  very  easily  credit
mystical  fanaticism with utterly  obscuring human feeling.

60  BOOK  VI. CHAPTEE  IH.

even  in  the  midst  of  civilisation  which  is  in  other  respects
far  advanced.  But  in  the  most  enlightened  age  of  Greece
and  Eome  we  find  the  exposing  of  weakly  children  recom-
mended in  the  most  open  way,  in  an  ideal  constitutional  con-
struction ;  and  we  find,  in  practice,  the  abomination  of  a  system
of  slavery,  that  could  not  claim  even  such  justification  as  may
be  found  for  the  white  slave-owner  of  the  present  day,  in  the
contempt  that  he  feels  for  the  black-skinned  race  which  he
reckons  as  belonging  to  the  inferior  animals — a  system  in
which,  on  the  contrary,  men  were  enslaved  by  others  of  their
own  race,  and  in  which  there  was  much  more  cold,  systematic
cruelty  than  in  modern  slavery,  and  hardly  less  of  passionate
savagery.  And  all  this  in  a  Golden  Age  of  art,  and  amid  the
■glory  of  one  of  the  great  kingdoms  of  the  world.

But  we  do  not  need  to  go  back  to  distant  centuries  for
instances  of  what  lies  at  our  very  doors.  I  am  not  alluding
to  the  evils  inseparable  from  war — war  which  springs  up
again  afresh  in  every  age,  and  which  it  is  idle  to  hope  that
we  can  charm  away  with  the  olive  branch  of  peace.  When
advanced  civilisation  turns  to  this  last  resource,  it  is  not
because  any  delight  in  outrage  stirs  it  to  the  temporary
unchaining  of  murderous  forces,  but  because  it  recognises
that  the  complication  of  the  situation  is  too  great  to  be
solved  by  existing  human  wisdom.  No  one  denies  that,
spite  of  this  recognition,  the  solution  would  often  be  really
very  easy  to  find ;  but  the  very  fact  that  the  right  view  does
not  obtain  general  acceptance  and  realization,  is  one  of  the
inevitable  deficiencies  of  every  civilisation  which  has  recourse
to  the  ultimatum  of  war.  So  men  betake  themselves  to
the  extreme  remedy  of  momentarily  suspending  those  laws
of  humanity  by  which  we  are  ordinarily  bound,  and  of
referring  to  force  the  decision  which  has  been  sought  in
vain  from  wisdom;  yet  still  the  suspension  is  only  partial,
and  men  always  regard  as  sacred,  at  least  those  forms  of
intercourse  which  serve  to  facilitate  the  return  at  any
moment  from  a  state  of  violence  to  peaceable  relations.
Therefore,  however  lamentable  it  may  be  to  see  this  appeal  of

MANNEES  AND  MORALS.  6-1

civilisation  to  force  recurring  again  and  again,  we  find  even  in
the  appeal  itself  a  reference  to  that  good  to  which  men  hope  it
will  help  them  to  return ;  but  there  are  not  wanting  proofs
of  a  continued  influence  of  barbarous  philosophy  in  sugges-
tions which  are  made  unhesitatingly  even  in  our  own  time ;
in  incitements  to  wars  of  extermination,  in  exhortations  to
assassination,  in  instigations  to  go  beyond  legitimate  self-
defence  and  the  re-establishment  of  justice,  to  deeds  of
immoderate  and  bloody  revenge.

§  3.  Let  us,  however,  turn  back  to  those  simple  phseno-
mena  in  which  dawning  civilisation  betrays  a  gradual
heightening  of  the  human  sense  of  self-esteem.  To  keep  one's
own  body  free  from  all  accretions  of  extraneous  matter  is
an  impulse  of  cleanliness  which  is  everywhere  a  sign  either
of  the  beginning  of  culture,  or  of  a  happy  natural  constitu-
tion that  promises  to  favour  the  establishment  of  culture.
On  the  whole,  we  can  hardly  maintain  that  cleanliness  is
natural  to  men  in  a  higher  degree  than  to  the  beasts ;  it
springs  up  spontaneously  among  people  who  are  invited  by
the  proximity  of  the  ocean  to  frequent  indulgence  in  the
pleasure  of  the  bath;  but  where  this  favouring  condition  is
absent,  we  find  not  only  that  barbarous  nations  are  extremely
uncleanly,  but  that  even  among  those  who  have  pretensions  to
belong  to  the  civilised  world,  uncleanliness  is  quite  compatible
on  the  one  hand  with  effeminate  good  nature,  and  on  the
other  hand  with  active  aesthetic  taste  for  beauty  in  outward
form  and  movement.  Uncleanliness  is  unendurable  only  to
those  civilised  nations  who  strive  after  order  and  con-
sistency in  their  inner  life,  in  their  whole  system  of  thought,
in  their  feelings  and  endeavours.  Gifts  of  genius,  as  well
as  benevolence  of  disposition,  have  in  every  respect  an  extra-
ordinary compatibility  with  uncleanliness  and  disorder;  on
the  other  hand,  nations  which  are  not  so  remarkable  for  these
endowments,  but  which  produce  more  perfect  characters,
will  be  inclined  to  the  same  nicety  and  systematic  precision
with  regard  to  their  own  persons  which  they  introduce  into
their  occupations  and  surroundings.

62  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IIL

I  am  not,  I  think,  having  recourse  to  a  fai^fetched
analogy  when  I  couple  with  this  outwaid  virtue  the  inner
virtue  of  truthfulness.  The  worth  of  truth,  and  the  total
impossibility  of  carrying  on  human  intercourse  under  a
system  of  barefaced  lying,  is  so  strongly  felt,  even  by  men
in  the  most  barbarous  state,  that  lying  has  always  been
regarded  as  the  root  of  all  evil,  at  least  in  certain  circum-
stances in  which  men  reckon  upon  truth.  But  the  impulse
to  speak  truth  is  not  directly  bound  up  with  the  recogni-
tion of  its  worth,  and  it  is  only  in  civilised  society  that  the
liar  appears  to  himself  worthy  of  condemnation,  whilst  the
life  of  barbarians  is  in  many  respects  founded  on  craft  and
carefully  cultivated  hypocrisy.  We  may  remark  that  to  a
man  of  morally  cultivated  mind  it  is  peculiarly  hard  to  tell  an
isolated  lie  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  for  some  temporary
and  isolated  end ;  he  feels  that  it  disturbs  too  conspicuously
his  consistency  as  an  individual,  and  is  conscious  of  being
untrue  to  himself ;  it  is  much  easier  to  make  consistent  lying
the  maxim  of  his  conduct;  in  that  case  he  can  still  be  con-
scious of  having  a  coherent  individuality,  not  destitute  of  all
method  and  order.  The  same  thing  is  seen  in  the  case  of
other  moral  relations ;  men  hesitate  to  infringe  one  isolated
law  of  social  order  the  more  if  they  still  recognise  the  others,
and  by  this  recognition  condemn  their  own  deed ;  it  is  some-
what easier  to  set  oneself  in  opposition  to  social  order
altogether,  and  to  wage  war  against  the  world,  like  some
monster  cut  adrift  from  it.  In  such  a  course  there  may  yet
be  expressed  —  though  misguided  to  the  last  degree  —  the
impulse  of  an  individualizing  personality  to  establish  the
basis  of  its  own  conduct  not  in  dependence  on  foreign  condi-
tions, but  in  systematic  complete  harmony  with  itself.

Around  these  rare  cases  of  conscious  grand  systematic
untruth  clusters  the  incredible  amount  of  petty  incoherent
falsity,  which  in  the  most  varied  forms  pervades  all  strata  of
civilised  society,  and  which  seems  to  me  much  less  akin
to  lying  in  the  ordinary  sense  than  to  that  impurity  and
untrustworthiness  of  the inner  life  which appear,  only  im-

MANNEES  AND  MORALS.  63

perfectly  veiled  by  fair  appearance,  as  the  general  rule
among  barbarous  men.  To  a  character  of  thorousfh  moral
development  every  entangled  complication  of  circumstances,
every  uncertainty  regarding  claims  which  it  is  entitled  to
make  or  called  upon  to  satisfy,  every  doubt  about  its  relations
to  others  is  as  odious  as  bodily  impurity.  We  need  only  com-
pare with  this  the  prevailing  inclinations  of  the  lower  classes,
in  order  to  see  those  moral  deficiencies  which  it  is  so  hard  for
imperfect  civilisation  to  avoid;  the  difficulty  of  extracting
from  them  a  definite,  decided  promise,  their  constant  dis-
position to  leave  everything  they  can  in  a  state  of  fluctuating
uncertain  indecision,  their  inaccessibility  to  the  notion  that
one's  word  once  given  is  of  binding  obligation,  and — in  wider
circles — the  propensity  to  cling  to  doubtful  and  untenable
relations,  the  hope  that  if  one  never  takes  a  decided  step  one
will  be  able  in  the  hurly-burly  of  events  to  snatch  some
advantage,  of  which  one  has  at  present  no  clear  notion — in
short,  inexhaustible  patience  with  all  sorts  of  confusion,  and
a  delight  in  wriggling  on,  with  the  help  of  procrastination,
waiting  about,  half-admissions  and  retractions,  and  general
uncertainty,  through  the  course  of  events  which  to  men  thus
inclined  seems  itself  equally  uncertain.  Among  the  more
intelligent  upper  classes  the  same  deficiency  recurs,  but  under
other  forms,  or  under  the  same  forms,  but  in  different  connec-
tions ;  among  them,  as  among  those  whose  conditions  of  life
are  less  favoured,  the  noble  spirits  are  but  few,  but  there  are
some  of  these  in  all  ranks  of  life — souls  who,  with  an  un-
wearied impulse  towards  truth,  renounce  all  those  pretexts
with  which  the  slothful  of  heart  seek  to  excuse  this  mental
instability,  and  who,  moved  by  the  enthusiasm  and  force  of
moral  conviction,  not  only  desire  to  make  their  whole  duty
clear  before  their  eyes  at  every  step  of  this  changing  life,  but
also  obey  with  unhesitating  decision  every  clear  call  to
action.

.  Unexpected  perfidy  and  perfectly  sudden  and  inexplicable
changes  of  mood  have  always  been  the  first  wa!rnings  which
have  roused  mistrust  towards the  deceptive friendliness of

64  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IIL

barbarous  men.  It  is  the  nature  of  a  beast  to  act  in  accordance
with  the  passion  of  the  moment,  but  in  a  man  the  passionate
motives  to  action  due  to  momentary  feeling  should  be
moderated  by  the  counterbalancing  force  of  the  other  moral
motives  which  the  memory  of  past  experience  has  stored  up.
Children  and  barbarous  peoples  lack  this  retarding  or  regu-
lating flywheel  that  can  hinder,  as  in  machines,  the  precipitate
course  of  springs  once  set  in  motion,  and  we  can  as  little
rely  upon  their  moods  as  upon  the  course  of  the  weather.
To  realize  this  one  must  look  into  one's  own  mind.  How
easily  is  one  inspired  with  momentary  enthusiasm  by  some
noble  thought,  or  the  idea  of  performing  some  magnanimous
deed !  But  this  excitement  is  followed  by  a  state  of  nervous
exliaustion,  or,  to  state  the  case  more  simply  and  honestly,  by
laziness ;  there  wake  up  all  sorts  of  little  likes  and  dislikes
which  were  hushed  at  first ;  and  at  last,  although  the  work
may,  as  we  had  pictured  it  to  ourselves,  be  indeed  a  noble
one,  yet  all  the  same  we  find  that  we  can  get  on  without  it,
and  besides  who  would  thank  us  for  our  pains  if  we  were
to  trouble  about  it  ?  Here  we  see  that  moral  weakness
which  so  lightly  dons  the  cloak  of  heroism,  but  has  not  the
enduring  strength  necessary  for  holding  fast  the  ideals  of
youth,  and  then  coolly,  as  though  it  had  long  ago  weighed
the  whole  matter,  rejects  as  an  idle  dream  that  which  it  was
too  lazy  to  convert  from  a  dream  to  reality.  In  a  mind
which  has  not  been  furnished  either  by  education  or  by  rich
experience  with  power  sufficient  to  withstand  this  sloth,  the
obscurer  of  all  that  is  good,  but  which  retains  unimpaired  the
capacity  of  appreciating  every  passing  advantage  or  dis-
advantage, the  sloth  wiU  be  almost  necessarily  intensified  to
falsity.  Any  fancy  that  crosses  the  mind,  any  unfamiliar
association  of  Ideas,  rouses  mistrust,  and  disturbs  the  equili-
brium of  these  poverty-stricken  souls,  for  whom  all  steady
social  intercourse  makes  shipwreck  on  the  rock  of  their  own
incapacity  to  calculate  and  guide  the  course  of  their  inner
life — a  course  which  is  not  amenable  to  any  standard  of  reason-
ableness, of  principle,  and  of  self-government. We  find  that

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.  65

this  running  wild  of  the  course  of  thought  and  of  changes  of
mood  is  not  confined  to  men  who  are  in  a  state  of  barbarism,
any  more  than  other  moral  deficiencies  are ;  on  the  contrary,
it  is  found  among  all  nations  except  those  which  by  a  long
course  of  development  embracing  equally  all  departments  of
human  life  have  become  the  very  repositories  of  human
culture ;  and  alas !  the  genius  of  civilisation — quieter,  self-
centred,  hemmed  in  by  a  thousand  self-imposed  limits — is  but
too  often  imposed  upon  by  this  as  yet  unexhausted  "  natural
force."  For  we  find  ready  to  our  hand  this  and  other  flatter-
ing names  for  such  untamed  and  untutored  wildness,  which
bribes  our  aesthetic  judgment  sometimes  with  the  heroic
noise  of  boundless  passion  that  must  have  its  way,  regardless
of  consequences,  sometimes  with  the  different  charm  of  some-
thing unique,  incommensurable,  supernatural.  We  too  easily
forget  that  much  which  looks  extremely  well  in  a  picture  and
has  a  striking  effect  in  poetry,  would  make  us  heartily
ashamed  of  our  prepossession  if  we  were  to  see  it,  not  at  a
single  favourable  moment  but  in  the  ordinary  course  of  life,
in  connection  with  all  its  manifold  results.  The  charm  of
what  is  strange  and  full  of  characteristic  expression  and  one-
sided originality,  is  so  great  that  it  leads  every  one  to  be
sometimes  unjust  towards  that  consistent,  thoughtful,  steadfast
order  of  civilised  life  which  though  less  warm  in  colouring  is
ineffably  more  worthy.

I  4.  "We  now  turn  back  once  more  to  the  most  funda-
mental relations  between  Nature  and  Man ;  to  the  great
mystery  which  joins  our  spiritual  life  to  our  bodily  form,  and
mental  excitations  to  external  gesture  and  movement,  which
binds  up  the  continuance  of  our  personal  life  with  the  con-
tinuous activity  of  the  physical  machine  of  our  body — that
body  which  we  so  cherish  as  long  as  it  serves  us,  and  which
we  regard  with  such  strange  horror  as  soon  as  life  has
departed  from  it ;  by  which,  finally,  our  existence  altogether
is  made  dependent  on  the  inexplicable  secret  of  bodily  repro-
duction. The  more  deeply  conscious  the  soul  is  of  itself  and
of  its  destiny,  the  more  obnoxious  to  its self-esteem  is  the

VOL.  IL  E

66  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IIL

direct  unity  presented  by  the  combination  of  the  inner  life
with  the  marvellous  material  organism,  the  soul  being  in-
evitably forced  to  sympathize  intensively,  by  pain  and  pleasure,
with  all  the  excitations  of  the  body,  and  to  trust  to  it  for  the
expression,  the  accomplishment,  and  even  the  very  quickening
of  its  endeavours.  For  in  truth  the  soul  can  enjoy  the  full
warm  life  which  alone  can  satisfy  it,  only  if  the  supersensuous
play  of  its  states  and  activities  is  supplemented,  as  by  a
sensuous  echo,  by  the  sum  of  all  those  feelings  which  seem  to
make  known  to  us  the  strength  and  elasticity,  the  tension  or
relaxation,  the  rest  or  the  sympathetic  stirring  of  desire
which  affect  our  material  part.  Our  spiritual  nature  is  every-
where ashamed  at  finding  itself  in  indissoluble  connection
with  the  world  of  sense — at  the  consciousness  that  while  its
own  aims  have  intrinsic  worth  and  are  incommensurable  with
material  processes,  we  are  yet  bound  by  the  mechanical  order
of  Nature,  and  that  of  our  whole  destiny  no  part  could  be
realized  without  those  natural  impulses  by  which  our
endeavours  are  provided  with  tangible  objects  and  means  of
attainment :  it  is  the  dim  consciousness  of  all  this  which  in
the  dawn  of  moral  culture  has  produced  those  various  develop-
ments of  the  sense  of  shame  by  which  the  human  race  is
everywhere  prompted  to  veil  the  physical  basis  of  its  spiritual
existence,  especially  when  this  physical  basis  furnishes  the
pre-eminently  sensuous  means  by  which  we  must  reach  the
most  precious  and  spiritual  treasures  of  life  and  love.

I  will  not  attempt  to  decide  what  is  the  significance  of
those  traces  of  a  sense  of  Modesty  which  appear  even  among
beasts,  or  to  what  extent  it  may  be  an  innate  natural  feature
of  the  human  race.  Observation  of  barbarous  peoples  reveals
to  us  sometimes  a  considerate  delicacy  and  purity  of  manners,
but  much  more  often  a  bestial  absence  of  restraint  in  the
satisfaction  of  all  physical  wants ;  and  we  are  left  in  doubt
which  of  the  two  we  should  regard  as  original  and  which  as
the  result  of  dawning  civilisation  or  of  almost  total  relapse
into  savagery,  or,  indeed,  whether  we  should  not  refer  differ-
ences in this  respect to  peculiarities  which  are  not  shared

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.  67

by  all  mankind.  However,  beside  the  moral  sentiment  on
these  subjects  which  has  on  the  whole  become  established
among  all  civilised  peoples,  civilised  reflection  and  sophistry
■  have  produced  two  one-sided  but  mutually-opposed  views  :
on  the  one  hand,  the  exaggerated  contempt  with  which  a
fanatical  spiritualism  looks  down  upon  all  Nature  as  some-
thing in  itself  unclean,  shameful,  and  degrading,  and  to  be
resisted  by  every  weapon  of  a  gloomy  asceticism ;  on  the
other  hand,  the  cool  assumption  that  everything  which  is
natural  is  pure.  Neither  the  former  opinion  with  its  hatred
of  Nature,  nor  the  latter  with  its  easy  complaisance,  has
succeeded  in  guiding  the  moral  feelings  of  civilised  humanity
on  the  whole ;  but  both  have  had  an  important  practical  effect
on  the  temper  of  different  times,  and  both  have  in  many
ways  obscured  theoretic  belief  concerning  the  grounds  of
such  moral  feeling  and  the  demands  made  by  it.

With  regard  to  those  deep  and  sacred  joys  of  life  which
we  can  reach  only  through  the  middle  term  of  sense,  it  is
not  a  genuinely  human  feeling  of  modesty  which  leads  us  to
despise  and  reject  them  merely  on  account  of  this  medium,  to
which  they  are  joined  in  the  order  of  Nature ;  on  the  other
hand,  in  that  intentional  prying  into  this  mysterious  connection
which  vainly  seeks  to  justify  itself  by  the  pretence  of  serving
science,  there  is  an  unconscious  immodesty;  and  not  here
only,  but  also  in  analysing,  for  the  confirmation  of  christian
humility,  all  the  foulness  and  corruption  on  which  rest  the
beauty  and  proud  gladness  of  our  life — in  brief,  in  the  dis-
position to  hunt  after  that  which  is  impure  and  sinful,  of
which  there  will  be  the  more  to  be  found  in  proportion  as
the  imagination  which  seeks  it  is  the  more  corrupt.  The  man
of  genuine  moral  feeling  sees  primarily  that  which  is  pure  and
noble  and  divine  in  things ;  the  indissoluble  connection  of  all
this  with  the  world  of  sense  seems  to  him  to  be  entailed  by
his  own  finiteness,  but  to  have  no  power  to  destroy  his  faith
in  the  worth  of  those  blessings  which  are  only  accessible
through  the  medium  of  sense.

But  on the  other  hand,  the  principle  that all which  is

68  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  III.

natural  is  to  be  regarded  as  pure,  leads  to  a  mode  of  thought
and  action  which  is  rejected  with  equal  decision  by  cultivated
moral  feeling.  It  can  naturally  be  no  reproach  to  a  finite
creature  to  be  subject  to  the  wants  entailed  by  his  bodily
organization,  and  to  say  merely  this  would  be  to  show  but
cheap  wisdom.  But  that  in  our  consideration  of  human  life
as  a  whole,  we  should  regard  these  calls  of  Nature  as  entitled
to  put  in  an  appearance  without  check  or  reserve,  and  to  be
reckoned  in  their  primitive  simplicity  as  among  the  pheeno-
mena  of  moral  development — this  is  a  notion  which  we  must
in  all  cases  reject  as  a  mark  of  inhuman  barbarism.  It  is
difficult  to  say  whether  the  claims  of  moral  culture  in  life
and  in  art  are  more  deeply  sinned  against  by  the  impassioned
voluptuousness  which  breaks  through  many  a  moral  barrier,
and  misuses  poetry  as  a  means  to  its  own  glorification,  or  by
the  cold  unemotional  temper,  which — taking  a  pride  in  being
beyond  the  reach  of  temptation  and  knowing  nothing  of  what
is  seductive  but  only  of  what  is  unclean — seeks  this  last,  and
with  naked  plainness  describes  or  practises  it  as  being,  or  be-
longing to,  "  human  nature."  If  voluptuousness  leads  sooner  to
the  transgression  of  moral  limits,  yet  at  least  there  is  in  it  the
remembrance  of  a  natural  charm  to  which  the  human  impulse
is  subordinate ;  but  in  that  realism,  coarse  and  scornful  by
turns,  which  takes  pleasure  in  emphasizing  the  inevitable
earthly  element  in  all  that  is  fair  and  noble,  and  in  recognis-
ing with  deliberate  expressness  the  impurity  which  our  nature
cannot  shake  off — in  this  there  is  a  corruptness  of  imagination
which  far  more  completely,  though  perhaps  less  quickly,  blunts
all  moral  sensitiveness.  Beside  two  such  monstrous  growths
the  principle  of  the  purity  of  Nature  will  certainly  for  the
most  part  lead  to  a  middle  path  ;  it  will  allow  the  general
practical  necessity  of  modest  decency,  but  will  blame  as
exaggerated  sentimentality  the  wish  to  ignore  those  natural
facts  which  it  is  in  truth  impossible  to  deny.  The  conduct
of  grown-up  men  and  women  tends  for  the  most  part  to  be
in  agreement  with  this  view,  which  with  simple  straight-
forwardness inclines to call everything by its real  name.

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.  69

Unless  people  are  guarded  by  a  noble  refinement  of  mind,
the  older  they  grow  the  less  reticent  do  they  become  with
regard  to  their  physical  nature — increasing  bodily  infirmities
incessantly  call  attention  to  the  functions  of  animal  life,  and
give  occasion  to  seek  medical  counsel  and  help ;  and  thus  is
gradually  shattered  the  proud,  shy  modesty  of  the  individual
spirit,  the  attachment  of  which  to  its  disintegrating  envelope
begins  to  be  loosened.  If  in  contrast  to  this  we  recall  the
indignation  of  some  young  and  lofty  soul,  when  in  ordinary
life  in  the  intercourse  of  elder  persons  it  hears  others  treat
and  discuss  and  bring  before  it  with  idle  indifference  circum-
stances which  it  feels  impelled  to  conceal  even  from  itself,
we  shall  be  constrained  to  admit  that  even  the  well-meanins
moderate  view  of  steady-going  folk  involves  a  sensible  retro-
gression in  moral  refinement,  and  that  of  all  kinds  of  en-
lightenment none  is  more  hazardous  than  that  which  conflicts
with  the  prepossessions  of  modesty.

We  are  in  the  habit  of  expecting  this  feeling  to  be  most
active  in  the  intercourse  of  the  two  sexes,  and  in  fact  the  forms
by  which  such  intercourse  is  regulated  are  all  the  more  essen-
tial marks  of  high  moral  culture  because  definite  forms  are  so
little  prescribed  in  this  department  of  ordered  life  by  mere
natural  cii'cumstances.  The  only  kind  of  marriage  which
would  everywhere  seem  unnatural  is  that  between  parents  and
children,  and  this  on  account  of  the  disparity  of  age;  but
Nature  enters  no  protest  against  marriage  between  brothers
and  sisters,  and  presents  as  many  analogies  in  favour  of  poly-
gamy as  in  favour  of  monogamy;  indeed,  mere  Nature  provides
us  with  no  reasons  why  we  should  substitute  a  life-long  union
for  a  temporary  connection  formed  for  the  gratification  of
desire.  All  the  limits  which  the  human  race  has  set  to  its
desires  of  this  kind  are  the  product  of  a  gradually  awakening
moral  sense  ;  the  attempt  to  find  for  them  a  natural  foundation
which  does  not  exist,  does  not  make  them  any  the  more  sacred
or  intelligible.  For  we  are  neither  justified  in  following  the
dictates  of  Nature  merely  as  such,  nor  bound  in  duty  to  do
so;  it  is  only  when  we  act  contrary  to  those  commands  of

70  BOOK  VL CHAPTER  III.

Nature,  on  obedience  to  which  all  successful  action  depends,
that  our  procedure  is  vain  and  criminal ;  but  with  regard  to
those  things  which  she  leaves  to  our  option,  the  moral  nature
has  to  make  a  nicer  choice,  a  choice  which  can  only  be  justi-
fied by  its  ideal  end.  There  is  no  other  particular  of  ordered
life  in  reference  to  which  there  has  been  a  more  strange
divergence  in  the  variety  of  custom,  and  this  variety  is  to  be
explained  by  a  consideration  of  the  different  degrees  of  clear-
ness with  which  the  worth  of  human  personality  and  of  the
individual  soul  was  presented  to  the  imagination  of  different
ages  and  nations.  To  some  nations  of  antiquity,  marriage
between  brothers  and  sisters  seemed  admissible ;  to  us  it
seems  so  incomprehensible  that  its  inevitable  necessity,  in  case
of  the  human  race  having  sprung  from  a  single  pair,  has  been
thought  a  sufficient  argument  in  disproof  of  this  view  of
our  origin.  But  to  think  this  is  clearly  wrong ;  for  it  is
certainly  an  error  to  imagine  that  the  sinfulness  of  such  a
connection  is  immediately  declared  by  the  voice  of  Nature.
On  the  contrary,  the  voice  which  declares  it  is  that  of  the
most  highly  developed  moral  insight,  which  impresses  upon
men  a  horror  of  mingling  two  human  relationships,  of  which
each  can  be  experienced  in  the  whole  fulness  and  beauty  of
its  ethical  significance  only  if  it  is  kept  uncontaminated,  by
isolation  from  the  other.  This  monition  could  have  had  no
weight  for  those  primitive  brothers  and  sisters  who  were  as
yet  all  the  world  to  each  other.

As  we  associated  purity  of  the  inner  life  with  bodily  cleanli-
ness, we  would  also  assign  to  modesty  a  wider  range  than  is
generally  considered  to  belong  to  it.  As  it  is  certainly  a
mark  of  defective  civilisation  to  neglect  the  development  of
the  bodily  frame  and  its  capacities,  so  is  it  little  in  agreement
with  genuinely  moral  feeling  to  make  one's  bodily  presence
conspicuous  and  to  wish  to  be  esteemed  on  account  of  it.  The
more  highly  civilised  nations  and  the  more  cultivated  classes
of  society  consider  as  most  essential  to  a  fitting  dignity  of
demeanour  that  correctness  of  external  appearance  which
neither  can  be  found  fault  with,  nor  attempts  to  show  off"  any

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.  7l

personal  advantages,  and  which  is  thus  best  adapted  to  prevent
any  undue  attention  from  being  excited  by  one's  personal
appearance.  On  the  other  hand,  it  betrays  a  lower  degree  of
culture  to  show  off  physical  strength  and  skill,  except  in  work
in  which  they  find  appropriate  employment,  and  to  wish  to
do  one's  work  in  the  world  by  means  of  a  noisy  display  of
one's  bodily  gifts.

In  respect  of  this,  nations  and  individuals  are  divided  into
two  distinct  groups,  the  peculiarities  of  which  pervade  and
give  a  tone  to  all  departments  of  culture.  There  is  one
disposition  which — to  employ  here  one  of  the  most  repulsive
phrases  which  modern  times  have  invented — considers  that  the
business  of  life  is  to  develop  oneself  (sich  darzuleben) ;  there
is  another  which,  forgetting  and  neglecting  self,  tries  to  find  a
reflex  of  its  own  Ideas  in  any  finished  work,  any  labour,  any
external  order ;  each  has  for  the  other  an  antipathy  which  only
gives  place  to  mutual  admiration  when  they  look  at  one  another
from  a  distance,  and  the  one  sees  its  own  deficiencies  supplied
by  the  other's  peculiarities.  We  will,  however,  not.  conceal  the
fact  that  in  the  interests  of  human  culture  we  are  decidedly  in
favour  of  the  last,  notwithstanding  all  its  shortcomings.  A
deep-rooted  aversion  to  take  in  hand  any  hard  instrument  not
easy  to  manage,  and  to  do  a  spell  of  honest  work,  is  in  the  case
of  men  of  the  disposition  which  we  first  noticed,  ordinarily
joined  with  an  inclination  to  make  a  boundless  fuss  about
their  own  appearance  and  about  all  those  physical  powers
which  the  bodily  organization  graciously  and  gratuitously  puts
at  the  disposal  of  the  fancy.  Continual  inquisitive  activity
of  the  senses  and  quick  receptivity  makes  such  men  good
observers  while  they  do  observe ;  but  their  attention  being
easily  distracted,  for  the  most  part  they  grasp  only  the  super-
ficial harmonies  or  discords  of  external  form,  only  what  is
graceful  or  ludicrous.  They  likewise  feel  an  unceasing  need
of  manifesting  their  inner  life  with  all  its  emotions,  however
transitorj'  and  insignificant ;  and  this  on  the  one  hand  leads
them  to  be  always  making  a  show  and  trying  to  give  a
picturesque  and  heroic  air  to  their  finery  or  their  rags,  and

72

BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  III.

on  the  other  hand  tends  to  bring  their  minds,  even  in  solitude,
into  a  dramatic  frame,  in  which  they  take  a  secret  pride  and
pleasure.  Little  inclined  to  real  exertion,  they  make  the  most
perfect  theatrical  use  of  their  bodily  gifts  ;  they  are  eloquent,
and  in  their  language  indulge  in  far  more  of  high-sounding  and
diffuse  description,  colouring,  and  ornamentation  than  there  is
any  occasion  for  j  they  are  given  to  song  and  noise,  and  add
to  all  this  the  luxury  of  expressive  gesticulation.  It  is  chiefly
the  southern  countries  of  the  temperate  zone  which  by  their
fineness  of  climate  have  produced  in  their  inhabitants  both  a
bodily  organization  which  combines  beauty  and  strength,  and
also  a  keen  satisfaction  in  the  endowments  and  capacities  of
this  corporeal  frame,  and  in  addition  to  these  the  passion
and  vividness  with  which  they  feel  to  the  full  the  joy  or
admiration,  the  love  or  hatred,  the  devotion  or  despair  which
any  situation  may  call  forth.  If  we  add  to  this  the  approving
definition  of  their  nature,  long  ago  adopted  by  philosophic
reflection,  and  say  that  in  them  and  in  their  culture  we  see
attained  the  highest  development  of  the  living  human  form,
we  think  we  shall  have  sufficiently  indicated  the  short-
coming which  is  attributed  to  them  by  men  of  the  opposite
disposition.

For  to  cultivate  oneself,  and  to  make  oneself  into  a  perfect
human  being,  may  easily  seem  to  be  the  essential  scope  of  all
human  tasks;  but  nevertheless  we  must  admit  a  deficiency  in
this  mode  of  thought,  which  aims  solely  at  moulding  its  own
being  into  a  beautiful  flexible  whole,  doing  this  partly  with  a
kind  of  natural  instinct,  partly  with  doctrinaire  self-conscious-
ness—  a  deficiency,  namely,  in  that  submission  and  self-
sacrifice  which  make  one  element  of  morality.  And  this  remark
does  not  apply  merely  to  that  so-called  healthy  natural
sensuousness  which,  glorying  in  the  endowments  of  the
physical  organization,  does  in  truth  accomplish  no  more  than
the  production  of  a  first-rate  specimen  of  the  species  man,
looked  at  from  the  point  of  view  of  natural  history ;  we  must
also  blame,  as  a  more  refined  kind  of  Egoism,  the  deceptive
self- culture  which  does  indeed  always  seek  that  which  is  good

MANNERS  AND  MORALS.  73

and  noble,  but  only  in  order  to  adorn  with  all  the  ornaments
of  virtue  that  specially  cherished  central  point  which  we  call
our  Ego.  All  the  duties  imposed  upon  itself  by  a  mind  of
this  temper  seem  to  it  to  be  duties  to  itself  alone;  the  dignity
of  its  own  personality  is  the  end  to  which  every  effort  of  life
is  devoted.

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  other  mode  of  thought  which  we
contrasted  with  this  does  not  accomplish  the  same  results,  but
the  consciousness  of  personal  dignity  comes  to  it  rather  as  an
accidental  gain,  because  it  does  not  aim  primarily  at  this  end,
but,  forgetting  and  denying  self,  works  for  the  general  realiza-
tion of  what  is  good  in  all  the  world.  Indeed,  it  would  be
more  in  accordance  with  truth  to  say  that  what  it  gains  is  not
the  consciousness  of  personal  dignity,  but  the  habit  of  feeling
and  acting  in  accordance  with  this ;  and  also  it  attributes  less
value  to  the  efficacy  of  external  expression,  which  will
naturally  belong  in  greater  measure  to  him  who  regards  him-
self as  a  work  of  art  to  be  polished  to  the  utmost  pitch  of
perfection.  To  be  of  use  in  the  world,  and  to  do  one's  work
in  life  by  labouring  for  the  general  good,  is  the  comparatively
prosaic  motto  of  men  of  this  character ;  and  their  own  person-
ality is  regarded  as  but  one  among  many — the  many  who  are
to  share  in  the  general  benefit  and  rejoice  at  it.  Wherever  at
particular  periods,  or  in  particular  nations,  this  mode  of
thought  has  preponderated,  there  has  arisen  delight  in  work
of  a  kind  that  not  only  is  advantageous  to  the  community,  but
also  affords  in  its  products  an  objective  reflection  of  individual
personalities — products  in  the  characteristic  forms  of  which  the
worker  sees  embodied  the  worth  of  his  being  and  his  own
creative  fancy.  Not  himself,  but  what  he  has  made,  not  his
person,  the  product  of  cosmic  forces,  but  that  reflection  of  his
own  being  in  his  surroundings  which  his  bodily  and  mental
labour  and  self-sacrifice  have  called  forth — these  it  is  which
such  a  man  regards  as  what  entitle  him  to  a  place  in  the  world,
and  in  proportion  as  this  feeling  grows,  there  increases  also  his
aversion  to  any  ostentatious  display  of  a  personal  strength  and
beauty  which  are  the  gift  of  Nature. To  speak  louder  than

74  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IIL

is  nece&sary,  seems  to  him  an  uneducated  display  of  vocal
resources;  to  be  more  excited  than  the  importance  of  the
occasion  justifies,  appears  to  be  a  foolish  yielding  to  the  sheer
power  of  the  external  stimulus ;  he  regards  as  unendurable  all
liveliness  of  gesture,  all  pantomime  and  movements  of  the
hands 'which  accompany  simple  verbal  expression  as  a  mere
luxury  of  bustle,  wholly  useless  and  ineffectual;  and  the
objectless  and  overflowing  manifestation  of  mental  moods  is
as  repugnant  to  him  as  to  be  everlastingly  thinking  ho.w  to
pose  effectively.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  these  contrasts  of
external  demeanour  are  connected  with  points  favourable  and
unfavourable  to  mental  life,  and  how  this  disposition  of  mind,
if  it  becomes  still  more  self-contained,  threatens  the  beauty  of
life  and  art  with  a  self- absorption,  a  closeness,  and  a  reserve
which  are  in  truth  little  in  accordance  with  its  original  self-
forgetting  and  self-sacrificing  bent.

I  must  renounce  the  attempt  to  investigate,  within  the
narrow  limits  of  these  observations,  the  other  innumerable
peculiarities  of  moral  feeling  which  are  expressed  in  the  forms
of  daily  intercourse  among  men,  and  the  development  of  which
is  due  partly  to  the  special  circumstances  of  life,  and  partly
to  the  original  disposition  of  particular  nations.  We  may
remark  in  general  that  as  culture  advances,  expressly  estab-
lished rules  of  etiquette  become  more  numerous,  not  only  for
the  regulation  of  the  conduct  of  inferiors  towards  superiors,
but  also  to  prevent  personal  dignity  from  being  wounded  in
the  ordinary  intercourse  of  life  by  natural  passion  and  curiosity,
or  to  secure  the  performance  of  binding  duties  against  which
sloth  and  selfishness  rebel,  by  the  sanctity  of  inviolable
custom,  regulating  even  the  minutest  details.  The  less  scope
is  allowed  to  arbitrary  choice  in  determining  the  mode  of  any
performance,  the  more  imperative  does  the  performance  itself
seem.  (In  saying  this,  we  would  by  no  means  deny  that  the
refinement  and  politeness  of  manners,  hospitality,  and  other
virtues  which  we  find  exercised  in  states  of  rudimentary  cul-
ture, may  not  be  partly  founded  on  natural  good-heartedness.)
The further  progress  of  civilisation generally  breaks these

MANNERS  AND  MOEALS.  75

trammels  of  conduct  for  good  and  also  for  ill.  In  modern
life  even  in  the  cases  in  which  etiquette  is  most  thought  of,
generally  speaking  it  either  has  a  legal  or  political  signifi-
cance, which  is  of  use  not  in  personal  intercourse,  but  as  a
symbol  of  that  objective  order  which  transcends  all  mere
subjectivism — or,  if  it  is  really  a  form  of  intercourse,  it  is
seldom  of  such  rigidity  that  a  cultured  person  would  not  be
able  to  substitute  for  the  ordinary  form  some  other  of  similar
significance.  Here  also  culture  drops  the  use  of  fixed  and
specialized  precepts,  and  trusts  more  to  that  unconstrained
moral  feeling  to  tlie  predominance  of  which  it  is  due  that
the  social  intercourse  of  civilised  peoples  is  superior  to  the
ceremonious  meetings  of  less  developed  nations.  But  we
must  equally  admit  that  with  the  removal  of  this  curb,  social
intercourse  among  the  more  uneducated  classes  is  freed  from
all  check;  clumsy  curiosity,  intrusive  indiscretion  of  every
kind,  and  the  absence  of  all  respect  for  the  inner  life  of
another,  make  the  intercourse  of  these  classes  far  less  dignified
than  the  reserve  with  which  the  hospitality  of  simpler  peoples
receives  the  wanderer  and  provides  for  his  wants  without
inquiring  too  precipitately  how  he  is  called,  whence  he  comes,
and  whither  he  goes.  It  is  becoming  more  and  more  rare  to
find  societies  in  which  customs  handed  down  from  antiquity
with  all  their  traditional  circumstantiality  and  detail,  still  give
to  social  intercourse  a  cast  of  grave  and  considerate  cere-
moniousness.

CHAPTEE IV.

THE  OEDER  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.

Nature  and  Culture— Home  {die  Heimat)—TlhQ  Life  of  Hunters— Of  Shepherds
— Permanent  Occupation  of  Land,  and  Agriculture — Home  {das  Haus) —
Family  Life  —  Society  —  Division  of  Labour  —  Callings  of  Individuals  —
Simple  and  Complex  Structure  of  Society— Civilisation— History.

S  1.  "VTTHO  is  there  that amid  the  thousand  cares  and

w

perplexities  of  life  has  not  sometimes  asked
with  a  sigh,  To  what  purpose  is  all  this  pain  and  struggle  ?
To  what  purpose  all  the  conventionalities  which  at  one
moment  oblige  us  to  useless  exertion,  and  at  another  impose
upon  us  constraints  which  are  equally  irksome  ?  To  what
purpose  all  this  haste  to  be  rich,  since  our  very  organization
prevents  us  from  getting  enjoyment,  except  in  imagination,
from  the  abundance  of  overflowing  wealth  ?  To  what  purpose
is  our  sensitive  regard  to  honour  when  the  estimation  which
others  have  for  us  adds,  directly  at  least,  so  little  to  our
happiness  ?  Why  should  we  not  restrict  ourselves  to  the
simple,  natural  wants  of  existence,  and  give  up  struggling
after  all  those  tilings  which  are  but  means  to  other  objects
more  or  less  remote — objects  which  themselves,  when  looked
at  closely,  are  of  only  imaginary  worth  ?  In  such  moods  it
seems  to  us  that  Diogenes  in  his  tub  had  found  the  true  secret
of  practical  wisdom,  and  that  all  the  complex  culture  which
surrounds  us  would  do  well  to  abolish  itself,  and  no  longer  to
hinder  l)y  the  useless  constraints  of  innumerable  artificialities
the  satisfaction  of  the  few  wants  inseparable  from  human
nature.

And  yet  it  was  in  vain  that  Diogenes  protested  against  the
civilisation  of  his  age ;  and  all  those  individuals  who  since  his
time  have  turned  their  backs  upon  human  culture  have  only

THE  STEUCTURE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  77

been  able  to  make  their  solitude  endurable  to  themselves  by
knowledge,  thought,  and  reflection  which  they  owe  to  the
very  culture  which  they  despise.  Opposition  to  the  com-
plexities and  details  of  civilisation  has  a  charm  only  as  long
as  it  remains  mere  opposition ;  if  mankind  by  sudden  consent
were  to  return  to  the  simplicity  of  the  most  natural  conditions,
without  doubt  the  same  mental  forces  which  had  brought
about  this  resolution  would  forthwith  be  as  busy  as  before  in
reproducing  in  turn  all  the  rejected  superfluities  of  civilisation.
We  may  frankly  admit  that  there  is  very  much  in  the  com-
plexity of  our  present  mode  of  life  which  is  in  itself  idle  and
unmeaning,  and  that,  if  we  were  free  from  certain  wants,  we
should  do  more  wisely  and  be  more  happy.  But  the  truth  is
that  we  already  have  these  wants,  and  the  mere  knowledge
that  they  are  not  inseparably  joined  to  human  nature  as  a
whole  does  not  in  the  least  alter  the  fact  that  they  are  so
much  the  more  firmly  bound  up  with  that  definite  type  ot
human  nature  which  is  special  to  us,  and  which  we  owe  to
historical  development  and  to  education.  We,  as  we  are,
should  suffer  from  their  non-satisfaction,  and  the  same  degree
of  happiness  which  men  in  the  natural  state  could  obtain  by
the  use  of  scanty  means  is  only  possible  for  us  through  the
simultaneous  fulfilment  of  many  conditions,  or  through  the
conscious  and  voluntary  renunciation  of  many  individual
satisfactions.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  a  voluntary  oblivion
of  that  towards  which  our  hearts  are  yearning  is  not  in  our
power ;  it  is  only  great  historical  changes  of  fortune  that  may
sometimes  obscure  a  nation's  remembrance  of  all  the  complex
variety  of  its  demands  upon  life,  and  make  it  capable  of  being
satisfied  with  the  simple  and  elementary  enjoyments  of
returning  barbarism.

Have  we,  however,  a  right  to  speak  thus,  and  to  prefer  such
culture  to  such  barbarism  ?  Seeing  that  in  advanced  culture
satisfaction  is  dependent  on  so  many  conditions,  and  that  it
must  involve  so  much  self-denial,  is  not  this  condition  of
culture  unhappier  than  that  more  natural  life,  which  with
greater  ease  and  security  reaches  its  state  of  equilibrium,  and

78  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

seems  to  be  exposed  only  to  the  inevitable  ills  of  tlie  course
of  Nature?  These  are  questions,  however,  which  we  can
easily  answer.  For  the  more  vividly  we  represent  to  ourselves
the  simplicity  of  a  state  of  Nature,  the  more  clear  does  it
become  not  only  that  it  could  never  suffice  to  satisfy  our
souls,  but  also  that  those  living  impulses  in  us  which  stand  in
the  way  of  such  satisfaction,  have,  with  all  their  train  of
unrest  and  failure,  an  unconditional  right  to  be  preferred  to
that  contented  poverty  of  mental  existence  which  only  seems
to  us  now  and  then  desirable  as  a  break  in  our  own  more
agitated  life.  The  happiness  to  which  the  human  soul  is
destined  by  no  means  consists  in  the  mere  absence  of  all
disturbances  which  could  hinder  those  impulses  which  proceed
most  directly  from  Nature,  or  in  the  maintenance  of  favourable
conditions,  securing  to  them  an  uninterrupted  and  uniform
satisfaction  ;  the  course  of  civilisation  is  not  merely  a  succes-
sion of  compensatory  efforts  capable  of  re-establishing,  under
less  favourable  conditions  and  by  the  use  of  more  powerful
means,  a  lost  equilibrium  and  a  degree  of  happiness  previously
possible.  On  the  contrary,  by  the  opposition  which  the
natural  course  of  things  offers  to  a  too  easy  satisfaction  of
natural  impulses  ;  by  the  labour  to  which  man  is  compelled,
and  in  the  prosecution  of  which  he  acquires  knowledge  of,
and  power  over,  things  in  the  most  various  relations ;  finally,
by  misfortune  itself  and  the  manifold  painful  efforts  which  he
has  to  make  under  the  pressure  of  the  gradually  multiplying
relations  of  life :  by  all  this  there  is  both  opened  before  him
a  wider  horizon  of  varied  enjoyment,  and  also  there  become
clear  to  him  for  the  first  time  the  inexhaustible  significance
of  moral  Ideas  which  seem  to  receive  an  accession  of  intrinsic
worth  with  every  new  relation  to  which  their  regulating
and  organizing  influence  is  extended.  In  the  longing  for  a
return  to  a  simpler  life  there  is  involved  a  temporary  over-
estimation  of  merely  physical  wellbeing,  and  we  soon  bethink
us  that  a  cultured  mind  possesses  .far  more  springs  of  happi-
ness, the  origin  of  which  we  cannot  trace.  Perhaps  we  should
not  seriously  wish  to  be  without  even  the  suffering  entailed  by

THE  STKUCTURE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  79

self-denial.  And  then  there  is  pain,  the  bitterness  of  which  is
only  intelligible  by  reference  to  the  refined  relations  of  social
life,  and  to  the  consciousness  of  combined  victory  and  recon-
ciliation springing  from  practised  ethical  insight — pain  which
gives  rise  to  innumerable  feelings  not  easily  expressed,  and
pervading  our  whole  life  like  a  precious  fragrance  that  we
would  on  no  account  consent  to  renounce.  Men  are  much
inclined  to  delude  themselves  with  the  hope  of  combining  two
incompatible  advantages,  i.e.  the  simplicity  of  existence  in  a
state  of  Nature,  and  the  feelings  with  which  we  ourselves
regard  the  external  world — we  who  have  been  moulded  by  the
influences  of  science,  art,  and  religion.  For  we  would  certainly
wish  to  take  with  us  these  feelings  when  we  return  to  a  state
of  Nature ;  but  we  should  remember  that  they  are  products  of
a  culture  which  is  unthinkable  without  all  that  intricate
mechanism,  the  noise  and  inflexibility  of  wliich  sometimes
disturb  us.  We  can  choose  only  the  one  or  the  other ;  either
the  simple  monotonous  harmony  of  an  uneventful  life  accord-
ing to  Nature,  or  the  full,  articulated  melody  of  civilisation,
gradually  unfolding  through  many  a  discord ;  and  no  one  can
doubt  that  the  latter  presents  the  higher  beauty,  and  that
civilisation  is  not  a  mere  roundabout  means  of  attaining  under
altered  conditions  the  same  degree  of  enjoyment  as  was  tasted
in  a  state  of  Nature,  but  that  it  must,  on  the  contrary,  be
regarded  as  a  power  which  for  the  first  time  unfolds  before  us,
in  all  the  glory  of  the  perfect  flower,  the  full  worth  and  joy
of  every  moral  relation.

On  this  subject  I  have  now  but  a  few  plain  remarks  to  add.
I  will  not  here  go  into  the  question  of  the  first  origin  of
civilisation,  nor  endeavour  to  point  out  either  what  definite
causes  (in  the  minds  of  individuals  and  nations  or  in  external
circumstances)  aroused  and  guided  the  spirit  of  progress,  or
what  obstacles  were  put  in  the  way  of  general  or  special
development  either  by  conditions  of  life  or,  more  obscurely,
by  national  character ;  these  things  will  for  the  most  part
remain  always  unknown  to  us,  and  as  much  as  we  can  hope
to  make  clear,  we  defer  to  a  later  historical  consideration. It

80  BOOK  VL CHAPTER  IV.

is  just  as  little  my  intention  to  institute  here  a  comparison
between  the  different  epochs  of  civilisation  through  which
mankind  have  hitherto  passed,  although  such  an  attempt
might  admonish  us  to  desirable  caution  in  many  respects.
For  this  attempt  would  in  the  first  place  take  us  back  to  an
observation  which  we  have  already  made,  to  the  effect  that  a
clear  advance  in  knowledge  and  power,  and  in  all  the  external
trappings  of  life,  may  take  place  without  a  simultaneous
increase  of  those  things  that  are  good  in  themselves,  for  the
sake  of  which  all  the  labour  of  civilisation  is  employed.  With
the  advance  of  civilisation  and  of  its  power  over  the  external
world  there  arise  everywhere  new  relations  and  new  sources  of
enjoyment,  but  the  alteration  of  social  conditions  which  is
bound  up  with  these  other  changes,  unavoidably  demolishes
many  a  form  of  existence  handed  down  from  antiquity,  to  the
joy  and  worth  of  which  only  poetry  and  not  real  life  will  ever
again  find  access.  Whether  this  is  to  be  regretted,  or  whether
on  the  whole  in  our  destiny  the  good  only  makes  way  for  the
better,  is  a  question  the  answer  to  which  we  can  seek  only  in
considering  the  history  of  the  human  race.  But  the  worth  of
culture  in  general,as  compared  with  that  natural  condition  which
we  sometimes  describe  as  a  state  of  innocence  and  sometimes
as  barbarism,  is  not  here  called  in  question.  And  although  a
sharp  line  of  demarcation  dividing  the  two  would  only  be
possible  if  we  could  contrast  a  perfect  humanity,  hitherto
unrealized,  with  complete  brutishness,  yet  we  may  emphasize
some  individual  features  of  social  order,  on  the  presence  of
which  the  excellence  of  any  culture  must  depend,  and  on  the
more  or  less  completely  organized  combination  of  which  to  a
coherent  structure  is  grounded  the  superiority  of  one  stage  of
culture  over  another.

A  man  wants,  in  the  first  place,  a  home,  and  possessions,  and
a  sphere  of  work,  so  that  he  may  feel  he  has  some  definite  place
assigned  to  him  in  the  ordered  universe ;  he  further  wants
not  merely  occasional  contact  with  his  fellows,  but  a  lasting
community  of  life  with  some  one  person  at  least,  so  that  he
may  secure  understanding  and  sympathy  for  his  own  nature

THE  STRUCTUEE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  81

and  individuality.  The  family  circle,  too,  requires  that
beyond  its  own  narrow  limits  there  should  stretch  a  wider
social  background,  by  the  common  opinion,  custom,  and  law
of  which  its  own  life  and  effort  are  regulated,  to  which  it
belongs,  and  by  which  it  is  supported  and  judged  ;  finally,  it
is  in  all  cases  inevitable  that  the  mind  of  this  society  should
connect  its  own  common  life  and  the  existence  of  every
individual  with  the  future  and  the  past  by  some  theory  of  the
earth's  history,  and  should  link  all  terrestrial  existence  to  some
still  more  comprehensive  theory  of  the  universe  by  a  common
religious  belief.

§  2.  Not  even  beasts  rove  about  altogether  homeless  over
the  surface  of  the  earth ;  even  where  a  wide  extent  of  country
everywhere  offers  them  equal  means  of  subsistence,  they  restrict
their  wanderings  to  a  limited  region,  beyond  which  they  are
driven  only  by  force  or  unaccustomed  circumstances,  and  not
by  their  own  impulse.  It  is  as  though  each  living  soul  could
only  taste  rest  and  happiness  when,  instead  of  feeling  lost
amid  the  restlessly  changing  multiplicity  of  new  impressions,
it  can  make  the  unvarying  representation  of  its  own  familiar
surroundings  the  centre  around  which  are  grouped,  in  dimi-
nishing degrees  of  clearness,  the  more  distant  variety  of  the
outside  world.  Man's  love  of  adventure,  which  would  other-
wise lead  him  to  transgress  more  easily  than  beasts  these
self-imposed  limits,  is  counterbalanced  by  another  and  more
profound  impulse,  that  of  the  spirit  of  acquisition  which  makes
him  wish  that  the  results  of  his  activity  should  not  disappear
with  the  crowd  of  changing  objects  on  which  it  is  expended,
but  should  gradually  accumulate  in  lasting  monuments  of  his
labour,  and  present  in  visible  and  connected  form  the  gain
acquired  by  his  life's  work.

Natural  circumstances  favour  or  hinder  this  inclination  in
various  degrees.  "Where  men  as  yet  without  fixed  habitation
are  forced  by  the  great  abundance  of  animal  life  and  the
necessity  of  defending  themselves  from  the  attacks  of  wild
beasts  to  take  at  first  to  the  hunter's  life,  the  dawn  of  higher
civilisation meets rather  with delays and hindrances than

VOL.  IL  r

82  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

with  rapid  furtherance.  The  necessity  of  following  wander-
ing game,  substitutes  for  the  idea  of  a  settled  abode  the
wider  and  vaguer  idea  of  a  hunting-ground,  and  the  ease
with  which  the  captured  prey,  after  very  slight  preparation,
can  be  applied  to  satisfy  natural  wants,  as  well  as  the  way
in  which,  in  this  kind  of  life,  all  the  fruit  of  men's  efforts  is
consumed  as  it  were  from  hand  to  mouth,  without  leaving  a
trace  behind,  is  not  conducive  to  any  thought  of  collecting
the  results  of  one's  labour  so  as  to  make  some  lasting  and
coherent  monument,  or  any  thought  of  so  arranging  life  as
to  connect  into  some  scheme  of  development  men's  fitful
attempts  to  trade  and  accumulate.  Cunning  patience  and
passionate  fury  of  attack  are  the  two  capacities  which  this
life  demands  and  exercises,  in  alternation ;  both  are  but  little
calculated  to  promote  higher  human  civilisation.  Only  the  calm
with  which  the  North  American  Indian  listens  without  interrup-
tion to  the  speech  of  another,  and  the  passive  courage  which  he
shows  under  suffering,  are  useful  elements,  which,  from  the
necessity  of  quietly  enduring  countless  hardships  and  mishaps,
have  been  cultivated  in  the  school  of  this  wild  life,  in  which
the  hunter  is  early  taught  to  watch  with  silent  self-restraint
every  movement  of  the  jaguar  or  buffalo,  so  as  not  to  betray
himself  too  soon  by  any  disturbance  of  them.  If  there  were
not  other  ineradicable  impulses  of  human  nature  impelling
individual  men  to  some  combination  among  themselves,  there
would  be  little  in  the  character  of  this  mode  of  life  that  could
lead  the  homeless  hunter  to  social  union  and  the  development
of  human  intercourse ;  the  occupations  of  all  are  too  uniform
for  any  one  to  expect  that  any  other  should  specially  com-
plement his  own  knowledge  and  capacity.

The  pastoral  mode  of  life  brings  with  it  conditions  some-
what more  favourable  to  development.  It  cannot  altogether
dispense  with  courage  and  activity,  which  are  needed  for  the
protection  of  the  flocks  and  herds  ;  but  it  is  based  not  on
destruction  but  on  cultivation  of  animal  life  ;  and  this  life
calls  out  alongside  of  a  patience  which  is  not  sneaking  and
cowardly  but  calm  and persevering,  much  forethought  and

THE  STEUCTUEE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFK  83

providence,  and  leads  to  a  growing  variety  of  wants,  and
hence  to  the  beginning  of  a  division  of  labour  in  a  small
society  of  members  all  helping  one  another.  In  place  of  the
sudden  alternations  between  wholly  inactive  leisure  and  exhaust-
ing effort  which  are  usual  with  those  who  lead  a  hunter's  life,
there  is  established  a  steady  succession  of  occupations  each  of
which  reckons  upon  the  rest,  and  which  reciprocally  make
each  other  possible ;  social  life  takes  the  place  of  isolation,
and  the  position  in  which  different  persons  stand  with  regard
to  the  property  (whether  held  in  common  or  by  individuals)
with  the  management  of  which  all  are  concerned,  calls  forth
of  itself  simple  differences  of  social  importance.  With  the
possession  of  this  moveable  property  arise  the  first  elements  of
two  notions  which  are  foreign  to  the  hunter's  life,  namely  rural
economy  and  society.  Settlements  of  some  kind,  which  although
not  necessarily  permanent  are  yet  of  some  duration,  are  indis-
pensable ;  and  if  the  custom  of  feeding  the  flocks  by  letting
them  graze  on  natural  pastures  necessitates  a  periodical  change
of  abode,  still  a  return  to  familiar  grounds  is  always  preferred
to  uncertain  wanderings  into  distant  localities.  Thus  life
becomes  more  and  more  bound  up  with  the  region  of  country
which  now  (for  the  first  time)  begins  to  be  a  home,  with  the
fountains,  hills,  and  woods  of  which  there  begins  to  be  linked
an  ordered  remembrance  of  past  events,  and  which  no  longer
is  the  mere  scene  of  adventures  that  have  been  gone  through,
but  supplies  to  coherent  labour  that  background  and  basis  of
orientation  which  imagination  always  requires.  But  pastoral
life  in  itself  does  not  everywhere  produce  those  fair  first
fruits  of  civilisation  which  we  rejoice  to  see  in  some  examples
of  it.  Partly  the  nature  and  capacity  of  the  domesticated
animals,  the  kind  of  tendance  they  require,  and  the  degree  of
their  attachment  to  mankind,  partly  climatic  and  social  con-
ditions, and  finally  the  incalculable  peculiarity  of  national
character  modify  greatly  the  degree  of  development.  The
pastoral  tribes  of  the  polar  regions,  pressed  by  the  disfavour
of  Nature,  and  cut  off  from  contact  with  a  different  and  more
advanced  civilisation  by  wide reaches  of  country,  present  a

84

BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

poverty-stricken  picture  beside  the  life  of  the  Semitic  patriarchs,
in  the  simple  grandeur  of  which  we  find  distinct  traces  of  com-
merce and  of  pretty  considerable  contact  at  many  points  with
the  culture  of  stationary  tribes.  It  is  not  only  that  the  barter
of  an  infant  commerce  provides  the  shepherds  with  products
of  foreign  industry  with  which  they  may  adorn  their  life  and
make  it  easier — the  mere  knowledge  that  beyond  their  im-
mediate horizon  there  stirs  other  human  life  with  other  forms
and  customs,  must  lift  their  apprehension  above  that  monotony
which  with  more  isolated  tribes  arises  from  want  of  the  idea
of  human  society.  For  indeed  this  idea  is  absent  even  now
in  cases  where  a  larger  association  of  families  repeats  each
the  same  mode  of  life,  the  same  occupation,  and  the  same  petty
domestic  organization.

Even  antiquity  knew  that  the  real  beginning  of  higher
human  civilisation,  was  in  all  cases  to  be  found  in  the
change  from  nomad  life  to  permanent  settlement,  and  knew  it
with  a  fresher  and  nearer  feeling  than  is  possible  for  us.  This
change  was  a  necessary  result  of  the  need  for  procuring  means
of  subsistence  from  vegetable  life,  a  more  fruitful  and  certain
source  of  supply  than  the  animal  world.  It  is  only  luxu-
riant tropical  lands  that  yield  such  a  vegetable  supply  to  a
large  extent,  without  any  human  labour ;  and  in  just  those
regions  man  would  have  remained  most  completely  a  parasite
of  his  bread-fruit  bearing  land,  if — among  populations  that
were  growing  numerous  and  pressing  one  another  on  all  sides
— the  impulse  to  social  enjoyments,  and  many  a  sensuous
desire,  flaming  up  irrepressibly,  had  not  either  given  rise  to
some  regulation  of  this  communal  life,  or  at  least  by  violent
interruptions  of  such  regulation,  infused  into  existence  an
element  of  passion.  Where  these  food-bearing  plants  are
scarcer,  the  spots  where  they  abound  mark  the  abodes  of
men,  who  settle  down  at  the  foot  of  the  trees,  but  systematic
civilisation  is  first  developed  where  Nature  has  made  work  a
necessary  forerunner  of  enjoyment.  The  benefits  which  the
vegetable  kingdom  has  bestowed  upon  man  in  the  banana,
the  bread-fruit  tree,  the  date-palm  and  the  cocoa-nut  tree,  are

THE  STEUCTUKE  OF  EXTEENAL  LIFE.  85

certainly  not  accepted  by  him  without  any  thought  what-
ever ;  and  the  imagination  of  the  people  who  live  upon  the
products  of  these  plants  is  sensitive  -  enough  to  link  with
their  striking  images,  in  grateful  veneration,  the  dawning
poetical  reflection  of  their  simple  life.  But  far  superior  to
these  incitements  is  the  educative  power  everywhere  exercised
by  the  various  occupations  involved  in  the  cultivation  of
cereals.  It  is  his  own  strength  and  effort  which  the  tiller  of
the  ground  must  employ  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  wants ;
Nature  and  the  soil,  with  which  he  deals,  neither  offer  their
gifts  gratuitously,  nor  can  they  be  swindled  out  of  them,  but
they  yield  them  to  unceasing  and  exact  industry.  The
necessary  attention  to  a  number  of  small  conditions  which
all  help  to  secure  the  result;  the  indispensableness  of  a
definite  succession  of  occupations  which  cannot  be  altered  by
caprice  nor  avoided  by  thoughtless  presumption;  patience  not
only  in  struggling  with  the  weather  and  the  seasons,  but
also  in  waiting  for  the  slow  maturing  of  the  produce  which
cannot  be  accelerated  by  any  greedy  haste;  and  finally  the
spectacle  of  the  uniformity  with  which  in  general  the  work
of  natural  forces  proceeds — all  these  things  teach  the  mind
to  feel  itself  taken  up  by  and  involved  in  a  trustworthy,
consistent,  and  complicated  system  of  natural  order ;  and  they
will  not  fail  to  produce  even  in  the  most  poorly  endowed
mind  a  consciousness  of  the  necessity  of  complete,  con-
nected, and  systematic  means  to  secure  the  success  of
any  work,  and  to  show  how  little  a  life  that  proceeds  as  it
were  upon  the  spur  of  the  moment  can  reckon  upon  satis-
faction and  success.

The  growing  labours  of  agriculture  involve  the  establish-
ment of  permanent  settlements,  and  man  now  enters  for  the
first  time  into  a  relation  of  manifold  opposition  to  Nature,  on
which  all  further  progress  in  civilisation  depends.  For  in
fact  the  powerful  tie  binding  man  to  the  soil,  which  first
strikes  one  in  considering  the  stationary  state,  is  not  the
predominant  element  in  this  relation,  and  the  nomad  who
wanders  hither  and  thither  has  little  reason  to  look  down  with

86  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

Bcorn  upon  this  tie ;  on  the  contrary,  he  is  himself  in  a  state
of  much  greater  dependence  upon  Nature,  to  the  scenery  of
which  he  seems  to  belong  almost  as  much  as  the  flock  which
he  guides  or  the  game  which  he  pursues.  It  is  within  the
four  walls  of  home  that  a  man  begins  to  enjoy,  in  his  leisure
time  and  secluded  from  all  outward  influences,  the  quiet  con-
centration of  family  life,  and  to  prepare  the  mechanical  means
with  which  to  make  fresh  excursions  into  the  surrounding
world,  and  to  secure  and  work  up  its  products :  these  walls  of
home  are  a  much  more  powerful  means  towards  freeing  him
from  dependence  on  the  external  world  than  is  the  fugitive
haste  of  the  nomad,  who  restlessly  changes  one  place  for
another  without  finding  access  to  any  inner  world,  except  in
the  quiet  interior  of  his  tent  in  the  intervals  between  his
journeys.  The  walls  of  home  enclose  a  new  realm  of  human
thought  and  effort;  within  them  rising  generations  find  a
fenced  and  guarded  region  of  existence,  filled  with  memorials
of  their  forefathers,  with  whose  banished  forms  the  life  of  the
present  is  now  for  the  first  time  in  conscious  and  unbroken
community — the  work  which  they  have  left  behind  being
added  to,  altered,  and  carried  on  by  each  generation,  which
thus  makes  its  own  contribution  to  what  went  before.  But  it
would  be  whoUy  unnecessary  to  describe  the  thoughts  and
feelings  which  arise  in  every  one  at  the  name  of  home,  and
which  are  repeated  in  all  their  freshness  and  fulness  when-
ever there  is  founded  any  permanent  settlement,  intended  to
become  the  scene,  for  an  indefinite  time,  of  a  succession  of
human  joys,  sorrows,  hopes,  and  remembrances,  all  inextricably
bound  up  with  one  another.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  in  the
dawn  of  civilisation  the  contrast  between  Nature  and  the
world  of*  mmd  appears  first,  and  in  its  most  expressive  mani-
festation, as  the  contrast  between  domestic  life  and  the  un-
boundedness  of  the  external  world.

Even  m  our  present  life,  in  which  the  intricate  connection
of  mental  interests  obscures  in  many  ways  our  relation  to
Nature,  we  may  easily  observe  what  an  important  influence  is
exercised  upon  our  minds  by  the  visible  marks  of  our  efforts

THE  STRUCTUEE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  87

in  external  works.  The  artificer  who  frames  a  work  of  his
own  hands,  and  whose  joy  in  it  is  not  diminished  by  any
existing  social  deficiencies,  retains  almost  always  a  more  even
and  contented  humour  than  the  inquirer  who  lives  in  a  super-
sensuous  world  of  merely  intellectual  interests.  It  is  true  that
he  may  be  compensated  for  many  a  long  struggle  in  the
moment  when  the  result  of  these  takes  form  in  artistic  com-
pleteness ;  but  it  is  seldom  that  this  result  is  as  certain  and
complete  in  itself  as  the  external  work  which,  with  all  its
excellences  and  defects,  is  set  before  our  eyes  in  visible  shape
and  can  be  fully  estimated,  and  which  as  it  grew  beneath  our
hands  gave  us,  at  every  step,  practical  insight  into  the  means
of  overcoming  individual  difficulties.  So  that  all  the  more  in
the  dawn  of  civilisation  (as  in  the  beginning  of  every  individual
life)  must  there  be  a  joyous  celebration  of  the  awakening  of
self-regard  as  soon  as  self  beholds  the  first-fruits  of  its  inner
thought  and  effort  embodied  in  the  form  of  a  finished  work  of
its  own  creation.  Every  tool  or  utensil  that  a  man  has  con-
structed bears  for  him  the  stamp  of  some  thought  of  his  own,
and  it  represents  to  him  at  the  same  time,  the  future  service
which  it  will  render,  and  the  power  with  which  his  own  mind
is  now  armed,  for  influencing  the  external  world — that  mind
having  now  a  stronger  and  a  wider  grasp  than  when  it  had  only
the  aid  furnished  by  his  own  bodily  organization.  This  pro-
found need  of  seeing  our  own  life  reflected  in  surroundings
which  have  been  transformed  by  ourselves,  governs  us  always.
Not  only  must  house  and  home  present  to  us  the  traces  of  past
activity,  and  the  instruments  of  that  which  is  to  come ;  but
even  where  more  spiritual  interests  are  concerned,  to  which  no
spatial  phaenomenon  can  adequately  correspond,  we  like  to  be
able  at  least  to  point  out  some  definite  spot  as  the  centre
from  which  any  particular  human  activity  is  used  to  radiate.
It  is  true  that  God  is  near  us  everywhere,  but  every  civilisation
in  its  earliest  dawn  founds  local  and  permanent  sanctuaries
and  altars,  and  men  will  only  adopt,  as  their  special  place  of
prayer,  those  spots  which  they  feel  have  been  made  sacred  by
the  prayers  of  their  forefathers  and  the  common  devotion  of

88

BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

their  contemporaries.  It  is  not  merely  the  pressing  necessity
of  maintaining  life  which  leads  to  the  establishment  of
permanent  settlements;  but  when  a  man  gets  a  home,  he
seems  to  take  as  it  were  spiritual  possession  also  of  his  whole
surroundings,  or  perhaps  we  might  better  say  that  it  is  then
that  spiritual  life  receives  local  manifestation.

S  3.  With  the  establishment  of  a  steady  centre  and  circle
of  work  a  prosperous  development  of  other  moral  relations
first  becomes  practicable.  It  is  hardly  possible  that  in  the
wild  life  which  hunters  lead  the  intercourse  of  the  two  sexes
should  attain  a  higher  significance  than  that  which  as  a  matter
of  fact  it  actually  does  reach.  Constant  participation  in  the
efforts  of  the  man  is  by  Nature  made  impossible  for  the
woman,  and  if  it  were  possible  it  would  still  be  a  partnership
which  would  afford  to  the  diverse  mental  natures  of  both
very  little  opportunity  for  the  development  of  their  special
characteristics.  Under  such  conditions  masculine  strength
cannot  find  in  the  woman's  mind  any  essential  complement  of
its  own  insufficiency,  because  the  life  is  so  poor,  and  furnishes
so  few  circumstances  which  are  of  emotional  value,  and  in  which
both  have  a  common  interest;  moreover,  in  consequence  of  the
lack  of  property  to  be  looked  after,  there  is  too  little  com-
munity of  labour  and  of  solicitude.  The  other  family  relations
also  suffer  from  this  absence  of  a  common  aim  in  life.  Among
beasts  we  see  the  young  lives  environed  by  a  parental  love
which  is  capable  of  self-sacrifice,  but  which  suddenly  cools
when  the  need  of  help  in  the  young  diminishes ;  and  just  in
the  same  way  men  in  a  state  of  Nature  afford  striking  examples
of  the  self-sacrifice  of  parents  for  their  children,  but  we  also
see  how  easily,  wdth  them,  this  connection  is  dissolved,  when
the  children  have  attained  bodily  maturity.  In  fact  whero
one  generation  never  takes  up  and  continues  the  work  of  that
which  preceded  it,  but  each  one,  as  though  isolated  and  beginning
afresh  for  itself,  turns  to  universal  Nature,  in  order  to  obtain
the  satisfaction  of  its  wants  in  traditional  modes,  it  is  plain
that  there  cannot  be  that  intimate  communion  of  souls  having
common  interests  in  life  and  yet  individually  different  charac-

THE  STEUCTURE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  89

ters  and  different  imaginative  bents,  and  that  community  and
at  the  same  time  that  conflict  of  wishes,  hopes,  and  fears,  by
which  in  the  civilised  world  there  is  developed  from  the
natural  bonds  of  kinship  a  moral  community  of  hearts.  It
has  been  often  observed  how  easily  and  painlessly  the  North
American  Indian  can  bid  his  parents  a  last  good-bye ;  and  by
man  in  his  natural  state  the  relation  between  brother  and
sister  is  felt  to  have  even  less — ^much  less — significance  and
beauty  than  that  between  parent  and  child.

I  might  go  on  to  pastoral  life,  and  extol  in  it  the  higher
meaning  which  men  now  feel  in  family  ties — the  freer  condition
of  women,  who  from  being  the  slaves  of  men  have  been  raised
to  be  their  companions — the  pleasure  which  is  taken  in  carry-
ing on  genealogical  tables,  by  the  unbroken  coherence  of  which
each  individual  member  of  a  society  which  has  grown  up  by
degrees  is  assured  of  his  connection  with  ancestors  whose
names  have  been  made  illustrious  by  well-preserved  traditions
of  glorious  events  and  deeds.  But  the  fact  is  that  these  fair
beginnings  of  culture  are  found  only  among  a  few  favoured
races,  and  especially  in  that  Semitic  past  which  we  are
accustomed  to  regard  as  a  mirror  of  the  purest  and  most
primitive  human  development.  They  are  found  much  attenu-
ated and  accompanied  by  far  less  depth  of  feeling  in  the
warlike  shepherd  tribes  which  still  enliven  the  wildernesses
and  steppes  of  the  old  world,  and  they  almost  disappear  in
the  unpoetic  savagery  of  the  polar  races.  A  more  compre-
hensive ethnographical  comparison  than  we  can  here  attempt
would  make  it  clearer  to  us  that  the  degree  of  cultivation
attained  is  by  no  means  wholly  dependent  on  the  particular
modes  of  life  which  we  are  here  considering ;  and  on  the  other
hand  would  show  how  strikingly  the  unexplained  differences
of  mental  endowment  which  distinguish  individual  races  of
men  lead  to  divergence  in  their  course  of  development,  under
conditions  which  are  in  all  other  respects  similar.  More
than  this,  much  which  we  should  be  inclined  to  regard  as  the
almost  immediate  effect  of  a  mode  of  life  determined  by
external  circumstances,  is  perhaps  the  echo  of  some  extinct

90  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

civilisation,  or  a  reflection  from  some  other  civilisation  existing
elsewhere,  into  fruitful  relations  with  which  the  historical  course
of  events  has  brought  some  tribe  which  has  apparently  developed
in  isolation.  Historical  consideration  may  distinguish  if  it  can
the  separate  influences  of  these  coefficient  factors ;  but  if  we
are  merely  concerned  to  estimate  the  ethical  importance  of
modes  of  life  on  which  modern  civilisation  is  built,  we  shall
not  doubt  that  permanent  settlements,  and  the  sphere  of  work
which  first  establishes  itself  in  house  and  home,  form  the
firm  basis  of  consolidated  family  life,  and  indirectly  through
this  of  wider  social  order  also.  It  is  not,  indeed,  possible  in
the  nature  of  events,  nor  is  it  an  imperative  necessity  of
human  nature,  that  clans  gradually  increasing  in  number
should  permanently  continue  to  inhabit  that  native  land  of
their  forefathers  in  which  they  themselves  were  born,  or  that
the  bonds  of  relationship  which  link  a  numerous  posterity
both  to  one  another  and  to  their  ancestors,  should  be  held  in
distinct  and  present  remembrance  to  degrees  of  indefinite
remoteness.  Grandparents  and  grandchildren  are  held  together
by  a  strong  natural  bond,  but  when  we  get  beyond  the  third
generation  (and  similarly  with  the  wide  extension  of  kinship
by  marriage)  these  feelings  of  blood-relationship  cool  down
rapidly  into  the  mere  general  interest  which  men  take  in  their
fellow-men  or  fellow-countrymen.  This  does  not,  however,
destroy  the  charm  that  we  shall  always  find  in  being  able  to
look  back  through  centuries  of  successive  generations  of  which
we  know  ourselves  to  be  the  latest  representatives ;  bu^  as
such  tradition  is  only  made  possible  by  the  existence  of
cultured  feelings  of  considerable  strength,  so  its  value  must
consist  either  in  the  consciousness  of  some  transmitted  histori-
cal work  which  has  to  be  carried  on,  or  in  reflection  on
the  connection  of  human  destinies  which  may  here  be  followed
clearly  along  a  single  continuous  chain,  whilst  universal
history  in  its  consideration  of  the  whole  hum-'vn  race,  loses
sight  of  individual  threads.  It  is  but  few  who  can  take  such
a  retrospect,  and  to  whom  is  granted  the  happiness  of  lingering
in  an  old  ancestral  home  and  among  memorials  of  their  fore-

THE  STRUCTURE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  91

fathers;  for  most,  their  parents'  temporary  home  takes  the
place  of  an  inherited  estate.  But  even  to  such  a  paternal
home  fancy  gladly  looks  back  from  amid  the  storms  of  later
life ;  and  after  the  dispersion  of  the  family,  when  the  difficulty
which  its  members  find  in  keeping  up  an  acquaintance  with
each  other's  various  pursuits  and  courses  in  life  has  weakened
the  feeling  of  connection  between  them,  the  yearning  with
which  they  look  back  to  the  past  and  deeply-felt  happiness
of  domestic  union  bears  witness  to  the  worth  which  a  settled
establishment  of  families  possesses  even  in  our  own  civilised
condition.  This  dispersion  itself  is,  however,  made  less
painful  by  the  ever-increasing  importance  of  society,  which,
in  proportion  as  its  internal  structure  becomes  more  elaborate
and  complete,  gives  rise  to  an  increased  number  of  other
ethical  relations  between  individuals — relations  which  are  of
as  great  worth  as  the  ties  of  kinship,  and,  in  some  cases,  of
still  greater.  But  it  hardly  needs  showing  that  the  moral
strength  of  these  social  relations  is  itself  rooted  in  the  soil
of  domestic  family  life,  and  that  every  career,  though  its
orbit  may  be  apparently  eccentric,  really  revolves  about  this
centre,  and  derives  its  human  worth  from  the  fact  that  it  had
its  origin  in  that  life,  and  will  find  in  it  its  consummation,  or
that  at  any  rate  it  works  for  a  community  which  is  founded
upon  such  life.

§  4.  If  the  natural  course  of  things  did  not,  setting  out
from  a  single  original  pair,  produce  a  growing  society,  or  if  it
did  not,  in  the  present  condition  of  the  world,  place  every  one
at  the  beginning  of  his  life  in  the  midst  of  an  already  existing
society,  each  individual  pair  would  have  to  long  in  vain  for
the  help  which  such  a  living  background  of  life  can  afford
towards  the  full  development  of  humanity  and  the  satisfaction
of  all  the  wants  of  men's  souls.  I  do  not  doubt  that  the
smallest  cottage  is  large  enough  for  happy  lovers;  but  we
may  be  certain  that  without  the  remembrance  of  a  society,  the
cultivating  influence  of  which  they  experienced  before  their
isolation,  and  without  any  return  to  this  living  circle,  the
happiness  of  their  love  would  not  be  essentially  greater  than

92  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

that  which  falls  to  the  lot  of  the  forest  Indians,  who,  going
about  in  melancholy  couples,  ungregarious  and  dumb,  search
for  and  partake  together  the  means  of  satisfying  their  wants.
The  drama  of  life  is  too  tame  when  it  is  played  by  only  two
persons ;  they  want,  at  least,  the  chorus  to  keep  them  in  mind
of  the  inexhaustible  fulness  of  human  interests,  of  which  only
a  small  portion  can  be  brought  into  consciousness  by  their  own
relations  to  one  another.  Men  and  women  cannot  be  satisfied
by  the  solitary  companionship  of  one  other  human  being ;
they  wish  to  observe  his  attitude  to  some  third  person,  and
to  know  that  he  also  observes  theirs ;  finally,  they  wish  that
the  reciprocal  influence  of  themselves  and  their  companion
should  be  seen  and  recognised  by  other  intelligent  beings ;  for
to  enjoy  without  other  people's  knowing  anything  about  it  is
not  much  better  than  to  be  non-existent.  This  need  of  others'
recognition  runs  through  our  whole  life ;  even  the  most  modest
love  does  not  wish  to  hide  its  joy  for  ever,  he  who  has  a  friend
desires  to  show  his  pride  in  him  before  the  world,  and  the  praise
which  we  receive  from  another  does  not  please  us  so  much  as
the  consciousness  of  being  honoured  by  it  in  the  eyes  of  some
third  person ;  all  artistic  effort  demands  recognition,  and  the
most  unselfishly  devoted  scientific  labour  carried  on  in  self-
absorbed  isolation  from  the  world  of  contemporaries  secretly
reckons  upon  the  generations  to  come  and  their  appreciation.
Finally,  it  is  not  without  cause  that  men's  favourite  topic  of
conversation  in  all  ages  has  been  their  fellow-men ;  for  it  is  a
fact  that  everything  else  in  heaven  and  earth  is  of  less  imme-
diate interest  than  the  doings  of  men,  in  observing,  investi-
gating, praising,  and  blaming  which  we  can  best  become
conscious  of  our  own  advantages,  deficiencies,  efforts,  and  ends.
Now,  as  long  as  the  mode  of  life  of  any  considerable  society
causes  complete  uniformity  of  the  aims  and  occupations  of
all,  this  mutual  interest  and  sympathy  cannot  unfold  its
whole  educative  force.  It  is  fixed  settlements  and  the  many
occupations  made  necessary  by  agriculture  which  first  lead  to
a  growing  variety  of  callings  in  life,  and  the  whole  nature  of
a  man  is  pervaded  and  influenced  by  the  particular  spirit  of

THE  STEUCTUEE  OF  EXTEENAL  LIFE.  93

his  calling,  without  its  suppressing  those  human  qualities
common  to  all.  In  this  there  is  a  double  advantage.  On  the
one  hand,  any  life-work  which  is  chosen  to  the  exclusion  of
every  other,  not  only  requires  a  thorough  acquaintance  with
the  objects  about  which  it  is  concerned,  and  produces  great
habitual  exactness  and  systematic  technical  consistency  in  the
treatment  of  them,  but  it  also  introduces  the  worker  to  a
manageable  and  coherent  circle  of  thought,  within  which
universal  truths  stand  out  with  the  more  convincing  force  in
proportion  as  the  examples  which  illustrate  them  intelligibly
and  clearly  are  more  special  to,  and  as  it  were  inherent  in,
the  particular  occupation  at  which  the  worker  is  employed
day  by  day.  In  order  to  appreciate  the  truth  of  this,  we
need  only  recollect  the  store  of  proverbs  and  proverbial  sayings
in  which  all  nations  are  accustomed  to  treasure  up  the  prac-
tical wisdom  of  experience ;  the  most  expressive  of  them  show
that  the  general  truth  which  they  contain  has  been  abstracted,
within  the  sphere  of  some  definite  calling,  from  particular
examples  occurring  there,  and  there  alone.  On  the  other
hand,  every  calling  gives  a  special  cast  to  the  mind,  a  parti-
cular bent  to  the  imagination,  distinctive  standpoints  and
modes  of  criticism  to  philosophic  views — and  it  gives  to  the
emotions  and  to  the  whole  mental  attitude  of  a  man  a  har-
monious and  distinctive  stamp;  consequently  every  one  is
now  an  object  of  greater  interest  to  others.  When  we  are
absorbed  in  the  study  of  a  character  thus  strange  to  us  and
so  different  from  our  own,  beside  the  innumerable  individual
traits  which  arouse  our  sympathy,  that  which  is  common  to
human  nature  stands  out  so  much  the  clearer,  and  our  moral
horizon  becomes  enlarged  when  we  cease  to  think  that  we  are
justified  in  regarding  our  own  special  fashion  of  existence
as  the  only  one  that  is  conceivable,  or  the  only  one  that
is  praiseworthy.  But  as  the  opening  of  the  Odyssey  em-
phasizes what  our  modern  passion  for  travel  confirms — namely,
the  value  of  learning  to  know  the  cities  and  the  modes  of
thought  of  many  men — this  aspect  of  the  educative  influence
of  society  needs  no  further  proofs. We  will,  on  the  contrary,

94  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

glance  at  the  dangers  entailed  by  the  ever-increasing  variety
of  ways  of  life  and  the  acquaintance  of  each  with  the  others,

"We  need  only  refer  in  the  briefest  way  to  that  narrowness
of  thought  and  bluntness  of  sensibility  for  essentially  human
interests  which  may  be  caused  by  restriction  to  some  mono-
tonous groove  of  occupation.  But  the  coexistence  and  neigh-
bourhood of  different  modes  of  life  has  disadvantages  too,  as
well  as  advantages.  The  more  uniform  the  occupations  of  a
large  society  are,  the  more  easily  is  there  formed,  as  a  standard
for  all  actions,  a  fixed  rule  of  custom,  from  which  nothing  is
exempt;  as  long  as  this  remains  unshaken,  it  reduces  the
individual  to  little  more  than  a  mere  sample  of  some  typical
national  civilisation,  at  the  same  time,  however,  securing  him
from  the  misery  of  doubt  and  of  moral  instability.  But  where
civilisation  has  produced  greater  division  of  labour  and  greater
variety  of  life,  especially  where,  in  consequence  of  historical
conflicts,  there  is  a  mixture  of  the  kindred  civilisations  of
different  peoples,  a  confusing  multiplicity  of  possible  modes
of  existence  is  presented  to  the  mind ;  the  influence  of  this
is,  on  the  one  hand,  powerful  in  raising  the  intellect  above
the  narrowness  of  transmitted  prejudices ;  but  on  the  other
hand,  it  is  equally  powerful  in  disturbing  the  stability  and
security  of  all  moral  restraints.  For  this  reason  the  numerous
amalgamations  of  different  nations  which  have  happened  in
the  course  of  history  are  from  some  points  of  view  the  most
interesting  epochs  of  human  development.  When  any  estab-
lished and  harmonious  civilisation  has  been  broken  up,  the
imagination  of  men  is  given  back  to  unrule ;  and  yet  strongly
stirred  by  the  influences  of  the  past,  it  moves  among  the  ruins
full  of  haunting  thoughts,  loosed  from  all  constraint,  eagerly
investigating  in  every  direction,  and  inclined,  from  the  lack
of  mental  equilibrium,  to  splendid  extravagances.  Such
times  may,  indeed,  bring  forth  products  in  which  there  is
more  richness  and  variety  and  more  of  the  fire  of  genius  than
there  is  generally  even  in  the  prime  of  any  civilisation  which
has  attained  stable  equilibrium,  and  is  faithful  to  its  ideal :
but  we must  also  remember  that  such times  are fated  to

THE  STRUCTUKE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  95

sink  down  into  a  state  which  is  a  mixture  of  genuine  barharisna
and  isolated  unnatural  moral  exaggerations.  We  see  this
morally  dissolving  force  in  the  present  day  in  all  those  abodes
of  men  in  which  there  is  continual  contact  between  strongly
contrasted  civilisations.  It  was  long  ago  remarked,  and  with
justice,  that  in  the  East  weak  minds  must  be  very  confusingly
affected  by  the  sight  of  so  many  different  races  who,  some
white  and  some  black,  some  proud  of  their  freedom,  others
servile  slaves,  pray  in  one  place  to  these  gods  and  in  another
place  to  those  ;  who  in  some  cases  are  faithful  to  the  marriage
tie,  in  others  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  polygamy.  Everything
seems  to  be  permitted — all  seem  happy  in  their  own  fashion,
and  there  falls  no  bolt  from  heaven  to  pronounce  judgment
amid  this  chaos  of  opinions.

To  pass  from  a  national  habit  of  life  to  a  more  self-conscious
condition  of  humanity,  civilisation  must  run  this  risk  of
scepticism,  and  history  continually  renews  its  efforts  to  increase
the  reciprocal  influence  of  different  divisions  of  the  human
race.  It  is  seldom  that  individuals  or  nations  are  induced  to
wander  far  by  want  of  the  simplest  and  most  natural  means
of  subsistence ;  they  are  led  to  do  so  more  often  by  a  restless
adventurous  impulse,  most  often  of  all  by  a  desire  for  objects
of  which  the  direct  worth  for  human  nature  is  but  unim-
portant, and  which  partly  charm  the  senses  and  the  love  of
novelty,  and  partly  acquire  through  habit,  as  civilisation
advances,  the  character  of  imperative  necessities  of  life.  We
find  that  even  in  ancient  times  poets  and  moralists  spoke  of
the  insatiableness  of  men  which,  urged  by  a  thousand  artificial
wants,  transcends  all  natural  limits,  and  brings  into  a.  life
that  might  pass  simply  and  peaceably  the  danger  and  unrest
of  far-reaching  undertakings.  How  much  might  be  added  to
such  complaints  in  these  days !  For  now  there  is  no  depart-
ment of  Nature  which  does  not  attract  men  to  infinite  labour
by  its  productions.  In  the  mineral  world,  gold  and  precious
stones,  iron,  brimstone,  and  coal  have  tempted  them,  and  have
led  to  the  discovery  of  new  countries  and  to  a  development
of  industry  to  which  are  due  the  birth  and  extended  influence

96  BOOK  VI. CHAPTEK  IV.

of  innumerable  other  human  activities.  The  vegetable  king-
dom by  its  edible  products  early  gave  an  impulse  to  commerce,
but  the  interested  spirit  of  enterprise  has  been  called  out  in
much  larger  measure  by  sugar,  coffee,  tea,  and  the  numerous
spices  which  people  could  do  without  as  long  as  they  had  not
had  them.  Finally,  in  the  animal  kingdom,  the  whale  and  the
furs  of  the  Arctic  quadrupeds  have  attracted  courageous  and
enterprising  spirits  to  the  inhospitable  polar  regions,  and  the
web  spun  by  the  insignificant  silk-worm  early  led  to  com-
merce between  civilised  nations.  The  boundless  influence
exercised  by  all  these  circumstances  on  the  development  of
human  capacities  is  too  well  known  in  our  own  time  to  need
more  than  a  passing  mention.  A  life  which  could  have  been
contented  with  the  satisfaction  of  its  primary  natural  wants,
would  have  found  little  stimulus  to  further  development ;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  luxuries  that  men  might  have  done
without  have  caused  all  physical  and  mental  powers  to  be
exerted  to  the  utmost,  and  as  there  has  been  a  continuous
increase  in  the  degree  of  exertion  necessary  to  ensure  the  hope
of  success,  science  has  grown  great  in  this  ministry,  and  in  it
the  constructive  imagination  of  men  has  found  inexhaustible
occupation,  and  moral  courage  has  encountered  innumerable
opportunities  of  proving  its  worth  in  new  and  peculiar
circumstances.

§  5.  We  have  so  far  considered  culture  only  with  reference
to  the  good  things  of  life  which  it  produces  and  offers  to
individuals ;  the  further  it  advances  the  more  does  it  require
likewise  fixed  external  rules  of  individual  conduct,  and  a
definite  system  of  administration  securing  the  greatest  amount
of  general  satisfaction  that  is  rendered  possible  by  the  existing
or  attainable  means  of  enjoyment.  A  society,  with  the
customs  and  rules  which  have  grown  up  naturally,  becomes
transformed  into  a  State,  which  has  to  take  the  living  moral
Ideas  existing  in  the  mind  of  the  society  and,  scientifically
and  with  conscious  calculation,  to  work  them  as  governing
principles  into  the  details  of  present  circumstances ;  likewise
to  present  to  the  mind  of  each,  as  a  systematic  whole,  with  the

THE  STRUCTURE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  97

clear  stamp  of  objective  reality,  that  spiritual  organism  of
which  he  is  a  member.  This  is  not  the  place  for  describing
an  ideal  of  political  order,  a  task  to  which  we  shall  not  return
tQl  the  end  of  our  considerations ;  but  we  must  here  briefly
notice  the  necessity  of  following  such  an  ideal  with  more  or
less  success,  and  the  inevitable  relations  with  it  into  which
each  living  individual  must  enter  in  the  natural  course  of
things.  "We  shall  find  that  there  are  two  struggles  perpetually
going  on,  one  between  subjective  self-will  in  general  and  the
obligation  of  an  objective  order,  the  other  between  the  wants
of  the  individual  and  the  mechanism  of  ordered  political  life
by  which  these  wants  are  not  all  satisfied.

Coeval  with  all  the  political  organizations  of  the  world  are
the  hardships  inflicted  by  their  institutions  on  individual
members  of  the  community ;  hardships  which  are  blame-
worthy in  all  cases  where  merit  and  struggling  capacity  are
by  law  denied  room  for  development  and  the  opportunity  of
winning  a  congenial  position  in  life,  excusable  in  cases  where
the  political  organization,  while  making  all  careers  accessible
to  all,  does  not  at  the  same  time  remove  those  hindrances  to
entering  upon  them  which  proceed  partly  from  external
circumstances,  partly  from  human  nature  and  its  weaknesses
and  evil  inclinations.  We  shall  have  special  occasion,  at  a
later  stage,  to  consider  these  partly  evitable  and  partly
inevitable  deficiencies  of  human  arrangements ;  we  only  refer  to
them  here  in  as  far  as  they  may  awaken  doubts  of  the  general
beneficence  of  civilisation,  and  excite  the  desire  for  a  return  to
the  simplicity  of  a  state  of  Nature.  There  can  of  course  be
no  question  that  the  ever-increasing  refinement  of  life  does  not
benefit  all  in  equal  measure,  that  a  full  enjoyment  of  the
physical  and  mental  advantages  of  civilisation  is  the  lot  of
only  a  favoured  few,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  in  all  ages  a
large  fraction  of  mankind  remains  far  below  the  level  of
attainable  culture  and  far  removed  from  its  enjoyments.  But
this  only  makes  it  all  the  more  erroneous  to  imagine  that
while  culture  raises  the  more  favoured  ones,  it  inevitably
diminishes  the  measure  of  enjoyment  of  all  the  rest  to  a  less

VOL.  II.  G

•^8  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

amount  than  might  be  possible  for  them  if  all  the  trammels
of  a  complex  social  order  were  to  fall  away.  A  sufferer,
wounded  in  spirit,  forgets  in  his  pain  very  many  benefits
which  he  owes  to  this  order,  and  which  because  they  do  not
assume  the  tangible  form  of  some  private  possession  are  as
easily  overlooked  as  the  presence  of  the  atmosphere  that  un-
obtrusively surrounds  us  and  makes  respiration  possible ;  he
forgets  the  security  of  his  person,  the  legal  protection  which
is  accorded  to  his  claims,  the  possibilities  of  culture  which  are
open  to  him,  the  use  which  he  makes  (and  indeed  the  very
existence)  of  various  ready-made  paths  in  which  he  may
endeavour  to  employ  his  powers  in  a  way  advantageous  to  him-
self. He  forgets  that  all  this,  as  well  as  his  very  knowledge  of
most  of  the  good  things  which  are  denied  him,  is  only  mad©
possible  by  the  civilisation  which  he  blames,  and  that  on  the
other  hand  the  simple  state  of  Nature  for  which  he  yearns
could  not  secure  to  a  numerous  population  in  most  climates
anything  like  the  same  satisfaction  of  its  wants  as  civilisa-
tion affords — indeed,  there  are  but  very  few  climates  where
it  could  even  do  this  approximately  and  for  a  time.  The
evils  of  poverty  and  misery  which  we  so  often  see  in  close
proximity  and  saddening  contrast  to  the  growing  splendour
of  wealth,  should  no  doubt  stir  up  earnest  efforts  for  the
improvement  of  social  arrangements,  but  they  do  not  invali-
date the  assertion  that  every  man  who  is  a  member — though
only  in  a  subordinate  and  unfavourable  position — of  a  civilised
society,  has,  unless  hindered  by  his  own  fault,  not  only
participation  in  an  infinitely  richer  mental  life  than  would
have  been  accessible  to  him  as  a  result  of  his  own  isolated
strength,  but  also  possesses  greater  possibilities  of  material
wellbeing.

To  the  consideration  of  the  other  conflict — that  which  we
mentioned  first — we  will  also  devote  just  a  few  words.  The
pressure  which  is  imposed  on  the  individual  in  the  interests
of  universal  order,  the  limits  which  it  sets  to  his  humours,
fancies,  and  passions,  naturally  causes  in  him  a  counter-current
of  effort,  and  he  seeks  either  to  escape  from  this  condition  of

THE  STRUCTURE  OF  EXTERNAL  LIFE.  99

constraint,  or — wliere  that  is  not  possible — to  abolisli  or
change  the  order  itself  which  is  the  cause  of  the  constraint.
Society  will  feel  justified  in  attempting  to  do  the  last  when  it
suffers  as  a  whole  from  those  of  its  institutions  which  have
become  unsuitable.  And  to  wish  to  maintain  an  established
order  in  opposition  to  the  needs  of  the  whole  community,  for
the  satisfaction  of  which  it  exists,  is  but  a  mere  empty
devotion  to  forms.  Ihis  established  order,  however,  may  not
only  stand  opposed  to  the  individual  as  authoritatively
restraining  his  personal  desires,  it  can  also,  in  a  moral  point
of  view,  not  be  so  completely  subject  to  the  arbitrary  will  of
the  community  as  if  it  had  been  the  result  of  arbitrary
convention.  The  statutes  of  a  society  which  has  come
together  of  its  own  accord  may  indeed  be  regarded  as  bind-
ing by  conscientious  members,  but  no  one  regards  them  as
sacred ;  indeed,  their  being  looked  upon  as  binding,  and  the
observance  of  fidelity  and  faith  with  regard  to  them,  seem  to
me  to  be  possible  only  in  a  civilised  society  which  has  pre-
viously become  accustomed  to  reverence  a  binding  moral
order  which  is  independent  of  its  own  arbitrary  will.  A
great  political  community  is  thus,  to  a  large  extent,  every-
where a  work  of  Nature,  or  rather  not  of  mere  Nature,  but  of
a  Moral  Order  which  is  independent  of  the  individual,  and
the  commands  of  which  occur  to  men  when  they  are  living
together  in  a  life  of  social  communion,  tt  rests  on  the  one
hand  on  a  pious  regard  for  the  work  which  our  forefathers
have  begun,  whether  it  is  human  labour  or  the  development
of  humanity ;  on  the  other  hand,  on  provident  love  for  our
descendants,  since  we  wish  to  preserve  for  them  that  whicli
we  have  inherited  and  to  transmit  it  to  them  with  interest.
A  humanity  which  aimed  at  forgetting  completely  both  past
and  future  and  at  making  all  the  arrangements  of  life  sub-

I ordinate  merely  to  present  satisfaction,  would  be  distinguished
from  the  beasts  by  nothing  except  a  better  choice  of  means.
Therefore,  although  there  is  no  question  that  the  mechanism  of
civilised  order  exists  for  the  sake  of  society,  and  not  society

100  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  IV.

mere  sum  of  all  the  individuals  of  which  at  any  given  moment
it  is  composed.  Even  in  the  improbable  case  of  all  the
members  without  a  single  exception  agreeing  with  one  another,
yet  even  then  these  coexisting  members  would  not  constitute
the  community  which  from  a  moral  point  of  view  is  entitled
to  decide  with  supreme  authority  on  all  the  forms  of  its  own
constitution  ;  we  must  reckon  as  indispensable  members  of  such
a  community  both  the  generations  that  are  past  and  those
which  are  still  hidden  in  the  lap  of  the  future.  A  man
cannot  be  truly  called  a  citizen  of  a  state  or  of  the  world,
unless  he  feels  himself  included  in  this  unbroken  chain  of  the
temporal  development  of  humanity,  endowed  with  innumerable
benefits  won  for  him  by  past  generations,  and  hence  bound
body  and  soul  to  this  historical  whole,  without  which  his  own
existence  would  be  unthinkable,  and  whose  unfinished  work
he  is  called  upon  to  develop  further  by  his  own  activity  and
intelligence.  Something  of  this  feeling  has  stirred  men  in  all
ages,  but  a  consideration  of  history  will  teach  us  how  seldom
the  one-sided  attachment  to  what  is  old  and  the  blind  and
passionate  love  of  innovation  have  consciously  joined  for  the
carrying  on  of  this  work  of  true  development,  and  how  much
oftener  it  has  been  left  for  the  Tinconscious  and  pressing
necessity  of  circumstances  to  work  out  by  degrees  the  progress
that  human  wills  had  refused  or  had  in  vain  attempted  to
carry  on.

CHAPTEE V.

THE INNER LIFE.

Doubts  concerning  the  Ends  and  Aims  of  Human  Life — Man  as  a  Transitory
Natural  Product — Spontaneous  Judgments,  and  Reflections  upon  them —
Connections  with  the  Supersensuous  World — Superstition — Religiousness
— Unsteadiness  and  Incoherence  of  Human  Effort.

§  1.  rilHE  more  complex  and  multiform  the  external  order
-L  of  life  is,  the  more  pressing  becomes  the  question,
What  is  the  kernel  of  this  hull,  and  what  is  the  clear  gain  f
which  men  are  to  purchase  at  the  cost  of  their  life's  labour  ?  ^
It  is  not  asked  only  by  those  whose  unfavourable  position  in.  y
the  midst  of  a  complex  civilisation  forces  them  to  a  long
struggle  for  existence  and  to  a  continuous  series  of  efforts
in  which  every  success  only  brings  an  immediate  necessity  for
fresh  labour,  and  hardly  affords  the  hope,  even  in  the  far
distance,  of  at  last  reaching  a  secure  position.  It  is  asked  ;
just  as  often  by  those  who  enjoy  all  the  good  things  of  life
without  having  to  take  any  trouble  about  winning  and
establishing  their  footing  in  society;  to  them,  too,  it  often
seems  as  though  there  were  no  objects  and  aims  of  existence
except  such  as  men  arbitrarily  choose  to  set  before  them-
selves—  as  though  nothing  could  stir  the  soul  except  the
passion  of  a  struggle  for  something  yet  unattained,  whilst
any  good  that  one  has  succeeded  in  winning  seems  to  melt
into  thin  air,  and  the  tension  of  effort  being  relaxed  there
remain  in  its  place  a  tedium  and  lassitude  which  seem  to
seek  in  vain  for  some  new  object  that  will  not  lose  all  charm
in  the  moment  of  attainment.  There  are  indeed  some  lots
;more  favoured — lots  in  which  spells  of  hard  work  and  joyous
holidays,  labour  and  compensating  enjoyment,  are  fairly  mixed ;
[  but  even  from  the  peaceful  content  ot  such  lives  men  are  rudely

101

102  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V,

roused  by  the  doubts  which  are  stirred  in  them,  both  by  the
injustice  of  Nature  and  by  a  consideration  of  history.  The
comfort  that  can  be  derived  from  a  comprehensive  consideration
of  human  destinies  and  the  traces  of  divine  guidance  in  the
history  of  mankind,  is  not  within  the  reach  of  the  majority ;
within  the  range  that  is  accessible  to  them  it  is,  generally
speaking,  only  a  soul  that  has  already  attained  peace  that  can
grasp  the  wide  harmonies  in  which  all  lesser  discords  are  lost.
It  is  not  always  in  the  power  of  honest  endeavour  to  struggle
upwards  to  a  satisfactory  position  in  life,  and  even  if  we  were
to  allow  that  no  misfortune  happened  without  some  error  on
the  part  of  him  who  suffers  from  it,  still  this  admission  would
soften  but  little  the  bitterness  which  we  feel  at  seeing  incom-
parably greater  faults  repaid  by  the  undeserved  favour  of
circumstances.  And  then,  finally,  how  many  hopes  are  dashed
to  the  ground  by  sickness  and  by  death !  How  many  souls
appear  on  the  stage  of  this  earthly  life  only  to  quit  it  again
forthwith  without  end  or  aim — without  bringing  forth  any
fruit  of  development  in  their  brief  existence  !  And  if  we  take
a  survey  of  the  fates  of  human  beings  as  far  as  our  own
experience  goes,  what  do  we  see  but  a  perpetual  repetition  of
the  same  labours  and  sorrows,  the  same  misunderstandings  and
perversities,  differing  only  in  external  accessories,  and  every-
where brightened  only  by  the  same  isolated  lights  of  transitory
enjoyment  ?  How  great  is  the  number  of  the  hours  and  days
which  are  spent  in  works  and  labours  which  we  should  never
have  undertaken  except  in  the  hope  of  a  result  which  would
more  than  counterbalance  them ;  and  how  few  are  the
moments  in  which  it  seems  to  us  that  we  have  really  lived,
and  not  been  merely  busied  with  preparations  for  living !
There  is  scarcely  a  soul  which  is  altogether  free  from  reflec-
tions of  this  sort,  although — very  fortunately  for  mankind —
they  are  in  most  men  extremely  transitory,  being  displaced  by
cheerfulness  of  temper  or  deliberately  put  aside — and  the
heart  is  thus  enabled  to  surrender  itself  to  the  attraction
of  all  the  little  charms  of  life,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  them
for  the  moment. It  is  even  as  the  old  saying  declares,  We

I

THE  INNER  LIFE.  103

know  not  whence  we  conie  nor  whither  we  go  ;  the  wonder  is ]y^
that  we  can  be  as  light-hearted  as  we  are.

The  short  survey  of  human  existence  which  we  have  been
attempting as a preparation for the consideration of  its
historical development,  can  hardly  aim  at  concluding  with
an  answer  to  these  pregnant  questions. But  the  very  fact
that  such  questions  are  raised,  and  that  men,  with  hope  and
doubt,  with  faith  and  vivid  fancies,  look  for  ends  and  aims  of
their  existence,  that  they  feel  themselves  to  be  in  constant  con- ,
nection  with  a  supersensuous  world  and  by  their  very  efforts (
to suppress  the  feeling  only  bear  witness  to  its  obstinate 1^
vitality — all  these  reflections  and  emotions  (as  well  as  the
external  order  of  society  and  evea  more emphatically  than
it)  must  be  reckoned  among  the  decisive  facts  which  raise \
humanity  far  above  any  psychical  development  of  which  the |
inferior  animals  are capable. It  is  true  that  among  some i
species  of  animals,  the reciprocal  action  of  their  psychical
mechanism  and  physical  organization  leads  to  an  established
order  of  social  life ;  but  whilst  in  these  animal  polities  a  pre-
determined order,  fixed  in  every  detail,  combines  the  actions
of all  the  members  to  an  ever  uniform  whole,  it  is  among
mankind  alone  that  with  the  question.  What  are  we,  and  to
what_are we  destined? there  first  breaks the dawn  of a
genuine inner life,  for the development  and  enriching of
which all our expenditure of external activity seems
designed. The  views  of  life  which  attempts  at  answering ,A.
these questions have produced  in  the  human  mind  at  all '
periods,  will  form  our  topic  for  the  rest  of  this  chapter.

S  2.  There  are  scarcely  any  theoretic  convictions  that  are
more  severely  tried  by  comparison  with  experience  than  the
opinions  which  we  frame  concerning  our  own  human  nature
and  destiny.  In  the  quiet  presence-chamber  of  speculative
thought,  it  is  what  is  good  and  noble  and  significant  in  human
life  that  stands  out  as  if  it  were  the  whole,  and  all  the  dross
being  refined  away,  the  image  of  man  is  insensibly  glorified
into  an  ideal  form  which  not  only  fits  harmoniously  into  its
place  in  the  intelligible  whole  of  universal  order,  but  merits

104  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V.

a  place  so  promment  that  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  describe
worthily  the  significance  of  its  destiny  and  the  profound  import-
ance of  its  position  in  the  world.  This  reverent  conception
of  humanity  receives  a  rough  shock  where  we  come  into
contact  with  its  average  individual  representatives.  We  do
indeed  find  everywhere  the  general  physical  and  mental
capacities  with  which  man  is  endowed  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  high  destiny,  but  so  little  are  these  capacities
consecrated  to  the  service  of  that  destiny,  that  love  of  the
race  and  contempt  for  the  individual  are  but  too  often  found
to  be  compatible.  The  last  may  perhaps  be  modified  by  a
fair  consideration  of  those  seeds  of  good  which  we  may  always
find  even  in  perverted  human  nature;  but  the  impression
which  we  receive  on  the  whole  from  these  everyday  experiences
should  make  us  critical  of  that  over-estimation  of  human  worth
which  has  become  so  familiar  to  our  anthropological  reflec-
tion, and  which  in  truth  corresponds  but  ill  with  the  far  more
modest  judgment  which  men  mete  out  to  themselves  in  their
unsophisticated  daily  thought.  In  the  same  way  that  terrestrial
Nature  has  been  regarded  as  the  only  phaenomenal  world  in
which  the  wealth  of  the  Creative  Substance  has  been  manifested,
has  it  been  quite  common  for  philosophy  to  regard  man  as
the  isolated  apex  of  this  phaenomenal  world,  and  to  imagine
that  there  was  nothing  between  him  and  God  except  a  yawn-
ing chasm,  the  blank  emptiness  of  which  could  offer  no  great
hindrance  to  our  leaping  across  it.  He  who  will  only  trust
to  the  most  direct  experience,  a  kind  of  experience  which
presents  us  with  nothing  that  is  supersensuous  and  shows  man
as  supreme  in  the  world  of  sense,  is  right  from  a  certain  point
of  view.  But  he  who  once  permits  his  imagination  to  stray
beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  sensible  world  is  wrong  if  he
does  not  at  the  same  time  admit  the  possible  boundlessness
of  the  supersensuous  realm,  but  tries  instead  to  put  that
which  is  highest  in  the  known  world  of  sense  into  the
position  of  next  neighbour  to  the  keystone  of  the  universe.
It  is  not  our  business  to  fill  up  that  wide  expanse  with
dreams  more  or  less  daring  and  more  or  less  uncertain ;  but

THE  INNER  LIFE.  105

we  must  say  that  we  regard  as  worthless  any  theory  which — ■
vainly  imagining  that  it  has,  by  some  dialectic  method,  possessed
itself  of  the  equation  to  the  curve  which  represents  the  law  of
universal  development — thinks  to  demonstrate  that  the  human
mind  is  the  crown  and  end  of  that  which  can  know  no
end — that  human  life  and  existence  are  the  last  link  in  the
great  chain  of  self-developing  Infinity.  Let  us  give  up  the
presumptuous  attempt  to  extract  from  such  supposed  certainty
of  the  high  position  which  we  occupy  in  the  scale  of  creation,
the  secret  of  our  being,  of  our  hopes  and  our  destiny  ;  let  us
rather  set  out  with  the  admission  that  we  are  a  feeble  folk,
often  wearing  out  our  hearts  with  doubt,  bare  of  counsel  and
of  aid,  and  feeling  nothing  so  keenly  as  the  uncertainty  of  our
origin,  of  our  fate,  and  of  our  aims.

The  same  exalted  and  solemn  light  in  which  the  concept  of
humanity  appears  to  the  eye  of  speculation,  illumines  with
still  more  striking  brightness  the  calm  figures  of  primitive  men
as  tradition  shows  them  to  us  at  the  beginning  of  history,
wandering  over  the  still  youthful  earth  within  the  precincts
of  Paradise  or  in  patriarchal  simplicity.  How  quickly  the
glory  of  this  picture  too  is  changed  when  we  glance  at  the
countless  swarm  to  which  mankind  have  multiplied  since
then  !  In  this  noise  and  hurly-burly  of  most  prosaic  reality,
how  hard  it  is  for  the  imagination  to  retain  the  impression
which  is  so  naturally  produced  by  the  contemplation  of  that
little  community  of  the  early  world  which  we  know  so
well,  and  the  poetic  largeness  of  its  simple  modes  of  life  !
"We  are  only  expressing  a  feeling  which  must  be  familiar  to
all  when  we  recall  the  humiliating  and  confusing  effect
exercised  upon  us  by  a  concrete  consideration  of  the  un-
measurable  multitude  of  mankind,  amid  the  throng  of  whom
our  own  individuality  seems  to  be  swallowed  up.  It  is  not
perhaps  the  entirely  solitary  man  who  feels  that  God  is
close  to  him,  and  that  he  is  guarded  and  sheltered  by  direct
divine  interposition,  but  it  is  likely  that  this  happiness  will
be  experienced  by  one  who,  while  involved  in  the  sacred  com-
munity of  family  life,  feels  that  all  the  significant  relations  of

106  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V.

soul  to  soul  which  grow  out  of  this  community  are  interwoven
with  his  own  inner  life,  and  is  not  disturbed  by  any  thought  of
the  thousandfold  repetition  in  every  corner  of  the  globe  which
makes  this  significant  harmony  of  existence  seem  a  mere
ordinary  everyday  occurrence  in  the  course  of  events.  As
our  hearts  are  not  large  enough  to  embrace  all  with  equally
active  affection,  so  do  we  shun  the  idea  of  sharing  with  a  count-
less number  of  other  persons  our  own  relation  to  the  Infinite,
and  it  seems  to  us  that  the  strength  of  the  tie,  and  indeed  our
very  assurance  of  its  reality,  decrease  in  proportion  to  the
increase  of  the  numbers  to  which  it  is  extended.  The  more
mankind  emerges  from  the  retirement  of  patriarchal  life,  and
becomes  conscious  of  the  inexhaustible  fertility  with  which,
from  time  immemorial,  the  earth  has  produced  one  race  of
men  after  another,  differing  greatly  in  external  form  and
mental  endowments,  and  yet  all  alike  in  essentials,  indeed  all
in  the  mode  and  conditions  of  their  life  resembling  to  some
extent  those  races  of  beasts  which  in  still  greater  multitudes
inhabit  the  most  remote  corners  of  the  earth,  and  which  arise
and  pass  away  in  shoals — the  more  vividly  all  this  is  present
to  consciousness,  the  less  ready  will  men  be  to  ent^r  on  a
consideration  of  the  worth  of  their  own  existence,  and  their
mind  will  be  gradually  possessed  by  a  belief  that  mankind
is  but  one  of  the  transitory  phsenomena  which  an  eternal
primitive  force,  revelling  in  the  work  of  alternate  creation
and  destruction,  brings  forth,  only  that  it  may  vanish  in  its
turn.

In  saying  this  I  do  not  intend  to  suggest  that  at  any  period
of  history  this  view  has  been  predominant  among  men,
although  it  might  in  fact  be  recognised  as  giving  the  key-
note of  thought  at  various  epochs.  I  would  rather  point  it
out  as  a  view  that  may  be  met  with  in  all  ages,  never  perhaps
as  an  unquestioned  faith,  but  rather  as  a  widespread  feeling
that  casts  its  shadow  effectively  enough  over  all  human  effort.
Indeed,  this  mean  opinion  of  themselves  which  men  hold,
appears  in  a  twofold  aspect.  In  the  first  place,  it  appears
without being sharpened and developed by far  -  reaching

THE  INNER  LIFE.  10  "7

reflection,  as  a  direct  consciousness  of  their  own  lowness
and  commonness,  in  the  vast  number  of  those  who,  confined
by  the  disfavour  of  circumstances  to  a  narrow  circle  of  thought
and  compelled  to  a  daily  struggle  with  petty  hindrances,  can
only  be  said  to  endure  life  as  a  burden  imposed  upon  them.
Familiar  with  the  aspect  of  misery,  they  know  how  men  are
ignominiously  reaped  down  in  shoals  by  the  course  of  Nature,
whilst  to  him  who  is  more  happily  placed  the  infrequent
spectacle  of  dissolution  has  at  least  the  comforting  and  elevat-
ing solemnity  of  an  event  which  is  out  of  the  common.  All
the  dark  shadows  of  life,  all  the  hardships  inflicted  by  the
ordinary  course  of  events,  stand  out  in  naked  prominence  in
their  daily  experience,  and  produce  that  passive  resignation
with  which  in  all  ages  the  bulk  of  the  human  race  endures
life  and  death.  They  do  not  live  their  life  but  they  tolerate
it  from  its  beginning  to  its  end,  having  no  comprehensive
aims,  and  only  intent  upon  warding  off  in  detail  immediate
ill,  and  winning  in  detail  proximate  small  advantages  ;  in  the
same  way  they  tolerate  death  as  a  necessity  which  it
would  be  hardly  worth  while  to  escape  for  the  sake  of
continuing  such  a  life  as  theirs;  for  although  they  may
remember  some  isolated  enjoyments,  they  would  hardly  find
that  life  held  for  them  any  great  and  permanent  treasure  of
delight  which  they  would  feel  impelled  to  try  and  secure  from
destniction.  The  same  power  that  helps  us  over  so  many
dark  and  fathomless  chasms  in  life  softens  also  the  gloomy
colouring  of  this  mood  of  thought — I  allude  to  the  thought-
less forgetfulness  with  which  the  human  soul  entertains  in
close  conjunction  the  most  diverge  opinions,  never  bringing  them
into  clear  contrast — a  thoughtlessness  which  enables  us  to
give  ourselves  up  fully  and  entirely  to  the  passing  pleasure  of
the  moment,  although  we  entertain  such  a  poor  opinion  of  the
worth  of  our  life  on  the  whole.

That  which  we  have  here  been  considering  as  spontaneous
feeling,  and  an  ordinary  accompaniment  of  existence,  reappears
refined  by  reflection  and  intensified  to  explicit  belief  in  count-
less varied  forms  of  theoretic  conviction  which  for  the  present

108  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V.

we  "will  not  attempt  to  investigate  further.  There  can  have
been  no  period  in  which  there  did  not  exist  views  according
to  which  human  life  was  regarded  as  a  passing  wave  thrown
up  by  an  unknown  ocean  in  its  continuous  movement ;  but  all
these  views,  with  the  slight  worth  which  they  attribute  to  the
individual  as  a  mere  mortal  and  vanishing  phsenomenon,  have
only  exercised  a  noticeable  influence  upon  life  itself  in  cases
where  they  have  been  the  living  outcome  of  that  natural  turn
of  mind  which  we  have  been  describing,  the  causes  and  con-
sequences of  which  were  by  these  views  brought  into  clear
consciousness.  But  where  this  spontaneous  feeling  has  been
other  and  better,  where  minds  have  been  stirred  by  the  large
interests  of  culture  and  civilisation,  and  have  been  admitted,
by  favourable  circumstances  of  nurture  and  education,  to  a
living  participation  in  those  interests — in  all  such  cases
living  life  has  been  stronger  than  the  pantheistic  and  material-
istic views  developed  in  opposition  to  it  by  reflection  or
scholasticism,  and  men  have  in  reality  lived  and  felt  and
striven  after  another  fashion  than  that  set  down  in  their  own
theories  concerning  themselves.

I  know  that  this  will  be  denied,  and  that  it  will  be  main-
tained that  all  moral  greatness  and  purity  of  life  can  be  logically
combined  with  a  faith  that  does  in  fact  in  perfect  honesty
deny  the  existence  of  a  supernatural  order  of  things,  our
connection  therewith,  and  the  continuance  of  our  existence
/'  beyond  the  limits  of  earthly  life.  I  admit  the  fact  of  this
"^  combination,  but  not  its  logical  consistency ;  on  the  contrary,
it  is  that  very  inconsistency  of  our  nature  which  so  often
saves  us  from  being  perverted  by  our  theoretic  errors,  which
makes  it  possible  for  us  to  combine  action  accordant  with  a
sense  of  the  dignity  of  humanity  with  views  the  logical  effect
of  which  would  be  to  annihilate  that  dignity,  and  this  in  a
fashion  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  wholly  contradictory.  It
is  asserted  that  the  obligation  of  the  Moral  Law  is  not  altered  if
we  regard  all  mental  life  a.s  merely  so  much  mechanical  action
of  matter  and  its  accidental  combinations,  having  no  higher  end
than  to  persist,  and  to  fluctuate  hither  and  thither  for  as  long

THE  INNER  LIFE.  109

a  period  as  is  made  necessary  by  the  collocation  of  the
material  particles  ;  in  this  assertion,  however,  there  certainly
is,  not  a  logical  connection  of  thought,  but  a  forcible  moral
resolve  that  has  determined  to  hold  fast  by  a  reverence  for
morality,  spite  of  the  materialistic  theory  with  which  it  is
incompatible.  It  will  perhaps  be  attempted  to  substitute,  for
a  supersensuous  mysterious  world  which  is  to  us  the  source
of  the  obligation  of  moral  commands,  the  Dignity  of  Man  and
a  Self-respect  whicli  isolates  him  from  dependence  on  any
superior,  yet  enjoins  him  to  rule  and  keep  in  check  the  lower
nature  in  himself.  I  doubt,  however,  if  a  view  which  recog-
nises only  a  mechanical  course  of  Nature  can  logically  do
anything  with  such  ideas  as  those  of  reverence  and  so  forth
but  reckon  them  among  the  morbid  productions  of  imagina-
tion to  which  nothing  real  corresponds,  and  of  which  it  has
already  learnt  to  reject  so  many.  I  doubt  further  whether  a
view  which  regards  the  individual  as  merely  a  passing  phase
in  the  spontaneous  activity  of  an  Infinite  Substance,  could  have
any  logical  reason  for  attributing  to  such  a  nonentity  any
obligation  to  maintain  a  dignity  belonging  to  it  in  its
individual  and  transitory  character  —  a  dignity  which  it
should  or  could  maintain  by  its  own  spontaneous  activity
— whether  such  dignity  ought  not  much  rather  to  have  its
presence  or  absence  laid  to  the  account  of  the  Infinite  Sub-
stance itself.  The  logical  outcome  of  all  such  views  can  only
be  to  let  ourselves  go  as  Nature  prompts,  and  to  use  that
mysterious  sparkle  of  independent  substantiality  which  shines
within  us,  with  what  wisdom  we  may,  for  the  attaining  and
enhancing  of  physical  wellbeing.  Thus  moral  commands  could
only  be  accepted  as  maxims  of  action  on  account  of  the
secondary  consideration  that  they  are  useful  on  the  whole.

Meanwhile  it  is  not  possible,  nor  is  it  our  intention,  to
discuss  in  this  place  the  question  whether  these  different
views  of  the  supersensuous  world  are  intrinsically  right  or
wrong ;  our  intention  has  merely  been  to  refer  to  them  in  as
far  as  they  are  to  be  reckoned  among  the  ordinary  factors  of
human development. And here we  must  repeat  that  we

110  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V.

doubt  whether  any  one  of  these  views  which  regard  human
beings  as  altogether  dependent  and  transitory  has  ever  become
a  really  pervading  sentiment  of  the  whole  nature,  in  spon-
taneous thought  and  action,  as  well  as  in  reflection.  When  an
ancient  poet,  having  scouted  all  ideas  of  deities  and  retribution
after  death  as  useless  terrors  by  which  the  smooth  and  peaceful
course  of  our  natural  pleasure  in  life  is  disturbed,  turns  upon
us  and  inveighs  against  the  fear  of  death,  and  asks,  Do  we,
insatiable,  desire  to  go  on  feasting  for  ever,  and  never  to
retire  with  dignity,  as  satisfied  guests,  from  the  banquet  of
life  ?  the  effect  produced  is  no  doubt  striking.  But  in  asking
this,  does  he  not  forget  that  monitions  to  moderation  and
dignity  must  fall  very  flat  on  the  ear  of  him  who  knows  that
in  an  hour  he  will  cease  to  be  ?  Or,  in  using  this  simile,  which
is  quite  out  of  keeping  with  his  general  tenor,  is  he  not  per-
chance secretly  influenced  by  the  truer  thought  that  this  life
is  indeed  a  banquet  from  which,  as  guests  who  have  had
enough,  we  must  depart;  but  that  we,  not  so  transitory,  depart
from  it  only  to  enter  another  state  of  existence  in  which
there  will  remain  to  us  the  memory  of  what  we  have  before
enjoyed  ?  And  on  the  other  side,  what  poetic  and  glowing
expression  has  often  been  given  to  pantheistic  views !  But
whilst  they  extol  with  devotional  rapture  the  absorption  of
the  individual  in  the  universal,  is  not  that  which  they  are
glorifying  just  the  abiding  and  enduring  joy  which  the  mortal
experiences  in  its  reunion  with  the  eternal  ?  And  do  they  not
hereby  assert  the  immortality  of  that  mortal,  which,  though
destined  to  extinction,  is  only  destined  to  such  an  extinction
as  signifies  its  eternal  preservation  in  some  form  or  other  ?
This  thought,  which  pantheistic  poetry  cannot  escape,  is  one
which  cannot  be  got  rid  of  either  by  the  most  prosaic  reason-
ing or  the  most  commonplace  views.  People  may  seem  to  be
as  thoroughly  convinced  as  you  will  of  their  own  impending
annihilation,  and  may  speak  of  the  disappearance  of  personal
existence  in  the  lap  of  universal  Nature,  and  one  may  indeed
imagine  that  that  which  used  to  happen  may  cease  to  happen,  i
but  one  can  never  imagine  that  anything  which  has  once  existed

THE  INNER  LIFE.  Ill

can  cease  to  be.  And  however  much  people  may  attempt
to  persuade  themselves  that  the  self-conscious  Ego  is  in  fact
only  an  event,  a  vanishing  passage  between  atoms  variously
moved,  still  the  immediate  consciousness  of  our  personal  reality  \y^
will  always  remain  invincible  to  these  attempts,  and  we  can
never  think  of  ourselves  as  melting  away  in  the  great  receptacle
of  universal  Nature  without  thinking  too  that  we  shall  stUl  be
preserved  and  go  on  existing  in  it  in  our  dissolved  condition.

I  must  repeat  that  I  am  not  setting  up  these  modes  of
thought  as  true,  but  am  describing  them  as  facts  of  our
unsophisticated  consciousness ;  they  may  be  right  or  wrong,  but
at  any  rate  they  are  what  we  go  through  life  with ;  our  reflec-
tions are  never  quite  free  from  a  presentiment  of  something  j  ■
supersensuous.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  not  in  a  position
to  raise  these  presentiments  to  a  condition  of  unquestioned  n^s
authority,  except  by  a  summary  act  of  faith ;  it  is  the  natural
condition  of  man  to  fluctuate  between  the  consciousness  of  an
eternal  destiny  and  the  ever-recurring  dread  of  being  a  mere
indifferent  and  perishing  production  of  the  general  course  of
Nature,  both  feelings  being  toned  down  by  thoughtless  light-  C
heartedness.  And  even  that  apathetic  mood  of  the  majority
which  I  have  described  is  broken  by  suggestions  of  such  pre-
sentiments, and  the  monitions  of  conscience  make  it  plain  to
them  now  and  again  that  they  are  not  altogether  like  the  grass
of  the  field  and  the  perishing  productions  of  the  vegetable  world  ;
and  conversely  the  security  of  the  most  earnest  conviction  of
the  eternal  significance  of  man's  spirit  is  shaken  by  the
unmistakeable  and  peremptory  clearness  with  which  the  course
of  Nature  seems  to  declare  tliat  no  other  fate  can  await  the
living  mind  than  the  fate  of  sharing  in  that  destruction  which
befalls  the  living  form,  and  of  disappearing  from  the  world  of
realities  without  leaving  a  trace  behind.

If  we  stay  to  consider  for  a  moment  that  philosophic  view
01  which  the  dominant  characteristic  is  a  vivid  consciousness
of  human  meanness  and  transitoriness,  we  see  plainly  that  it
is  hardly  entitled  to  speak  at  all  of  aims  in  life.  Its  scientific
teachings  have  indeed  gone  so  far  as  to  dissuade  men  from  ail

112  BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V.

carking  care  concerning  such  aims  and  all  supersensuoua
interests  in  general,  and  to  recommend  them  to  restrict  them-
selves to  a  regulated  satisfaction  of  natural  wants.  But  they
have  seldom  gone  further,  and  have  hardly  ever  succeeded  in
silencing  the  opposition  of  a  better  feeling  which  always  sets
itself  against  such  a  reduction  of  life  to  the  condition  of  a  sort
of  peaceable  and  aimless  vegetation.  On  the  one  hand,  they
have  had  to  give  way  to  human  nature  so  far  as  tacitly  to
allow  to  the  knowledge  of  truth,  the  charm  of  beauty,  and  the
majesty  of  moral  commands,  that  superiority  to  all  mere
natural  impulses,  however  urgent,  which  the  mind  is  accus-
tomed to  attribute  to  them,  allowing  it  in  spite  of  the  fact
that  the  superiority  is  not  intelligible  on  their  principles ;  on
the  other  hand,  they  have  never  been  able  to  put  a  stop  to
practical  efforts  which  far  transcend  the  needs  of  a  mere
vegetative  existence.  Although  in  theory  men  would  often
have  denied  the  existence  of  this  inextinguishable  feeling  of
being  bound  up  with  an  imperishable  world,  yet  its  activity  has
been  shown  again  and  again,  sometimes  in  provident  care  for  the
wellbeing  of  a  distant  posterity — a  care  which  seems  to  spring
up  spontaneously  in  men's  hearts — sometimes  in  the  intense
interest  taken  in  the  general  improvement  of  mankind ;  and,
how  often,  in  outbursts  of  ambition  which  have  disturbed  the
world !  The  individual  soul  that  considers  itself  to  be  a  mere
passing  production  of  Nature  is  seldom  altogether  indifferent  to
future  fame,  and  yet  in  what  would  the  attraction  of  such
fame  consist  if  it  were  merely  attached  to  a  name  which  no
longer  had  an  owner !  In  all  these  manifestations  there  is
revealed  the  suppressed  belief  in  a  world  of  spiritual  interests,
a  world  to  which  its  individual  members  are  indissolubly
united,  far  as  we  may  yet  be  from  any  clear  idea  of  the  way
in  which  what  seems  so  transient  becomes  endowed  with
eternal  existence.

§  3.  But  in  the  mysterious  compound  of  feelings  of  which  we
are  continually  conscious,  that  particular  feeling  of  the  nothing-
ness and  forlornness  of  our  earthly  existence  is  not  always
dominant. Over  against  the  prose of this resigned mood

THE  INNEE  LIFE.  113

stands  the  wild  poetry  of  superstition,  as  a  second  great  mani-
festation of  human  self-consciousness.  It  has  been  long  ago
remarked  how  surprisingly  near  the  rankest  superstition  is  to
unbelief,  and  how  it  seems  to  arise  out  of  it.  And,  in  fact,
the  thought  of  the  common  and  natural  transitoriness  of  the
individual  and  of  the  perdurableness  belonging  only  to  the
dark  and  unfathomable  Eternal  are  like  two  notes  that  ring
out  together ;  a  gust  of  wind  may  make  now  one  and  now  the
other  swell  fuller  and  overpower  its  fellow.  But  all  super-
stition depends  upon  this,  that  the  activity  of  that  Infinite
Substance  which  at  first  was  regarded  as  guiding  the  course
of  individual  things  only  indirectly  and  from  a  distance,  as
it  were  with  calm  indifference,  suddenly  comes  to  be  con-
sidered as  immediately  present  in  all  the  most  insignificant
affairs,  permeating  the  whole  frame  of  phaenomena,  and  con-
necting its  parts  together  with  the  mysterious  force  of  an
all-pervading  fervour,  from  which  the  individual  creature,
surrounded  and  caught  on  every  hand,  is  never  able  to  escape.

This  belief  that  we  are  encompassed  on  all  sides  by  a
supersensuous  world,  among  the  clouds  of  which  the  near  and
sharply  defined  outlines  of  our  lives  become  lost,  indiscriminately
and  past  recognition,  is  also  a  mood  of  thought  which  has,  on
the  one  hand,  predominated  during  long  periods  of  human
development,  and  on  the  other  hand,  is  in  all  periods  ready  to
come  to  the  front  again  in  isolated  manifestations.  This  mood
has  influenced  life  in  different  ways,  according  as  the  tempera-
ment and  disposition  of  nations  and  their  greater  or  less
appreciation  of  the  clear  factual  relations  of  experience  and
the  primary  moral  demands  of  the  soul  have  disposed  the
imagination  either  to  a  calm  receptive  temper,  or  to  a  gloomy
or  immoderate  enthusiasm.  Oriental  extravagance  endowed
its  picture  of  the  world  with  a  wide  background  and  luxuriant
wealth  of  colouring ;  it  introduced  notions  of  the  beginning  of
the  world,  of  the  good  and  evil  principles  of  all  things,  of  the
fall  of  man  from  his  first  estate  through  Satan,  of  a  history  of
the  world,  in  the  sense  of  a  coherent  development  of  all  visible
and  invisible  reality ;  for  it  all  these  supreme  thoughts  which

VOL.  II.  H

114  BOOK  VI. CHAPTEK  V.

the  human  mind  elsewhere  only  approaches  with  timidity,
appeared  above  the  mental  horizon  of  everyday  life,  wearing
the  familiar  aspect  of  well-known  stories ;  they  were  retained
there  by  innumerable  ceremonies — sometimes  by  monstrous
expiations,  by  which  men  imagined  that  they  won  back  sanc-
tification  and  a  power  over  Nature  (of  which  recovery,  how-
ever, unprejudiced  observation  would  not  have  been  able  to
point  out  the  slightest  trace) — sometimes  by  detailed  precepts
which,  petty,  vexatious,  and  useless  as  they  were,  hampered
the  most  spontaneous  movements  of  common  life  by  reminders
of  their  pretended  dependence  on  mysterious  bonds  of  the
great  universe  itself.  Grecian  mythology  took  a  different
course ;  not  without  loss  of  instructive  content,  but  with  an
increase  of  gracious  and  artistic  development,  it  restored  to
freedom  the  greater  part  of  human  life,  delivering  it  from  the
rank  oppressive  growth  of  a  mysticism  which  darkened  the
world  from  pole  to  pole.  Different  times  and  different  modes
of  life  have  favoured  different  developments  of  this  temper
of  mind ;  but  wherever  our  earthly  existence  has  been  pene-
trated by  the  conviction  of  a  close  and  thoroughgoing  con-
nection between  this  existence  itself  and  an  universal  cosmic
life,  and  the  conviction  has  been  systematized  by  attempts  to
establish  a  mystic  and  theocratic  regulation  of  common  social
relations,  the  natural  course  of  development  has  been  hindered
by  the  imposition  of  artificial  and  to  some  extent  unintelligible
tasks,  which  have  thrown  into  the  shade  the  true  physical  and
moral  interests  of  unperverted  human  nature.

There  arose  from  this  source  not  only  distorted  theories,
which  unconcernedly  contradicted  the  most  ordinary  expe-
rience, but  also  a  series  of  gloomy  ascetic  struggles,  which  are
among  the  most  noteworthy  phaenomena  in  the  world's  history,
and  which  in  the  interests  of  an  ideal  end  inaugurated  an
express  combat  against  just  those  natural  foundations  upon
which  the  existence  of  the  combatant  depends.  But  on  the
other  hand,  where  a  more  propitious  course  of  events  has
given  greater  development  to  men's  taste  for  daily  labour  and
for  the  pursuit  of  commerce  and  manufacture,  interest  in  the

THE  IN^'ER  LIFE.  115

system  by  which  a  clear  division  of  daily  labour  is  marked
out  for  different  individuals  throws  into  the  shade  anxiety
concerning  the  connection  of  our  life  with  an  invisible  and
mysterious  order  of  things ;  and  this  anxiety  only  reappears  in
isolated  manifestations  of  superstition,  which  persistently  con-
tradict experience,  without,  however,  producing  much  effect
on  the  whole.  In  this  way  of  looking  at  life  there  is  a
general  preponderance  of  melancholy;  and  superstition,  be-
lieving itself  to  be  everywhere  encompassed  by  the  immediate
presence  of  the  most  profound  cosmic  relations,  feels  this
encompassing  to  be  for  the  most  part  as  a  continual  suspicion,
temptation,  and  menace,  with  which  men  are  hemmed  in  by
some  dark  and  destiny-laden  power.  But  there  is  bound  up
with  this  gloomy  view  a  higher  estimate,  unconscious  and
involuntary,  of  finite  personality.  The  mysterious  connection
of  things  seems  to  be  everywhere  concerned  with  this  per-
sonality, and  to  hold  it  fast ;  and  for  that  very  reason  it  seems
that  this  cannot  be  a  commonplace,  transitory,  and  insigni-
ficant element  which  the  course  of  Xature  makes  and  then
again  unmakes,  but  must  be  an  indestructible  and  real  being
that  of  its  own  choice  and  free  will  ponders  the  perplexing
questions  of  the  universe,  and  is  in  a  position  to  incur  inef-
faceable guilt  by  its  own  election.  Thus  superstition  is  full
of  the  idea  of  responsibility,  an  idea  which  cannot  be  recog-
nised by  the  view  which  regards  every  finite  being  as  a  mere
insignificant  production  of  the  Universal  Substance.

§  4.  I  now  hasten  briefly  to  a  conclusion  which  is  only
intended  to  form  the  starting-point  of  our  final  considera-
tions. From  fluctuation  between  the  two  views  of  life  which
I  have  been  describing,  there  arises  a  state  of  equilibrium
which,  though  not  unattainable  for  man,  is  perhaps  only  fully
reached  in  rare  and  favoured  moments. We  would  distinguish

tthis  third  mood  of  thought  as  Religiousness.  In  this  stage
consciousness  of  our  own  weakness  is  bound  up  with  the
belief  that  we  are  called  nevertheless  to  an  imperishable
work  in  the  world;  and  the  conviction  of  an  intimate  con-
nection between  our  earthly  life  and  the  mysterious  whole  of

116

BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V.

this  universal  frame  no  longer  interferes  with  our  care  for
the  small  tasks  of  daily  life.  It  is  not  the  power  of  larger
knowledge  which  accomplishes  the  union  of  these  conflicting
thoughts,  but  the  power  of  a  larger  and  more  Kving  faith,
which  attributes  to  the  voice  of  spiritual  experience  and  of
conscience  as  great  importance  as  to  the  testimony  of  the
senses,  and  at  the  same  time  does  not  twist  this  testimony  in
order  to  make  it  accord  with  a  pretended  higher  knowledge,
being  content  to  believe  that  God  has  reserved  to  Himself
alone  cognisance  of  the  day  and  hour  in  which  all  our  long-
ings and  presentiments  are  to  be  fulfilled.  The  function  of
earthly  life  in  the  coherent  infinity  of  existence  seems  to  be
of  the  nature  of  a  preparation,  of  an  educative  probation,  not
aimless  and  empty  of  significance  as  a  vanishing  present  uncon-
nected with  any  future,  but  on  the  other  hand,  not  to  be  an
end  in  itself,  or  of  such  binding  force,  that  every  error  of  the
school-life  must  have  the  influence  of  an  irrevocable  fate.  From
this  mode  of  thought  arise  the  conscientiousness,  the  earnest
endeavour,  and  the  patient  love  which  the  mind  ought  to
bring  to  bear  upon  the  tasks  of  earthly  life,  together  with
that  still  greater  earnestness  of  mood  and  calm  peace  which
come  to  us  from  feeling  that  the  imperfection  of  earthly  effort
has  the  sting  taken  out  of  it;  for  it  is  not  the  outward
result  achieved  (which  may  be  insignificant),  but  loyal  honest
labour,  which  is  both  the  end  of  such  effort  and  the  vocation
to  which  we  are  called.

But  it  is  after  all  only  for  brief  moments  that  we  really
feel  this  sense  of  peace.  I  am  not  here  referring  to  the  con-
flicts and  disturbances,  and  the  ever-recurring  unrest  which
arise  from  the  differences,  smoothed  over,  but  not  reconciled,
between  the  conclusions  of  faith  and  the  importunate  objec-
tions of  science ;  for  it  is  a  keen  sense  of  these  differences
that  is  at  the  foundation  of  our  attempt  to  get  a  clear  idea
of  the  position  and  destiny  of  man.  The  less,  therefore,  do
we  need  to  point  out  again  in  this  place  what  violent  dis-
turbances our  peace  of  mind  is  subject  to  from  this  quarter^
But there is another  human  imperfection  which  we have

THE  INNER  LIFE.  117

often  referred  to,  and  must  refer  to  once  again  at  the  end
of  this  survey  of  the  moods  which  characterize  our  inner  life ;
I  mean  that  unsteadiness  of  our  thoughts  and  feelings  which
so  seldom  allows  us  to  hold  fast  that  which  belongs  to
our  peace,  and  to  make  it  sound  on  in  deep  unbroken  har-
mony. Sometimes  we  think  of  the  ends  alone  and  forget  the
means,  sometimes  we  are  absorbed  in  the  treatment  of  the
means  themselves,  and  lose  all  remembrance  of  the  end ;
what  is  exalted  dazzles  us,  and  makes  us  lose  sight  of  small
duties,  and  no  less  does  the  consideration  of  small  things
blind  us  to  that  which  is  great ;  tension  and  relaxation  alter-
nate here  as  in  bodily  conditions,  and  our  thoughts  are  not
the  same  on  Sundays  and  on  week-days.  How  much  of  that
which  in  hours  of  thought  we  acknowledge  as  our  earnest
conviction  seems  for  long  periods  together  to  slip  out  of  our
recollection,  being  like  a  hoarded  treasure  which  it  is
enough  merely  to  possess — and  how  rare  are  the  moments  in
which  that  supersensuous  world  in  which  we  believe  is
present  to  our  consciousness  as  a  living  truth  that  really
touches  our  life  itself!  What  we  so  often  see  in  great
matters,  delay  in  carrying  out  good  resolutions,  is  of  almost
universal  occurrence  in  small  matters ;  with  an  honest  belief
in  the  unity  of  our  work,  and  of  the  connection  there  is
between  all  human  efforts  for  the  fulfilment  of  one  and  the
same  destiny,  we  yet  put  off  the  consideration  of  many
questions,  and  our  activities  seem  to  work  independently
and  in  isolation  in  the  most  various  directions.  Thus  the
whole  circle  of  the  sciences,  and  each  science  in  particular,  lose
all  conscious  reference  to  their  common  centre,  as  though  each
constituted  an  independent  and  self-sufficing  sphere  of
interests,  and  it  is  the  same  with  art  and  the  industries
which  minister  to  the  wants  of  external  life ;  so  that  while
on  high  days  and  holidays  we  recognise  the  supreme  and
absolute  end,  we  work  on  week  by  week  for  mediate  ends,
separated  by  several  removes  from  the  final  end.  In  saying
this  we  wish  not  so  much  to  express  a  serious  reproach,  as
to  indicate  an  imperfection  from  which  human  nature  cannot

118

BOOK  VI. CHAPTER  V,

quite  free  itself  by  the  mere  force  of  good  intentions.  And
the  confession  of  this  very  imperfection  is  just  the  concluding
duty  of  this  sketch,  the  business  of  which  has  been,  not  to
describe  ideals  which  we  have  to  pursue,  but  to  set  forth  the
opinions  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  mankind  are  accustomed
to  entertain  regarding  their  ideals,  and  the  efforts  which  they
actually  make  to  approximate  to  these  ideals.

CONCLUSIOK

THE  point  at  which  we  have  now  arrived  is  not  a  final
resting-place,  but  an  inclined  plane,  along  which  we
have  to  proceed  further,  and  from  which  we  now  make  a
hasty  survey  of  the  whence  and  whither  of  the  path  we  have
been  travelling.

The  first  important  section  of  our  considerations  only
brought  us  to  an  unsatisfying  conclusion ;  it  seemed  that
Man  was  merely  one  among  countless  examples  of  what  can
be  accomplished  by  the  universal  order  of  Nature's  mechanism.
"We  saw,  indeed,  that  laws  alone  never  in  any  case  produce
a  real  being;  they  produce  such  only  by  means  of  a  pre-
existent  Keal,  actual,  manifold,  and  primary,  which  subordinates
itself  and  its  working  to  these  laws,  its  capacity  of  action
being  merely  directed  and  regulated  by  them.  But  the  whole
wealth  of  reality  which  we  have  thus  to  presuppose  seema
at  first  to  be  a  mere  scattered  manifold  of  fortuitous  facts,
not  joined  by  any  bond  of  living  unity  so  as  to  form  a
second  great  department  of  the  universe,  in  the  same  way
as  the  individual  laws  of  the  mechanical  order  of  Nature
harmonize  together  so  as  to  make  a  first  fundamental  depart-
ment. Since  experience  shows  traces  not  only  of  a  sub-
ordination of  all  individual  elements  under  similar  universal
laws,  but  also  of  their  co-ordination  into  a  systematic  whole,
the  parts  of  which  are  complementary  to  one  another,  this
harmony  came  to  be  perversely  regarded  as  a  blind  outcome
of  the  original  nature  and  collocation  of  cosmic  elements;
these,  it  was  held,  must  have  a  nature  and  position  of  some
kind,  and  having  just  that  which  they  have  and  no
other,  must  necessarily  result  in  this  order,  and  not  in
permanent chaos. The pertinacity of  this unsatisfactoiy

120  CONCLUSION.

view  V7as  overcome  at  last ;  and  it  was  obliged  to  confess
itself  as  being  in  fact  only  the  disguised  and  unwilling
expression  of  the  acknowledgment  that  the  final,  the  most
comprehensive  and  the  fundamental  fact  of  reality,  is  the
unity  and  inner  coherence  of  creative  Nature,  which  did  not
throw  into  that  realm  of  necessary  laws  an  unconnected
multitude  of  examples  to  be  experimented  on,  but  set  before
them  the  hidden  germ  of  an  ordered  world,  that  they  might
develop  it.  And  if  reflection  thinks  beforehand  of  the  sub-
sequent combination  of  its  individual  conclusions,  it  will
add  the  thought  that,  speaking  generally,  this  system  of  law —
to  which  reality  seems  to  submit — is  not  in  truth  a  pre-
existing necessity  to  which  reality,  being  of  later  birth,  thus
accommodates  itself;  that  on  the  contrary  the  creative
Nature  which  seems  to  adapt  itself  to  mechanical  require-
ments, is  the  first  and  only  Eeal,  this  mechanism  being
merely  the  form  in  which  its  activity  flows  forth;  and  in
consequence  of  the  thoroughgoing  unity  and  consistency  of
this  activity,  the  form  of  it  can  be  abstracted  from  particular
examples,  can  be  isolated  as  though  it  were  a  universal
necessity,  everywhere  the  same,  and  finally  can  be  conceived
as  a  foreign  and  independent  limit  of  that  of  which  it  is  the
very  nature.

It  is  this  living  reality  that  has  been  the  subject  of  our
consideration;  we  have  sought  to  find  in  it  Man,  and  the
position  occupied  by  his  special  nature  as  contrasted  with  the
equally  special  natures  of  other  beings.  The  result,  however,
wliich  we  have  arrived  at  as  the  conclusion  of  our  considerations
is  almost  wholly  negative.  Extensive  as  we  found  the  influ-
ence of  universal  and  uniformly  acting  conditions  upon  the
development  of  human  existence  to  be,  we  found  also  that  it
never  suffices  to  explain  this  development  without  predis-
positions to  civilisation  of  the  most  special  kind  which  it
encounters  in  the  human  creature,  but  does  not  first  produce
in  him.  But  when,  on  the  other  hand,  we  attempted  to
determine  positively  the  connection  of  this  human  nature
with  the  whole  of  reality  and  its  significant  position  in  that

CONCLUSION.

121

whole,  our  reflections  resulted  in  doubts  and  obscurity.  We
Imow  not  wliat  there  is  hidden  from  us  in  the  countless  stars
which  touch  our  lives  only  when  a  ray  from  them  reaches
our  eyes  by  night ;  how  then  should  we  know  our  place  in
the  whole  great  universe,  with  only  a  small  fraction  of  which
we  are  acquainted  ?  We,  living  on  the  surface  of  this  planet,
find  ourselves  at  the  head  of  an  animal  series  the  perfected
type  of  which  is  reached  in  our  organization,  but  of  what
import  is  this  dignity  in  the  animal  kingdom,  a  matter  of
which  we  hardly  ever  think  during  life,  and  which  is  of  no
advantage  to  the  progress  of  our  development  ?  i'inally,
we  feel  ourselves  divided  mentally  from  this  animal  world
by  a  great  chasm;  but  pursuing  ideals  which  concern  us
alone,  on  the  one  hand  we  find  that  we  almost  everywhere
fall  short  of  that  in  which  alone  we  believe  that  there  is
worth,  and  on  the  other  hand  we  remark  how  there  vegetates
around  us  simultaneously  that  other  kind  of  animate  life
which  knows  not  these  ideals.  Our  own  ends  are  not  clear
to  us ;  innumerable  things  exist  outside  of  us,  the  meaning
and  destiny  of  which  we  know  still  less ;  he  who  would  know
himself  must  divine  the  plan  of  the  whole  great  cosmic
frame  which  includes  such  various  constituents.

We  shall  attempt  in  the  last  part  of  these  considerations
to  develop  as  much  of  this  plan  as  has  been  made  plain  to
us  by  our  survey  of  history,  and  by  the  connection  of  Ideas
which  the  intellectual  labour  of  the  human  race  has  gradually
attained — thus  uniting  scattered  threads  of  reflection,  and
reconciling  many  an  apparent  contradiction.

BOOK VII.

HISTOET.

123

I

CHAPTEK I.

THE  CBEATION  OF  MAN.

Obscnrity  of  the  Beginnings  and  of  the  Future  of  Man's  Life — Nature  and
Creation — Steadiness  of  Development  in  Nature,  and  Aibitrary  Divine
Interference — The  Sphere  of  Nature  and  the  Sphere  of  History — The
Genesis  in  Nature  of  Living  Beings  and  of  Man — Impossibility  of  setting
this  out  in  Detail.

§  1.  XTIEOM  all  of  us  the  beginnings  of  our  life  are
-L  hidden,  and  beyond  the  few  recollections  of  early-
childhood  which  we  venture  to  trust,  there  settles  down  a
wide  and  unknown  background  of  profound  obscurity.  Yet
an  eye  which  could  penetrate  the  gloom  would  certainly  not
find  it  empty ;  the  most  plastic  period  of  our  life  has  doubtless
been  influenced  by  innumerable  conditions  which  have  left
behind  them  results  that  still  continue  to  operate  in  us.  It
may  be  that  these  blind  and  involuntary  beginnings  of  develop-
ment become  comparatively  unimportant  beside  the  deliberate
self-education  of  later  life ;  but,  for  good  and  for  ill,  we  owe
to  the  impressions  stored  up  in  this  prehistoric  period  many
a  vague  propensity  of  which  we  are  conscious,  and  which  we
reluctantly  acknowledge,  and  many  a  lofty  aspiration  which
we  obey  as  the  voice  of  something  higher  than  we  ourselves.
And  the  future  as  well  as  the  past  is  hidden  from  us ;  we
know  not  whither  our  course  will  impel  us.  A  glance  at  the
proximate  objects  which  we  have  set  before  ourselves,  marks
out  some  part  of  the  path  which  stretches  into  our  future,  but
as  we  travel  further  along  it  innumerable  unexpected  impres-
sions throng  upon  us,  distracting,  enticing,  suggesting  new
aims,  awaking  fresh  endeavours,  and  at  the  end  of  our  way  we
find  ourselves  at  a  spot  quite  other  than  that  to  which  our
earliest  desires  pointed,  and  unable  even  to  understand  much
of  that  which  once filled and stirred our  whole  soul. So

125

126  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  I.

strange  is  the  constitution  of  that  Ego  which  the  finite  spirit
accosts  as  its  Self,  and  speaks  of  as  its  Self.  In  the  full  con-
sciousness of  inalienable  self-identity  such  a  spirit  believes
that  it  moulds  itself  and  its  nature  from  the  very  foundation
by  its  own  activity,  and  does  not  see  that  even  at  the  times
when  it  is  most  conscious  of  development  it  does  little  more
than  labour  at  modifying  the  surface  of  a  germ  which,  unwit-
ting both  of  its  origin  and  of  its  future,  it  finds  implanted
within  itself.

The  same  spectacle  is  presented  on  a  larger  scale  by  the
history  of  mankind.  Neither  the  progress  of  exact  science
nor  the  wider  view  afforded  to  human  reflection  by  the  ever
higher  standpoints  to  which  it  gradually  attains,  lightens  the
obscurity  that  shrouds  both  the  origin  of  our  race  and  the
final  outcome  of  its  development.  We  have  only  learnt  that
there  has  taken  place  an  inevitable  and  irreparable  dislocation
of  those  graphic  representations  of  the  beginning  and  end  of
all  things  between  which,  as  between  two  fixed  limits,  the
boding  imagination  of  men  was  wont  to  believe  that  the
swelling  tide  of  human  destiny  could  be  hemmed  in.  And
perhaps  the  failure  to  hem  it  in  thus  is  due  to  a  feeling
which  is  the  heritage  of  humanity  and  which  humanity  itself
secretly  wishes  to  retain — thb  ieeling  that  there  are  in  the
world  immeasurable  regions  which  are  veiled  in  twilight,
and  a  sense  (felt  by  men  who  are  midway  between  the  two
profound  abysses — safe  because  hidden — of  past  and  future)  of
rejoicing  in  the  limited  illumination  which  opens  up,  over
some  few  centuries  of  human  existence,  an  outlook  that  is
much  interrupted  and  fills  men  with  forebodings.

To  us  at  least  it  almost  seems  as  though  men's  imagination
delighted  to  dwell  on  the  great  enigma  of  our  origin  and
destiny  only  because  it  is  assured  beforehand  of  failure,  and  it
would  perhaps  recoil  with  dread  if  a  bold  leap  were  really  to
lead  to  a  solution  of  the  questions  with  which  it  timorously
and  yet  rashly  meddles.  As  long  as  these  outermost  regions
are  wrapped  in  total  darkness  we  may  interpret  the  outlines
of  that  which  is  hidden,  in  accordance  with  the  longings  of  our

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.  121

own  hearts;  if  light  were  to  break  in  and  convince  us  that
it  is  not  as  we  had  thought,  it  might  easily  be  that  the  pro-
spect thus  opened  before  us  would  seem  too  boundless,  the
distances  too  immeasurable  to  afford  us  any  longer  the  unre-
flecting security  which  had  previously  made  us  feel  quite  at
home  in  the  great  universal  frame.

But  we  need  not  speak  of  this  as  of  something  that  might
happen  in  case  very  unlikely  conditions  were  to  be  fulfilled ;
the  fact  rather  is  that  the  discord  to  which  we  refer  has
actually  been  produced  by  the  initial  steps  ventured  by
science  in  the  endeavour,  to  throw  light  upon  the  origin  of
mankind.  Therefore  we  must  so  far  yield  to  the  longing
which  continually  draws  us  to  these  mysteries  as  to  try  and
separate  between  the  possible  answer  to  a  general  question
and  the  impossible  satisfaction  of  a  curiosity  that  extends  to
details.

§  2.  It  was  at  any  rate  only  among  the  most  unintellectual
nations  that  opinions  concerning  the  origin  of  the  world  were
due  merely  to  the  unrest  of  ordinary  curiosity  which  (without
any  sense  of  the  different  degrees  of  importance  attaching  to
different  questions)  seeks  to  satisfy  itself  about  all  objects  of
experience,  small  or  great,  by  a  circumstantial  account  of  their
origin.  In  all  cases  where  cultured  intelligence  has  set  forth
in  poetic  legends  the  beginning  and  end  of  things,  it  has  been
moved  by  the  deeper  longing  to  show  that  the  enigmatical
fraction  of  cosmic  order  which  constitutes  earthly  history
comes  forth  directly  from  a  higher  world,  and  that  after  ful-
filling its  appointed  tasks,  it  will  return  again  whence  it  came.
We  have  been  brought  up  to  believe  the  most  exalted  of  all
these  accounts.  According  to  our  faith  the  earth  and  its
denizens  were  the  direct  creation  of  the  divine  hand,  the
earth  being  the  only  abode  of  life  in  the  immeasurable  extents
of  space ;  and  the  last  day  will  give  back  into  God's  own  hand  the
results  of  earthly  history,  which  is  itself  the  sum  of  all  history,
and  which  has  at  no  moment  of  its  course  escaped  the  vigilant
eye  of  Providence.  Creation  and  judgment  bound  the  chang-
ing panorama  of  history  and  satisfy  our  hearts  with  a  sense  of

128  BOOK  VII, CHAPTER  I.

the  unity  of  that  unchanging  Being  in  whom  are  comprehended
all  the  mutations  of  circumstances.

Is  it  true  that  this  wide  scope  of  thought  has  become
impossible  for  the  spirit  of  modern  science  ?  Or  has  it  (as  often
happens  with  great  thoughts)  only  taken  on  an  unaccustomed
form  of  expression,  under  which  guise  it  continues  to  exist  in
its  integrity?  Modern-  science  starts  no  longer  from  the
"  without  form  and  void  "  over  which  the  Spirit  of  God  broods,
but  perchance,  from  a  sphere  of  heated  vapour  which  with
countless  others  is  whirling  round  in  space ;  it  no  longer
marks  off  periods  of  the  world's  formation  as  the  work  of
different  days  of  the  divine  creation,  but  measures  them
according  to  the  decrease  of  radiated  heat,  the  formation  of
liquids,  the  solidification  of  the  earth's  surface  and  its  mani-
fold fissures  ;  it  no  longer  deduces  the  origin  of  living  creatures
from  an  immediate  interposition  of  God,  but  ascribes  them  to
the  gradual  evolution  of  those  productions  which  were  brought
forth  by  the  inherent  powers  of  primitive  matter,  being  at
first  simple  and  becoming  increasingly  complex.  Does  all
this  really  decide  the  great  question,  Do  we  owe  our  existence
to  Nature  or  to  Creation  ?  and  does  it  decide  it  in  a  way
unfavourable  to  the  aspirations  of  faith  ?

I  think  not ;  on  the  contrary,  the  longing  to  emphasize
ever  more  and  more  the  unmediated  creative  activity  of  God,
to  the  exclusion  of  all  natural  means,  must  admit  that  it  does
itself  only  bind  this  activity  the  closer  to  limiting  condi-
tions, after  the  inappropriate  pattern  of  human  action.  It  is
not  enough  that  the  evolution  of  Nature  takes  place  according
to  the  will  of  God ;  governed  by  a  secret  conviction  that  there
may  be  something  which  resists  this  will,  if  only  through
inertia,  this  temper  of  mind  desires  to  see  the  very  application
of  God's  hand  by  which  He  either  makes  nothing  into  some-
thing, or  introduces  order  among  the  formless  elements  of
things.  But  such  actual  application  is  necessary  only  for
feeble  creatures  whose  will  can  of  itself  move  nothing,  and
who  must  therefore  endeavour  to  accomplish  a  mediated  result
by  setting  in  action  limbs  of  a  body  with  which  they  did  not

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.  129

endow  themselves  according  to  laws  which  they  did  not
set  up.  Such  extremely  undisguised  anthropomorphism,  and
limitation  of  divine  action,  will  indeed,  no  doubt,  be  readily
given  up,  or  even  eagerly  rejected ;  but  the  more  refined
representations  which  take  its  place  are  still  influenced  by
the  working  of  the  same  mistaken  idea.  If  God  did  not  form
the  world  by  the  might  of  His  hand,  must  He  not  at  least
have  breathed  into  it  the  breath  of  life — must  He  not  have
spoken  some  Let  there  he — must  He  not  have  given  an
external  impetus  of  some  kind,  without  which  His  will  could
not  have  been  communicated  to  things  ?  How  obstinately  does
our  imagination  cling  to  such  requirements  !  And  yet  all  the
time  we  are  perfectly  conscious  that  it  is  not  in  the  momentum
of  His  breath,  not  in  the  commotion  produced  in  the  world
by  the  sound-waves  of  His  voice,  that  creative  efficacy  is  to
be  sought ;  this  efficacy  resides  only  in  the  will  of  God  itself,
and  things  do  not  need  to  be  made  aware  of  this,  as  of  some-
thing eyternal  to  them,  by  physical  hearing  and  feeling,  in
order  to  obey  Him  who  fills  their  being.

Now,  if  that  which  formed  the  world  were  neither  the
visible  hand  of  God,  nor  the  breath  of  His  mouth  that  might
be  felt,  nor  His  word  that  might  be  heard,  but  only  His  will,
silent  and  invisible,  what  kind  of  spectacle  would  have  been
presented  to  a  mind  that  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  witness
the  process  of  creation  ?  Nothing  but  the  spectacle  of  things
that  seemed  to  arise  spontaneously  from  nothing,  or  that
spontaneously  condensed  out  of  invisible  diffusion  into  visible
form,  since  no  audible  command  called  them  forth  from  a  pre-
existing storehouse — ^nothing  but  the  spectacle  of  movements
which  seemed  to  spring  spontaneously  from  the  elements
themselves  and  their  invisible  action  and  reaction,  since  they
were  not  communicated  by  any  perceptible  breath  from  God's
mouth — nothing,  finally,  but  the  spectacle  of  bodies  which,
as  no  visible  hand  put  together  their  constituent  parts,
would  seem  to  be  produced  by  the  reciprocal  attraction  of  the
elements.  Therefore  the  process  of  the  formation  of  the
world  would  appear  in  no  way  different  to  him  who  conceived

VOL.  II.  I

130  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  I.

of  it  as  pervaded  by  the  creative  activity  of  God,  and  to  him
who  could  see  in  it  nothing  but  a  successive  evolution  according
to  natural  law.  If,  therefore,  we,  setting  out  from  experience,
feel  ourselves  compelled  by  scientific  consistency  to  trace  back
the  chain  of  such  developments  to  the  very  beginning  of  the
world,  we  need  not  fear  that  we  shall  on  this  account  be
necessarily  driven  to  adopt  a  conception  which  excludes  the
dependence  of  the  world  upon  God.  On  the  contrary,  we
arrive  in  the  end  at  just  the  same  conception  that  should  be
presented  to  us  from  the  beginning  by  faith  in  a  divine
creation,  if  such  faith  understand  its  own  aim.  For  the  purer
and  grander  our  conception  of  this  creative  activity  is,  the  less
shall  we  expect  at  any  moment  a  special  manifestation  of  the
finger  of  God  in  the  phaenomenal  world ;  but  we  shall,  on  the
contrary,  believe  that  His  almighty  power  is  present  in  the
constancy  of  Nature's  regular  working,  invisible,  but  not  there-
fore less  efficient.

§  3.  But — ^it  will  be  objected — does  this  set  our  doubts
at  rest  ?  Is  the  bitter  thought  taken  away,  that  what  is
great  and  what  is  small,  what  is  exalted  and  what  is  mean,
all  proceeds  indifferently  from  the  inlierent  powers  of  thb
material  elements  ?  Was  there  no  more  express  divine
volition  exercised  in  the  production  of  living  creatures  which
are  destined  to  the  passionate  struggles  of  an  historical
development  than  in  the  formation  of  the  inanimate  surface
of  the  earth  upon  which  their  life  is  to  be  lived  ?  Did  no
specially  solemn  circumstances  distinguish  the  beginning  of  our
own  existence,  did  no  interposition  of  powers  superior  to  the
uniform  course  of  Nature  mark  a  division  at  the  point  at
which  creatures  endowed  with  mental  life  appear  upon  the
destined  theatre  of  their  activity  ?

In  mentioning  this  last  requirement  I  am  not  jesting ;
,we  are  all  subject  to  fancy  that  great  events  are  not  quite
complete  unless  their  entrance  upon  the  stage  of  life  is
glorified  by  a  striking  transformation  both  of  the  stage  itself
and  of  the  actors  ;  and  even  in  the  present  case  we  are
subject  to  this  fancy,  although  we  must  admit  that  here  the

THE  CEEATION  OF  MAK.  131

splendour  of  the  new  scene  would  be  wasted,  no  one  being
in  existence  upon  whom  it  could  make  an  impression.  This
being  so,  we  can  with  all  the  more  force  meet  the  first
objection  to  which  we  referred,  by  asking  what  is  meant  by
that  inherent  power  of  the  elements  to  which  men  are  so
reluctant  to  attribute  the  origin  of  the  animate  world  ?  The
fact  is,  that  those  who  with  pitying  consideration  would
convince  us  how  utterly  impossible  it  is  that  the  beauty  and
significance  of  living  creatures  could  have  arisen  from  the
mere  action  and  reaction  of  the  elements,  combat  us  from
positions  which  we  believe  that  we  ourselves  hold  more
strongly  even  than  they.  For  it  is  they  whose  view  betrays
the  erroneous  presupposition  that  there  could  be  action  and
reaction  of  elements,  whilst  these  elements  are  regarded  as
isolated,  and  not  comprehended  in  the  One,  and  that  such
action  and  reaction  might  lead  to  definite  results.  And
having  inconsiderately  abandoned  to  this  mode  of  being  and
of  action  (which  they  regard  as  possible)  the  one  part  of
Nature,  they  seek,  arbitrarily  and  too  late,  to  withdraw  from
the  same  influence  the  other  part  of  Nature,  being  alarmed
by  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  difficulties  which  it  seems  to
them  that  nothing  but  a  direct  interposition  of  divine  power
can  remove.  Too  late  ;  for  if  elements,  through  their  own
nature  and  without  any  concourse  of  God,  are  capable  of
exercising  certain  activities,  how  are  they  to  be  subsequently
made  dependent  on  divine  government  ?  If  the  divine  will
makes  any  call  upon  them  for  action  which  does  not  follow
from  their  very  nature,  will  they  not  oppose  to  such  calls,
not  only  mere  passive  inertia,  but  also  all  the  resistance  of
which  an  independent  and  active  being  is  capable  ?  And
how  could  this  resistance  be  overcome  unless  both  God  and
Nature  were  embraced  by  a  higher  law  valid  for  both,  which
should  guarantee  to  the  divine  will  a  definite  measure  of
obedience  on  the  part  of  Nature  ?  If  one  seeks  to  heighten
the  idea  of  divine  governance  by  representing  it  as  acting
from  without  upon  a  spontaneously  active  world  which  is
opposed  to  it,  and  by  ascribing  to  it forms  of  activity  other

132  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  I.

than  those  according  to  which  this  world  itself  acts,  one  ia
inevitably  led  to  the  conception  of  divine  action  above
indicated,  a  conception  applicable  not  to  the  infinite  God,
but  to  a  restricted  and  finite  being.

But  it  would  be  wrong  to  regard  the  mode  of  thought
discussed  above  as  the  only  one  which  is  opposed  to  our
own  view.  On  the  contrary,  those  who  agree  with  us  in
recognising  God's  working  under  the  forms  of  Nature's
activity,  may  yet  doubt  whether  this  working  restricts  itself
to  such  forms  and  spends  itself  in  them.  The  rejection  of
the  figurative  representation  of  the  application  of  God's  hand
will  not  be  considered  a  sufficient  refutation.  For  your
imaginary  observer — it  might  be  said — there  may  indeed
have  been  no  divine  hand  specially  visible  among  the
phgenomena  of  the  genesis  and  formation  of  the  world,  but
all  may  have  seemed  to  him  to  result  from  invisible  powers
of  spontaneous  growth.  This,  however,  would  by  no  means
prove  that  every  single  moment  of  such  development  con-
tained within  itself  all  the  necessary  conditions  for  the
production  of  that  which  should  follow,  and  that  there  was
no  need  of  divine  aid  in  order  to  complete  the  conditions
necessary  to  a  result  apparently,  but  only  apparently,  caused
by  the  complement  of  phsenomena.  "We  should  be  making
an  arbitrary  assumption  if  we  supposed  that  after  the
creation  of  things  and  the  regulation  of  their  evolutionary
relations,  God  would  withdraw  Himself  for  ever  from  the
world ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  possible  and
probable  that  at  every  subsequent  moment  He  should  require
from  things  actions  which  were  not  contained  as  self-evident
consequences  in  their  previous  performances ;  and,  finally,  we
could  not  doubt  that  these  commands  of  God  would  be
unhesitatingly  obeyed,  just  because  the  nature  of  things  and
their  capacity  of  action  are  a  nonentity  without  Him.

But,  we  would  reply,  that  completion  by  divine  aid  must
either  be  something  which  is  according  to  rule,  and  the
addition  of  which  at  a  definite  point  in  the  order  of  the
world had  been  determined by  God  from  the  beginning,  in

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.  133

accordance  with  the  eternal  consistency  of  His  being ;  or  it
must  be  something  which  is  not  according  to  rule,  something
which  He  adds  without  finding,  in  Himself  or  in  the  phsenomena
to  which  He  supplies  it,  a  reason  for  choosing  this  particular
kind  of  completion  and  no  other.  In  the  first  case  this
divine  help  is  included  from  our  point  of  view  in  the
enlarged  idea  of  natural  order,  since  we  hold  that  Nature
never  works  without  the  concourse  of  God ;  in  the  second
case  (which,  indeed,  is  that  which  common  opinion  prefers),  we
have  to  ask,  What  is  the  worth  of  the  advantage  which  is
to  be  secured  by  such  a  view,  and  which  is  advocated  with
jealous  preference  ?  Shall  we  regard  God  as  greater,  if  we
believe  that  He  governs  the  world  by  a  series  of  disconnected
commands  ?  or  Nature  as  more  exalted,  if  we  believe  that,  as
a  whole,  it  is  at  all  times — or  even  only  occasionally — inade-
quate to  produce  the  phsenomena  of  the  next  moment  ?
Whence  comes  it  that  the  other  form  of  divine  activity  (that
of  the  steady  development  from  within  of  a  pre-existing
germ)  alway,?  has  to  fight  for  acceptance  in  our  minds  with
a  preference  for  uncertain  repeated  interpositions  of  divine
activity  coming  from  without?

As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  the  ascription  of  this  very
consistency  to  the  divine  activity  which  is  repugnant  to  a
secret  craving  of  our  souls.  To  make  all  subsequent  resolves
only  the  necessary  results  of  one  primal  resolve,  and  all
subsequent  activity  only  the  inevitable  result  of  an  original
creative  volition,  involves  a  denial  of  freedom  of  action
which  seems  to  us  incompatible  with  the  idea  of  a  living
personal  God.  Our  view  threatens  irresistibly  to  issue  in  a
superstition  which  regards  the  world  as  being  merely  the
unintentional  necessary  development  of  a  spontaneously
expanding  primal  being,  to  which,  at  the  same  time,  all
history  seems  meaningless,  since  that  which  had  once  been
included  in  this  being  at  the  beginning,  as  something  which
must  necessarily  follow,  could  have  nothing  essential  to  gain
in  the  course  of  events  in  which  it  should  undergo  a  special
process  of  production. The  capacity  of  doing  what  without

134  BOOK  Vn. CHAPTER  I.

6uch  doing  would  never  have  happened,  of  preventing  what
without  such  prevention  would  inevitably  have  occurred,  the
possibility  of  gaining  in  insight  and  in  range  of  will,  and
of  ceasing  to  desire  that  which  had  previously  been  desired,
and  finally  the  consciousness  of  a  capacity  of  independent
determination,  not  only  as  regards  the  future  form  of  the
external  world  with  which  our  action  is  concerned,  but  even
as  regards  the  consistency  of  our  own  nature — all  this  it  is
that  we  seek  in  a  living  personality,  that  we  think  we  find
in  ourselves,  and  that  we  miss  in  a  representation  of  divine
action  which  exhibits  it  as  always  bound  by  its  own  special
law.  To  secure  these  treasures  of  freedom  and  vital  action
for  God  as  well  as  for  ourselves,  we  have  recourse  to  modes
of  representation  that  labour  under  obscurities  and  contra-
dictions of  which  we  are  not  ignorant.  This  is  why  we
prefer  the  thought  of  an  uncertain  and  disconnected  divine
activity;  for  truly  to  us  finite  beings  it  seems  as  though
our  freedom  were  most  clearly  certified  by  the  inconsequence
with  which  we  can  alter  and  break  off  the  course  of  our
development.  This  is  why  we  do  not  even  shun  the  danger
of  degrading  divine  activity  to  the  external  elaboration  of
a  material  world  existing  from  eternity ;  for  we  even  fancy
that  we  have  a  fresh  proof  of  our  freedom  and  capacity  of
arbitrary  choice  in  the  opposition  which  the  inherent  activities
of  the  external  world  offer  to  our  exertions.  This  is  why
we  so  often  renew  the  attempt  to  reduce  as  far  as  possible
(since  we  cannot  altogether  deny)  the  sphere  of  development
according  to  natural  laws,  and  to  draw  a  sharp  boundary
line  between  Nature  as  the  realTn,  of  necessity,  and  History  as
the  realm  of  freedom.

In  both  there  lies  before  us  a  succession  of  chansincj
events.  But  as  far  as  Nature  is  concerned  we  should  be
quite  satisfied  if  it  were  only  a  collection  of  occurrences
which  without  being  connected  in  systematic  and  progressive
development  were  merely  confirmatory  and  concrete  ex-
amples of  the  steady  validity  of  certain  universal  laws.  It
is  only  in  the  mental  development  of  the  human  race  that

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.

135

we  feel  a  primary  neefl  of  comprehending  the  series  of  events
as  a  history  of  which  the  end  is  more  worthy  than  the
beginnin<:;f,  and  the  whole  of  which  would  be  worthless  if  it
were  merely  a  repetition,  in  time  and  destitute  of  freedom,  of
that  which  already  existed — not  subject  to  temporal  limita-
tions and  prefigured  in  full  completeness — in  its  causes.  All
the  lavish  passion  of  longing  and  remorse,  love  and  hatred,  with
which  history  is  filled,  we  are  unwilling  to  regard  as  wasted ;
and  it  would  be  wasted — ^yes,  and  the  very  existence  of
mental  life  would  seem  to  us  an  incomprehensible  anomaly —
in  a  cosmos  in  which  there  was  nothing  to  change,  and  which,
undisturbed  by  all  this  struggle  of  souls,  was  entirely  taken
up  by  the  leisurely  development  of  already  existing  conditions.
And  now  having  reserved  for  the  history  of  this  spiritual
life  that  freedom  which  it  seems  to  need,  we  once  more
extend  our  demands  beyond  our  requirements  ;  we  will  not
cede  to  the  sway  of  that  detested  natural  necessity  even  our
physical  existence  or  our  origin.  We  would  much  rather
owe  them  to  the  fiat.  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image.  Even
in  such  a  representation  the  creative  activity  of  God  seems
to  us  more  near  and  intelligible,  more  full  of  life  and  warmth,
and  our  own  existence  seems  to  have  a  nobler  and  happier
origin  than  if  we  believe  that  we,  like  the  rest  of  Nature,
have  been  produced  by  an  unresting  coherent  development.

Now  this  distinction  between  Nature  and  ffistory  certainly
points  to  real  mental  needs,  the  satisfaction  of  which  we
shall  consider  later.  But  we  can  agree  to  the  separation
of  these  two  departments  without  acknowledging  the  false
boundary  line,  which,  needlessly  and  contrary  to  experience,
marks  off  the  origin  of  mankind  as  not  belonging  to  the
sphere  of  natural  development.  According  to  the  present
course  of  man's  life,  experience  shows  us  that  wherever  it
is  connected  with  the  external  order  of  Nature,  it  is  wholly
subordinated  to  the  rules  of  this  order.  Eaces  of  men  arise
and  pass  away  according  to  the  same  laws,  and  after  the
same  fashion,  as  races  of  animals;  the  external  powers  of
Nature are  not more forbearing towards the pre-eminent

136  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  L

creature  endowed  with  a  rational  mind,  than  they  are  towards
the  irrational  animal ;  their  destructive  influences  affect  the
life  that  is  historically  significant  with  the  same  impartial
indifference  with  which  they  dissolve  combinations  of  lifeless
matter;  finally,  nowhere  does  Nature  quit,  for  the  gratifi-
cation of  rational  minds,  the  paths  of  her  accustomed  activity,
rejoicing  our  hearts  with  the  wonders  of  a  Golden  Age  in
which  everything  happens  for  our  satisfaction,  instead  of
merely  that  event  happening  which  is  the  inevitable  result
of  previous  causes ;  there  is  no  way  of  bringing  about  trans-
formations of  the  external  world  corresponding  to  our  inner
life,  except  by  our  activity  availing  itself  of  natural  means
in  obedience  to  the  laws  of  Nature.  Thus  we,  being  in
our  life,  our  sufferings,  our  achievements,  altogether  holden
by  the  power  of  natural  necessity,  should  gain  but  little  by
rescuing  the  origin  of  our  species  from  the  grasp  of  this
necessity.  The  freedom  of  such  a  distant  past  could  be  no
compensation  for  present  constraint.

And  just  as  little  do  we  feel  that  our  claims  to  freedom  are
necessarily  demolished  if  we  give  up  this  attempt.  For  we
originally  desired  this  freedom  only  for  our  inner  life,  and.
indeed  only  for  a  small  part  of  that.  This  spiritual  life,
receiving  stimulation  from  Nature,  and  limited  in  its  reaction
to  natural  means,  is  not  itself  directly  included  in  the  order
of  Nature.  Between  this  stimulation  and  these  reactions  is
interposed,  as  a  department  sui  generis,  the  internal  elaboration
of  the  received  impressions.  There  may  take  place  here
innumerable  occurrences  which  are  more  than  the  steady
continuation  of  effects  initiated  in  us  by  the  external  world  ;
there  may  take  place  innumerable  connections  of  received
stimulations,  in  accordance  with  points  of  view  which  alto-
gether transcend  Nature,  resulting  in  the  production  of
impulses  to  reaction  to  which  mere  natural  order  would  never
have  led  without  this  complementary  interposition  of  mental
life.  However  highly  one  may  rate  this  free  action  of  mental
power  in  human  nature,  it  wiU  always  receive  due  estimation
as  long  as  it  is  limited  to  the  world  of  thoughts ;  but  only  in

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.  137

subordination  to  certain  laws  will  the  cosmic  order  admit  of
its  efficient  access  to  external  Nature.  And  however  specially
we  may  imagine  the  history  of  mankind  to  be  guided  from
the  loftier  standpoint  of  divine  wisdom,  from  a  higher  plane
than  natural  evolution,  we  may  be  quite  satisfied  if  this
guidance  takes  place  through  action  and  reaction  between  God
and  the  spiritual  nature  of  man,  in  such  a  way  that  the  thoughts,
feelings,  and  efforts  thus  aroused  and  developed,  also  alter  the
external  position  of  mankind,  to  the  same  limited  extent  to
which  our  action  is  able  to  change  the  physical  conditions  of
our  existence.  Thus  within  the  realm  of  Nature  with  its
uninterrupted  coherence,  there  is  certainly  a  possibility  of
history,  and  we  are  neither  justified  in  maintaining  nor  bound
to  deny,  without  proof,  that  to  this  history  freedom  appertains;
but  the  external  destinies  of  our  race  only  belong  to  history
in  as  far  as  they  depend  upon  our  own  actions.

§  4.  After  these  remarks  we  may  return  to  the  two  questions
which  we  mentioned  above.  We  can  now  answer  the  question
which  refers  to  the  general  process  to  wliich  we  trace  back
the  origin  of  living  creatures  in  general,  including  the  human
race.  This  occurrence  also  we  unhesitatingly  conceive  as
a  necessary  result,  which  at  a  definite  period  of  the  earth's
formation  arose  from  the  then  existing  collocation  and  recipro-
cal action  of  matter,  with  the  same  inherent  necessity  which
now  connects  the  continued  existence  and  the  reproduction
of  living  creatures  with  the  present  distribution  of  material
masses  and  their  relations  to  one  another.  The  course  of
Nature,  indeed,  from  which  we  believe  that  living  creatures
have  sprung,  is  iu  our  view  something  richer  and  fuller  than
that  small  fraction  of  it  which  is  known  to  science ;  so  far,
such  a  course  of  Nature  is  not  confined  to  working  upon  life-
less matter,  but  presupposes  inherent  activity  in  its  elements,
and  it  will  perhaps  be  the  glory  of  the  future  to  define  the
special  characteristics  of  this  activity,  and  to  determine  the
laws  of  its  influence  upon  the  external  operations  of  things.
Moreover,  we  do  not  maintain  that  all  which  the  elements  can
accomplish  is  to  be  measured  by  the  narrow  possibilities  still

138  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER!

left  open  by  the  rigidity  which  the  most  essential  natural
relations  have  now  attained.  In  earlier  stages  of  cosmic
development,  when  (everything  being  yet  in  process  of  forma-
tion) there  was  both  greater  celerity  of  change  and  also  a
prevalence  of  modes  of  connection  which  did  not  afterwards
recur,  it  may  perhaps  have  been  the  case  that  the  elements
produced  effects  different  in  nature  and  magnitude  from  those
to  which  the  present  course  of  Nature  gives  rise,  limited  as
this  is  to  the  maintenance  of  uniform  conditions.  However,
we  do  not  by  any  means  mention  these  fluctuating  and  never
definitely  circumscribed  representations  in  order  to  embellish
our  own  view  in  the  eyes  of  our  opponents,  but  rather  for  the
sake  of  pointing  out  that  none  of  them  can  mitigate  the  rigour
which  causes  so  much  alarm.  For  if  there  is  one  thing  that
we  shall  always  hold  fast  by,  it  is  that  even  these  creative
habits  of  the  primal  course  of  Nature  were  events  governed  by
law,  and  proceeded  from  an  activity  that  in  its  own  course
laid  fresh  foundations,  by  means  of  the  productions  of  its  early
periods,  for  the  more  intense  and  complex  activity  of  later
periods.  Nature  works  from  the  beginning  according  to  laws
which  either  (1)  are  unalterable,  or  (2)  themselves  alter
regularly,  as  the  conditions  alter  which  have  arisen  under
their  sway,  and  are  therefore  to  be  regarded  as  regular  and
ordered  functions  of  their  own  results.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  altogether  impossible  to  answer
the  particular  questions  prompted  by  curiosity  concerning  the
circumstantial  course  of  events  from  which  there  gradually
arose  the  structure  of  organic  beings  and  of  man  himself.  A
view  which  does  not  attribute  this  occurrence  to  supernatural
and  therefore  in  itself  indescribable  influence,  but  makes  it
dependent  on  the  concatenation  of  innumerable  details,  will
inevitably  lay  itself  open  to  the  reproach  of  rash  and  arbitrary
invention  if  it  attempt  to  enumerate  all  these  details,  for  the
real  determination  of  which  our  own  range  of  experience  is
very  far  from  furnishing  adequate  analogies.  This  fate  has
overtaken  all  attempts  to  exhibit  the  gradual  evolution  of  the
higher  forms  of  living  creatures  from  the  lower,  and  the  origin

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.  189

of  these  from  the  immediate  action  and  reaction  of  the
elements.  But  there  are  two  considerations  which  we  desire
not  to  withhold  from  the  notice  of  those  who  would  found
an  objection  against  the  general  conclusions  of  natural  science
upon  its  incapacity  to  exliibit  the  details  of  these  conclusions.
In  the  first  place  we  may,  without  much  difficulty,  convince
ourselves  that  this  difficulty  in  describing  first  beginnings  is  a
misfortune  by  no  means  peculiar  to  our  theory,  but  is  one
which  it  has  in  common  with  all  others.  It  certainly  sounds
passing  strange  when  a  daring  investigator  of  Nature
describes  the  protoplasmic  cell,  which,  having  been  formed  in
the  ocean  and  slowly  borne  to  land,  is  there  developed  into  a
quadruped  or  a  man ;  but  the  poverty  of  this  attempt  lies
rather  in  the  total  ineffectiveness  with  which  it  addresses
itself  to  the  insoluble  problem,  than  in  the  fact  that  different
assumptions  might  lead  to  a  better  conclusion.  Hence  it
seems  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  we  attribute  the  origin
of  animate  life  to  the  natural  action  and  reaction  of  the
elements  or  to  a  peculiar  vital  force ;  any  representations
which  we  can  frame  of  the  gradual  concrete  progress  of  its
formation  will  be  just  as  strange  and  untrustworthy  in  the  one
case  as  in  the  other.  If,  according  to  the  first  view,  the
elements  combine  spontaneously  to  form  a  protoplasmic  cell,
or  a  germ,  which  then  goes  on  to  further  stages  of  develop-
ment, according  to  the  second  view  the  vital  force  is  just  as
shy  of  revealing  its  mode  of  operation.  For  naturally  we
shall  not  believe  that  this  vital  force  forms  the  finished
creature  with  all  its  parts  in  an  instant  from  the  elements*
and  if  we  seek  to  show  how  it  works  by  a  progression  from
the  simpler  to  the  more  complex,  the  cell  or  the  germ  (from
which  in  this  case  too  we  have  to  set  out)  seems  no  better
endowed  and  no  more  probable  than  the  cell  and  germ  which
in  the  previous  case  we  derided.  The  Mosaic  account  of  the
creation  employs  two  different  representations  of  the  way  in
which  things  arose.  First  God  says,  Ld  the  earth  bring
forth  all  manner  of  herbs.  "Would  the  results  of  the  com-
mand to  produce  plants,  thus  communicated  to  the  forces  of

140

BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  I.

the  soil,  have  differed  in  appearance  from  the  conception  of
natural  science,  according  to  which  the  separate  elements  of  the
soil  first  developed  into  germs,  and  these  again  into  plants  ?
The  attempt  to  work  out  this  idea  in  detail  is  as  hopeless
as  all  others  of  a  similar  kind.  Man,  on  the  contrary,  is
formed  by  God's  own  hand ;  but  we  do  not  need  to  repeat  how
unsatisfactory  is  a  comparison  taken  thus  directly  from  labour
of  the  most  ordinary  kind.  It  therefore  appears  that  all  these
modes  of  thought  are  involved  in  equal  difficulties  when  they
attempt  to  give  sensible  representations,  that  shall  be  credible
and  probable,  of  processes  which  are  separated  by  a  gaping
chasm  from  the  sphere  of  our  own  experience.

The  other  point  that  I  wished  to  notice  is,  that  we  are
accustomed  to  estimate  one  and  the  same  idea  very  differently
when  it  comes  before  us  as  a  conjecture,  and  when  it  is  offered
as  the  expression  of  a  fact.  What  a  succession  of  minute  and
interdependent  events  is  presented  by  the  intricate  processes
of  formation,  fructification,  and  development  in  the  seed  of  a
plant !  How  complex,  and  in  many  of  its  features  unin-
telligible to  us,  is  the  development  of  animals  by  division
and  coalescence,  segregation,  and  aggregation,  and  various
changes  of  an  apparently  supplementary  character  in  the
relative  position  of  parts — some  of  which  seem  to  waste  away
after  having  rendered  their  mysterious  service  during  a  definite
period  of  development !  Now  if  any  one,  unsupported  by
the  testimony  of  the  microscope,  should  have  conjecturally
described  the  multiplicity  of  arrangements  which  that  instru-
ment actually  reveals,  how  those  who  consider  animate  life  to
be  only  comprehensible  as  resulting  from  the  misty  and  magic
sway  of  a  single  impulse,  would  have  found  fault  with  him
for  advocating  a  mode  of  thought  at  once  rash,  tedious,  and
intellectually  poverty-stricken !  The  fact  of  alternate  genera-
tion among  the  lower  animals  having  been  established  by
observation,  scientific  speculation  finds  it  by  no  means  diffi-
cult to  discover  retrospectively  ingenious  theoretic  grounds  of
interpretation,  whereas  beforehand  any  conjecture  that  such
variation  might  occur,  would  have  been  rejected  as  an  impossi-

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.  141

bility,  contradictory  of  the  idea  of  sex,  and  of  the  whole
economy  of  natural  history.  Whether  the  original  production
of  animals  and  plants  by  the  conjuuction  of  inorganic  elements
will  ever  be  proved  as  a  fact  which  still  takes  place,  we  do
not  know ;  but  if  a  day  should  ever  come  when  it  is  proved,
then  people  will  suddenly  remember  that  it  was  a  thing
always  possible  in  the  very  nature  of  it,  and  that  it  never
involved  the  absurdity  that  people  see  in  it  as  long  as  it  is
only  a  scientific  conjecture  that  is  inconvenient  to  various
prejudices.  Let  us  therefore  trust  our  question  to  the  future ;
let  us  leave  science  to  make  further  investigations  ;  if  it  should
ever  succeed  in  drawing  a  more  definite  picture  of  the  origin
of  animate  life,  people  will  accept  with  equanimity  realities
coinciding  wholly  in  essentials  with  processes  which,  now  that
they  can  only  present  themselves  as  possibilities,  are  peevishly
rejected  as  wretched  inventions  of  a  low  and  unworthy  mode
of  thought.

Such  being  our  views,  we  regard  as  useless  any  further
lingering  in  these  outer  courts  of  history,  in  which  science
can  discover  merely  shadowy  outlines  and  no  clearly  defined
forms.  We  will  not  follow  the  astronomical  investigations
which  seek  to  discover  how  the  world  was  formed,  and  to
decide  whether  the  distribution  and  movements  of  the  heavenly
bodies  make  it  probable  that  there  is  a  common  centre  of
this  universal  frame,  or  whether  it  is  more  likely  that  many
stellar  systems,  each  independent  in  itself,  circle  round  a
merely  ideal  centre  of  gravity  by  the  force  of  reciprocal
attraction.  As  much  as  is  certain  in  these  considerations
only  confirms  what  we  knew  otherwise,  namely,  that  it  is
upon  a  small  eccentric  spot,  lost  as  it  were  in  the  immensity
of  the  whole,  that  this  human  life  is  developed,  with  all  its
passion  and  lofty  aims — a  brief  and  serious  monition  which
points  out  to  us  an  abyss  of  unknown  possibilities,  and  warns
us  that  we  should  not  take  it  for  granted  that  earthly  history
is  equivalent  to  that  of  the  universe.

Neither  will  we  enter  into  geological  investigations,  and
immerse  ourselves  in  a  consideration  of  the  different  periods

142

BOOK  Vn. CHAPTER  I.

of  the  earth's  formation,  and  in  discussions  as  to  how  the
gradually  altered  condition  of  the  atmosphere  and  of  the  solid
surface  of  the  earth,  furnished  at  different  stages  the  conditions
of  the  production  and  maintenance  of  various  successive  organic
creations.  The  magic  spell  which  descriptions  of  this  vast  and
obscure  past  always  exercise  upon  our  mind,  would  give  to  my
colourless  picture  a  charm  which  I  find  it  hard  to  renounce.
But  these  investigations  proceed  upon  many  uncertain  assump-
tions and  are  laden  with  sources  of  error;  and  they  are
therefore  specially  unsuited  for  the  confirmation  of  definite
results  at  the  present  moment,  when  many  noteworthy
discoveries  have  wakened  attention  without  having  caused
any  decided  clearing  up  of  difficulties.  Yet  it  seems  that
man  is  one  of  the  most  modern  denizens  of  the  earth;
indubitable  remains  of  our  species  have  not  been  found  deeper
than  the  later  alluvial  strata,  which  are  still  being  slowly  and
steadily  increased  in  low-lying  levels  by  progressive  deposition
of  the  matter  of  abraded  rocks  which  is  carried  down  by  the
current  of  swift  streams.  Therefore  it  seems  that  man  was
not  produced  before  a  time  in  which  existing  climatic  dis-
tinctions prevailed,  and  the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms
had  developed  in  all  essentials  the  forms  which  we  now  see
around  us.  We  must  leave  it  for  the  future  to  prove  whether
this  limitation  can  be  removed  and  a  much  longer  vista  be
opened  before  us,  in  which  there  may  perchance  be  hidden
many  beginnings  of  races  of  men  dijBfering  widely  from  one
another.  Without  at  present  declaring  for  this  view  as  the
more  probable,  we  may  yet  feel  that  we  ought  to  be  prepared
to  accept  both  it  and  the  altered  position  which  the  small
section  of  historical  development  at  present  known  to  us  would
occupy  in  such  an  enlarged  life  of  humanity — a  life  which  to
our  imagination  would  be  almost  boundless.

And,  finally,  we  should  not  lay  too  much  weight  on  pre-
sentiments as  to  the  future  to  which  we  may  be  tempted  by
that  insight  into  the  connection  between  the  different  forces
of  Nature  which  has  now  been  attained.  Whether  reciprocal
transformations  of  energy  or  a  consistent  consolidation  of  all

THE  CREATION  OF  MAN.  143

particular  results  of  the  course  of  Nature,  will  gradually  pro-
duce a  permanent  preponderance  of  such  conditions  and
modes  of  motion  in  matter  as  are  incompatible  with  the
continued  duration  of  animate  life,  or  to  what  other  fate  this
earthly  sphere  is  destined — these  are  points  concerning  which
we  can  no  more  look  for  certain  information  than  we  can
regarding  the  very  first  beginnings.  Let  us  therefore  bid
adieu  to  these  insoluble  riddles,  and  turn  from  the  external
history  of  the  human  race  to  that  inner  history  of  humanity
which,  with  its  manifold  changes,  is  included  in  the  slower
progress  of  external  Nature.

CHAPTER IL

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.

What  is  History?— History  as  the  Education  of  Humanity— History  as  the
Development  of  the  Idea  of  Humanity— Conditions  necessary  to  make  sucli
a  Development  valuable — Concerning  Reverence  for  Forms  instead  of  for
Content — History  as  a  Divine  Poem— Denial  of  any  Worth  in  Historical
Development— Condition  of  the  Unity  of  Humanity  and  of  the  Worth  of
its  History.

S  1.  IVTOW  what  is  the  significance  of  this  inner  mental

N'

history  of  the  human  race  ?  What  are  the  laws
of  its  course,  or  the  plan  which  connects  into  intelligible
unity  the  varied  wealth  of  its  phgenomena  ?  Our  age  boasts
as  its  prerogative  that  it  knows  an  answer  to  this  question  ;
but  however  dangerous  it  may  be  to  rebel  against  modes  of
thought  to  which  vigorous  and  brilliant  intellectual  essays  have
accustomed  us,  we  must  still  confess  that  in  regard  to  history
there  is  no  lack  of  the  most  contradictory  opinions,  each  of
which  disputes  even  the  elementary  assumptions  of  the  others.
I  will  not  linger  over  the  cool  assertion  that  everything  has
happened  already  and  that  there  is  nothing  new  under  the
sun ;  but  remark  that  in  opposition  to  the  willingly  accepted
doctrine  that  the  progress  of  humanity  is  ever  onwards  and
upwards,  more  cautious  reflection  has  been  forced  to  make  the
discovery  that  the  course  of  history  is  in  spirals  ;  some  prefer
to  say  epicycloids  ;  in  short,  there  have  never  been  wanting
thoughtful  but  veiled  acknowledgments,  that  the  impression
produced  by  history  on  the  whole,  so  far  from  being  one  of
unmixed  exultation,  is  preponderantly  melancholy.  Un-
prejudiced consideration  will  always  lament  and  wonder  to
see  how  many  advantages  of  civilisation  and  special  charms
of  life  are  lost,  never  to  reappear  in  their  integrity,  when
any  form  of  culture  is  broken  up. Subsequent  ages  may  com-

144

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  145

pensate  the  loss  by  other  and  indeed  by  higher  advantages ;
but  this  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  the  earlier  ones  have
passed  away  never  to  return  ;  that  which  past  times  have
toiled  for  and  won  can  never  be  inwoven  with  the  work  of
subsequent  ages  with  the  completeness  necessary  for  continuous
and  steady  progress,  but  nearly  everywhere  the  new  life  arises
out  of  the  ruins  of  the  old  at  the  cost  of  painful  sacrifices.
This  melancholy  impression  received  from  history  as  a  whole
is  not  much  mitigated  by  well-meant  reference  to  the  fact
that  in  individual  life  too  the  bloom  of  youth  must  be
sacrificed  to  the  strength  of  manhood,  and  this  again  to  the
wisdom  of  old  age,  and  that  it  is  only  the  most  favoured  lands
that  are  permitted  to  see  fruit  and  blossom  and  bud  simul-
taneously on  the  same  plant.  Do  not  all  these  comparisons
only  increase  the  grounds  of  our  complaint  ?  If,  however,
they  comfort  any  one,  is  not  the  comfort  they  bring  derived
from  the  thought  that  human  history  is  itself  only  a  natural
process  to  which  we  must  accommodate  ourselves,  and  about
the  right  and  end  of  which  it  is  of  no  use  to  ask  ?  But
for  him  who  clings  to  the  belief  in  a  guidance  which  is  ^
ordering  this  confusion  of  human  destinies  to  some  higher
good — how  is  Jie  to  interpret  the  spectacle  which  history
presents  ?

§  2.  That  history  is  the  education  of  humanity,  is  the  first  /fj
phrase  with  which  we  provisionally  pacify  ourselves.  And
indeed  unfathomable  designs  of  educative  wisdom  must  ever
be  a  fruitful  source  from  which  to  derive  all  the  astonishing
turnings  and  twistings  of  the  course  of  history.  But  if  we
are  not  wholly  satisfied  with  this  general  consolation  which
would  allay  our  doubt  with  the  bare  assurance  that  a  solution
exists,  if  we  seek  to  trace  at  any  rate  in  the  great  outlines  of
history  that  educative  plan,  how  many  hindrances  do  we
meet !  We  know  sometimes  what  has  happened,  and  can  see
how  it  led  necessarily  to  the  subsequent  condition  of  things  ;
we  may  often  be  certain  of  the  greater  perfection  of  what  is
later  in  time,  and  even  a  dull  mind  may  often  perceive  some
arrangement  by  which  the  new  condition  of  things  will draw

VOL.  II.  K

146

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  II.

advantage  from  the  old ;  but  who  can  calculate  with  certainty
what  would  have  happened  if  particular  circumstances  had
been  different,  or  can  say  what  possible  greater  good  may-
have  been  missed  by  the  actual  course  of  events  leading  to
something  that  was  less  good  ?

I  wish,  however,  to  speak,  not  of  the  difficulties  of  carrying
out  this  view  fully — such  difficulties  being  in  fact  very  great
for  every  view — but of  the  doubts  which  are  raised  by  the
application  of  this  idea  of  education  to  mankind. Education
is  only  intelligible  to  us  when  a  single  individual  is  concerned  ;
when  it  is  one  and  the  same  person  who  becomes  better,  who
bears  the  penalty  of  his  mistakes  and  enjoys  the  fruit  of  his
repentance  ;  and  who,  if  in  the  progress  of  development  he  has
to  sacrifice  some  good  which  he  possessed,  may  yet  keep  the
memory  of it  as something  which he has himself  enjoyed.
It  is not so clear  how  we are to  imagine one course of
education as applying to successive generations of men,
allowing  the  later  of  these  to  partake  of  the  fruits  produced
by  the  unrewarded  efforts  and  often  by  the  misery  of  those
who  went  before. To  hold  that  the  claims  of  particular  times
and  individual  men  may  be  despised  and  all  their  misfortunes
disregarded if  only mankind improve upon the whole,  is,
though  suggested  by  noble  feelings,  merely  enthusiastic  thought-
lessness. The  humanity  which  is  capable  of  progress  can  never
be  anything  other  than  the  sum  of  living  individual  men,  and
for  them  nothing  is  progress  which  does  not  mean  an  increase
of  happiness and  perfection  for  those  very  souls  which  had
suffered  in  a  previous  imperfect state. But  the  humanity
which  is  opposed  to  individual  men  is  nothing  but  the  general
concept  of  humanity  ;  this  concept,  however,  which  can  neither
suffer  nor  experience  anything,  nor  undergo  any  evolution,  is
not  the subject  of  history. Only individual specimens of
humanity,  humanity of different periods,  can, when com-
pared  together,  show  a steady  progress  towards perfection  ;
but  the  earlier  know  nothing  of those  which  succeed  them,
and  the  later  know  little  of  the  earlier. What  then  is  it  that
justifies  us  in  regarding  these  disconnected  members  as  one

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  147

humanity,  and  what  is  the  meaning  of  an  education  which
does  not  do  just  that  which  is  the  very  business  of  education —
which  does  not  attempt  to  replace  what  is  more  imperfect  by
what  is  more  perfect  in  the  same  pupil,  but  throws  aside  the
half-educated  scholar  in  order  to  bring  forth  better  results  of
culture  in  another  ?

And  the  same  difficulty  at  once  recurs  if  we  look  not  at
the  succession  of  ages,  but  at  each  particular  age  itself.  There
has  never  been  a  period  of  history  in  which  the  culture
peculiar  to  it  has  leavened  the  whole  of  humanity,  or  even
the  whole  of  that  one  nation  which  was  specially  distinguished
by  it.  All  degrees  and  shades  of  moral  barbarism,  of  mental
obtuseness,  and  of  physical  wretchedness  have  ever  been
found  in  juxtaposition  with  cultured  refinement  of  life,  clear
consciousness  of  the  ends  of  human  existence,  and  free  par-
ticipation in  the  benefits  of  civil  order.  Humanity,  at  the
different  moments  of  its  historical  progress,  is  never  like  a
clear  and  even  current,  of  which  all  the  molecules  move  with
equal  swiftness ;  it  is  rather  like  a  mass  of  which  the  greater
part  moving  on  thick  and  slow  is  very  soon  checked  by  any
little  hindrance  in  its  course  and  settles  into  inactivity ;  there
is  never  more  than  a  slender  stream  which,  glancing  in  the
sunlight,  struggles  on  through  the  midst  of  the  sluggish  mass
with  unquenchable  life  and  energy.  It  is  true  that  sometimes
this  stream  widens  out,  and  then  occur  those  favoured  periods
in  which,  at  least  for  us  who  stand  afar  off,  a  general
enthusiasm  of  culture  seems  to  seize  a  whole  nation.  That
it  dues  not  indeed  really  extend  to  all,  even  we  who  live  later
can  see  ;  that  it  does  not  exclude  very  dark  shadows  of
sluggishness,  of  debasement,  and  of  misery  we  should  observe
more  clearly  if  we  stood  nearer.

Now  nothing  is  simpler  than  to  give  an  explanation  of  this
if  we  regard  history  as  merely  a  course  of  events  arising  from
the  concurrent  action  of  external  circumstances  and  the  laws
of  mental  life.  A  culture  which  does  not  merely  mean
natural  goodness  of  disposition,  but  includes  also  knowledge
of  things,  estimation  of  the  tasks  and  circumstances  of  human

148  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  II.

life,  and  consciousness  of  the  connection  between  the  individual
and  society  and  between  society  and  the  universe,  is  not
conceivable  apart  from  the  most  varied  influences  of  education
and  of  continued  intercourse  with  one's  fellows ;  but  the
hindrances  which  have  their  origin  in  the  external  circum-
stances of  existence,  and  which  always  stand  in  the  way  of  a
general  prevalence  of  such  favourable  conditions,  are  unfortu-
nately too  obvious  to  need  further  mention.  Thus  the  existence
of  a  vast  spiritual  proletariat,  which  there  seems  no  possibility
of  removing,  is  an  objection  which  the  idea  of  history  as  the
education  of  mankind  must  find  it  hard  to  overcome.  Human
action  must  be  content  to  attain  its  end  only  in  part ;  but  it
is  not  enough  that  the  divine  guidance  of  history  should
accomplish  its  aims  only  on  the  whole  or  in  the  majority  of
cases.  Conditions  of  mankind  which,  independent  on  indi-
vidual freedom,  follow  with  inexorable  necessity  from  external
conditions,  should  be  susceptible  of  interpretation  as  instances
not  of  the  failure  of  this  guidance,  but  of  ends  intentionally
aimed  at  by  it.  And  in  fact  such  an  interpretation  has  not
been  wanting.  As  different  trees,  it  is  said,  have  different
bark,  and  each,  whatever  its  rind,  grows  green  and  blossoms
in  content,  so  mental  endowment  and  external  good  fortune,
and  with  them  the  degree  of  culture  attainable  for  men,
are  variously  distributed;  there  is  progress  enough  if,  not-
withstanding all  these  irremovable  differences,  mankind  as
a  whole  wins  higher  standpoints ;  enough  even,  if  while  the
mass  of  mankind  remain  ever  in  an  uncivilised  condition
the  civilisation  of  a  small  minority  is  ever  struggling  upwards
to  greater  and  greater  heights.  In  answer  to  such  a  view
what  can  we  say  except  that  it  sets  forth  a  condition  of
things  which,  alas !  we  cannot  question,  but  that  it  neither
offers  any  explanation  which  makes  this  condition  more
intelligible  or  more  endurable,  nor  shows  us  how,  upon  such
assumptions,  we  can  be  entitled  to  speak  of  an  education  of
mankind.

Let  us,  however,  for  the  present  reckon  as  among  the  many
puzzles  "which  we  cannot  solve,  this  inequality  in  the  endow-

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  149

ment  and  good  fortune  of  men,  and  content  ourselves  with
the  progress  of  the  few.  But  however  great  this  progress
may  be,  we  would,  finally,  ask  of  this  view  which  we  are
calling  in  question,  why  precisely  it  was  necessary  that  there
should  be  an  education  of  mankind  resulting  in  progress,
and  why  an  end  should  have  been  set  before  us  which  could
only  be  reached  along  the  tedious  path  of  historical  develop-
ment ?  And  it  will  not  satisfy  us  to  point  out  that  the  slow
course  of  gradual  improvement  was  the  only  possible  way  left
open  by  the  nature  of  mankind  and  the  constitution  of  the
external  conditions  of  life.  The  divine  power,  which  is
supposed  to  direct  this  education,  created  the  world,  and  man,
and  all  the  conditions  of  his  life ;  it  was  open  to  it  to
order  them  all  according  as  it  would.  If,  then,  it  chose  to
educate  mankind  by  way  of  history,  it  did  not  so  choose
because  hindered  by  the  disfavour  of  circumstances  from
endowing  us  with  perfection  in  the  beginning,  but  because  it
willed  that  history  should  be,  and  willed  to  bestow  upon  us,
in  gradual  development,  a  greater  good  than  that  would  have
been  which  it  withheld.

This  inquiry  has  indeed  been  so  often  and  so  unanimously
answered  that  we  shall  perhaps  give  offence  by  approaching
with  such  circumlocution  and  delay  a  philosophical  question
the  reply  to  which  seems  thus  certain.  Man,  we  are  told,
must  become  in  knowledge  that  which  he  is  in  fact;  it
is  not  enough  that  he  should  be  and  remain  in  unreflecting
simplicity  that  to  which  by  his  mental  constitution  he  is
destined,  but  he  must  realize  it  gradually  and  consciously  as
his  own  work.  The  dignity  of  man  lies  in  this,  that  he
does  not  (like  the  lower  animals)  with  unconscious  impulse
work  out  ends  towards  which  uncomprehended  motives
and  favouring  external  circumstances  mysteriously  concur,
but  that  doubting,  erring,  and  improving,  he  learns  to  know
his  destiny,  his  duties,  and  his  powers.

A  survey  of  our  own  individual  life  will  certainly  easily
convince  us  that  such  development  from  unreflective  exist-
ence to explicit self-consciousness is a mental  gain  of  a

150  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  II.

unique  kind ;  but  can  we  in  truth  transfer  to  the  whde  of
humanity  the  value  which  we  see  that  it  has  for  the  indi-
vidual, and  is  there  not  in  such  a  transference  an  inexactness
similar  to  that  which  made  the  notion  of  education  inapplic-
able to  a  succession  of  different  individuals  taken  en  masse  ?
For  can  this  inner  work  of  development  (in  the  comprehensive
and  self-conscious  remembrance  of  which  the  moral  enjoyment
of  life  consists)  be  carried  out  vicariously  by  one  individual
for  another,  or  by  one  generation  for  another?  Or  does
history  perchance  exhibit  such  a  steadiness  of  connection  that
the  minds  of  later  times  pass  at  least  in  outline  through
the  same  evolutional  struggles  by  which  their  ancestors  weie
stirred  ?

It  seems  to  us  that  nothing  of  all  this  happens.  In  the
first  place,  each  individual  enters  into  life  without  any  con-
scious connection  with  the  past,  but  with  those  natural
capacities,  wants,  and  passions  of  his  species  which  are  little
changed  in  the  course  of  history ;  and  which,  in  as  far  as  they
are  changed,  are  yet  for  him  who  is  born  with  them  just  as
much  an  unmerited  and  unconsciously  received  endowment
of  Nature  as  the  dispositions  of  our  forefathers  were  for
them.  Thus  furnished  each  goes  through  the  experience  of
his  life,  each  passes  through  his  own  evolutionary  struggles,
and  all  these  also  are  essentially  similar.  The  influence  of
history  first  begins  when  the  individual  encounters  the  results
of  the  labours  of  his  immediate  predecessors  in  the  conditions
into  which  he  finds  himself  born,  to  which  he  has  to  grow
accustomed,  and  which  he  has  to  use  and  to  combat.
Without  doubt  the  form  of  development  which  the  indi-
vidual passes  through  is  modified  in  the  course  of  history  ;
but  it  is  not  by  any  means  modified  in  such  a  way  that  every
one  who  comes  later  has  a  view  of  the  course  of  human
development  which  is  fuller  and  more  conscious  in  proportion
as  the  time  is  longer  during  which  past  ages  have  been
endeavouring  to  struggle  upwards  through  individual  stages
of  evolution.  For  by  this  spiritual  labour,  which  wins
positions  from  which  it  can  itself  make  a  fresh  start,  con-

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  151

scions  knowledge  is  propagated  either  not  at  all  or  most
imperfectly  ;  what  happens  is  that  its  finished  results  enter
as  a  great  aggregate  of  prepossessions,  of  which  the  foundation
is  forgotten,  into  the  culture  of  him  who  comes  after.  They
may  in  this  way  often  make  it  possible  for  him  to  mount
higher  than  those  who  preceded  him;  but  nearly  as  often
they  are,  as  inherited  limitations  of  his  intellectual  horizon,
hindrances  in  the  way  of  a  development  which  would  have
been  possible  for  him  if  this  historical  dependence  had  not
existed.  But  in  both  cases  the  way  in  which  the  culture  of
past  times  is  for  the  most  part  handed  down,  leads  directly
back  to  the  very  opposite  of  that  at  which  historical  develop-
ment should  aim  ;  it  leads,  that  is,  to  the  formation  of  an
instinct  of  culture,  which  continually  takes  up  more  and  more  A
of  the  elements  of  civilisation,  thus  making  them  a  lifeless
possession,  and  withdrawing  them  from  the  sphere  of  that
conscious  activity  by  the  eSbrts  of  which  they  were  at  first
obtained. No  fortune,  it  is  said,  is  transmitted  undiminished  V^

to  the  third  generation ;  and  this  is  very  natural ;  for  the
first  inheritor  is  born  and  brought  up  in  the  presence  of  the
activity  by  which  the  fortune  was  accumulated,  and  if  the
desire  to  increase  it  leaves  him,  the  desire  to  preserve  it
generally  remains  ;  the  second  inheritor  born  in  full  possession
of  the  wealth  knows  nothing  of  the  worth  of  the  labour  which
created  it ;  thus  the  third  has  to  begin  the  same  cycle  afresh.  .  •
The  same  thing  happens  with  the  store  of  culture  which
history  accumulates.  It  is  true  indeed  that  the  results  of
the  latter  cannot  be  so  easily  dissipated,  as  on  the  other  hand
they  cannot  be  so  completely  transmitted  ;  but  the  elevating
freshness  and  joyousness,  full  of  prophetic  insight,  that  dis-
tinguish an  age  of  invention  and  discovery,  are  not  trans-
mitted to  the  ages  which  are  its  heirs.  Scientific  truths,
hardly-won  principles  of  social  morality,  revelations  of
religious  enthusiasm  and  artistic  intuition,  are  all  subject
to  this  devitalization  ;  the  greater  the  amount  of  this  wealth
which  is  transmitted  to  later  generations  the  less  is  it  a  living
possession, even  when outwardly recognised and retained,

152  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IL

which  it  not  always  is.  That  which  once,  when  it  first  arose
upon  the  intellectual  horizon  of  the  past,  was  in  truth  a
living  enlargement  of  the  soul,  and  a  perception,  full  of  mean-
ing, of  some  new  aspect  of  human  destiny,  is,  in  the  hands  of
later  generations,  like  a  worn  coin  which  one  takes  at  its
nominal  value,  but  without  knowing  what  are  its  image  and
superscription.

In  no  department  is  the  progress  of  mankind  more  un-
questionable than  in  that  of  science,  although  even  here  it
has  not  been  continuous,  interruptions  caused  by  long  periods
of  barbarism  having  often  made  necessary  the  rediscovery  of
forgotten  truths.  But  first  of  all  we  may  note  that  this
progress  has  brought  about  the  strange  result  that  the  whole
field  of  knowledge  has  become  too  vast  to  be  within  the  grasp
even  of  those  who  are  expressly  occupied  with  its  cultivation
How  odd  and  yet  laow  accordant  with  fact  it  is  to  speak  of
"  the  lofty  position  of  science  now-a-days."  What  is  science  ?
Not  truth  itself,  for  this  existed  always,  and  did  not  need  to
be  produced  by  human  effort.  So  that  science  means  simply
knowledge  of  the  truth ;  but  this  knowledge  has  become  so
vast  that  it  can  no  longer  be  comprehended  in  the  knowledge
possessed  by  any  individual  Such  is  the  strange  life  of
science  now-a-days  ;  it  exists,  but  for  any  individual  it  means
only  the  possibility  of  investigating  and  learning  to  know
each  of  its  parts  ;  in  no  mind  does  it  exist  in  completeness,
approximately  in  but  a  few,  and  hardly  at  all  in  the  mass  of
mankind.  We  see  that  now,  as  in  all  former  ages  which
were  in  possession  of  extensive  and  varied  scientific  know-
ledge, individual  men  take  up  particular  branches,  and  on
those  small  battlefields  fight  out  the  most  passionate  com-
bats, combats  which  sometimes  seem  to  jeopardize  all  that
has  been  gained  by  human  culture.  The  progress  of  science
is  not  therefore,  directly,  human  progress  ;  it  would  be  this
if  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  accumulated  truths  there
were  also  an  increase  of  men's  interest  in  them,  of  their
knowledge  of  them,  and  of  the  clearness  of  their  insight  con-
cerning them. Without  denying  that  some  periods  of  history

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  153

liave  to  a  certain  extent  fulfilled  these  requirements,  we  can
hardly  say  that,  looking  at  history  as  a  whole,  it  exhibits  a
steady  improvement  in  this  respect.

But  it  will  be  objected  that  the  progress  of  mankmd
towards  perfection  is  to  be  sought  not  only  in  the  advance
of  conscious  knowledge,  but  also  in  the  beneficent  effects
upon  men's  condition  which  science  leaves  behind  even  when
it  has  itself  passed  out  of  consciousness.  These  effects  have
been  eloquently  described,  and  we  willingly  admit  that  even
in  the  more  tangible  deposit  of  material  improvements  which
everyday  life  owes  to  advancing  knowledge,  there  is,  besides
the  mere  convenience  and  the  increase  of  comfort,  also  a
certain  mental  gain  and  a  certain  civilising  power  ;  the  mere
presence  of  refined  surroundings  may  have  a  modifying  and
elevating  influence  upon  those  vague  general  moods  which
make  as  it  were  the  background  of  all  our  endeavours.  But
while  we  do  not  deny  the  value  of  this  progress,  neither
would  we  overestimate  it.  Custom  soon  diminishes  it.  A
new  discovery  excites  lively  interest  for  a  time,  but  it  soon
falls  back  into  the  rank  of  those  natural  objects  and  events
by  which  we  are  always  surrounded,  the  mysteriousness  of
which  no  longer  has  any  exciting  effect  upon  us,  owing  to  the
lack  of  novelty.  At  the  most  now  and  then  in  a  moment
of  passing  absorption  in  a  thing,  we  think.  After  all  how
striking  this  or  that  discovery  is — or.  How  it  has  helped  on
human  intelligence.  But  most  commonly  it  happens  that
men  thoughtlessly  enjoy  the  fruits  of  inventions  with  a  certain
coarse  unthankfulness,  without  a  gleam  of  interest  or  curiosity
with  regard  to  the  mental  labour  which  produced  them,  and
as  though  it  were  a  matter  of  course  that  their  poor  life
should  be  adorned  by  such  uncomprehended  blessings.
Hence  we  are  justified  in  affirming  in  conclusion,  that
however  great  human  progress  may  be,  yet  at  all  times
men  are  but  very  imperfectly  conscious  of  this  onward
movement,  of  the  point  in  the  path  of  advance  at  which
they  may  happen  to  be  at  any  moment,  and  of  the  direction
whence they came and  whither they  are going. If it  is

154  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  II.

their  destiny  to  become  conscious  of  that  for  which  they
are  designed,  it  may  indeed  be  that  they  attain  such  a  con-
sciousness, but  they  attain  it  without  themselves  noticing  or
feeling  its  gradual  awakening;  it  cannot  be  said  that  men
grow  to  what  they  are  with  a  consciousness  of  this  growth,
and  with  an  accompanying  remembrance  of  their  previous
condition.  Therefore  the  notion  of  education,  when  trans-
ferred from  the  individual  (with  reference  to  whom  it  is  in-
telligible) to  mankind  as  a  whole,  solves  none  of  those  doubts
which  the  consideration  of  history  awakens  in  us.

8  3.  Will  they  be  any  better  solved  by  another  theory,  the
favourite  of  the  immediate  past,  which  has  long  been  im-
patiently awaiting  our  consideration  ?  According  to  this
theory  the  education  of  mankind  is  an  antiquated  and  un-
suitable phrase,  although  what  it  is  intended  to  express  is  the
truth.  This  phrase  gives  the  idea  that  God  arbitrarily  sets
before  men  ends  which  He  might  have  refrained  from  setting
before  them,  and  leads  them  in  paths  for  which  others  might
have  been  substituted.  Hence  the  education  theory  involves
us  in  the  misery  of  attempting  to  show  the  significance  and
importance  of  a  series  of  events  which  yet  as  products  of
arbitrary  will  must  remain  inscrutable  to  reason,  which  can
comprehend  only  necessary  consequence.  Whereas,  in  fact,
the  history  of  mankind  (like  all  genuine  evolution)  is  but  the
realization  of  its  own  concept.  All  true  existence,  it  is  said,
manifests  itself  by  emerging,  as  life,  from  that  condition
of  natural  determination  in  which  it  originally  is,  unfolding
itself  in  a  wealth  of  change  and  varied  manifestation;  and
finally  returning  as  it  were  to  itself  deepened  and  enriched,
and  enlightened  concerning  its  own  nature  by  the  work  of
development  which  it  has  passed  through,  and  the  fruits  of
which  it  retains.  It  is  by  this  law  that  mankind  are  stirred
and  impelled  to  historical  development.  As  the  self-develop-
ment of  the  human  mind,  and  as  the  very  destiny  and  inner
necessity  thereof,  history  can  neither  be  a  course  to  which  we
are  impelled  by  the  arbitrary  choice  of  an  overruling  purpose,
nor  one  to  which  we  are  impelled  by  the  unintelligent  activity

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTOKY.

153

of  external  facts.  But  it  becomes  intelligible  by  reference  to
the  idea  of  humanity ;  not  only  does  this  contain  the  ground
of  temporal  succession  in  general,  but  we  may  deduce  from  it,
for  each  and  all  of  the  stages  of  historical  development,  the
strict  and  complete  formula  which  constitutes  the  explanatory
principle  of  all  the  peculiar  features  of  these  stages ;  finally,
this  law  teaches  us  to  understand  not  only  that  progress  which
is  the  rule,  but  also  the  strange  retrogressions  and  eddies  by
which  the  continuity  of  this  progress  seems  to  be  interrupted.

35ut  in  our  opinion  this  last-mentioned  service  is  not
rendered  by  the  view  now  under  discussion  ;  the  fact  rather
is,  that  the  way  in  which  it  admits  incalculable  chance  and
arbitrary  will  in  history  alongside  of  the  strict  development
of  the  idea  of  humanity,  is  that  which  first  gives  us  occasion
to  test  the  validity  of  its  confident  assertions.

With  regard  to  all  phsenomena  we  feel  that  we  have  a
twofold  task — we  have  to  explain  step  by  step  the  possibility
and  mode  of  their  occurrence,  and  we  have  to  unravel  the
rational  signification  which  is  the  justification  of  their  exist-
ence and  of  all  the  assumptions  which  they  presuppose.  The
philosophical  view  which  gives  rise  to  the  above-mentioned
conception  of  history,  does  not  conceal  its  conviction  that  the
Meaning  or  the  Idea,  to  the  realization  of  which  every  chain
of  events  and  every  creature  is  destined,  constitutes  its  real
being,  and  that  to  search  out  this  innermost  fount  of  life  is
the  supreme  task  of  all  (even  of  historical)  investigation.
But  it  cannot  at  the  same  time  conceal — however  willing  it
may  be  to  do  so — that  it  lacks  a  definite  notion  of  the  relation
of  the  Idea  to  the  practical  means  of  its  own  realization.  It
must  allow  that  all  which  happens  in  history  is  only  brought
to  pass  by  the  thoughts,  feelings,  passions,  and  efforts  of  in-
dividuals, and  that  the  ends  towards  which  all  these  powers
with  their  living  activities  are  striving,  do  not  by  any  means
necessarily  coincide  with  those  towards  which  the  develop-
ment of  the  universal  Idea  tends.  And  the  only  addition
which  in  the  last  resort  it  can  make  to  this  confession  is
that  the  Idea  does  yet  prevail — nay,  does  on  the  whole  ex-

166  BOOK  Vn. CHAPTEK  II.

clusively  prevail  —  notwithstanding,  and  in,  and  with,  and
among  all  these  confused,  conflicting,  and  discordant  struggles,
whose  powerlessness  easily  leads  to  contempt  for  that  which
thus  cannot  be  turned  to  account.  Hence  this  view  has  in  fact
often  enough  declared  that  individual  living  minds  really
count  for  nothing  in  history,  that  they  are  but  as  sound  and

,  smoke,  that  their  efforts,  in  as  far  as  they  do  not  fall  in  with
the  evolution  of  the  Idea,  have  no  worth  and  significance  in
themselves,  and  that  their  happiness  and  peace  are  not  among
the  ends  of  historical  development.  The  course  of  history  is
as  the  great  and  awful  and  tragic  altar  on  which  all  individual
life  and  joy  is  sacrificed  to  the  development  of  the  universal

(  Idea  of  humanity.  And  it  is  just  here  that  we  find  the  expres-
sion of  the  essential  difference  which  distinguishes  this  view
from  the  preceding  one,  with  which  in  other  respects  it  has  so
much  in  common.  He  who  speaks  of  education  naturally  means
the  education  not  of  a  concept,  but  of  some  living  thing  which
is  only  marked  out  and  named  by  the  concept,  and  which  alone
could  be  capable  of  rejoicing  in  its  own  development.  This
interest  in  an  attainable  good  which  history  is  to  realize,  and  in
a  realm  of  living  creatures  who  can  enjoy  the  happiness  of  this
realization,  we  must,  if  we  have  not  got  rid  of  it  already,  learn  to
sacrifice  to  our  veneration  for  the  Ideal-development  theory.

I  How  much  wc  have  it  at  heart  to  oppose  this  theory  will

'  be  readily  understood.  Above  all,  we  must  note  that  only
C^  he  who  would  reverence  history  as  an  enigma  without  seek-
ing for  its  solution,  can  be  satisfied  with  the  mysterious  con-
cord between  what  is  required  by  the  evolution  of  the
Idea,  and  the  results  of  individual  efforts  which  are  in-
dependent of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  he  who  looks  for  a
solution  may  take  either  of  two  courses ;  whichever  of
these  he  may  choose,  he  is  bound  to  begin  by  stating
clearly  who  or  what  the  mind  of  humanity  is  of  which  history
is  the  development,  and  where  this  mind  is  to  be  found.

The  first  course  begins  with  the  statement  that  it  exists  only
in  the  countless  multiplicity  of  living  men,  contemporaneous  and
successive,  of  whose  nature  it  is  the  common  feature,  and  that

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  157

it  has  no  independent  existence  outside  of,  among,  or  beside
them.  From  an  analysis  of  this  general  character  of  humanity
(for  this  is  what  the  present  view  comes  to),  and  at  the  same
time  of  the  external  conditions  presented  by  the  earth  as  the
stage  of  life,  we  should  deduce  the  consequence  that  the  kind
and  degree  of  civilisation  which  would  furnish  the  greatest
possible  amount  of  development  and  satisfaction  of  all  human
capacities  would  not  be  attainable  in  the  course  of  a  single
life,  but  only  in  a  series  of  generations  of  which  each  would
start  in  its  course  from  the  stage  of  development  reached  by
that  which  had  preceded  it.  Then  we  should  bethink  us  that
this  development  would  be  worthless  if  it  took  place  with  the
unfailing  regularity  of  a  natural  process,  and  that  living  minds
were  not  formed  to  realize  a  steady  progress  determined  in
complete  independence  of  any  free  choice  on  the  part  of  the
agents,  even  supposing  that  such  a  progress  were  in  itself
desirable.  We  should  expressly  point  out  the  unconstrained
freedom  of  all  the  living  elements,  the  action  and  reaction  of
which  does,  notwithstanding,  form  the  foundation  of  a  steady
course  of  history.  Now  natural  science  sometimes  shows  that
the  irregular  minute  and  conflicting  molecular  movements  of
a  mass  not  only  do  not  affect  the  uniform  molar  movement  of
the  whole,  but  are,  for  intelligible  reasons,  incapable  of  alter-
ing it.  In  the  same  way  we  should  have  to  show  that  the
irregular  will  of  the  individual  is  always  restricted  in  its
action  by  universal  conditions  not  subject  to  arbitrary  will —
conditions  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  laws  of  spiritual  life
in  general,  in  the  established  order  of  Nature  to  which  this
life  is  bound  by  its  immutable  wants,  and  finally,  in  the
inevitable  action  and  reaction  between  the  members  of  a
soul-endowed  community.  This  problem  is  not  new,  nor
have  there  been  wanting  attempts  at  its  solution.  Indeed,
this  is  the  sense  in  which  the  calm  and  practised  observer  of
men  and  things  is  accustomed  to  understand  history.  By  the
nature  of  men's  minds,  which  is  always  essentially  the  same,  by
the  sameness  of  their  needs,  and  by  the  constant  similarity
v/hich  exists  between  the  circumstances  of  different  lives,  an

158

BOOK  Vn. CHAPTER  II.

obstacle  is,  sooner  or  later,  opposed  to  the  flood-tides  of  caprice,
and  only  those  less  violent  movements  can  continue  which  corre-
spond to  these  conditions  with  their  gradual  changes.  In  this
view,  then,  history  is  regarded  as  a  development  of  the  concept  of
humanity,  not  only  in  -the  self-evident  sense  that  nothing  can
happen  in  the  course  of  history  which  did  not  pre-exist  as  a
possibility  in  the  general  character  of  the  human  constitution,
but  also  in  the  sense  that  in  general  and  on  the  whole  only
those  phases  of  development  are  durable  and  succeed  one
another  which  correspond  to  the  destiny  which  is  appointed
for  the  spirits  of  men.

The  view  which  we  are  combating  scorned  this  course.  It
was  unwilling  to  regard  history  as  merely  the  result  of  a
multiplicity  of  forces  working  together ;  it  preferred  to  con-
sider it  as  proceeding  from  the  unity  of  a  single  impelling
power,  pervading  the  whole  course  of  historical  development.
In  that  case  the  mind  of  humanity,  of  which  history  is  to
cohstitute  the  self-development,  must  certainly  be  differently
defined.  It  will  not  help  us  here  to  give  it  the  name  of
Infinite,  or  Absolute,  or  the  Universal  World-Spirit,  in  as  far
as  this,  being  engaged  in  the  more  comprehensive  work  of  its
own  development,  takes  on  the  form  of  human  existence  in
order  to  pass  through  the  series  of  phsenomena  which  are
necessary  to  it  at  this  stage  of  its  course.  For  if  this  world-
spirit  is  dispersed  about  in  innumerable  individual  men  with-
out existing  complete  in  any  one  of  them,  how  can  it  guide
the  reciprocal  action  of  all  these  (for  their  power  of  free  choice
is  not  to  be  denied)  in  such  a  comprehensive  fashion  as  to
bring  about  a  development  conformable  to  its  own  concept  ?
It  would  clearly  contribute  to  this  result  in  is  far  as  it  is
present  in  all  individual  men  as  that  mental  organization
which  is  common  to  them  all ;  but  it  would  thus  only
confine  their  development  within  the  bounds  of  what  is
possible  for  such  a  constitution,  without  positively  marking
out  the  course  and  the  definite  forms  of  the  ilevelopment.
If  more  than  this  is  intended,  the  higher  unity  oi  history  can
only  be  reached  if  that  one  spirit  which  ought,  with  deliberate

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.

.159

forethought,  to  pervade  history  and  to  interpenetrate  it  with
the  unity  of  its  own  aim,  is  regarded  as  being  in  truth  an
actual  living  spirit,  having  an  existence  of  its  own,  among,  or
beside,  or  beyond,  or  above  individual  spirits,  and  not  involved
in  the  necessity  of  their  development  as  being  the  substance
which  undergoes  development,  but  enthroned  above  them  as
the  power  by  which  they  are  produced.  In  other  words,  this
second  path  leads  back  to  the  idea  of  history  as  a  divine
education  of  mankind,  as  on  the  first  path  we  were  led  to
regard  it  as  a  natural  process  in  which  everything  happens
which  logically  results  from  previous  circumstances.  The
doctrine  of  the  realization  of  the  Idea  in  history  appears  in
these  two  distinct  modes  of  thought ;  but  the  adherent  of  the
doctrine  will  doubtless  continue  to  maintain  that  it  presents
not  a  confused  blending  of  the  two,  but  their  combination  in
a  higher  speculative  unity.

But  in  sober  truth  this  view,  with  its  low  estimation  of
individual  life  as  compared  to  the  development  of  the  Idea,
gives  us  but  a  stone  in  the  place  of  bread  ;  and  we  must
consider  this  point  more  in  detail,  since  we  foresee  that  very
many  will  be  honestly  inclined  to  profess  the  opinion  which
we  censure.  There  are  no  errors  which  take  such  firm  hold
of  men's  minds  as  those  in  which,  as  in  this,  inexactness  of
thought  Tind  lofty  feeling  combine  to  produce  a  condition  of
enthusiastic  exaltation.

Tor  clear  knowledge  it  is  necessary  that  to  every  concept
we  should  add  in  thought  all  those  connections  without
which  its  meaning  would  be  unintelligible ;  but  owing  to  the
eager  haste  of  thought  and  speech  these  connections  are  very
commonly  passed  over  unnoticed.  In  our  varied  and  complex
civilisation  there  are  many  thoughts  which  seem  to  have  a
stamp  of  intellectuality  and  a  certain  striking  elegance  and
simplicity,  because  they  detach  from  the  soil  of  common
experience  and  transplant  as  it  were  into  empty  space,  apart
from  all  explanatory  surroundings,  ideas  familiar  to  us  in
everyday  life,  where  we  observe,  patiently  and  minutely,  all
the  conditions  on  which their  validity  depends. This fate

160  BOOK  VII. CHAPTEK  II,

has  overtaken  the  idea  of  phcenomenon  or  appearance  among
others.  It  is  plain  that  in  order  to  be  intelligible  this  idea
must  presuppose  not  only  a  being  or  thing  which  appears,  but
also,  and  quite  as  indispensably,  a  second  being  by  whom  this
appearance  is  perceived.  This  second  being  may  be  called
the  necessary  place  of  the  appearance,  for  nowhere  except  in
it  does  the  appearance  take  place,  being  never  anything  else
than  the  image  which  the  perceiving  being,  in  accordance  with
its  own  nature,  draws  for  itself,  of  that  other  by  which  it  is
affected.  But  this  reference  is  almost  wholly  suppressed  in
ordinary  speech ;  and  when  being  and  appearance  are  contrasted,
nothing  is  thought  of  but  that  one  being  which  emits  the
appearance  as  an  emanation  from  itself — the  emanation  being
supposed  to  exist  and  appear  on  its  own  account,  without
needing  a  second  being,  as  a  mental  state  of  which  only  can
it  attain  reality.

Of  course  any  mode  of  speech  is  harmless  if  men  under-
stand what  it  really  indicates,  and  limit  its  applications  and
the  deductions  from  it  accordingly ;  but  both  this  under-
standing and  these  limitations  are  wanting  in  the  present  case.
What  is  called  phsenomenon  or  appearance  is  at  bottom  only
the  process  which  may  become,  or  may  cause,  a  phsenomenon
as  soon  as  it  affects  a  being  capable  of  perception ;  this  pro-
cess is  not  the  phsenomenon  itself  Now  to  the  true  notion  of
phsenomenon  there  attaches  a  value  which  can  by  no  means
be  transferred  to  the  process  which  precedes  it ;  that  a  being
not  only  exists,  but  exists  for  another,  is  not  merely  a  fact  like
other  facts,  but  includes  an  element  of  pleasure ;  it  seems  to  us
that  the  worth  of  a  being's  existence  (though  not,  of  course,  that
existence  itself)  is  heightened  and  doubled  when  its  image  is
reflected  in  another,  or  when,  speaking  generally,  its  content
is  not  only  there,  but  is  recognised  by  some  mind  and  is
advanced  to  be  the  object  of  some  enjoyment,  though  it  may
be  only  the  enjoyment  of  understanding.  He  who  asks.
Would  a  being  exist  if  it  did  not  appear  ?  can  hardly  mean
merely  that  the  real  existence  of  a  thing  consists  in  its  going
out  of  itself,  and  in  the  emanation  from  it  of  an  activity  that

/

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  161

is  directed  outwards.  This  going  out  of  itself  will  rather  be
understood  as  an  emergence  from  the  deafness,  and  blindness,
and  night  of  a  state  in  which  it  is  uncognised  and  forgotten,
into  the  full  clear  day  of  awakened  consciousness,  of  being
named  and  being  known.  For  the  poetical  apprehension  of
Nature  the  rising  of  the  sun  does  not  merely  mean  that  the
sun  which  before  was  below  the  horizon  now  rises  above  it ;
it  means  also  that  it  becomes  itself  visible  and  renders  other
objects  visible,  and  floods  the  world  with  an  enlightenment
which,  since  it  makes  all  things  exist  for  one  another,  itself
constitutes  day  and  awakening,  and  in  fact  the  full  reality  of
that  which  before  was,  as  it  were,  only  potential.  In  the
same  way,  that  appearance  of  a  being,  which  we  value  and  of
which  we  speak  as  of  some  great  good,  signifies  always  the
entrance  of  something  real  into  a  consciousness  which  takes  \.
pleasure  in  it.  This  kind  of  appearance  cannot  be  conceived
as  the  mere  emanation  of  some  being  from  which  it  flows
forth  as  a  medium  that  shines  by  its  own  light — a  kind  of
light,  in  fact,  the  business  of  which  is  to  give  light  to  itself
and  to  the  darkness,  and  of  which  this  philosophy  knows
so  much,  and  optics  nothing  whatever.  For  an  error  it  is
and  will  remain  to  treat  that  shining  of  light  which  exists
only  in  the  perception  of  the  percipient,  or  that  semblanse
which  exists  only  in  consciousness,  or  that  pleasure  in  a
phaenomenon  wliich  can  be  found  only  in  conscious  perception
of  it — to  treat  all  these  as  if  they  were  occurrences  that
could  take  place  in  empty  space,  merely  proceeding  forth
from  one  being  without  being  received  into  any  other.

Here  we  have  to  renew  our  old  conflict  with  this  mode  of
thought.  He  who  sees  in  history  the  development  of  an
Idea  is  bound  to  say  whom  this  development  benefits,  or  what
benefit  is  realized  by  it,  I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  that  there
should  be  merely  pointed  out  to  us  in  the  later  stages  of
development,  as  the  fruit  of  such  development,  some  blessing
which  was  not  previously  extant,  but  that  we  should  be
shown  that  the  higher  good  consists  in  the  previous  absence
of  this  blessing,  and  in  its  gradual  attainment  by  way  of  this

VOL.  II.  L

16,^  BOOK  Vn. CHAPTER  IL

evolution.  But  if  we  agreed  to  find  enougli  happiness  in  the
raere  spectacle  of  a  developing  Idea,  and  to  renounce  any
further  advantage  to  which  it  might  conduce,  yet  even  the
review  of  these  thoughts  as  they  march  past  would  presup-
pose a  world  of  spectators  by  whom  it  would  be  witnessed.
Who,  then,  are  the  spectators  ?  Either  mankind  themselves
while  they  are  developing  are  conscious  of  their  development
and  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  this  consciousness ;  or  God  alone
surveys  history  while  mankind  undergo  it  unconsciously ;  or
finally,  there  are  individual  human  souls  which  are  conscious
of  the  historical  progress  of  the  Idea,  while  the  rest  only
experience  it  as  their  fate  and  their  lot  in  life.

The  first  of  these  answers  cannot  be  given.  Unquestion-
fibly  mankind  have  in  every  age  had  some  notions  concerning
their  own  being  and  their  destiny,  notions  which  have  come
to  them  from  the  conditions  in  life  and  the  experiences  which
fell  to  their  share.  We  would  not  scorn  these  notions  because
they  do  not  constitute  a  collective  consciousness,  but  merely
jin  energetic  mental  bent  which  at  the  most  is  only  intensified
to  full  reflection  on  particular  occasions,  and  even  then  only  to
one-sided  reflection.  But  the  mass  of  mankind  remain  quite
ignorant  of  the  historical  foundation  of  this  feelincc  which
pervades  their  life,  and  of  its  significant  place  in  the  whole  of
historical  development.  Obscure  traditions  of  the  "  good  old
times,"  or  unsatisfied  longings  for  a  better  future,  unsup-
ported by  any  knowledge  of  facts  worth  mentioning,  are  all
the  philosophy  of  history  with  which  the  majority  are
acquainted  ;  the  subtle  succession  of  the  different  phases  of
development  of  the  historical  Idea  is  displayed  quite  without
effect  as  far  as  the  consciousness  of  mankind  on  the  whole  is
concerned.

The  second  answer  will  be  more  readily  given  and  more
willingly  received,  because  it  is  apt  to  be  understood  as  being
better  than  it  is.  For  what  view  is  there  that  might  not  join
in  the  modest  confession  that  it  is  God  alone  who  perfectly
understands  the  meaning  of  history  ?  But  more  than  this  is
involved. History  being  understood  as  the  development of

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  163

the  concept  of  humanity  which  is  cognizable  by  God  alone,  it
must  also  be  the  case  that  this  development  alone  is  the  end
and  aim  of  history,  while  all  which  finite  beings  do  and  suffer,
hope  and  fear,  strive  for  and  avoid,  attain  or  fail  of,  is  but  as
part  of  the  machinery  and  trappings  which  the  divine  mind
employs  in  order  to  bring  before  its  own  view  this  spectacle
of  the  evolution  of  the  concept.  I  know  that  no  one  will
lightly  profess  this  view  in  its  undisguised  repulsiveness  as
his  own  conviction  ;  still  in  reality  it  is  to  only  too  large  an
extent  at  the  foundation  of  philosophies  of  history.  It  is  not
indeed  conceivable  that  in  surveying  the  tragic  course  of
events  the  soul  of  the  observer  should  remain  wholly  unsym-
pathetic and  not  be,  at  least  occasionally,  surprised  into
warmth  of  feeling ;  but  how  often  have  we  been  admonished
to  rise  superior  to  the  softheartedness  of  this  sentimental  mode
of  regarding  history,  and  to  learn  that  it  is  only  the  necessary
progress  of  the  concept  that  is  of  consequence,  and  not  the
happiness  or  misery  of  men  !  And  further,  what  is  repulsive
in  the  picture  which  we  have  drawn  is  certainly  less  striking
from  the  fact  that  it  is  seldom  God  who  is  spoken  of  as  the
spectator  of  this  show,  but  generally  a  World-spirit,  or  an
Absolute,  or  a  self-conscious  Idea.  The  unbearableness  of  an
egoism  which  could  use  a  world  of  sensitive  creatures  merely
as  material  for  its  own  refined  amusement  is,  of  course,
softened  when  the  nature  of  the  egoist  is  so  obscurely  con-
ceived, and  so  removed  from  all  similarity  to  ourselves,  that
we  are  left  without  any  standard  for  the  estimation  of  moral
worth.  And  for  the  rest  we  gain  nothing  by  this  change  of
expression.  For  an  inscrutable  impersonal  primal  being  in
the  place  of  the  living  God  might  indeed  govern  the  world
and  us  as  a  supreme  power,  but  could  not  be  the  source  of
any  obligations  or  any  duties.  Therefore  the  assumption  of
such  a  being,  even  if  it  really  explained  the  external  course
fof  history,  would  deprive  the  inner  development  of  history  of
a  most  effective  spring.  For  however  large  a  share  chance
may  have  had  in  determining  the  course  of  events,  something
at  any  rate  is  due  to  the  honest  efforts  of  mankind  who  with

164  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IL

a  sense  of  sacred  duty  towards  posterity  have  laboured  to
preserve  and  to  increase  their  possessions.  If  we  were  forced
to  believe  that  all  personal  life  is  but  a  stage  of  development
through  which  an  impersonal  Absolute  has  to  pass,  we  should
either  cease  our  efforts,  since  we  could  discover  no  obligation
to  co-operate  in  helping  on  a  process  totally  indifferent  both
in  itself  and  for  us,  or — in  case  we  held  fast  the  treasure  of
love  and  duty  and  self-sacrifice  of  which  we  find  ourselves
possessed — we  should  have  to  confess  to  ourselves  that  a
human  heart  in  all  its  finitude  and  transitoriness  is  incom-
parably nobler,  richer,  and  more  exalted  than  that  Absolute
with  all  its  logically  necessary  development.

We  may  pass  over  the  third  answer  very  briefly.  No  one
can  seriously  believe  that  history  takes  place  in  order  that  it
may  be  philosophically  understood  by  philosophers ;  the  fact
is  indeed  that  there  is  not  even  a  philosophy  of  that  which
has  taken  place.

But  there  is  another  consideration  which  will  be  opposed
to  our  rejection  of  all  these  answers.  An  Idea,  it  is  said,
Eot  only  exists  in  the  consciousness  of  him  who  apprehends
it  or  reflects  upon  it ;  it  is  also  really  and  effectively
present  in  things  themselves  and  their  connections.  It  is
present  as  an  existing  condition  before  the  attention  of
thought,  which  comes  later,  has  been  directed  to  it ;  and  it
is  plain  that  it  would  continue  its  previous  existence,  and
that  its  validity  would  suffer  no  detriment,  even  if  the  gaze
and  the  reflection  of  a  thinking  being  should  never  be  directed
towards  it,  making  the  content  of  the  Idea  an  object  of  its
own  consciousness.  If,  therefore,  only  a  few  individual
minds,  or  even  if  no  one  at  all,  were  conscious  of  the  Idea
which  is  operative  in  history,  it  would  nevertheless  continue
to  exist  in  order  that,  unconscious  and  unknown,  it  might
guide  the  destinies  of  the  human  race.  Mankind  as  a  whole
would  then  be  comparable  to  an  individual  man  who  is
imceasingly  conscious  of  pain  or  pleasure,  or  some  other
sensation  resulting  from  his  bodily  organization,  without
knowing  the Idea  or  plan  in accordance with which the

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  165

forces  of  his  organism  are  combined  to  reciprocal  action.  We
ourselves,  however,  may  be  compared  to  physiologists  who
investigate  the  laws  of  this  action,  and  we  should  not  regard
the  Idea  which  orders  the  system  of  vital  functions  as  being
the  less  efficient  or  the  less  worthy  of  investigation  because  the
living  man  generally  remains  unconscious  of  it,  and  because
it  was  unknown  to  us  up  to  the  moment  of  its  discovery.

This  analogy,  which  is  a  just  one,  needs  only  to  be  pursued
in  order  to  refute  the  objection  which  it  is  brought  forward  to
support.  For  surely  we  should  hardly  hold  that  those  rela-
tions of  organic  forces  can,  while  they  remain  hidden,
constitute  the  aim  of  life,  or  that  the  living  body  is  destined
merely  to  realize  ordered  activities  working  altogether  in
obscurity.  In  the  sensations  which  we  experience  in  some
way  not  yet  understood,  in  the  pleasure  and  displeasure  which
are  the  final  result  of  some  secret  action  of  our  organs,  in  the
supple  activity  of  our  limbs,  and  the  joyous  sense  of  that
power  over  them  which  is  ours  we  know  not  how — in  all  this
it  is  that  the  life  of  the  body  consists.  On  the  other  hand,
all  that  unknown  activity  is  to  be  reckoned  as  part  of  the
mechanical  means  which  exist,  not  on  their  own  account,  but
in  order  that  these  higher  results  may  be  realized.  In  this
sense  the  secret  development  of  an  Idea  may  indeed  be  con-
sidered as  the  guiding  clue  of  universal  history,  and  this  clue
may  remain  for  ever  unknown,  provided  only  that  the  succes-
sion of  benefits  which  are  attached  to  it,  and  which  go  on
increasing,  are  enjoyed  and  known.  But  a  view  which
accepted  this  interpretation  would  not  differ  essentially  from
that  which  regards  history  as  resulting  necessarily  from  the
co-operation  of  the  spiritual  nature  which  is  in  us  and  the
material  conditions  of  life  which  are  without  us.  It  would
be  distinguished  from  the  latter  view  by  only  one  peculiarity,
and  that  one  of  very  doubtful  value — it  would  believe,  that  is,
that  the  manifold  impulses  which  have  their  source  in  the
human  mind,  and  are  operative  in  history,  can  be  compre-
hended under  the  one  name  of  the  concept  of  humanity,  and
that  the  separate  investigation  of  those  gradual  changes  which

166  .BOOKVn. CHATTER  n. -

these  impulses  undergo  in  course  of  time,  may  be  replaced  by
the  one  general  formula  of  a  development,  assumed  to  be
logically  necessary,  of  that  concept.

But  just  this  interpretation,  which  we  allow,  is  by  no  means
contemplated  by  the  views  referred  to ;  they  imagine  that  they
have  found  in  that  hidden  self-development  of  the  Idea  not  a
serviceable  means,  but  the  final  sense  and  aim  of  historic
evolution,  not  a  guiding  thread  on  which  are  gradually  strung
the  substantial  goods  of  life,  but  the  Supreme  Good  itself.  And
I  to  this  we  must  unceasingly  renew  an  opposition  often  offered
before.  In  the  order  of  the  world  a  never-to-be-explained
mystery  may  possibly  shroud  the  means  used  to  attain  the
ends  aimed  at,  or  the  laws  in  accordance  with  which  these
means  work ;  but  it  would  be  the  most  preposterous  form  of
mysticism  to  suppose  that  there  could  be  ends  in  the  universe
which,  although  no  one  knew  of  their  content  or  fulfilment,
should  yet  continue  to  be  ends,  or  blessings  which  were  so
ruysteriously  hidden  that  no  one  could  observe  them  or  rejoice
because  of  them,  and  which  should  yet  continue  to  be  blessings,
and  indeed  to  be  the  greater  and  more  sacred  the  less  this
incomprehensible  veil  was  ever  lifted  from  them.  That
which  is  to  be  a  blessing  has  its  sole  and  necessary  place
of  existence  in  the  living  consciousness  of  some  spiritual
being ;  aU  that  lies  outside  of  spirits,  external  to  them,
between  them,  before  them,  or  after  them,  all  that  is
mere  matter  of  fact,  or  thing,  or  quality,  or  relation,  or  event,
belongs  to  that  impersonal  realm,  through  which  indeed  the
way  to  blessings  may  lie,  but  in  which  blessing  can  never  be.
[  As  long  as  we  have  breath  we  will  strive  against  this  super-
'  stition,  which  though  so  calm  is  yet  so  frightful,  spending
itself  wholly  in  veneration  of  forms  and  facts,  knowing  nothing
whatever  of  true,  warm-hearted  life,  or  overlooking  it  with  iu-
I  comprehensible  indifference,  to  seek  the  innermost  meaning  of
I  the  universe  in  observing  a  secret  etiquette  of  evolution.  And
yet  how  often  do  we  encounter  this  superstition  !  We  have
seen  it  shrink  back— like  a  sensitive  plant  at  a  touch — when
natural  science  has  cheerfully  enlarged  upon  all  the  efficient

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  ^67

means  upon  which  depend  the  joyousness  of  animal  life,
its  abundance  of  physical  satisfactions,  its  sense  of  vigour,
its  joy  in  the  varied  changes  which  it  experiences.  "What
this  superstition  thinks  of  importance  is  not  that  there
should  be  a  vigorous,  joyous,  self-conscious  reality,  but  that
there  should  be  a  show — that  everything  which  exists  should
recall  symbolically  something  which  itself  it  is  not,  should
ring  in  unison  with  activities  which  it  does  not  exercise,
with  destinies  which  it  does  not  experience,  with  Ideas  of
which  it  remains  ignorant.  And  wlien  in  history  tlie  rich-
hued  ardour  and  passion  of  human  life  are  unfolded  before
the  adherents  of  this  doctrine — the  inexplicable  peculiarities
of  individual  minds,  the  disturbing  complications  of  human
destinies  which,  in  many  respects  alike  in  their  outlines,  are
yet  inconceivably  various  in  their  individuality — when  this
great  picture  is  opened  before  them,  then  they  rise  up  and  ask
if  there  is  no  way  of  reducing  this  grandeur  back  to  something
poor  and  small — of  reducing  lacTc,  in  sober  truth,  for  we  go
backwards  and  not  forwards  if  we  allow  the  tedious  emptiness
of  a  logically  necessary  development  to  be  imposed  upon  us
as  the  final  meaning  and  end  of  the  universe.  And  therefore
will  we  always  combat  these  conceptions  which  acknowledge
only  one  half,  and  that  the  poorer  half,  of  the  world ;  only  the
unfolding  of  facts  to  new  facts,  of  forms  to  new  forms,  and
not  the  continual  mental  elaboration  of  aU  these  outward
events  into  that  which  alone  in  the  universe  has  worth  and
truth — into  the  bliss  and  despair,  the  admiration  and  loathing,
the  love  and  the  hate,  the  joyous  certainty  and  the  despairing
longing,  and  all  the  nameless  fear  and  favour  in  which  that
life  passes  which  alone  is  worthy  to  be  called  life.  And  yet
no  doubt  our  combating  will  be  wholly  in  vain,  for  those
whom  we  oppose  will  ever  seek  afresh  to  cover  the  imperfec-
tion of  their  ideas  with  the  cloak  of  a  generous  putting  aside
of  self ;  they  will  always  be  ready  to  profess  anew  that  there
is  a  meaning  in  saying  that  phsenomeua  happen  even  when
they  are  not  seen,  that  symbols  are  emUematic  even  when  no
one  understands  them,  that  Ideas  are  expressed  by  matters  of

168  BOOK  VIL CHiPTER  II.

fact  even  when  there  is  no  one  upon  whom  the  expression
could  make  an  impression.  This  sounding  brass  and  this
tinkling  cymbal  will  ever  be  struck  anew ;  or  rather  this
brass  which  does  not  sound  and  this  cymbal  which  does  not
tinkle,  for  sounding  and  tinkling  have  their  purest  and  highest
value  for  this  mode  of  thought,  when  considered  as  what  they

-^ are  in  themselves  wlien  no  one  hears  them.

S  4.  But  are  we  not  mollified  by  another  conception,  which
does  justice  to  the  incalculable  variety  and  wealth  of  history
and  redeems  it  from  the  poverty-stricken  condition  of  being  a
mere  logically  necessary  development  of  a  concept,  and  accord-

•^  ing  to  which  history  is  a  divine  poem,  produced  by  God's
creative  fancy,  with  the  spontaneity  and  life  of  a  genuine
work  of  art  ?  One  might  be  in  doubt  as  to  the  class  of
artistic  productions  among  which  this  poem  should  be  reckoned;
to  some  it  has  seemed  to  have  the  uniform  flow  of  an  epic,
to  others  to  be  as  full  of  catastrophes  as  a  tragedy ;  again,  it
has  not  unfrequently  been  regarded  as  a  comedy  by  mocking
philosophers  in  sardonic  moods ;  and  each  of  these  views
has  seemed,  to  those  who  held  it,  to  have  something  in  it.
Meanwhile  it  is  plain  that  the  phrase  contains,  in  the  first
place,  merely  a  comparison  of  the  impression  made  upon  us  by
history  with  the  similar  impression  which  we  receive  from
poetry.  The  peculiar  character  of  the  impression  is  made
clearer  by  the  comparison,  but  not  so  the  causes  by  which  in
both  cases  it  is  produced.  Perhaps  we  might  more  justly  and
more  usefully  make  the  converse  statement,  and  say  that
poetry  derives  its  power  from  its  similarity  to  history.  For
art  is  never  a  mere  playing  with  forms ;  it  is  true  and  genuine
only  when  we  recognise  its  forms  as  the  same  as  those  upon
which  the  cosmic  order  is  based,  and  according  to  which
those  events  happen  which,  taken  as  a  whole  and  in  the
breadth  of  their  simultaneous  complications  as  well  as  in
their  temporal  succession,  are  just  history  itself.  Because
<  the  epic  brings  before  us  with  simple  clearness  this  vast  and
wide  and  variously  agitated  stream  of  human  destinies,  without
offering  instructive  solutions  of  particular  difficulties,  it  has

I

TIIE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  169

the  same  effect  upon  us  as  history  itself,  which  with  equal
reserve  hides  the  secret  of  its  whole  significance  under  a  series
of  sharply  defined  events  which  stand  out  in  strong  relief.

So  far  the  comparison  of  history  with  poetry  is  nothing
more than a graceful play of thought, going from one  "

unknown  to  the  other,  and  expressing  each  in  terms  of
the  other  without  really  making  either  of  the  two  more
plain.  But  the  comparison  has  something  more  in  view.  It
aims  not  only  at  comparing  the  finished  poem  with  the  course
of  past  history,  hut  also  at  comparing  the  production  of  the
work  of  art  by  the  imagination  of  the  artist,  with  the  origin  of
history,  due  to  an  equally  incalculable  spontaneity  of  the  divine  <-

mind.  Something  would  indeed  be  gained  if  the  essential
peculiarity  of  that  artistic  imagination  could  be  defined  in  a
way  that  might  be  understood  without  again  having  recourse
to  imagination.  We  do  not  know  that  this  has  been  done.
For  if  we  consider  the  information  which  we  have  concerning
this  mental  activity — concerning  the  spontaneity  with  which  it
produces  what  is  fair  and  what  is  repulsive,  inventing  examples
of  the  application  of  necessary  laws  with  boundless  licence
— concerning  the  perceptible  justice  with  which  it  proceeds
in  the  combination  of  these  arbitrarily  constructed  events,
without  our  ever  being  able  to  take  a  comprehensive  and
intelligent  survey  of  the  whole — we  find  that  in  these  charac-
teristics and  others  which  have  often  been  noted,  the  mystery  of
history  is  reproduced  in  all  its  features,  only  it  remains,  unfor-
tunately, just  as  much  a  mystery  as  before.  We  receive  no
enlightenment  with  regard  to  the  origin  of  this  divine  fancy
or  its  ends,  nor  with  regard  to  the  way  in  which  the  concep-
tion of  it  may  be  combined  with  our  other  ideas  of  God,
or  with  the  rest  of  our  philosophy.  Therefore,  though  we
willingly  agree  with  this  view  in  what  it  denies,  we  are  in
no  wise  enriched  by  what  it  affirms.

§  5.  And  now,  after  so  many  vain  attempts  to  interpret  the  ^

progress  of  history,  we  will  consider  that  opposite  opinion
which  altogether  denies  history  in  the  sense  of  a  progressive
development  on  earth. This  view,  too,  is  by  no  means  a  mere

1^0  BOOK  Vir. CHAPTER  II.

peculiarity  of  mistaken  thought,  making  a  casual  appearance
now  and  again ;  in  ancient  as  well  as  in  modern  times  it  has
reached  the  point  of  the  most  pronounced  aversion  to  every-
thing mundane,  an  aversion  which  has  heen  enthusiastically
carried  into  practice.  Innumerable  heathen  penitents  and
christian  hermits  have  retained  in  their  solitude  a  deep  and
pervading  conviction  that  human  life  on  earth  does  not,  as  a
whole,  piogress  towards  any  ideal  of  perfection  which  is  here
either  attainable  or  even  only  aimed  at,  but  that  everything  is
vanity.  They  regarded  only  the  constant  and  unmediated
return  of  the  individual  heart  to  God,  and  its  exaltation  to
the  supersensuous  world  as  progress,  and  all  other  earthly
life  as  but  a  continual  repetition  of  the  old  imperfections.
This,  too,  is  a  philosophy  of  history.  It  is  probably  based
upon  less  profound  combinations  of  thought  than  the  opinions
which  point  to  a  progress  which  is  supposed  to  be  perceived ;
but,  on  the  other  hand,  innumerable  sacrifices  have  proved  it  to
be  a  most  living  conviction,  and  it  will  continue  to  receive
fresh  proof  of  the  same  kind ;  for  it  is  ordinarily  our  last  con-
fession when  we  depart  from  life  and  leave  behind  us  all  the
plans,  the  carrying  out  of  which  once  seemed  to  us  a  work
of  such  greatness  and  importance.

Shall  we  give  ourselves  up  without  reserve  to  this  denial
of  earthly  good  ?  Would  there  not  hence  result  an  inactive
contemplative  disposition  which,  by  causing  too  early  a
renunciation  of  all  mundane  gain,  would  abolish  the  conditions
of  struggle  after  that  which  is  supramundane  ?  Such  retire-
ment from  the  world  is  conceivable  only  as  retirement  from  a
world  which  one  has  known,  from  a  life  in  which  one  has  partici-
pated. It  is  only  a  remembrance  of  the  wealth  of  mental
life,  of  the  happiness  and  misery,  the  hopes  and  illusions,
which  the  social  interweaving  of  human  efforts  includes  and
produces,  that  can  afford  to  solitary  contemplation  an  object
of  reflection  in  considering  which  it  may  develop  its  ideas
concerning  the  supersensuous  life.  He  who  has  experhmced
nothing  is  made  no  wiser  by  solitude,  and  communion  with
the  phsenomena  of  Nature,  and  with  the  thoughts  which  would

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  17 1

be possible  for a mind altogether  withdrawn  from  human
society,  could  lead to  no  better  peace  than  that  which  the /
inferior  animals  possess.

But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  not  inevitable  that
depreciation  of  what  is  earthly  should  be  intensijfied  to
such  contempt  for  all  living  activity.  Men  may  recognise
that  the  social  relations  of  human  life  offer  the  sole
though  intractable  material  by  elaboration  of  which  they  are
enabled  to  work  out  the  ideals  towards  which  they  struggle
and  aspire ;  and  this  recognition  may  lead  them  to  devote
themselves  with  all  their  heart  and  soul  to  the  tasks  of  earthly
existence.  We  show  the  perverse  pride  of  human  exacting-  y^
ness  in  only  taking  pleasure  in  work,  and  only  valuing
it  when  we  are  assured  that  the  results  of  our  activity  will
hold  a  lasting  place  in  the  history  of  the  universe,  and  will
have  imperishable  value.  If  we  estimate  more  modestly  our
performances  here,  regarding  them  as  mere  prentice  work,
then  we  can  in  all  seriousness  combine  with  the  preparation
for  a  higher  end  that  calm  resignation  which  will  patiently
endure  that  our  attempts  here  should  be  without  progress  or
lasting  results.  In  proportion,  then,  as  we  estimated  more
highly  the  immediate  relation  of  each  individual  soul  to  the
supersensible  world,  the  value  for  mankind  of  the  coherence  of
history  would  sink ; history,  however  it  may  move  forward  '

or  fluctuate  hither  and  thither,  could  not  by  any  of  its  move-
ments attain  a  goal  lying  out  of  its  own  plane,  and  we
may  spare  ourselves  the  trouble  of  seeking  to  find  in  mere
onward  movement  upon  this  plane  a  progress  which  history  is
destined  to  make  not  there,  but  by  an  upward  movement  at
each  individual  point  of  its  course  forwards.

And,  it  is  asked  finally,  is  it  not  this  unhistorical  life  that  N
is  actually  lived  by  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  ?  For  the
unrest  and  v.'iriety  of  revolutions  and  transformations,  the
meaning  and  connection  of  which  we  are  seeking,  is  yet,  when
all  is  said,  the  history  of  the  male  sex  alone  ;  women  move  on
through  all  this  toil  and  struggle  hardly  even  touched  by  its
changing  lights,  ever  presenting  afresh  in  uniform  fashion  the

172  rOOK  VIL CHAPTER  II.

grand  and  simple  types  in  which  the  life  of  the  human  soul  is
manifested.  Is  their  existence  to  count  for  nothing,  or  have
we  only  for  a  moment  forgotten  its  significance  in  scholastic
zeal  for  the  Idea  of  historical  development  ?

By  such  considerations  the  inclination  to  an  unhistoric
conception  of  human  destiny  is  strengthened ;  still  this  does

j^  not  overcome  the  opposition  of  a  moral  sentiment  which  warns
us  against  giving  up  everything  that  we  cannot  understand,
and  admonishes  us  to  esteem  the  temporal  advance  of  history  as
a  real  good.  Even  that  which  holds  us  back  from  this  recog-
nition, when  we  are  considering  its  course  scientifically — that
is,  the  unequal  distribution,  among  successive  generations  who
know  not  one  another,  of  an  ever-increasing  quantum  of  good
— is  not  felt  as  a  misfortune  in  actual  life. On  the  contrary,

^  that  universal  absence  of  all  envious  feeling  towards  future
generations  which  coexists  with  so  much  selfishness  in  detail,
is  one  of  the  most  noteworthy  peculiarities  of  the  human
mind.  And  not  only  do  we  not  in  the  slightest  degree
grudge  to  this  future  the  greater  happiness  of  which  we
ourselves  can  only  have  a  prophetic  foretaste,  but  it  is  further
the  case  that  a  vein  of  self-sacrificing  effort  for  the  establish-
ment of  a better  condition  of  things  in  which  we  ourselves

^  shall  not  participate,  runs  through  all  ages,  having  sometimes
a  noble,  sometimes  a  commonplace  aspect,  at  one  time  appear-
ing as  the  conscious  devotion  of  affection  and  at  another  as  a
natural  impulse,  unconscious  of  its  own  significance  and  of
any  definite  aim.  This  wonderful  phsenomenon  may  well  tend
/  to  confirm  our  belief  that  there  is  some  unity  of  history,
transcending  that  of  which  we  are  conscious,  a  unity  in  which
we  cannot  merely  say  of  the  past  that  it  is  not — a  unity  rather
in  which  all  that  has  been  inexorably  divided  by  the  temporal
course  of  history,  has  a  co-existence  independent  of  time ;  in
which  finally  the  benefits  produced  in  time  are  not  lost  for
those  who  helped  to  win  but  did  not  enjoy  them.

This  view  will  certainly  not  escape  the  reproach  of  marring
one  of  the  fairest  traits  of  human  character  by  assigning  to  it  a
basis  of  selfishness  ;  nor  will  it  at  the  same  time  escape  the

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  173

suspicion  of  demanding  from  human  hearts  the  magnanimity  of
motiveless  self-sacrifice  when  such  self-sacrifice  results  from
love  for  others  or  for  mankind  without  any  thought  of  selfish
advantage.  But  these  reproaches  would  show  a  misunderstand-
ing of  the  subject  under  discussion.  We,  too,  would  hold  such
a  thought  of  selfish  gain  far  removed  from  the  motives  of  our
action,  but  we  cannot  in  the  same  way  exclude  it  when  we  are
considering  the  structure  of  the  universe.  While  we  lay  great
stress  upon  maintaining  the  principles  of  our  conduct  in  all  the
purity  of  unselfishness,  we  feel  it  equally  important  that  the
world  itself  should  appear  to  us  as  a  significant  and  worthy
whole.  We  require  our  own  happiness,  not  for  the  sake  of  our
happiness,  but  because  the  reason  of  the  world  would  be  turned
to  unreason  if  we  did  not  reject  the  thought  that  the  work  of
vanishing  generations  should  go  on  for  ever  only  benefiting
those  who  come  later,  and  being  irreparably  wasted  for  the
workers  themselves.  All  human  longing  to  find  a  guiding
thread  in  the  confused  variety  of  history  springs  from  the
unselfish  desire  to  recognise  a  worthy  and  sacred  order  in  the
system  and  course  of  the  world.  This  longing  has  impelled
some  who  held  different  views  from  ours  to  sacrifice  the  sub-
stantial happiness  of  all  individuals  to  the  constant  and
uniform  development  of  a  universal;  but  as  we  regard  such
attempts  as  a  misdirection  of  thought,  we  are  impelled  by  it
to  the  opposite  demand  for  a  lasting  preservation  of  that,  the
continual  destruction  of  which  would  render  fruitless  all  effort
to  develop  even  the  universal  itself  Each,  in  order  to  keep
his  own  thought  pure  from  selfishness,  may  exclude  his  own
happiness  from  this  demand ;  but  he  cannot  avoid  requiring
the  preservation  of  the  happiness  of  others,  unless  the  world
itself,  and  all  the  flourish  about  historical  development,  are  to
appear  as  mere  vain  and  unintelligible  noise.

This  faith,  being  the  interpretation  of  the  results  of  historic
life,  is  connected  with  the  self-sacrificing  and  provident  love
which  is  the  noblest  spring  of  that  life.  The  presentiment
that  we  shall  not  be  lost  to  the  future,  that  those  who  were
before  us  though  they  have  passed  away  from  the  sphere  of

^-i

]  74  .BOOK  Vn. CHAPTER  H.

earthly  reality  have  not  passed  away  from  reality  altogether,
and  that  in  some  mysterious  way  the  progress  of  history
affects  them  too — this  conviction  it  is  that  first  entitles  us
to  speak  as  we  do  of  humanity  and  its  history.  For  this
humanity  does  not  consist  in  a  general  type-character  which
is  repeated  in  all  individuals,  no  matter  how  many  they  are,
or  have  been,  or  shall  be  ;  it  does  not  consist  in  the  countless
number  of  individuals  who  are  only  brought  together  by  our
thought  into  a  unity  which  they  have  not  in  reality,  since
as  a  matter  of  fact  they  are  dispersed  and  some  would
still  be  if  the  rest  did  not  exist ;  but  it  consists  in  that
real  and  living  community,  which  brings  together  into  the
reciprocity  of  one  whole  the  plurality  of  minds  which  are
separated  from  one  another  in  time,  and  in  the  particular  place
of  each  in  tliat  whole  being  marked  and  reserved  beforehand,
just  as  though  the  whole  number  had  been  already  reckoned
over.  And  history  cannot  be  a  mere  slender  ray  of  reality
slipping  on  between  two  abysses  of  absolute  nothingness,
past  and  future,  ever  consigning  back  to  the  nothingness  in  its
rear  that  which  its  efforts  had  won  from  the  nothingness  in  its
van  ;  there  must  be  a  pre-established  sum,  in  which  the  flux
of  becoming  and  of  vanishing  away  is  consolidated  to  per-
manent existence.  Where  the  human  mind  fortifies  itself  in
its  efforts  by  an  appeal  to  the  spirits  of  ancestors  or  to  future
renown,  it  does  it  with  this  idea  ;  an  appeal  to  what  is  non-
existent is  powerless — no  appeal  can  be  of  any  efficacy  which
is  not  strongly  penetrated  by  this  thought  of  the  preservation
and  restoration  of  all  things.

Such  a  faith  is  not  easy  in  all  ages.  As  long  as  the
limited  purview  of  mankind  embraced  only  the  near  distance
of  a  known  past  and  the  familiar  surroundings  of  home  and
clan,  there  was  a  powerful  attraction  in  the  thought  that  this
simple  life,  bounded  at  the  one  end  by  creation  and  at  the  other
by  the  last  judgment,  was  a  probation  at  the  close  of  which
would  begin  the  happy  communion  of  all  those  who  had  been
divided  from  one  another  by  the  lapse  of  time.  Our  extended
intellectual  horizon  embraces  a  multitude  of  unlike  nations.

THE  MEANING  OF  HISTORY.  175

the  indefinite  ebb  and  flow  of  a  far-flowing  historical  stream,
the  ever  uniform  working  of  Nature,  and  the  immeasurable
extent  of  the  universe,  and  we  can  neither  be  satisfied  with
such  a  brief  and  homely  solution  of  complications  which  have
become  infinite,  nor  can  we  find some different  conception
capable  of  meeting  our  own  more  exacting  requirements  and
giving  a  clear  representation  of  the  ideal  of  which  we  are
conscious. Yet,  notwithstanding,  we  .  hold  fast  the  primitive ]
faith,  and  do  not  find  that  we  can  replace  it  by  explanations /
which  have  seemed  more  acceptable  to  the  culture  of  our  age ; I
on  the  contrary,  it  is  only  by  presupposing  the  truth  of  this
belief  that  modern  views  can  free  themselves  from  the  internal
contradictions in which  we found  them  involved. For  no /
education  of  mankind  is  conceivable unless  its  final  results ) ,
are  to  be  participated  in  by  those  whom this  earthly  course [
left  in  various  stages  of  backwardness ;  the  development  of
an  Idea  has  no  meaning  unless  all  are  to  be  plainly  shown  in
the  end  what  that  development  is  of  which  in  past  time  they  ^
had  been  the  ignorant  subjects. He  who  seeks  a  plan  in
history,  will  find  himself  inevitably  compelled  to  acknowledge  (J^

this  faith  ;  he  alone  can  feel  no  need  of  it  who  sees  in  history
nothing  but  examples  of  universal  laws  of  action,  each
example  due  to  the  impulse  of  anterior  forces,  and  not  to  the
attractive  power  of  ideals  as  yet  unattained.

But  in  truth  our  presupposition  suilices  only  for  the  ^
removal  of  inner  contradictions  ;  neither  it  nor  our  empirical
knowledge  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  exhibit  the  plan  which
history  follows.  Not  our  empirical  knowledge  ;  for  we  are
well  aware  how  small  the  sum  of  our  knowledge  is  when
compared  with  all  the  wealth  of  life  of  which  our  planet  has
been  the  scene,  and  how  little  the  fragments  which  we  know
make  us  capable  of  discovering  the  path  that  may  have  been
taken  by  the  course  of  earthly  history  as  a  whole.  And  if  we
did  know  all  this  which  we  do  not  know,  it  might  still  be  doubt-
ful how  far  this  earthly  life  could  be  understood  as  a  whole
in  itself  and  without  needing  the  help  of  anything  else  to
explain  it ;  and our  scientific  insight  is  infinitely  far ^rom

176

BOOK  Vir. CHAPTER  II.

penetrating  all  the  ramifications  of  the  connections  by  which
it  may  be  bound  up  with  a  vaster  universe,  which  perhaps
contains  material  for  its  completion.  Thus  history  still  seems
to  us,  as  it  has  seemed  in  all  ages,  to  be  a  path  which  leads
from  an  unknown  beginning  to  an  unknown  end,  and  the
general  views  as  to  its  direction  which  we  believe  we  must
adopt,  cannot  serve  to  indicate  the  course  and  cause  of  its
windings  in  detail

I
I

and
B  adv
H woi

L

CHAPTER III.

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.

Theories  as  to  the  Origin  of  Civilisation — Theories  of  a  Divine  Origin — Organic
Origin  of  Civilisation — Instance  of  Language — Importance  of  Individual
Persons — Laws  of  the  Historic  Order  of  the  World — Statistics — Determinism
and  Freedom — Uniformities  and  Contrasts  of  Development — The  Decay  of
Nations — Influence  of  Transmission  and  Tradition.

§  1.  nniVEiSr  in  antiquity  reflection  was  in  many  ways
-■-i  directed  to  the  origin  of  that  ordered  life,  in  the
enjoyment  of  which  men  then  found  themselves,  and  there
jippeared  even  then  the  same  extreme  views  by  which  opinion
is  now  divided.  Human  civilisation  as  a  whole  seemed  so  ^
wonderful  when  first  apprehended  that  its  origin  appeared  in-
comprehensible except  as  an  express  divine  institution.  Pioua
legends  very  early  sought  to  find  in  the  benefactions  of  the
gods  the  source  of  the  commodities  of  human  life,  partly  of
those  whose  origin  is  still  an  enigma  to  us,  and  also  of  many
others  which  would  not  seem  to  us  to  exceed  the  reach  of
easily  comprehensible  developments  of  human  powers.  The
sense  of  the  evil  in  society  came  to  strengthen  the  melancholy
notion  of  a  past  Golden  Age  in  which  there  lived  innocent
men,  with  simple  hearts,  at  peace  with  each  other  and  with  the
world,  under  the  protection  of  the  gods,  until  growing  know-
ledge of  the  world  brought  coveting  and  strife — or  perhaps  it
was  that  these  latter  awaked  men's  slumbering  capacities  for
knowledge.  With  this  picture  of  a  fair  beginning  and  an  t,^
ill  continuance  was  soon  contrasted  that  of  an  origin  of
brutal  savagery,  from  which  mankind,  schooled  by  suffering
and  experience  and  making  good  use  of  their  lessons,  gradually
advanced  to  the  rich  complexity  of  their  contradictory,
wonderful,  ill-fated  civilisation.  Both  conceptions  have
VOL.  II.  M

178  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  III.

been  repeated  with  innumerable  modifications  by  succeeding
ages ;  generally  with  a  leaning  to  assumptions  which  inter-
fered with  impartiality  of  judgment.

Even  the  old  view,  which  opposed  the  theory  of  earthly
development  to  that  of  divine  origin,  set  out  from  declared
hostility  to  all  religious  contemplation ;  the  rationalistic
Enlightenment  (Aufkldrung)  which  long  governed  opinion  in
modem  times,  was  equally  prone  to  express  depreciation  of  all
which  pointed  to  something  more,  in  the  dim  beginnings  of
history,  than  lucky  chances  and  the  ingenuity  of  busy  brains.
This  Enlightenment  traced  back  the  beginning  of  political  life
to  a  convention  entered  into  by  honest  men  of  remote  antiquity;
language  they  traced  to  an  agreement  to  use  certain  sounds  as
the  most  appropriate  means  of  communication ;  the  maxims  of
morality  were  attributed  partly  to  a  general  recognition  of  the
usefulness  (accidentally  discovered)  of  certain  kinds  of  conduct,
partly  to  the  precepts  of  far-seeing  teachers ;  and  finally,  the
origin  of  religion  was  referred  to  men's  natural  inclination  to
superstition  and  the  artful  use  of  this  by  priestly  cunning.  In
all  this,  deliberate  calculations,  such  as  are  known  only  to
a  somewhat  advanced  civilisation,  were  made  the  producing
causes  of  civilisation  itself,  by  the  Enlightenment — which  thus
failed  in  finding  the  solution  of  its  problem.  But  it  is  not
this  failure,  destined  perhaps  to  befall  other  attempts  of  the
same  kind,  which  has  sharpened  the  aversion  of  the  present
generation  towards  this  mode  of  looking  at  history ;  it  is
the  obvious  endeavour  to  represent  all  this  (which  must  indeed
come  to  pass  through  the  instrumentality  of  men)  as  though  it
were  the  arbitrary  product  of  human  action.  We  cannot,
however,  deny  that  the  theory  we  are  considering  was  due  to
real  need  of  enlightenment  although  it  sought  to  satisfy  the
need  in  a  very  inadequate  fashion.

When  the  opposite  view  was  revived,  it  exceeded  all  modera-
tion and  all  necessity  by  connecting  the  early  history  of  man-
kind with  supramundane  beginnings,  in  ways  which  could  not
afford  the  expected  advantages  even  if  motives  for  preferring
them,  which  were  absent,  had  existed. In  combating  these  views

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  l79

I  would  not  refuse  them  the  consideration  which  is  their  due.
That  historical  life  was  preceded  by  a  primitive  state  of  moral
holiness  and  profound  wisdom,  and  that  all  succeeding  ages
were  taken  up  with  the  decay  of  this  glory  and  a  struggle
against  the  decay — such  a  wholly  perverted  view  of  history
as  this  will  hardly  find  advocates  in  the  present  day.  But  if
there  were  such  they  need  not  be  alarmed  at  the  objection
that  it  is  only  development  from  the  less  to  the  more
perfect,  and  not  progress  in  an  opposite  sense,  that  has  all
natural  analogies  in  its  favour.  He  who  has  once  come  to
regard  history  as  something  more  than  a  mere  natural  process,
who  has  made  up  his  mind  to  regard  it  as  part  of  a  great  and
divine  plan  of  the  universe,  will  also  be  secretly  convinced
that  to  understand  its  course  something  a  little  more  profound
may  be  needed  than  the  simple  formula  of  progress  in  a
straight  line.  That  course  may  perhaps  involve  many  wind-
ings which  are  only  dimly  intelligible  to  us,  but  which  if
clearly  understood  would  disclose  a  striking  and  living  mean-
ing of  infinitely  higher  value  than  the  barren  conceit  of  a
continuous  advance  uninterrupted  by  catastrophes.  It  is  not
in  vain  that  various  ages  and  nations  have  worked  out,  with
devotion  and  longing,  ideas  of  a  fall  from  some  better  state  of
existence,  of  temporal  life  as  a  penance,  and  of  a  final
reconciliation  and  restoration  ;  by  doing  so  they  have  borne
witness  that  if  the  mind  does  not  (thanks  to  material  ana-
logies) forget  its  own  being  and  nature,  it  is  capable  of
beheving  something  differing  widely  from  a  progress  which
(having  no  loss  to  regret)  is  busied  in  producing  with  its  own
hands  all  the  goods  that  it  requires.  But  historical  investi-
gation, however  far  it  has  advanced,  has  come  no  nearer  the
discovery  of  the  existence  on  earth  of  an  ideal  primitive  state,
■  and  has  in  fact  left  it  hardly  disputable  that  our  civilisa-
tion must  have  grown  up  from  simple  and  indigenous
I  beginnings  along  the  path  of  a  gradual  and  much  interrupted
development.
§  2.  Such  an  admission,  however,  does  not  exclude  super-
natural beginnings, only that in the place of an ideal

}

180  BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  IH.

condition  of  primitive  men  there  would  have  to  be  substituted
t  the  thought  of  a  divine  education  by  which  men's  natural
powers  should  have  been  guided  up  to  a  point  at  which  the
species  had  become  capable  of  its  own  further  development.
The  addition,  expressed  or  understood,  of  the  opinion  that
from  that  time  forth  the  divine  guidance  ceased,  shows  us
that  men  imagine  such  guidance  to  have  been  exercised  in
*  primitive  times  in  a  more  express  and  striking  way  than  in
that  later  progress  of  history  which  it  is  just  as  impossible  to
withdraw  altogether  from  its  influence.  In  order  to  estimate
this  opinion  we  will  consider  it  as  manifested  in  more  definite
views.

No  one  will  attribute  the  beginning  of  human  education  to
intercourse  with  angels  who  walked  in  visible  form  upon  the
earth.  We  find  in  primitive  times,  not  infallible  wisdom
which  could  not  have  been  acquired  from  a  merely  human
standpoint,  but  signs  of  an  active  curiosity  which  sometimes
hit  and  sometimes  missed  the  mark ;  not  a  complete
systematization  of  society  which  would  seem  referrible  tc
divine  arrangement,  but  simple  forms  of  life  easily  explicable
as  the  result  of  natural  relations  and  natural  sociality,  and
more  complex  forms  presenting  a  very  human  mixture  of
pride  and  fear,  cunning  and  violence  ;  not  a  faith  the  other-
wise unattainable  truth  of  which  must  have  come  by  revela-
tion, but  religions  in  which  aspirations  after  an  ideal  had
developed  conceptions  of  very  various  worth ;  finally,  no
'  primitive  speech  of  divine  construction,  but  from  the  begin-
ning a  number  of  different  manifestations  of  the  common
faculty  of  speech.  Faultless  perfection  in  all  these  cases
might  make  it  necessary  to  seek  an  explanation  by  reference
to  constant  intercourse  with  superior  beings ;  what  we  actually
find,  however  —  mental  activity  generally,  inventiveness  of
intellect  and  vigorous  constructive  faculty,  but  not  the
exclusion  of  error  —  all  this  does  not  demand  such  an
assumption.

But  for  this  inapplicable  conception  may  be  substituted  an
influence of  the Godhead upon the  human mind just  as

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  181

immediate  though  more  hidden.  We  do  not,  it  may  be  said,
seem  to  find  in  the  course  of  psychic  life  as  at  present  con-
stituted the  conditions  necessary  for  the  initiation  of  a
civilisation  capable  of  being  hereafter  transmitted  with  ease.
A  state  of  the  mental  capacities  differing  generally  from  that
which  we  now  see  must  have  been  the  basis  of  such  a
beginning,  and  this  may  perhaps  have  been  transformed  to
the  existing  constitution  of  mental  life  by  the  very  reactions
naturally  accompanying  progress.  This  view  takes  two
different  and  more  definite  forms,  neither  very  probable.
That  the  general  laws  according  to  which  the  events  of
psychic  life  are  combined  in  men  and  animals  were  different
in  primitive  times  from  what  they  are  now  (which  is  the  one
form),  is  a  supposition  that  to  us  seems  incredible,  and  that
can  in  no  case  lead  to  any  useful  results.  For  other  laws  of
the  train  of  ideas,  if  not  reinforced  by  other  and  copious
sources  of  knowledge  or  by  extraordinary  mental  activity,
would  either  (1)  not  lead  to  new  and  otherwise  inaccessible
developments,  or  (2)  would  lead  to  developments  merely
strange  and  singular;  they  could  not  lead  to  those  from
which  our  historical  civilisation  has  in  fact  grown  up  without
any  substantial  interruption.  And  the  same  would  hold  of
that  other  interpretation  which  sets  forth  that  it  is  the  moods,
the  inclinations,  the  receptivity,  and  the  aspirations  of  the
soul — which  are  subject  to  the  general  laws  of  mental  life  as
being  the  living  objects  to  which  these  laws  apply — that  it  is
these,  and  not  the  laws  themselves,  which  were  once  constituted
and  combined  in  a  fashion  different  from  that  which  obtains
in  existing  human  nature.  No  doubt  this  significant  psychic
nature  may  be  very  different  in  different  individuals,  since  its
manifestations  are  not  produced  by  general  laws,  although
they  are  formally  determined  by  such,  and  the  development
of  their  results  similarly  regulated ;  but  he  who  would
exaggerate the  peculiarity of  men's  primitive,  as compared

I  with  their  present,  mental  state,  likening  it  to  the  instinct  of
brutes,  to  demoniac  possession,  or  to  the  twilight  of  clairvoyant

182  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IIL

condition  is  not  wildly  aberrant  and  extraordinary  phaeno-
rnena,  but  the  beginnings  of  our  own  familiar  development.
Therefore,  without  denying  that  the  mental  life  of  the  earliest
antiquity  may  have  been  so  different  from  our  own  that  we
cannot  fully  realize  it,  we  yet  hold  that  the  assumption  of
unlikeness  above  referred  to  is  not  particularly  useful  even
when  kept  within  the  limits  of  moderation,  and  that  when
carried  to  excess  it  is  of  no  value  whatever  for  the  explanation
of  that  which  we  want  to  have  explained.

I  am  compelled  to  regard  with  the  same  scruples  a  view
which  seeks  to  find  the  nidus  of  that  primitive  mental  con-
dition specially  in  the  religious  life,  or  in  God's  presence  in
the  devout  consciousness  of  man.  Certainly  like-mindedness
in  religion  is  one  of  the  most  essential  bonds  upon  which  the
union  of  a  people  can  depend,  and  the  greater  the  contrast
between  the  faith  of  any  people  and  that  of  their  neighbours
the  more  stubbornly  often  has  such  a  nation  kept  itself
uncontaminated.  But  we  should  not  be  justified  in  asserting
that  without  the  religious  bond  all  other  natural  inducements
to  social  life  would  only  suffice  at  most  to  constitute  a  horde,
not  a  nation.  That  language  should  have  been  the  same  for
all  mankind  in  primitive  times  is  not  made  comprehensible,
with  regard  either  to  its  origin  or  its  construction,  by  the
supposition  of  unanimity  of  faith  ;  and  we  are  equally  in  the
dark  as  to  what  must  have  happened  for  a  division  of  faith
(due  to  unknown  causes)  to  have  led  to  a  confusion  of  tongues,
through  which  new  and  varying  appellations  were  given  to  all
those  objects  of  common  life  which  were  not  in  intimate
connection  with  the  sphere  of  religious  thought.  It  is  easy
to  give  the  general  answer,  that  there  is  nothing  so  separate
and  isolated  in  human  life  as  not  to  be  affected  by  religious
belief  and  its  peculiar  character.  But  if  one  is  not  satisfied
with  the  vague  devotional  thrill  caused  by  this  indefinite
expression  of  a  true  thought,  one  sees  what  degrees  and  pro-
portions there  are  in  this  connection  of  human  things  with
divine.  Neither  in  life  nor  in  science  is  it  possible,  necessary,
cr  desirable  that  true  religion  should  strive  to  exhibit  what  is

THE  FOKCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  183

secular — the  course  of  Nature  and  human  freedom — as  the
immediate  shadow  and  reflection  of  what  is  divine;  that  it
should  deny  or  grudge  to  these  the  comparative  inde-
pendence with  which,  by  native  strength  in  the  j&rst  place,
they  produce  their  own  special  results.

§  3.  We  have  yet  to  glance  at  a  view,  a  favourite  of
modern  times,  in  which  the  idea  of  a  mysterious  beginning  of
human  civilisation  approximates  to  the  thought  of  natural
development.  The  rationalistic  fashion  of  explaining  every
coherent  department  in  the  whole  frame  of  civilisation  as
constructed  out  of  a  multitude  of  separately  insignificant
accidents  and  inventions,  having  fallen  into  disfavour  as  a
caricature  of  mechanical  action,  it  has  become  customary  to
ascribe  the  forms  of  society,  the  growth  of  morality,  the
construction  of  language,  and  the  coherence  of  religious
belief,  to  organic  development.  Two  points  become  prominent
when  we  ask  what  meaning  can  here  be  assigned  to  this  term
organic — for  which  a  long  defence  will  have  to  be  made  if
at  the  last  day  account  has  to  be  given  for  every  idle  word.
In  the  first  place,  that  which  has  an  organic  origin,  being
withdrawn  from  the  region  of  conscious  invention  and  free
choice  which  belong  to  us  as  men,  is  supposed  to  grow
necessarily  out  of  the  innate  constitution  of  our  mental  being.
And  on  the  other  hand,  that  also  which  is  realized  in  the
intercourse  of  different  individuals  as  an  advantage  of  civilisa-
tion in  which  they  all  participate,  is  held  not  to  result  from
reciprocal  action  of  which  they  are  conscious  or  which  can  be
pointed  out,  but  to  be  the  immediate  product  of  a  mind  that
is  common  to  them  all.

Now  the  rule  within  us  of  an  unconscious  necessity  needs  no
demonstration.  Each  individual  sensation  in  us  bears  witness
to  it,  for  we  do  not  choose  what  the  sensation  shall  be  with
which  we  respond  to  the  external  stimulus  ;  every  feeling  of
harmony  or  discord  which  we  experience  is  the  involuntary
expression  of  something  that  takes  place  in  us  without  our
comprehension  or  co-operation  ;  if  a  melody  to  which  we  are
listening  is  broken  off  unfinished,  we  are  driven  to  seek for

184  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IH,

its  conclusion,  not  because  we  understand  at  all  why  the
conclusion  should  be  added,  but  because  our  soul,  with  un-
comprehended  power,  struggles  to  emerge  from  the  state  of
having  begun  some  movement  but  not  carried  it  out :  and  it
must  be  in  the  same  way  that  in  the  case  of  more  com-
plicated processes,  causes  of  which  we  remain  unconscious,
arouse  our  efforts  and  guide  them  with  sure  and  arbitrary
power.  Scientific  research  may  perhaps  some  day  succeed  in
clearing  up  these  obscure  processes ;  but  however  much  may
be  accomplished  in  this  direction,  the  difficulties  connected
with  the  beginnings  of  human  civilisation  would  not  be
lessened  thereby.  These  difficulties  are  to  be  found  in  the
fact,  not  that  a  coherent  whole  of  mental  life  is  developed
in  the  individual  soul,  but  that  such  developments  occurring
in  different  souls  coincide  to  form  a  common  intellectual
possession.  And  it  is  plain  that  those  who  can  find  the
explanation  of  this  in  the  notion  of  organic  origin,  labour
under  a  delusion.

Let  us  look  at  language  for  instance.  Each  individual
may  be  forced  by  an  unconscious  natural  impulse  to  manifest
his  mental  condition  by  definite  sounds ;  but  this  manifesta-
tion becomes  language  only  through  the  comprehension  and
recognition  of  the  hearer.  Now  capacity  of  excitation,
structure  of  thought,  and  connection  of  ideas,  may  be  as  like
as  you  will  in  members  of  the  same  tribe,  but  this  harmony
would  never  impel  them  to  choose  with  mechanical  uniformity
the  same  sounds  for  the  same  ideas,  and  the  same  inflections
to  express  the  same  relations.  For  the  spoken  word  is  tlie
immediate  reflection  not  of  objects,  which  are  the  same  for  all,
but  of  the  impressions  produced  by  these,  which  are  different
for  different  individuals.  Indeed,  in  the  same  individual  the
same  stimulus  does  not  produce  at  all  times  the  same
impression,  owing  to  his  varying  moods ;  and  language  as  it
grew  up  would  greet  objects  with  ever  varying  names  if  the
name  once  given  did  not  blend  so  completely  in  our  remem-
brance with  the  idea  of  the  thing  itseK  that  later,  even  when
we  learn  to  know  the  thing  from  quite  a  different  point of

THE  FORCES  THAT  WOEK  IN  HISTORY.  185

view,  the  name  recurs  to  us  as  one  of  its  most  constant  and
important  properties.  And  certainly  also,  with  whatever
solemn  obscurity  we  may  imagine  the  organic  speech-impulse
to  operate,  every  sound  must  have  been  pronounced  for  the
first  time  by  some  individual  mouth  with  lips  thick  or  thin.
Originally  it  belonged  to  him  only  who  had  framed  it ;  it
could  only  become  common  property  when  others  divined  its
signification  and  repeated  it  with  the  same  meaning.  How
this  happens  is  shown  in  a  general  way  by  the  ease  with
which  children  of  very  ordinary  abilities  master  the  materials
of  speech  without  express  learning,  and  grow  familiar  with
inflectional  analogies.  But  the  first  origin  of  language  still
presents  special  and  unsolved  difficulties.

If  a  great  number  of  individuals  with  equal  claims  to
consideration  had  simultaneously  taken  part  in  its  formation,
there  would  have  been  a  variety  of  quite  independent  names
for  some  ideas,  and  hence  a  superfluity  which  would  only
have  been  reduced  by  the  subsequent  necessity  of  reciprocal
intelligibility.  This  did  perhaps  actually  take  place  to  a
certain  extent ;  the  heterogeneous  store  of  roots  which  we
find  in  languages  may  be  the  result  of  a  mutual  adoption  and
surrender  of  words  formed  independently  by  dijEferent  men.
The  same  simple  idea  seems  to  have  been  originally  denoted
by  several  distinct  roots  of  different  sound,  which  later
(because  the  supply  was  in  excess  of  the  need)  came  severally
to  express  the  different  shades  of  meaning  attaching  to  the
idea ;  thus  it  happens  that  there  are  not  connected  series  of
words  coresponding  to  connected  series  of  ideas  in  such  a  way
as  that,  for  instance,  the  names  of  colours  should  be  more  like
one  another  than  like  the  names  of  impressions  of  other  kinds,
or  that  the  appellations  of  trees  should  have  a  greater  etymo-
logical resemblance  to  one  another  than  to  the  appellations  of
birds.  This  systemless  incoherence  of  the  material  of  language
would  indeed  result  if  objects  affected  the  linguistic  imagina-
tion of  a  single  individual  not  similarly,  in  as  far  as  they
were  similar,  but  in  a  way  varying  according  to  accidental
and  varying  conditions ;  and  we  see  that  if  language  grew  from

186  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  III.

the  concurrent  contributions  of  many  persons,  there  must
have  been  still  more  reason  for  this  variety.  It  would  have
increased  past  all  possibility  of  comprehension  if  (as  we
suggested  above)  the  number  of  equally  influential  language-
builders  had  been  considerable.

But  there  is  no  doubt  that  language  did  not  spring  into
existence  like  the  statutes  of  a  suddenly  formed  society,  but
that  it  grew  up  gradually  within  a  family,  or  clan,  or  tribe  ;  and
that  as  one  generation  succeeded  another  in  the  natural  course,
the  store  of  words  already  formed  would  be  transmitted  with
the  same  authority  as  other  traditional  arrangements.  The
creative  impulse  soon  dies  out  in  any  department  when  it
finds  patterns  provided,  by  imitating  which  its  wants  may  be
satisfied.  Therefore  an  existing  word  prevents  others  from
springing  up  to  express  the  same  idea ;  or  if  they  do  spring
up,  they  disappear  like  the  numerous  words  invented  by
children,  which  are  lost  when  their  mode  of  thought  grows
into  harmony  with  that  of  adults.  So  it  happened  that  only
so  great  a  variety  survived  as  resulted  from  a  process  of
mutual  accommodation  between  the  contributions  of  those
families  (not  very  numerous)  who  had  been  independent
constructors  of  language.

But  in  this  way  we  reach  merely  a  generally  used  store  of
words  and  not  the  grammatical  construction  of  language.
There  are  very  many  different  rules  for  denoting  different
relations  by  compounding,  blending,  and  modifying  roots,  and
each  of  these  modes,  again,  allows  of  course  of  an  innumerable
variety  of  applications.  How  among  this  abundance  of
possibilities  a  logical  construction  of  language  could  have
grown  up  is  an  enigma.  Besides,  one  cannot  believe  that
such  a  construction  could  be  produced  in  short  time  and  by
few  men ;  but  if  we  allow  a  long  time,  this  does  not  make  it
easier  to  understand  how  amidst  the  succession  of  different
generations  and  among  a  very  numerous  people,  just  one
single  plan  of  construction  out  of  the  many  possible,  should
have  gained  universal  recognition  and  mastery.  One  would
conjecture  that  in  such  a  long  course  of time  very  many

THE  FOEOES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  187

varying  attempts  at  construction  would  be  made  by  many
different  persons,  attempts  which  could  hardly  have  been
consolidated  to  the  unity  of  one  logical  construction  even  by
the  compensatory  process  of  mutual  accommodation.  But  do
we  find  this  logical  consistency  existing  throughout  in  the
grammatical  construction  of  language,  or  are  there  here  too
traces  of  a  complex  origin  ?  Do  not  most  languages  make
simultaneous  use  of  different  kinds  of  construction,  using  root-
modifications  together  with  prefixes  and  suffixes  ?  Are  there
not  various  forms  of  declension  and  conjugation  having  all  the
same  meaning  and  value  ?  In  this  abundance  of  forms — forms
which  in  all  developed  languages  are  the  last  to  experience
the  transforming  influence  of  the  principle  which  has  come  to
be  predominant — we  may  perhaps  find  survivals  of  construc-
tions which  were  originally  diverse.  Is  the  superabundance  of
cases,  of  tenses,  and  of  moods  really  to  be  ascribed  to  an
inexpressibly  delicate  sensibility  on  the  part  of  those  with
whom  language  originated — a  sensibility  that  from  the  very
beginning  and  as  it  were  at  one  stroke  provided,  with  syste-
matic completeness,  for  the  expression  of  the  finest  shades  of
thought — or  can  we  not  rather  trace  in  these  various  forms
the  remains  of  originally  diverse  attempts  at  formation  of
language,  which  attempts — since  they  held  their  ground —
came  as  a  consequence  of  their  superfluity  to  be  used  for  the
denotation  of  those  fine  shades  of  thought  ?  Eecent  progress
in  the  investigation  of  language  makes  me  feel  more  sure  than
I  did  formerly  that  many  of  the  latter  questions  may  be
answered  in  the  affirmative,  and  that  many  of  the  examples
adduced  may  be  really  conclusive;  meanwhile  what  I  have
said  here  is  said  not  so  much  for  its  own  sake  as  in  order
to  explain  what  that  is  which  we  are  seeking,  and  which  a
practised  eye  might  perhaps  really  detect  under  other  forms.

And  however  it  may  be  in  the  special  case  of  language,
our  assertion  will  yet  hold  good  in  general.  The  origin  of
every  mental  possession  held  by  men  in  common  supposes  a
period  in  which  by  reciprocal  appropriation,  surrender,  and
accommodation,  the  contributions  brought  by  individuals  and

188  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  111.

resulting  from  an  organic  necessity  of  tlieir  nature,  have
become  blended  into  one  coherent  whole.  It  is  only  indi-
vidual living  minds  which  are  centres  of  action  in  the  course
of  history;  every  principle  that  is  to  be  realized  and  to
become  a  power  must  be  first  intensified  in  them  to  individual
activity,  and  then,  through  a  process  of  reciprocal  action
between  them,  become  extended  and  generally  recognised.
How  commonplace  this  remark  is — yet  it  almost  seems  as
though  through  the  unintelligent  use  of  that  comparison  of
organic  origin  we  had  come  to  think  that,  when  language
began,  individual  words  fell  ready  made  like  snow-flakes  from
the  atmosphere  of  a  general  consciousness  upon  the  heads  of
individuals,  or  as  if  works  of  art,  the  results  of  national
imagination,  could  arise  like  clouds  in  the  sky  and  grow
larger  by  the  spontaneous  addition  of  formless  vapours.

^  4.  But  this  organic  view  of  history  would  banish  from
human  life  not  only  the  mechanism  of  reciprocal  action,  but
with  it  also  every  element  of  chance.  Among  the  most
choice  accomplishments  of  the  theory  is  the  demonstration
{-post  facto  indeed)  that  events  must  necessarily  have  happened
as  they  did,  and  that  being  logically  consistent  developments
of  the  spirit  of  the  age  they  could  not  have  been  prevented
by  any  exercise  of  individual  free  will.  Now  certainly  no
individual  power  can  make  itself  felt  in  history  unless  it
knows  how  to  subserve  some  prevailing  motive  of  action,
or  is  capable  of  in  some  way  alleviating  human  suffering.
But  on  the  other  hand,  those  mighty  men  who  through
inventive  genius  or  obstinate  constancy  of  will  have  had
a  decided  influence  upon  the  course  of  history,  are  by
no  means  merely  the  offspring  and  outcome  of  their  age.
In  most  cases  the  general  spirit  of  humanity,  the  organic
evolution  of  which  we  extol,  has  produced  no  more  than
a  feeling  of  present  pressure,  a  yearning  mood,  or  a  devout
desire  for  change.  It  has  stated  the  problems,  a  solution  of
which  was  wanted ;  but  the  fulfilment  of  these  desires  and
the  special  mode  of  fulfilment  are  works  the  doing  and  desert
of  which  belong  to  a  few  individuals. In  other  cases  there

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  189

has  not  even  been  tliis  precedent  sense  of  helpless  want,  but
the  heavy  unintelligent  opposition  of  the  majority  has  been
laboriously  overcome  by  the  successful  mental  effort  of  a  few,
who  have  thus  given  to  that  majority  new  aims  of  action.
And  finally,  where  individual  strength  has  actually  taken  up
the  tasks  of  the  age,  there  has  perhaps  seldom  been  an  exact
accomplishment  of  what  the  moment  required,  no  more  and
no  less ;  in  most  cases  there  has  been  added  much  both  of
good  and  bad  which,  extremely  effective  in  itself,  yet  went
beyond  the  immediate  need,  or  was  altogether  beside  it.  In
innumerable  cases  the  anticipated  development  has  been
interrupted  ;  the  skilful  calculation  of  far-seeing  minds  has
often  been  perverted  by  some  strong  tide  of  feeling  from  its
original  purpose,  and  for  long  periods  been  used  for  artful
ends.  Modes  of  thought  which  under  appropriate  conditions
were  adopted  by  men  of  genius,  have  withstood  progress  for
centuries  with  incredible  tenacity.  Forms  of  art  worked  out
by  great  minds,  but  not  of  universal  validity,  have  continued
to  maintain  their  predominance  when  they  had  become  out  of
harmony  with  the  altered  dispositions  of  mankind ;  and  even
in  science  inherited  errors  drag  on  like  a  slow  disease.  What
we  can  thus  observe  now  in  history  we  would  also  claim  as
explanatory  of  its  beginnings.  It  is  of  course  true  that  all
men  had  in  early  times  similar  capacities  and  wants,  but  all
did  not  take  an  equal  share  in  satisfying  human  impulses;  the
germs  of  civilisation  did  not,  like  the  upward  growth  of  a
young  forest,  shoot  forth  simultaneously  over  wide  extents
with  organic  necessity  and  regularity,  but  the  wandering,
incapable,  uninventive  impulse  of  the  whole  was  indebted  to
individual  happy  strokes  of  genius  for  its  first  distinct  ideals
and  the  first  satisfactions  which  paved  the  way  of  its  advance.
Meanwhile  this  influence  of  persons  no  doubt  varies  in
magnitude  in  different  domains  of  human  activity,  and  accord-
ing to  the  divergent  characters  of  different  periods  and  the
multiplicity  of  conditions  on  which  may  depend  the  action
and  reaction  between  individual  force  and  the  mass  of  man-
kind. It  is  dependence  upon  Nature  which  most  universally

I

<l

190  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  III.

rouses  the  inventive  ingenuity  of  men,  and  the  thoughts
which  here  help  them  to  obtain  what  is  most  necessary  arise
from  such  simple  combinations  of  ordinary  experiences  that
the  elementary  furniture  which  we  find  among  the  most
different  peoples  —  weapons,  implements,  woven  stuff,  and
ornaments — is  easily  intelligible  as  the  production  of  a  general
instinct  without  any  special  invention  by  individuals.  But
all  those  higher  and  more  refined  aids  which  have  led  to  a
more  productive  command  over  Nature,  are  connected  with  the
names  of  individual  discoverers ;  between  its  first  beginnings
and  the  period  of  universally  diffused  culture  to  which  we
are  perhaps  approaching,  life  has  in  this  respect  too  had  its
age  of  heroes.  And  as  in  other  departments  so  here  also
there  is  a  gradual  transition  from  one  stage  to  the  other.
When  any  sphere  of  thought  (as  for  instance  Natural  Science
in  the  present  day)  has  reached  a  grade  of  development  which
furnishes  not  only  innumerable  factual  items  of  knowledge,
but  also  general  forms  of  investigation  and  clear  indications  of
the  regions  in  which  answers  to  yet  unsolved  riddles  must  be
sought,  then  the  current  of  inquiry  once  set  in  motion  pro-
duces in  swift  succession  a  multitude  of  useful  inventions,
which  seem  to  spring  from  the  general  mind.  This  seems  to
be  the  case,  because  the  multitude  of  individuals  actively
interested,  and  the  vigorous  action  and  reaction  between  them,
throws  into  the  background  the  particular  contribution  of  each
several  person.  Further,  the  general  laws  which  science  shows
to  be  at  the  foundation  of  the  vast  commerce  of  modern
times,  are  familiar  to  every  one  in  their  application  to  the
simple  relations  of  ordinary  everyday  life ;  the  ill  results  of
acting  in  opposition  to  them  are  so  obvious  in  the  case  of
individuals,  that  a  great  number  of  slight  modifications  of  a
man's  course  of  action  are  the  immediate  result  of  any  un-
successful attempt  on  his  part  to  contravene  them.  Thus
it  seems  that  the  whole  system  of  our  arrangements  for  the
satisfaction  of  men's  wants  goes  on  improving  progressively
by  its  own  inherent  force,  and  without  needing  to  be  pioneered
by  the  inventions  of  individuals. Nevertheless  these  laws.

I

TEE  FORCES  THAT  WOEK  En HISTORY.  19 1

like  all  simple  truths,  become  hard  to  trace  when  with  increas-
ing intercourse  they  have  to  be  applied  to  a  group  of  relationa
which  are  very  numerous,  and  perhaps  themselves  either
unknown  or  modifying  one  another  after  an  unknown  fashion.
To  have  shown  that  these  laws  are  valid,  and  how  they  are
valid,  even  under  such  circumstances,  is  unquestionably  a  great
achievement  of  science,  and  it  has  not  been  accomplished
without  help  from  the  creative  genius  of  individual  persons.  ^
The  arrangements  of  social  and  political  life  have  also  passed
through  the  two  stages  of  development  which  we  are  here
distinguishing.  The  universal  homogeneity  of  human  nature
and  its  wants  no  doubt  lead  in  the  first  place  with  uninventive  j^

necessity  to  rules  of  intercourse  which  develop  in  the  same
way  and  succeed  one  another  in  the  same  order  everywhere.
But  even  if  the  purely  indigenous  development  of  a  society
could  be  left  altogether  to  the  organic  interaction  of  its  own
individual  forces,  the  political  guidance  of  the  society  under
difficult  external  conditions,  and  the  choice  of  the  right  path
at  the  right  moment,  would  be  always  dependent  upon  the  ■/  -I
wisdom  or  folly  of  individual  men.  Hence  it  was  that
antiquity  always  set  at  the  beginning  of  its  political  histories  ^ —
the  name  of  some  individual  lawgiver,  not  that  they  might
derive  from  the  individual  power  of  some  master-mind,  the
first  foundation  of  order — since  this  indeed  could  of  necessity
only  be  developed  by  means  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  a
number — but  that  they  might  derive  thence  the  first  firm
consolidation  of  that  order,  and  such  accommodation  as  had
been  arrived  at,  of  difficulties  occurring  in  the  application  of
law  to  concrete  cases.  We  scarcely  need  to  add  in  conclusion,
that  though  often  ill-defined  forms  of  enthusiasm  seem  to  be
of  obscure  origin,  yet  this  is  not  the  case  with  religions,  which  I  ^r— -
never  appear  in  history  without  some  founder ;  here  too  it
falls  to  the  concentrated  strength  of  individual  minds  to
satisfy  wants  which  under  similar  circumstances  are  always
alike  among  the  homogeneous  masses  of  mankind.

The  incalculableness  with  which,  for  human  eyes  at  least,  /_-

individual  greatness  influences  history  may  seem  to  threaten

192  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  III.

the  logical  consistency  of  all  historical  development,  and  to
reduce  it  to  a  continual  fluctuation  in  different  directions.
_t/  Yet  any  personal  power  requires  for  its  efficacy  the  receptivity
of  the  masses ;  the  want  of  this  or  the  presence  of  a  hostile
disposition  prevents  the  working  out  both  of  all  the  good  and  of
all  the  bad  effects  which  a  remarkable  mind  tends  to  produce,
and  prevents  likewise  the  realization  of  all  the  good  exclusively,
or  all  the  bad  exclusively ;  this  is,  of  course,  especially  the  case
with  respect  to  anything  which  is  in  opposition  to  the  require-
ments of  the  hour,  or  foreign  to  them.  The  more  active  the
reciprocal  contact  of  men  in  society  is,  and  the  more  intricate
their  exchange  of  thought,  and  the  larger  the  bodies  of  men
are  among  whom  this  contact  and  this  exchange  of  thought
prevail,  the  more  are  those  circumstances  changed  by  which
the  influence  of  individuals  is  conditioned.  The  scene  of  their
possible  action  is  certainly  enlarged,  but  the  probable  magni-
tude of  their  influence  is  decreased  with  regard  to  all  that  is
not  a  direct  continuation  or  fulfilment  of  projects  already
begun  and  wants  already  felt.  For  it  is  only  where  this  is
the  case  that  a  man  can  reckon  upon  the  collective  strength
of  a  public  opinion  and  sentiment  which  has  already  taken
into  consideration  all  possible  circumstances  of  life,  and  made
up  its  mind  about  them  somehow,  and  which  is  not  likely  to
let  itself  be  easily  detached  as  it  were  from  the  soil  to  which
it  clings  by  so  many  roots,  and  carried  away  by  the  arbitrary
will  of  a  single  individual  into  some  new  order  of  develop-
ment. Thus  as  the  ascendency  of  leading  characters  seems,
even  on  an  external  view  of  history,  to  disappear  as  their
number  multiplies,  there  arises  a  general  activity  of  stimu-
lating and  stimulated  elements,  presenting  the  appearance  of
organic  growth.

§  5.  Now  the  more  the  wholly  incalculable  disturbances
caused  by  free  individual  minds  are  in  the  end  outbalanced
by  the  opposing  invariableness  of  that  human  nature  which
always  remains  the  same,  and  those  conditions  of  earthly  life
which  are  always  alike,  the  more  are  we  entitled  to  inquire
for  universal  laws  to  which  the  historical  course  of  things  is

TflS  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORy.  193

^uliordinated. '  The  assumption  of  their  existence  is  not  j
incompatible  with  the  idea  of  a  plan  by  which  history  is  i
guided.  For  though  such  a  plan  presupposes  a  unity  of
history,  involving  the  condition  that  each  member  of  the
whole  series  can  occur  but  once,  and  that  no  two  are  inter-
changeable, yet  it  may  be  that  the  above-mentioned  similarity
between  all  the  subjects  of  human  history,  and  the  parallelism
between  the  forces  operating  upon  them,  may  produce  resem-
blances between  the  course  of  one  individual  stage  of  develop-
ment and  another,  while  if  we  take  the  whole  series  we  find
that  these  resemblances  are  gradually  repeated  on  higher  and
higher  levels,  and  are  thus  really  specially  distinguished  one
from  another.  However,  the  attempt  to  mark  out  these
resemblances  according  to  general  historical  laws  is  very  much
impeded  by  the  difficulty  of  determining  the  transforming
influence  which  the  peculiarity  of  each  member  of  the  series
has  on  the  course  which  we  should  expect  to  be  taken  by
those  events  with  which  he  is  connected,  if  we  were  guided
by  the  analogy  of  other  examples.  Hence,  though  history  is
so  much  extolled  as  the  teacher  of  men,  but  little  use  is  made
by  men  of  its  teachings.  Every  age  thinks  that  it  must
regard  the  peculiarities  of  its  wants  and  its  position  as  new
conditions  which  abrogate  the  applicability  of  those  general
points  of  view  that  are  due  to  the  reflection  of  previous  ages.
And,  indeed,  many  historical  laws  which  have  been  spoken  of
liX|  are  of  very  doubtful  validity,  and  are  hardly  transferable  from
'^"  one  period  to  another.  They  are  often  only  applicable  when
all  the  conditions  of  the  individual  case  from  which  they  have
Mt  been  abstracted  are  restored ;  and  when  that  is  done  they
cease  to  be  laws,  and  become  mere  descriptions  of  that  which
has  happened  under  certain  circumstances,  and  which  we  are
by  no  means  justified  in  expecting  to  happen  again  under
^P  similar  circumstances.  This  inexactness  appears  in  all  cases
in  which  people,  without  being  able  to  go  back  to  the  separate
effective  elements  of  a  complex  event,  attempt  merely  to
discover  the  final  outcome  of  the  course  of  events,  by  a  com-
■  parison  of  experiences  in  the  gross;  the  inexactness  can  only
K VOL.  II.  N

194  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  m.

be  avoided  in  these  cases  in  the  same  way  as  in  other  cases!
We  want  a  Social  Mechanics  which  can  enlarge  psychology
beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  individual,  and  teach  us  to  know
the  course,  the  conditions,  and  the  results  of  those  actions  and
reactions  which  must  take  place  between  the  inner  states  of
many  individuals,  bound  together  by  natural  and  social
relations.  Such  a  psychology  would  furnish  us,  for  the  first
time,  not  with  graphic  pictures  of  individual  stages  of  historic
development  and  of  the  succession  of  the  different  stages,  but
with  rules  which  would  enable  us  to  compute  the  future  from
the  conditions  of  the  present ;  or  to  speak  more  exactly,  not
the  future  from  the  present,  but  a  later  past  from  an  earlier
past.  For  even  in  the  construction  of  ideals  it  is  best  not
to  be  exalted  above  measure ;  we  shall  never  bring  any  such
mechanics  to  so  great  perfection  as  to  be  able  by  it  to  sway
the  future ;  it  will  be  enough  if  it  enable  us  to  explain  the
concatenation  of  past  occurrences  when  they  have  occurred,
and  if  with  reference  to  the  future  it  establish  probabilities,
action  in  accordance  with  which  is  wiser  than  any  other
course.

Now  it  is  natural  that  we  should  first  seek  to  establish  the
rule  of  such  universal  laws  within  short  periods,  during
which  we  may  regard  the  whole  sum  of  conditions  upon  which
the  course  of  events  depends,  and  which  we  cannot  analyse
exhaustively,  as  an  unknown  factor  which  remains  almost
invariable.  And  here  men  think  they  have  discovered  that  it
is  only  where  our  view  is  bounded  by  a  strictly  limited
horizon  that  the  appearance  of  freedom  and  indefiniteness  is
presented  to  us  ;  that  if  in  dealing  with  events,  we  take  large
numbers  and  wide  surveys,  we  find  that  not  only  does  the
physical  life  of  mankind  proceed  with  well-established  regu-
larity in  life  and  death,  in  the  relative  numbers  of  both
sexes,  and  in  the  increase  of  population,  but  that  also  the
manifestations  of  mental  life  are  determined  by  universal
laws,  even  to  the  number  and  nature  of  crimes  committed  in
equal  spaces  of  time.  Not  indeed  by  immutable  laws ;  for
just  as  there  is  a  slow  change  in  the  sum  total  of  unknown]

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  195

circumstances  by  which  events  are  conditioned,  so  also  there
is  an  alteration  from  time  to  time  in  the  formula  which
expresses  the  law  of  their  occurrence.  There  is  nothing,  how-
ever, to  prevent  our  conceiving  of  these  very  alterations  of
laws  as  themselves  subject  to  another  and  more  compre-
hensive formula,  since  the  changes  of  that  sum  total  of  con-
ditions on  which  these  laws  depend  are  due  almost  entirely
to  the  effects  of  those  states  of  human  society  which
themselves  come  and  go  according  to  law.  If  by  the
method  of  taking  large  numbers  it  has  been  made  out  at
what  age,  on  an  average,  great  poets  produce  their  greatest
work,  what  is  to  hinder  us  from  seeking  to  discover,  not  only
how  many  remarkable  men  of  every  kind  (expressed  either  in
whole  numbers  or  in  decimals)  appear  in  every  century,  but
also  how  in  the  course  of  thousands  of  years  this  proportion
alters  according  to  some  law  ?  We  may  easily  imagine  how  in
this  way  all  kinds  of  formulae  may  be  arrived  at,  expressive  of
the  acceleration  and  breadth  and  depth  and  colouring  of  the
current  of  historical  progress — formulae  which  if  applied  to
particulars  would  be  found  to  be  utterly  inexact,  but  which  can
yet  claim  to  express  the  true  law  of  history  as  freed  from
disturbing  individual  influences.

Very  closely  connected  with  this  way  of  regarding  the
matter  is  one  of  the  very  worst  of  all  the  views  which  banish
freedom  from  historical  development.  That  veneration  of
forms  instead  of  content — itself  one  of  the  most  dangerous
errors  to  which  our  thought  is  liable — which  is  vindicated  by
the  view  alluded  to,  could  not  be  exaggerated  in  any  more
senseless  way  than  by  the  final  acceptance  of  a  mere  realiza-
tion of  statistic  relations  as  the  aim  and  the  informing  Idea
of  history.  He  who,  following  oriental  Pantheism,  believes
not  only  that  he  encounters,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  order
of  the  world,  an  eternal  alternation  of  genesis  and  dissolution,
but  thinks  that  he  may  also  regard  this  form  of  occurrence  as
being  itself  the  most  profound  meaning  and  the  true  secret  of
K  reality — he  can  at  least  give  himself  up  with  misty  feelings
■  of  enthusiasm to  the  awful  and  exalted  pleasure  which  the

I

196  BOOK  Vir. CHAPTER  IlL

thought  of  such  a  course  of  events  produces  in  us.  He  who
after  any  other  fashion  believes  that  he  finds  in  history  nothing
but  the  rule  of  an  iron  necessity,  must  hold  that  this  is  in
itself  full  of  meaning ;  he  seeks  to  find  this  meaning  in  some
kind  or  other  of  justice,  according  to  which  the  content  and
nature  of  any  condition  of  things  being  what  they  are,  allow  and
demand  the  effect  which  takes  place.  To  such  a  concatenation
in  thought,  the  motives  of  which  at  least  are  reasonable,  the
mind  may  conceivably  sacrifice  the  idea  of  its  own  freedom  il
it  finds  in  this  scheme  no  place  for  it.  But  on  the  other
haud,  it  would  be  an  instance  of  unparalleled  perversity  to  see
the  guiding  ideals  of  the  order  of  the  world  in  the  establishment
of  regular  numerical  relations,  or  in  the  fact  that  events  happen
in  accordance  with  such  relations.  And  yet  here  I  am  not  alto-
gether beating  the  air,  and  my  fear  that  even  this  attempt — the
attempt  to  make  us  thus  believe  in  such  "  shadows  in  the  cloud  "
and  nothing  else — will  be  essayed,  is  not  quite  without  founda-
tion. For  we  do  actually  meet,  not  infrequently,  with  what
is  the  beginning  of  this  very  error.  It  is  with  some  pride,
and  not  without  something  of  the  thrill  of  awe  which  may
accompany  the  discovery  of  an  ultimate  mystery,  that  people
caricature  careful  investigations  (the  value  of  which  we  do
not  depreciate),  declaring  that  the  tale  of  yearly  crime  is
paid  by  mankind  with  greater  regularity  than  that  of  govern-
mental imposts.  It  is  plain  that  in  saying  this  they  think
they  have  affirmed  not  a  mere  fact  resulting  from  unknown
conditions  and  changing  as  these  change,  but  a  fundamental
law  which  with  mysterious  power  can  always  find  the  means
of  its  realization,  and  work  itself  out  whatever  may  be  the
opposition  of  unfavourable  circumstances.

This  erroneous  view  will  indeed  hardly  be  put  forth  as  a
doctrinal  assertion  concerning  the  meaning  pf  history ;  but  it
secretly  disturbs  just  judgment  in  the  matter  by  causing  a
confusion  of  thought,  and  this  the  more  easily  because  it  is
not  equally  wrong  with  regard  to  all  departments  of  events.
For  among  those  phsenomena  of  human  life  which  show  such
regularity  in  their  recurrence,  we  may  certainly  regard  some

THE  FOECES  THAT  WOEK  IN  HISTOEY.  197

as  being  subordinate  ends  of  the  cosmic  order,  oi  merely
means  to  tlie  realization  of  higher  ends,  and  that  will  hold  of
them,  to  a  certain  extent,  which  we  denied  to  be  of  universal
validity.  Most  of  such  phsenomena,  however,  may  be  com-
pared to  the  impeding  friction  which,  though  it  is  no  part  of
the  designed  performance  of  a  machine,  must  yet  always  bear
a  certain  determinate  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  machine  as
long  as  the  work  of  this  can  only  be  accomplished  by
mechanical  means.  But  it  is  worth  while  to  investigate  a
little  further  the  insignificance  of  the  extent  to  which  this
additional  determination  does  away  with  existing  difficulties.

The  equality  of  numbers  of  the  two  sexes  may  certainly  be
reckoned  among  those  arrangements  of  Nature  in  which  we
see  means  designed  for  the  attainment  of  the  higher  ends  of
life.  But  as  even  the  causes  are  unknown  which  in  any
particular  case  determine  the  sex  of  the  child,  so,  much  more,,
are  those  circumstances  unknown  which  determine  these
causes  (that  lead  to  different  effects  in  the  different  cases)  in
such  a  way  as  to  obtain  the  unvarying  gross  result.  The
logical  rule  which  directs  us  to  anticipate  that  diverse  possi-
bilities, when  there  is  no  actual  reason  why  one  should  occur
more  frequently  than  the  others,  will  all  be  realized  with
equal  frequency  in  the  future,  is  no  doubt  for  us  a  necessary
subjective  maxim — and  we  have  to  regulate  our  belief  in  the
probable  future  occurrence  of  these  cases  by  this  maxim,  for
Ij^^;  the  sake  of  practical  ends ;  but  it  contains  no  shadow  of
explanation  concerning  the  mechanism  of  those  conditions  by
which  the  equal  frequency  of  two  events  is  really  brought
about  in  the  cases  in  which  it  happens.  And  we  get  no  help
from  our  general  presupposition  that  the  very  possibility  of
all  reaction  is  based  upon  an  essential  and  inherent  con-
nection between  all  existing  things.  This  presupposition
does  indeed  provide  us  with  a  general  formal  reason  for
expecting  that  anything  which  happens  in  one  part  of  the
world  will  react  in  accordance  with  some  law  on  every  other
part  thereof;  but — just  because  it  seems  so  unquestionable  that
all  things  in  the  universe  are  connected  with  one  another — we

I

II:

^'

198  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  in.

only  remain  all  the  more  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  particular
and  favoured  connections  which  are  closer  and  more  effective
between  some  portions  of  the  world  than  between  others,  and
upon  the  presence  of  which  each  individual  determinate  event
must  depend.  It  therefore  continues  quite  obscure  by  what
determinate  arrangements  mankind  comes  to  form  a  complete
whole  of  such  a  kind  that  a  preponderance  of  one  sex  which
has  accidentally  happened  here,  calls  forth  there,  simul-
taneously or  subsequently,  a  counterbalancing  increase  of  the
other  sex,  the  external  conditions  of  life  being  so  very  dis-
similar, and  we  being  entirely  destitute  of  any  idea  of  how
the  necessary  action  and  reaction  could  take  place.  And  yet
not  only  does  the  fact  exist,  but  we  are  doubtless  justified  in
considering  that  in  it  (if  in  any  case  whatever)  one  of  Nature's
ends  is  attained^an  end  for  the  fulfilment  of  which  pre-
ordained means  will  not  be  wanting.

The  course  of  the  spiritual  life  of  society  is  still  more
obscure.  "We  believe  that  from  the  number  of  actions  of  a
particular  kind  observed  in  a  certain  period  which  has  just
elapsed,  we  can  conclude  to  a  certain  number  of  similar  actions
in  an  immediately  succeeding  period  of  equal  length,  only
because  the  sum  total  of  natural  and  social  conditions,  upon
which  they  depended  in  the  former  case,  alter  but  slowly,  and
in  short  periods  imperceptibly.  But  where  such  change  occurs
spasmodically,  we  do  not  expect  that  a  forecast  made  in  reli-
ance upon  the  past  will  be  applicable.  Still  this  caution  does
not  remove  all  difficulty.  Even  the  modified  statement  would
be  fully  justified  only  if  we  could  regard  the  sum  of  unknown
conditions  as  a  compelling  force  which  would  itself  command
a  definite  result  in  a  definite  time  ;  which  further,  finding  the
total  resistance  opposed  to  it  to  hold  always  a  similar  relation
to  its  own  magnitude,  would  be  capable  of  exercising  in
every  unit  of  time  one  and  the  same  fraction  of  its  energy ;
which  could  then  moreover  always  make  actual  use  of  this
capacity  by  ever  seeking  and  finding,  like  the  pressure  of  a
compressed  fluid,  the  points  of  non-resistance,  wherever  those
may  be ;  and  which  finally,  for  every  portion  of  the  result

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  199

already  produced  would  lose  a  corresponding  portion  of  its
potential  energy.  Now  in  the  case  before  us,  how  many  ol"
these  conditions  are  given  ?

Let  us  take  as  an  example  offences  against  property.  The
evils  of  the  existing  distribution  of  goods  in  a  society  have
active  force  only  in  as  far  as  their  pressure  is  felt.  If  then
we  make  not  poverty  but  the  feeling  of  want  our  point  of
departure,  can  we  say  of  this  active  force  that  there  corre-
sponds to  it  as  its  natural  effect  a  certain  number  of  thefts
without  any  regard  to  the  total  amount  of  unlawful  gain  ?  If
it  further  happened  that  in  a  certain  condition  of  civilisation,
this  power  always  encountered  equal  resistance,  what  would
be  the  explanation  of  the  fact  that  it  always  finds  for  its
exercise  the  same  number  of  favourable  opportunities,  and
that  these  should  always  be  presented  to  persons  incapable  of
resisting  them  ?  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  that  there
always  occur  a  great  many  more  opportunities  than  are  taken
advantage  of,  and  that  the  numbers  of  those  accessible  to
temptation  are  equally  in  excess  of  those  who  actually  offend,
it  becomes  only  the  more  difficult  to  understand  how  the
number  of  offences  already  committed  can  so  restrict  the
number  of  those  yet  to  come  as  to  cause  the  attainment  of  a
definite  sum  total.  So  the  connection  of  events  which  pro-
duces uniformity  in  the  numbers  of  such  actions,  is  altogether
unknown  to  us.

Just  as  little  are  we  satisfied  by  the  numerous  attempts  to
make  the  validity  of  such  laws  harmonize  with  individual
freedom  of  will.  If  (as  has  been  done)  we  regard  the  com-
mission of  a  certain  number  of  offences  as  an  inevitable  neces-
sity imposed  upon  society,  it  does  not  help  us  at  all  to  add
that  this  necessity  only  necessitates  the  actions  but  does  not
predetermine  the  agents.  If  human  freedom  cannot  get  rid
of  the  sum  total  of  offences,  the  fact  that  the  particular  agents
are  not  predetermined  does  not  leave  individuals  free — the  only
thing  that  still  remains  doubtful  is,  whose  unfreedom  will  be
taken  advantage  of  next  ?  It  has  been  said  that  if  an  insect
were  to  creep  over  any  part  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle

200  BOOK  Vn. CHAPTER  HI.

drawn  with  chalk,  it  would  see  all  round  it  nothing  but
irregularly  distributed  molecules  of  chalk,  though  for  an  eye
that  took  these  in  all  at  once,  from  some  distance,  they  would
be  arranged  in  the  regular  definite  order  of  a  circle.  If  these
dots  were  beings  endowed  with  souls,  it  might  be  imagined
that  taken  separately  they  had  scope  for  free  choice  of  their
position  in  the  circle,  while  taken  altogether  they  were  bound
to  contribute  to  the  formation  of  a  predetermined  outline.
We  reply  that  if  an  orderly  arrangement  of  many  elements
actually  exists  (for  the  circle  has  been  drawn),  it  is  indeed
easily  intelligible  that  this  arrangement  can  only  be  fully
taken  in  from  particular  points  of  view.  But  the  unorder  of
the  elements  when  looked  at  from  other  points  of  view,  is  not
by  any  means  the  same  thing  as  the  freedom  of  those
elements.  All  those  dots  of  chalk  are  perfectly  fixed  in  such
relations  as  are  necessary  for  the  structure  of  the  whole ;  they
all  lie  in  a  narrow  ring-shaped  zone  confined  both  internally
and  externally  by  a  bounding  line  that  has  no  breadth.  How
they  are  grouped  within  this  zone  is,  as  regards  the  form  of
the  whole,  to  a  certain  extent  indifferent,  and  it  is  just  to  the
extent  of  this  indifference  that  they  are  indeterminate.  Kow
if  the  dots  were  living  beings,  this  comparison  would  only
teach  the  simple  truth  that  they  had  freedom  of  action  in
those  directions  in  which  nothing  had  been  fixed  by  general
laws ;  thus  if  it  chanced  that  such  a  law  required  in  any
society  a  certain  number  of  thefts,  the  agents  would  be  free
'lot  with  regard  to  their  thievish  resolutions,  but  with  regard
to  whether  for  instance  their  thievish  exploits  should  be
accomplished  on  horseback  or  on  foot.

The  dislike  with  which  we  hear  of  laws  of  psychic  life,
whilst  we  do  not  hesitate  to  regard  bodily  life  as  subordinate
to  its  own  laws,  arises  partly  because  we  require  too  nmch
from  our  own  freedom  of  will,  partly  because  we  let  ourselves
be  too  much  imposed  upon  by  those  laws.  If  we  do  not  find
ourselves  involved  in  the  declared  struggle  between  freedom
and  necessity,  we  are  by  no  means  averse  to  regarding  the
actions  of  men  as  determined  by  circumstances  ;  in  fact  all

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  201

expectation  of  good  from  education  and  all  the  work  of  history
are  based  upon  the  conviction  that  the  will  may  be  influenced  by
growth  of  insight,  by  ennoblement  of  feeling,  and  by  improve-
ment of  the  external  conditions  of  life.  On  the  other  side,
a  consideration  of  freedom  itself  would  teach  us  that  the  very
notion  is  repugnant  to  common  sense  if  it  does  not  include
susceptibility  to  the  worth  of  motives,  and  that  the  freedom  of
willing  can  by  no  means  signify  absolute  capacity  of  carrying
out  what  is  willed — either  of  the  carrying  it  out  in  conflict  with
the  obstructions  of  the  external  world,  or  of  that  other  and
internal  carrying  out  by  which  the  will  suppresses  the  oppos-
ing movements  of  the  passions.  Therefore  not  only  the
possible  objects  of  men's  endeavours,  not  only  an  idea  of  the
means  to  their  attainment,  are  suggested  to  the  mind  by  a
number  of  stimuli  involved  in  the  culture  of  the  individual
and  of  society,  but  also  that  effective  strength  of  the  free  will  by
which  it  withdraws  itself  from  being  determined  by  passionate
impulses,  is  dependent  upon  the  collective  culture  of  society.
Hence  there  would  certainly  be  no  irreconcilable  contradiction
between  the  assumption  of  freedom  of  will  and  the  other
assumption  that  the  sum  of  active  conditions  which  operate
in  any  given  state  of  society,  hinder  to  a  certain  degree  the
effectiveness  of  all  free  action,  and  produce  a  pretty  uniform
amount  of  mere  instinctive  action.

flB  It  would  notwithstanding  still  be  wholly  incredible  that  the
struggle  of  will  and  moral  consciousness  against  all  these
obstructive  elements  should  be  as  exactly  predetermined  with
regard  to  its  result  as  those  statistical  laws  indicate. For  the

'■P  fact  is  that  these  laws  do  not  measure  at  all  that  which  we
should  expect  to  be  so  predetermined.  Such  laws  originating
for  example  in  a  comparison  of  tried  and  sentenced  offences
presuppose  that  the  number  of  crimes  which  become  known
B  bear  an  unvarying  relation  to  the  whole  number  of  those  com-
mitted, and  of  this  primary  assumption  no  proof  that  is  by
any  means  cogent  is  possible  ;  indeed,  if  they  are  designed  to
prove  anything  with  regard to  human freedom,  they must

202  BOOK  VII. CHAPTCK  IIL

just  as  constant  a  relation  to  the  number  of  tliose  which  have
been  resolved  upon  or  prevented,  or  have  miscarried,  and
indeed  to  the  wliole  multitude  of  m.ore  or  less  serious  tempta-
tions that  have  arisen  in  the  recesses  of  men's  minds.  Not
only  do  they  not  do  this,  but  deeds  of  murder  and  man-
slaughter being  counted  by  the  hundred,  there  are  grouped
together  under  those  class-names  cases  of  the  most  various
degrees  of  moral  turpitude,  the  mere  number  being  no  criterion
of  the  sum  of  evil  committed  in  a  given  time  by  a  given
society  in  any  direction.  Only  that  such  evil  being  a  kind
of  friction  inseparable  from  the  life  and  progress  of  society,
we  may  assume  this  sum  to  be  connected  by  some  definite
law  with  the  amount  of  movement  in  any  society ;  but  this
would  by  no  means  hold  of  the  mere  number  of  cases  in  which
the  incidental  ill  effect  takes  tangible  form  under  definite  heads
of  crime.  Therefore  even  if  the  constancy  of  this  number
should  be  confirmed  by  a  fresh  appeal  to  experience,  we  should
still  have  to  regard  it  as  a  fact  of  which  we  do  not  compre-
hend either  the  mode  of  production  or  the  significance  ;  we
should  never  think  of  regarding  it  as  an  historical  law  in  the
sense  of  a  predetermination  of  that  which  is  to  be.  However
the  fresh  appeal  itself  (which  has  been  quite  recently  made)
convinces  us  of  the  extreme  overhastiness  with  which  the
statistical  myth  has  been  built  up  from  deductions  which
cannot  be  relied  upon.  We  have  yet  to  obtain  from  exacter
investigations  the  true  material  for  more  trustworthy  conclu-
sions— material  which  should  take  the  place  of  the  statistical
myth  above  referred  to.

I  6.  The  investigations  of  which  we  have  been  speaking
referred  only  to  limited  periods  of  time.  The  succession  of
longer  periods  markedly  different  in  historical  features  has
seemed  to  reveal  not  less  definite  laws,  which  I  may  here  pass
over  more  briefly.  They  are  of  interest  only  in  as  far  as  they
have  reference  to  the  individual  tendencies  of  human  life,
which  we  shall  have  to  consider  later ;  the  more  widely  they
attempt  to  formulate  the  progress  of  humanity,  the  less  real
explanation  do  they  generally  contain. Thus  one  man  talks

I

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  203

of  a  law  of  uniformity  in  development,  another  of  its  sharp
contrasts  ;  others  prefer  the  trinity  of  thesis,  antithesis,  and
synthesis.  It  seems  clear  that  all  these  are  not  modes  of
occurrence  to  which  events  are  bound  to  conform,  as  if  there
were  in  the  mere  forms  themselves  something  which  it  were
worth  while  to  realize.  Eather  in  as  far  as  they  have  any
real  existence,  they  are  ultimate  forms  which  appear  as  social
action  and  reaction  progresses,  from  causes  for  which  we  have
yet  to  seek.  If  we  attempt  this  search  we  shall  find  that  the
significance  of  such  laws  is  partly  very  unimportant  and
partly  not  of  demonstrable  universality.  Thus  it  seems  hardly
worth  while  to  decorate  with  the  name  of  a  law  of  uniformity
the  very  simple  observation  that  the  culture  of  a  later  period
is  commonly  a  further  development  of  the  impulses  received
from  preceding  periods ;  at  the  most  it  is  only  useful  as
emphasizing  briefly  the  limiting  condition  to  be  found  in  the
fact  that  the  actual  transmission  of  what  already  exists  must
precede  further  development.  For  historical  progress  is  not
(as  people  sometimes  fancy)  to  be  compared  to  a  miasma  that
hovers  in  the  air  and  seizes  humanity  unawares,  either  all
mankind  simultaneously,  or  particular  sections  by  turns  ;  it
has  always  taken  place  only  within  that  narrow  circle  where
favourable  circumstances  permit  the  regular  transmission  of
attained  civilisation,  and  of  efforts  directed  to  the  relief  of
permanent  wants ;  and  it  has  only  spread  as  far  and  wide  as
geographical  conditions,  accessibility  of  countries,  facility  of
communication,  density  of  population,  and  multifarious  inter-
course between  men  in  war  or  peace  have  given  occasion.

The  law  of  contrast  that  people  sometimes,  without  any
difficulty,  allow  to  have  validity  at  the  same  time  as  the  law
of  uniformity,  without  drawing  any  boundary  line  between
the  conflicting  claims  of  both,  is  not  less  simple.  Speaking
broadly,  it  only  applies  where  simple  forms  of  life,  which  in
themselves  admit  of  unbroken  uniformity  of  existence,  are  in
any  way  disturbed,  and  men's  minds  have  become  agitated  by
the  longing  for  new  satisfactions.  Then  their  inventive  power
produces  peculiar  forms  of  civilisation,  corresponding  to  the

204  BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  IH.

momentary  wants  of  the  people  and  the  mental  temper  of
the  time,  without  satisfying  in  an  equal  degree  all  the
wants  of  human  nature.  The  longer  and  the  more  fully
any  such  characteristic  civilisation  has  stirred  up,  satisfied,
and  exhausted  all  the  receptivity  towards  it  of  which  men's
minds  were  capable,  and  the  more  widely  it  has  set  its  stamp
upon  all  external  social  relations  and  customs  of  life,  the
more  sensibly  do  men  feel  the  pressure  of  its  one-sidedness ;
and  the  more  vigorously  do  there  come  into  prominence
those  spiritual  pretensions  (still  fresh  and  unsatisfied,  and
seeking  to  impose  a  different  mode  of  life)  which  this  one-
sidedness  had  forced  into  the  background.  But  the  articu-
lation of  any  civilisation  of  long  standing  forms  a  whole
that  is  too  far-spreading  and  too  widely  rooted  for  newly
arisen  tendencies  to  overcome  it  in  all  points,  and  to  set
up  easily  in  opposition  to  it  a  new  and  different  and
consistent  philosophy.  Generally  the  influence  of  such  new
tendencies  is  disintegrating  and  destructive ;  it  is  only  after
a  long  interval  that  a  new  system  is  established — a  system
that  is  not  now  the  opposite  of  that  which  preceded  it,
because  the  time  that  has  elapsed  between  the  two  baa
smoothed  down  the  more  extreme  contradictions.  In  refer-
ence to  individual  departments  of  life  we  see  more  clearly
the  need  of  change  which  impels  the  human  mind  not
only  to  continual  removal  of  narrow  and  one-sided  arrange-
ments, but  also  to  an  aversion  for  truths  that  have  grown
old.  As  one  gets  tired  of  a  good  garment  that  one  has
been  wearing  for  a  considerable  time,  and  finds  that  another
which  has  been  long  laid  by  seems  to  have  a  wonderful
charm  of  restored  novelty,  so  the  satiation  of  one  side  of
our  spiritual  nature  produces  a  burning  thirst  for  just  as
one-sided  satisfaction  in  another  direction;  and  not  only  so,
but  there  comes  in  addition  a  general  inclination  for  para-
doxical return  to  long-forgotten  standpoints,  and  thus  moods
and  opinions  are  kept  in  a  continual  state  of  fluctuation.
Steady  development  belongs  almost  exclusively  to  those
sciences which are capable of practical application in

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.  205

ministering  to  our  wants,  and  in  which  unrestricted  change
of  "  modes  of  thought  and  points  of  view "  would  produce
painful  consequences.  On  the  other  hand,  men's  views  of  life,
the  tone  of  society,  artistic  ideals,  opinions  concerning  what
is  supernatural,  views  of  history,  taste  in  the  enjoyment  of
Nature,  and  forms  of  religious  worship — all  these  are  subject
to  the  influence  of  constantly  changing  moods — sentimentality
or  noisy  activity,  prophetic  enthusiasm  or  realistic  modera-
tion ;  and  it  often  seems  as  though  the  most  profound
penetration  were  shown  in  seeking  the  truth  just  where  no
one  suspects  it,  that  is  in  errors  which  the  previous  genera-
tion had  succeeded  in  refuting.  Thus  there  arises  the
alternation  of  characteristic  forms  of  civilisation  in  history,
and  thus  we  understand  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  in  the
course  of  progress  not  all  the  several  charms  of  life,  on  the
exclusive  development  of  which  earlier  times  may  have
expended  their  whole  strength,  can  be  preserved  and  handed
down  in  equal  vigour ;  on  the  contrary,  they  often  have  to
be  sacrificed  altogether  to  other  requirements  of  human
destiny,  on  which  succeeding  times  rightly  lay  stress.  This
surrender  of  previous  gains  is  explicable  to  us  as  a  result
of  human  weakness  ;  that  it  is  not  merely  a  partial  failure
of  historical  progress,  but  also  an  essential  feature  in  the
course  that  this  progress  must  take,  according  to  its  very
meaning,  is  an  assertion  which  we  can  only  regard  as
resulting  from  that  perversion  of  thought,  which  undertakes
to  justify  everything  that  actually  exists.

More  strange  is  it  that  not  only  the  forms  of  civilisation  but
also  the  torch-bearers  of  civilisation  change  as  history  goes  on.
Not  only  are  mankind  as  a  whole  never  found  moving  forward
together  at  the  same  stage  of  progress,  but  also  the  nations — at
least  those  of  antiquity — which  have  blossomed  into  civilisation
have  without  exception  sunk  back  from  the  summit  they  had
reached  to  varying  depths  of  barbarism  and  commonplace.
Men  are  certainly  in  too  great  haste  if  they  found  upon  these
facts  the  historical  law  that  each  nation,  like  each  individual,
has  its  life,  in  which  strength  first  increases  and  then  decreaf^es;

^

206  BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  III.

nnd it  is still worse if,  supported  by  this  comparison,  tliey
venture  to  pronounce  sentence  on  the  future  of  nations  which,
having  passed  through  some  phase  of  their  culture,  are  seen  to
be making new  and  tentative  efforts. It  is  not  clear  either
what reasonable  signification  this  growing  old  of  nations  can
have  for  the  plan  of  history,  nor  what  is  the  inner  connection
by which,  as  a mere  matter  of  fact,  it  is  universally  brought
about. Since in an individual  man  it  is  one  and  the  same
organism  to  which  must  be  referred  all  impressions  from  with-
out, and  all  reactions  of  its  own  activity,  we  can  understand
how  in  such  a  case  there  may  be  certain  relations  between  the
actin<T and  reacting  parts  which  would  necessarily  make  that
summation  of  experienced  states  result  in  the  gradual  alteration
and disintegration  of  him  who  is  the  subject  of  them. But
why  the  vital  strength  of  a  nation  cannot  always  remain
vigorous seems from this consideration only the more
obscure ;  and certainly  it  does  remain  vigorous in  those  who
for  centuries  have  gone  on  in the  monotony  of  some simple
civilisation. The growing old of nations is plainly not
included  in  the  idea  of  a  people  as  a  predetermined  necessity
of  development ;  and  where  it  takes  place  it  is  the  result  of
particular  conditions  of  life,  due  not  only  to  the  peculiarity  of
the  stage  of  civilisation  which  has  been  arrived  at,  but  also  in
part  to  external  circumstances. Nature  strives  to furnish
afresh  each  new  generation  with  the  old  capacities  of  the  race,
and  ever  to  present  anew  vigorous  and  unspoiled  subjects  for
further development. She does not altogether succeed  ;
bodily  vigour  and mental power may  diminish  through  the
fault of a dissolute past ;  even without  such fault, long
habituation  to  some  definite form  of  national culture  may
gradually  transform the  mental dispositions  of  a  people  in
ways  which  we  are  unable  to  trace,  and  make  it  difficult  to
find  a  new  equilibrium  of  healthier  conditions  of  life  when  the
internal corruption  of  that  culture  works  out,  and  causes  its
disintegration. But nowhere do we find justification for
assuming  that these  national  diseases  are  incurable,  and  that
\ when  one  flower  has  faded  a  second  cannot  follow. If  the

THE  FORCES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTORY.

20'

natious  of  antiquity  have  not  fulfilled  such  a  hope,  the  reason
was  that  not  only  did  their  culture  become  disintegrated
through  its  own  inner  deficiencies,  but  also  their  national
integrity  was  broken  up  by  the  destructive  conquests  of
enemies  more  robust  than  themselves.  That  any  national
civilisation  may  flourish,  it  requires  both  political  power  and
material  wealth ;  but  when  the  general  condition  of  the
world  does  not  allow  of  the  reinvigoration  of  its  power,  or
when  the  opening  of  new  roads  of  commerce  and  the
abandonment  of  the  old  ones  dries  up  the  previous  sources
of  wealth,  and  innumerable  incitements  to  industry  fall
away,  then  the  nation  which  any  such  fate  befalls  will  seem
to  pine  and  dwindle  incurably.  Yet  it  will  be  capable  of
reviving  to  fresh  life  if  the  wheel  of  fortune  makes  a  new
turn  favourable  to  it.

"We  must  add  to  these  considerations  yet  another  ques-
tion concerning  the  forces  operative  in  history.  Shall  we
attribute  the  similar  elements  which  are  found  in  the
customs  and  legends  of  different  nations,  to  transmission
from  one  to  the  other ;  or  shall  we  regard  them  all  as
indigenous  productions  which  having  sprung  up  anew,  again
and  again,  have  everywhere  assumed  similar  forms  on
account  of  the  essential  sameness  of  human  nature  ?  No
one  will  really  doubt  that,  taken  broadly,  both  views  are
to  be  accepted  to  some  extent ;  the  real  difficulty  is  where
to  draw  the  line  between  the  claims  of  the  two.  Both
modes  of  thought  have  often  tried  their  strength  on  one
particular  example,  the  legend  of  a  flood,  which  is  spread
far  and  wide  among  peoples  very  remote  from  one  another.
Eiverside  valleys  subject  to  frequent  and  considerable
inundations  have  been  the  homes  of  all  the  earliest
civilisations  ;  nothing  could  seem  more  natural  than  that  this
supreme  danger  threatened  by  the  elements  should  be  every-
where recorded  in  national  legends.  It  is  not  quite  so
easy  to  explain,  without  supposing  transmission,  the  great,
although  not  absolutely  uniform,  similarity  of  the  particular
details  with  which  legend  fills  in  the  history  of  the  occur-

j

208  BOOK  VII. CU AFTER  III.

rence;  hence  people  have  been  inclined  to  believe  in  a
common  origin  of  the  different  Asiatic  accounts,  and  to
assume  that  these  were  subsequently  varied.  But  the
American  Indians,  too,  relate  the  same  story  ;  it  was  sur-
prising to  find  that  in  one  of  their  legends,  Tespi — the  man
who  was  saved  from  the  flood  like  Noah — when  the  waters
begin  to  abate,  sends  forth  first  a  bird  of  prey ;  this  bird
does  not  return,  because  it  is  feasting  on  the  dead  bodies
of  the  drowned ;  then  Tespi  sends  out  other  birds  which  also
do  not  return;  it  is  only  the  humming-bird  that  comes  back
with  a  leafy  branch.  The  correspondence  is  striking  enough
to  make  one  suspect  communication,  perhaps  at  a  very  late
date ;  but  at  the  same  time  the  whole  character  of  the
legend  is  so  thoroughly  Indian  that  its  being  of  native
growth  is  not  in  the  least  improbable,  and  if  chronology
would  permit  we  should  perhaps  be  more  inclined  to  think
of  Indian  traditions  having  influenced  the  Mosaic  account
than  of  the  converse  having  happened.  So  it  stiU  does  not
seem  improbable  that  even  such  striking  coincidences  may
have  arisen  independently  in  many  unconnected  mythologies.
And  yet  I  confess  that  I  regard  with  mistrust  the  unre-
stricted generalization  of  this  way  of  judging.  It  is  true  that
the  natural  surroundings  of  all  nations  are  pretty  much  the
same ;  but  it  does  not  follow  so  clearly  that  the  impressions
produced  by  them  must,  on  account  of  the  sameness  of  men's
mental  nature,  everywhere  lead  to  the  same  estimation  of
events,  to  the  same  trains  of  thought,  and,  finally,  to  the
employment  of  similar  artistic  and  figurative  expressions.
The  points  of  view  from  which  men,  notwithstanding  their
human  likeness,  may  regard  Nature  are  manifold  enough ;  the
possible  impressions  produced  by  the  same  event  may  vary
infinitely  with  mood  and  circumstances ;  the  direction  which
may  be  taken  by  the  course  of  thought  that  they  stir  up  is
incalculable ;  every  correspondence  that  goes  beyond  the  most
inevitable  deductions  from  facts  seems  always  to  require  an
individual  proof  of  having  arisen  without  communication  or
transmission. Appeal has indeed been made to general

THE  FOECES  THAT  WORK  IN  HISTOEY.  209

psychological  laws  in  accordance  with  which  the  impression
produced  by  facts,  the  reflection  following  the  impression,  and
the  final  expression  by  figure  and  comparison,  must  be  con-
nected together ;  it  has  been  attempted  to  interpret  the  course
of  all  human  fancy  by  a  kind  of  general  symbolism  supposed
to  produce  similar  embodiments  of  similar  thoughts  in  the
most  diverse  mythologies ;  but  here  too  the  question  recurs,
Are  we  not,  in  the  cases  which  this  assumption  seems  to
confirm,  mistaking  the  effect  of  secret  transmission  for  a  proof
of  independent  correspondence  ?

The  general  scope  of  tradition  in  history  is  diflBcult  to
estimate.  The  very  existence  of  complete  and  flourishing
civilisations  is  forgotten  in  lands  which  were  their  home,  and
only  a  fragmentary  remembrance  of  them  preserved  in  the
records  of  neighbouring  nations,  and  for  us  great  spaces  of
past  time  are  wholly  blank.  On  the  other  hand,  isolated
features  (neither  the  most  important  nor  the  most  common)  of
earlier  civilisations  have  been  saved  amid  the  general  wreck,
and  reappear  among  the  most  different  nations.  Our  nursery
tales  contain  echoes  from  the  very  earliest  antiquity  ;  the  same
fables  that  exercise  our  own  reflection  in  youth  were  once
told  in  India  and  Persia  and  Greece ;  many  popular  super-
stitions of  to-day  have  their  root  in  heathendom.  With
regard  to  much  of  this  we  know  how  it  has  been  preserved
and  communicated,  with  regard  to  much  we  do  not ;  and  hence
we  not  only  learn  to  appreciate  the  great  amount  of  transmission
which  has  gone  on  imperceptibly,  but  we  also  remark  that  (as
in  all  ruins)  it  is  not  always  that  which  is  the  most  imposing
and  the  strongest  and  the  most  coherent  that  has  been  pre-
served, but  that  very  often  individual  fragments  of  what  was
I  once  the  common  property  of  mankind — fragments  which  look
strange  in  their  isolation — may  unquestionably  be  dispersed
among  the  widely  differing  civilisations  of  later  nations.

I

VOL.  II.

CHAPTEE IV.

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.

Common  Origin  of  Mankind — Assumption  of  Plurality  of  Origin— Variety  of
Mental  Endowment — Guidance  of  Development  by  External  Conditions-
Geographical  and  Climatic  Furtherances  and  Hindrances — Examples  of
Peoples  in  a  State  of  Nature.

S  1.  "rTriSTOEY,  in  the  sense  of  a  coherent  development,
-■-J-  connects  but  few  sections  of  mankind.  The  west
of  Asia  and  the  seaboard  of  the  Mediterranean  were  the  only
places  in  which  during  thousands  of  years  varying  forms  of
civilisation  followed  one  another,  each  transmitting  to  its
successor  its  own  gains  and  impulses  to  fresh  progress.  Out-
side this  focus  of  civilisation  innumerable  other  nations  have
either  gone  on  living  again,  century  after  century,  the  common
life  of  their  kind  and  nothing  more,  among  favourable  or
unfavourable  surroundings,  or  they  have  perhaps  struck  out
particular  forms  of  development,  but  withoiit  connection  with
the  favoured  nations,  and  without  contributing  in  any  essen-
tial way  to  the  further  progress  of  these  when  they  came  into
contact.  Hence  if  we  take  a  survey  of  history,  it  is  pre-
sented to  us  not  under  the  image  of  a  single  stream  embracing
all  mankind  and  carrying  them  forward  with  steady  action
and  reaction,  though  with  different  velocities,  in  the  same
direction ;  it  rather  seems  to  us  as  though  various  currents
flowed  from  various  sources,  remaining  long  without  any
reciprocal  influence — until  now  in  our  own  age  all  nations
begin  for  the  first  time  to  be  brought  within  view  of  one
another,  and  the  way  begins  to  be  prepared  for  a  universal
reciprocity  of  action  between  the  different  sections  of  man-
kind.

Even  classic  antiquity  had  this  impression  of  the  conditioi

210

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  211

and  fate  of  the  human  race  when  political  conflicts  and  the
curiosity  of  travellers  brought  to  light  upon  the  narrow  stage
of  the  then  known  world  many  peoples  differing  widely  in
appearance,  language,  and  customs.  In  this  impression  there
was  nothing  that  seemed  strange  to  the  mind  of  antiquity,  to
which  human  existence  appeared  to  be  merely  a  production  of
the  great  mother.  Nature,  coming  forth  from  her  infinity  and
returning  to  it  again ;  in  the  view  of  antiquity  the  numerous
races  of  men  (destined  merely  for  the  passing  joy  of  life,  and
not  for  the  accomplishment  of  tasks  of  eternal  significance)
may  have  sprung  each  from  the  soil  of  its  native  place,  with-
out any  original  connection,  and  as  manifold  witnesses  of  the
inexhaustible  fertility  which  Nature  displays  in  her  produc-
tions. It  is  only  where  some  individual  race  in  the  course
of  its  social  development  has  acquired  a  sense  of  the  lasting
connection  of  its  members,  that  national  tradition  seeks  to
strengthen  this  feeling  by  the  supposition  of  a  common  origin;
but  the  thought  of  a  comprehensive  unity  of  mankind  was  so
far  from  these  times  that  if  two  nations  were  found  to  have  a
connected  origin,  it  was  thought  to  be  quite  a  discovery,  just
because  it  could  not  be  in  the  least  presupposed.  It  was
Christian  civilisation  that  first  developed  with  decisive  clear-
ness the  thought  that  all  nations  made  part  of  one  whole,  and
that  evolved  from  the  concept  of  the  human  race  the  concept
of  humanity,  with  which  we  are  not  accustomed  to  contrast  a
)rresponding  concept  of  animality.  For  the  name  humanity
Expresses  just  this,  that  individual  human  creatures  are  not
lere  examples  of  a  universal,  but  are  preordained  parts  of  a
^hole ;  that  the  changing  events  of  history  which  men  experi-
Ince  are  not  mere  instances  of  the  similarity  or  dissimilarity
*of  results  which  spring  from  similar  or  dissimilar  conditions
according  to  the  same  universal  laws  of  Nature  and  of  life,  but
sections  that  have  their  place  in  a  vast  coherent  providential
governance  of  the  universe,  which  between  the  extreme  terms
ol  creation  and  of  judgment  allows  no  part  of  what  happens
to  escape  the  unity  of  its  purpose.  While  Christianity
developed  this  conviction,  it  at  the  same time  connected  it

11^

212  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

with  tlie  Hebrew  account  of  man's  origin,  in  whicli  early  and
cognate  views  (strange  to  classic  antiquity  and  far  above  it)
had  prevailed,  without,  however,  having  got  rid  of  all  the
narrowness  of  exclusively  national  conceptions.  The  wish  to
hold  all  the  numerous  races  of  men  together  by  the  bond  of
likeness  in  kind  and  species,  became  intensified  to  the  desire
to  trace  back  their  origin  to  a  single  ancestral  pair.  Even  this
duality  seemed  to  the  Mosaic  record  too  wide  a  beginning ;
according  to  this  record  the  mother  of  the  human  race  came
forth  in  a  wondrous  fashion  from  the  one  father  of  us  all,  who
was  himself  made  directly  by  the  hand  of  God.

The  beauty  and  religious  depth  of  thought  from  which
these  representations  sprang  will  never  fail  of  their  effect  upon
our  mind ;  but  if  the  necessary  development  of  human  imagina-
tion involved  a  representation  of  the  beginning  of  our  exist-
ence under  such  figures,  then  it  may  be  doubtful  whether  the
Mosaic  picture  reveals  an  historical  reality,  or  whether  it  can
only  be  justified  as  affording  satisfaction  to  an  inevitable
craving.  The  doubts  which  have  long  assailed  this  interpre-
tation of  our  primitive  history  justify  the  brief  consideration
which  we  now  subjoin.

If  the  human  race  has  really  descended  from  one  pair,  what
moral  results  would  follow  from  the  fact,  and  at  the  same
time  become  impossible  if  it  were  denied  ?  In  the  course  of
propagation  the  splitting  up  into  plurality  by  which  the  unity
is  succeeded  is  as  much  a  fact  as  the  unity  itself.  Hence  as
long  as  we  are  in  the  habit  of  making  historical  facts  the
sources  of  moral  commands,  the  second  fact  would  bind  us  to
divisioB  just  as  much  as  the  first  one  does  to  unity,  and
indeed  even  more  so,  since  the  plurality  increases  as  time  goes
on  ;  and  it  is  the  future  and  not  the  past  in  which  the  theatre,
or  at  any  rate  the  objects  of  our  action,  are  to  be  found.  On
the  other  hand,  if  mankind  arose  from  many  unconnected
beginnings — being  however,  as  it  now  is,  such  that  the  different
races,  endowed  with  capacities  similar  yet  not  altogether  the
same,  can  only  find  full  development  and  perfect  satisfaction
through  the  reciprocal  action  and  reaction  of  all  upon  all — even ,

I

EXTEENAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  213

if  this  were  the  case,  should  we  not  be  equally  justified  in
assuming  that  the  moral  destiny  of  men  must  be  fulfilled  by
the  union  of  all  in  one  humanity  ?  Undoubtedly  we  should  :
men  would  still  be  brothers  in  the  same  sense  in  which
they  would  in  the  contrary  case ;  for  since  they  certainly  are
not  brothers  in  a  literal  sense,  the  name  signifies  merely  the
recognition  of  that  spiritual  organization  which  is  given  to  all
of  us  alike,  and  of  the  worth  of  that  personality  which  we
have  to  reverence  even  in  its  most  insignificant  form.  Accord-
ing to  these  facts,  which  are  actual,  and  in  as  far  as  they  are
actual,  we  have  to  regulate  our  conduct ;  but  we  never  have  to
regulate  it  according  to  uncertain  historical  circumstances
which,  perhaps  have  been — the  reality  of  which  would  not
in  the  least  increase  the  imperativeness  of  our  obligations,
while  a  successful  refutation  would  necessarily  plunge  into
confusion  the  mind  which  had  based  its  sense  of  obligation
upon  them.

But  among  the  things  that  have  been  we  deliberately
reckon  that  singleness  of  origin,  supposing  it  to  have  been  a
fact.  The  more  earnestly  we  seek  the  unity  of  mankind,  the
more  must  we  desire  that  that  which  we  find  should  be  real
and  living  and  eternally  present ;  for  him  who  only  seeks  it  in
the  first  pair,  the  unity  must  always  be  something  that  merely
has  been.  For  the  influence  of  this  unity  has  nowhere  con-
tinued to  operate  in  history.  It  has  not  held  mankind
together,  and  has  neither  insured  to  them  as  a  whole  a  steady
common  development,  nor  to  the  different  branches  knowledge
concerning  each  other;  scattered  abroad,  in  parts  of  the  earth's
surface  most  remote  from  one  another,  the  different  nations
have  passed  their  life,  each  unacquainted  with  the  existence
of  the  rest.  But,  in  fact,  wherever  any  of  them  have  early
come  into  contact,  we  find  national  hatred  existing  as  the
guardian  of  national  peculiarities  which  no  race  is  willing  to
sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  another;  the  earliest  times  are  filled
with  incessant  conflicts  of  races,  even  of  those  whose  actual
relationship  could  be  historically  proved ;  as  one  wave  of  the
sea  makes  way  for  the  next,  so  in  this  wild  tumult  one  nation

K  sea  ]

214  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV,

after  another  has  been  swept  away.  So  little  has  that  assumed
community  of  origin  worked  in  the  outward  destinies  of  the
human  race ;  and  it  has  been  just  as  little  active  in  men's
feelings.  In  the  most  ancient  times  a  foreigner  was  regarded
as  altogether  without  rights ;  it  is  only  very  gradually,  and  in
proportion  as  history  gets  further  and  further  from  the
beginning,  that  there  are  developed  ideas  of  humanity  as  a
whole,  and  of  the  regard  which  we  owe  to  its  representatives.

A  glance  at  these  facts  leads  very  naturally  to  the  question,
Should  we  not  place  the  unity  of  mankind  in  the  future  as  an
end  of  action  to  be  sought  after,  rather  than  seek  it  in  the
past,  where  it  can  never  be  more  than  an  ineffective  and
ornamental  beginning  of  our  existence  ?  What  is  it  that  we
should  lose  if  we  had  to  sacrifice  a  unity  of  beginning  which
subsequent  progress  has  everywhere  contradicted  ?  It  cer-
tainly would  not  be  difficult  for  poetic  fancy  to  imagine  a
chain  of  events  which  would  exhibit  man's  original  lapse  from
unity  as  a  significant  part  of  some  secret  purpose  in  the
divine  governance.  But  while  we  fully  admit  the  worth  of
the  religious  thoughts  that  can  be  embodied  in  such  represen-
tation, we  should  yet,  when  they  are  put  forward  as  history,
require  proof  of  their  truth  independent  of  the  proof  of  their
significance.

The  assumption  of  originally  distinct  races  of  men,
differing  mentally  as  well  as  in  bodily  formation,  each
arising  in  a  region  suited  to  it  and  attaining  the  kind  and
degree  of  civilisation  which  its  capacities  made  possible,  has
not  unfrequently  been  opposed  to  the  theory  of  mankind's
original  unity  as  corresponding  more  naturally  with  the
view  which  history  presents  to  us.  This  assumption  has
been  set  forth  in  various  forms,  of  which  each  has  its  special
interest.

It  has  been  found  necessary,  in  the  first  place,  to  dis-
tinguish two  great  families  of  mankind,  the  active  family
of  white  men  and  the  passive  family  of  coloured  men.  It
is  supposed  that  the  latter,  dreamily  patient  and  inert,  loving
home and inaction, possess nothing of the ever active

L

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  215

inventive  restlessness  which  is  the  heritage  of  the  white
race ;  that  it  is  this  latter  race  alone  which,  impelled  by  the
spirit  of  progress,  has  spread  over  the  world  in  all  directions,
stirring  up,  educating,  subduing,  and  supplying  the  sluggish-
ness of  the  coloured  nations  with  germs  of  civilisation  whicli
they  would  have  been  incapable  of  producing  themselves.
Indeed,  the  latter  have  been  compared  to  the  monocotyledons
of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  those  grasses  and  reeds  which
growing  in  countless  multitudes  give  a  green  hue  to  un-
interesting landscapes,  with  their  monotonous  luxuriance ;
the  white  races,  on  the  other  hand,  which  alone  produce
individuals  of  historic  importance,  who  are  of  account  taken
separately,  are  compared  to  the  class  of  dicotyledons  which,
and  which  only,  produces  trees  with  their  picturesque  indi-
vidual forms.  How  easily  this  comparison  —  by  reference
to  the  vast  pine  forests  of  the  North  and  the  isolated  palms
of  the  South — might  be  so  elaborated  as  to  give  it  quite
another  meaning !  We  should  learn  that  the  external  con-
ditions of  habitat  and  climate  may  degrade  even  dicotyledons
to  a  homogeneous  crowd  that  is  counted  only  by  thousands,
and  that  even  monocotyledons  may  under  a  favouring  sky
develop  to  forms  which  excite  our  admiration.  Though  we
may,  however,  admit  provisionally  that  this  bifurcate  view,
without  being  applicable  in  detail,  yet  expresses  on  the  whole
a  real  historical  fact,  still  we  consider  that  it  is  illogical
if  it  thinks  that  it  can  hold  fast  the  unity  of  the  human
race,  while  it  separates  a  branch  db  initio  useless  from  the
only  fertile  one,  by  a  chasm  greater  than  that  which  generally
exists  in  Nature  between  two  species  of  the  same  genus,
supposing  neither  of  these  species  to  have  been  influenced
by  culture  and  discipline.

According  to  another  and  more  self-consistent  theory  which
gives  up  the  bond  of  a  common  origin,  the  different  families
of  men  sprang  up  independently  of  one  another  at  different
spots  on  the  earth's  surface  ;  besides  the  Caucasians  perhaps
only  the  Mongolian  race  being  indigenous  to  Central  Asia,
whilst  burning  Africa  produced  the  Black  man,  and  America

216  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

fostered  the  Red  man  from  the  first,  the  islands  and  coast
lands  of  the  South  Sea  and  the  Pacific  Ocean  having  been
gradually  peopled  from  some  unknown  centre  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Sunda  Islands.  This  view  again  has,  so
far,  neither  been  able  to  prevail,  nor  have  others  prevailed
over  it,  it  has  not  even  succeeded  in  defining  exactly  the
content  of  its  own  doctrine.  For  neither  has  it  been  con-
clusively shown  that  the  different  races  could  not  have  sprung
from  one  root,  nor  are  the  difficulties  which  stand  in  the
way  of  a  wide  diffusion  of  mankind  while  yet  in  a  help-
less condition,  so  great  as  to  prove  the  necessity  of  the
isolated  origin  of  each  nation  in  its  own  native  place.  On
the  contrary,  there  still  come  within  our  experience  many
facts  which  establish  the  possibility  of  migrations  to  great
distances  by  land  and  sea,  even  under  the  most  unfavourable
circumstances.  But  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  wanting
a  sufficient  number  of  clear  indications  concerning  the  actual
process  by  which  mankind  was  divided  into  unlike  sections,
and  concerning  the  paths  by  which  they  were  actually  dis-
persed over  the  earth.  There  seems  so  far  no  prospect  of
the  discovery  of  one  single  primal  language  ;  the  similar
elements  of  civilisation  which  are  found  among  nations
separated  by  great  distances  from  one  another  may  indeed
to  some  extent  point  to  early  intercourse  and  communication
of  thought,  but  cannot  prove  the  common  origin  of  those
between  whom  the  intercourse  took  place.  Eeasons  and
counter-reasons  being  so  evenly  balanced,  it  must  be  left
for  the  future  to  decide  whether  the  assertion  of  an  inde-
pendent origin  of  different  races  deserves  to  be  accepted ;
on  the  other  hand,  however,  the  content  of  the  assertion
itself  has  remained  hitherto  somewhat  indefinite,  on  account
of  the  uncertainty  which  exists  as  to  the  number  of  primitive
races  which  should  be  assumed,  as  to  the  way  in  which
these  became  mixed,  and  as  to  the  degeneration  which
occurs  to  a  limited  extent.  The  choice  of  the  five  races
above  referred  to,  was  perhaps  arbitrary ;  it  is  possible  that
others  may  have  just  as  much  right  to  be  brought  forward ;

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPi>IENT.  217

and  it  is  just  as  arbitrary  to  consider,  as  this  view  generally
does,  that  the  appearance  of  the  different  races  should  be
conceived  of  as  an  almost  simultaneous  creation  of  all
mankind  ;  it  may  be  rather  the  case  that  each  race  belongs
to  a  particular  geological  period.  If  this  were  so,  those
which  we  know  may  have  been  preceded  in  the  very  earliest
ages  by  many  others  of  which  we  know  nothing,  either
because  they  have  left  no  traces  behind  them,  or  because
the  monuments  which  testify  to  their  existence  are  buried
in  the  soil  of  the  great  continents  of  Asia  and  Africa,
the  palaeontological  investigation  of  which  has  hardly  yet
begun.  The  present  state  of  science  does  not  allow  of  any
decisive  judgment  on  these  matters ;  our  views  are  kept  in
a  state  of  continual  fluctuation  by  unexpected  discoveries
which  throng  one  upon  the  other,  and  which  we  shall  not
be  able  to  interpret  with  certainty  until  their  increased
number  has  made  their  connection  clearer.  Sometimes  we
seem  to  get  glimpses  of  an  immense  vista  rousing  vague
anticipations,  extending  to  prehistoric  times  of  our  species
of  which  we  have  at  present  no  knowledge ;  sometimes
these  avenues  through  which  we  had  had  a  glimpse  seem
to  shut  again,  and  the  far-reaching  views  which  they  opened
before  us,  close  in,  leaving  nothing  but  representations  of
trivial  events  that  have  taken  place  within  the  short  historical
■period  which  we  know.  At  such  times  it  is  useless  to
insist  upon  having,  at  any  price,  some  decisive  answer;  the
only  thing  that  is  of  use  is  to  look  steadily  at  the  various
possibilities,  and  to  forecast  the  consequences  which  a  future
onfirmation  of  any  one  of  them  would  have  for  our  philosophy
as  a  whole.

This  we  have  attempted,  and  though  we  believe  wo  have
ascertained  that  the  original  unity  of  the  human  race  is
I  «^not  one  of  those  thoughts  the  truth  of  which  is  necessary
I  for  the  satisfaction  of  our  soul,  on  the  other  hand  we  by
I  no  means  share  the  hostile  feeling  that  we  so  often  see
I  IP  displayed  in  disputing  this  unity,  which  after  all  may  possibly
be  a  fact. Mankind  would really  lose nothing whatever

218  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

by  the  establishment  of  the  one -origin  view,  in  which  (though
it  is  by  no  means  indispensable)  long  ages  have  believed
and  rejoiced  ;  and  just  as  little  would  they  gain  anything
if  by  proving  their  dispersed  and  plural  origin  their  fate
should  be  externally  assimilated  more  closely  to  that  of  the
grass  of  the  field,  the  blades  of  which  we  cannot  count  so
as  to  form  a  unity.  We  cannot  share,  we  can  only  under-
stand, that  hostility ;  it  will  very  naturally  arise  wherever
a  mistaken  zeal  for  certain  forms  of  conception  (in  which
religious  truth  is  supposed  exclusively  to  reside)  attempts
to  settle  without  reference  to  the  verdict  of  science,  certain
questions  which  ought  undoubtedly  to  be  submitted  to
scientific  judgment  guided  by  observation.  This  zeal,  while
it  injures  science,  gains  no  advantage  for  itself;  for  since  it
cannot  avert  the  coming  results  of  investigation,  it  will  at
last  find  itself  in  the  disagreeable  position  of  having  to
regulate  its  faith  according  to  the  discoveries  of  the  hour.
It  would  escape  this  fate  if  it  were  more  clearly  conscious
at  the  outset  that  the  real  treasures  of  faith  are  independent
of  any  special  forms  of  the  historical  course  of  events,  and
above  all  cannot  be  exclusively  attached  to  any  one  form
in  particular.

§  2.  With  the  assumption  of  a  plural  origin  of  mankind
is  commonly  combined  the  other  assumption  of  original
differences  of  endowment  of  the  different  races.  This  com-
bination finds  special  contradiction  in  a  view  which,  without
caring  about  the  original  unity  of  mankind  historically
considered,  believes  that  it  must  hold  fast  the  unity  of  kind
and  the  original  equality  of  all  men's  capacity  for  civilisa-
tion. According  to  this  view,  to  trace  back  the  varieties  of
development  which  individual  nations  have  experienced  to
innate  and  permanent  differences  of  their  bodily  and  mental
organization  is,  as  it  were,  a  shortening  of  the  arm  of  science,
the  business  of  which  rather  is  to  explain  the  divergence  of
mankind  from  one  another  as  regards  their  way  of  life,  by
pointing  out  all  the  natural  and  social  influences  which  have
worked  upon  the originally  similar  natures  of  men. It

lavel

is  I

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  219

certainly  not  necessary  to  lay  special  stress  upon  the  truth
which  is  unquestionably  involved  in  this  demand  upon
science;  it  is  perhaps  more  to  the  purpose  to  observe  that
even  this  correct  principle  of  investigation  may  be  carried
too  far.

The  principle  is  fully  justified  in  the  investigation  of  all
those  pha3nomena  which  we  may  still  observe  recurring  and
reproducing  one  another,  in  connection  with  and  conditioned
by  other  phsenomena,  but  cannot  on  the  other  hand  impose
on  Nature  itself  any  greater  simplicity  of  origin  than  Nature
really  has.  He  who  assumes  a  peculiar  vital  power  for  the
phsenomena  of  organic  life  may  soon  convince  himself  that  the
supposed  activity  of  this  power  is  determined  on  all  sides  by
physical  conditions,  and  here  it  is  that  it  becomes  necessary
for  him  to  explain  the  consequences  of  this  power  as  results
which  spring  from  co-operating  causes  in  accordance  with  the
Bame  universal  laws  to  which  those  external  influences  are
subject.  But  he  who  traces  back  all  plants  to  one  primal
plant,  and  all  animals  to  one  primal  animal,  on  the  one  hand
diverges  from  experience  which  presents  no  facts  that  require
such  a  supposition,  and  on  the  other  hand  affirms  a  process
which,  even  independent  of  experience,  is  by  no  means
necessary  on  general  grounds.  For  that  Nature  itself,  like
human  thought,  should  in  working  progress  from  the  imperfect
to  the  perfect,  from  the  simple  to  the  composite,  from  the
homogeneity  of  the  universal  to  the  manifold  variety  of
the  particular,  is  only  a  probable  conjecture,  in  as  far  as
Nature  requires  to  utilize  the  imperfect,  simple,  and  homo-
geneous, in  producing  the  more  complex  perfection  of  the
individual.  Where  we  cannot  assume  that  this  real  and
solid  advantage  accrues  from  Nature's  following  such  a  path,
we  have  no  reason  to  attribute  to  it  as  necessary  the  same
course  as  is  taken  by  our  own  thought  in  observing,  comparing,
and  classifying  the  perfected  reality  upon  which  it  comes  to
work. Nature  does not make first things and  then  their

H  attributes,  first  matter  and  then  the  forces  inhering  in  it ;

B  just  as  little  is  it  necessary  and  self-evident  that  it  should,  in

I

220  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

the  first  place,  embody  in  some  single  primary  form  the  universal
generic  concept  under  which  our  thought  may  subsequently
group  together  a  plurality  of  species,  effecting  later  the  historical
development  of  the  species  from  this  primary  form,  by  the
supplementary  influence  of  further  conditions.  Rather  does
Nature  (not  destitute  of  the  necessary  and  essential  means  of
direct  production)  undoubtedly  begin  with  all  the  rich  variety
of  creatures  which  are  equally  possible  as  embodiments  of
the  universal

Though,  however,  we  vindicate  the  possibility  of  this
assumption,  yet  we  do  not  recommend  that  it  should  be
thoughtlessly  employed.  The  principles  according  to  which
we  must  estimate  mental  life  in  general  would  above  all
things  never  permit  us  to  deny  altogether  to  certain  races
certain  mental  capacities,  attributing  to  others  an  exclusive
possession  of  them.  The  most  general  laws,  according  to
which  the  events  of  mental  life  happen,  are  valid  alike  for
men  and  animals  to  such  an  extent,  and  the  connection
between  the  different  forms  of  mental  activity  is  so  close  and
many-sided,  that  if  we  take  two  kinds  of  mind  which,  in
relation  to  many  departments  of  this  activity,  present  such  a
perfect  similarity  as  we  find  in  the  different  races  of  men,
we  shall  see  that  these  two  cannot  well  be  separated  (with
regard  to  any  other  department  of  the  same  activity)  by  the
existence  or  defect  of  some  innate  capability.  If  there  is  a
difference  of  original  endowment,  it  is  without  doubt  to  be
found  in  that  which  most  strikingly  distinguishes  from  one
another  even  individual  members  of  the  same  race ;  that  is,
in  disposition  and  not  in  the  nature  and  mode  of  operation  of
the  mental  powers  in  general,  which  are  common  to  all  By
disposition  we  mean  that  particular  combination  of  impulses  by
which  the  mental  powers  have  the  direction  of  their  activity
determined,  as  well  as  their  ends,  and  the  vigour,  variety,  and
constancy  of  their  exercise;  and  all  this  may  be  different  in
different  races,  partly  on  account  of  inherited  peculiarities  of
organic  formation,  partly  on  account  of  original  idiosyncrasies  of
mental  nature. And  it  is  this  which  also  determines  the  amount

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  221

of  attainable  development,  according  to  the  direction  in  which
it  predominantly  guides  the  interest  of  the  whole  mental  life,
and  according  as  it  makes  the  mind  more  receptive  towards
relations  of  things  the  observation  and  treatment  of  which
must  inevitably  lead  it  further,  or  causes  it  to  find  satisfaction
in  occupations  and  forms  of  life  which  contain  no  living  germ
of  progress.  The  attempt  to  extend  higher  civilisation  to  nations
which  have  hitherto  remained  wholly  strangers  to  it,  has  been
frustrated  much  more  by  the  difficulty  of  arousing  lasting
interest  in  the  benefits  of  our  own  culture  than  by  want  of
the  insight  necessary  for  understanding  it.

Now  whether  in  point  of  fact  these  varieties  of  disposition
are  irremovable  differences  of  original  endowment,  or  whether
even  they  are  but  the  accumulated  effects  of  constant  external
conditions,  is  a  question  which  historical  experience  so  far
can  hardly  decide.  The  nations  which  hitherto  have  had  a
long  term  of  life  constantly  reveal  to  us,  amid  all  the  striking
changes  of  civilisation  which  they  undergo,  a  tenacious  per-
sistence of  peculiar  characteristics  which  often  merely  change
the  scene  of  their  manifestation.  However  estimable  may  be
the  attempts  made  to  explain  the  varieties  of  human  develop-
ment by  reference  merely  to  the  effect  of  those  circumstances
by  which  life  is  conditioned,  they  have  not  hitherto  enabled  us
to  dispense  with  the  assumption  that  there  are  special  varia-
tions of  generic  human  nature  which  were  given  as  the
material  upon  which  those  conditions  had  to  operate  in  the
various  branches  of  mankind.

Our  judgments,  however,  on  all  such  questions  are  never
based  altogether  upon  scientific  grounds,  but  depend  also  on
unspoken  moral  needs  and  doubts.  Even  the  aversion  to
allow,  in  the  case  of  mankind,  the  possibility  of  original
variety, depends on a reason  of this kind. If different

B  creatures  differ  from  one  another  by  an  altogether  distinct
generic  stamp,  it  is  not  thought  surprising  if  some  lack  the
advantages  of  others ;  it  seems  that  each  should  be  contented

y  with  that  with  which  his  nature  has  provided  him.  The
different  races of  men, however,  seem to be  as near one

222  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

another  as  possible,  on  account  of  the  predominant  similarity
of  their  most  essential  characteristics,  and  what  is  of  still  more
importance,  they  are  capable  of  a  common  life  of  reciprocity
in  work  and  enjoyment ;  here  a  difference  of  mental  endow-
ment, which  would  be  not  merely  a  difference,  but  also  a
gradation  of  more  and  less,  would  seem  like  an  unjust
abridgment,  as  regards  the  less  gifted  races,  of  the  means
necessary  for  the  fulfilment  of  that  business  of  human  life
which  is  common  to  all  men — means  upon  which  all  therefore
seem  to  have  an  equal  claim.  This  consideration,  is  not
without  weight ;  indeed,  we  willingly  allow  that  the  supposition
is  inexplicable  that  a  race  of  men  may  be  for  ever  hindered
by  some  concealed  defect  of  their  organization  from  reaching
a  civilisation  for  the  attainment  of  which  they  seem  to  possess
rU  externally  cognisable  capacities ;  yet  the  enigma  referred
to  is  so  often  suggested  to  us  by  history,  and  in  forms  so
obtrusive,  that  our  failure  to  understand  it  must  not  lead
us  even  in  this  case  to  deny  its  existence.  For  still
more  inexplicable  than  those  inherent  natural  hindrances  to
progress  are  the  numerous  cases  where,  on  the  one  hand,
individuals  of  the  most  favoured  races  remain  far  below
the  general  level  of  endowment  of  their  race,  and  on  the
other  hand,  whole  nations  are  for  centuries  hindered  by
external  circumstances  from  attaining  a  degree  of  civilisation
by  no  means  beyond  the  reach  of  their  actual  mental  capacity.
If  we  can  neither  alter  nor  deny  this  fact  of  the  tyranny
of  external  conditions,  we  have  just  as  little  reason  for
regarding  the  limiting  power  of  original  natural  endowment  as
inconceivable.

§  3.  The  aversion  to  allow  innate  differences  in  the  dis-
positions of  nations  is  not  obscurely  connected  with  that
increasingly  popular  mode  of  thought  which  would  dispense
with  all  predetermination  of  future  development  in  the  human
mind,  and  would  leave  it,  as  selfless  and  plastic  material,  to
be  altogether  formed  by  external  conditions.  As  men's  taste
varies  in  art,  so  it  does  also  in  the  way  of  looking  at  history ;
and  although  we  may  easily  admit  that  each  of  the  opposed

EXTEKNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  223

views  may  be  justified  within  certain  limits,  yet  in  neither  case
are  there  wanting  unjustifiable  transgressions  of  the  limits  of
validity.  Early  historical  idealism  often  proceeded  as  if  the
spirit  of  man  dwelt  upon  earth  devoid  of  wants,  and  in  an
atmosphere  of  purest  ether,  and  as  if,  following  nothing  but
the  impulses  of  its  own  nature,  it  produced  the  melodious
succession  of  its  own  significant  developments,  unabridged  by
any  opposition,  and  only  incidentally  condescended  to  the
prose  of  mundane  circumstances  in  order  to  transfigure  them
to  a  reflection  of  its  own  splendour.  In  opposition  to  this
idealism,  the  realism  of  our  own  time  asserts,  and  rightly,  the
stimulating,  restricting,  and  guiding  power  which  those  same
mundane  circumstances  exercise  upon  the  uncertain  and
want-laden  nature  of  frail  humanity.  But  neither  is  it
necessary  that  the  idealistic  view  should  be  held  in  the
exaggerated  form  which  we  have  just  noticed,  nor  has  the
opposed  view  either  the  duty  or  the  privilege  of  carrying  its
necessary  and  well-founded  warnings  to  the  point  of  that
mephistophelic  scorn  with  which  men  sometimes  dispute  the
efficacy  of  all  nobler  springs  of  development — of  all  except
such  as  depend  on  imperative  need.

Only  plants  are  destined  to  live  by  the  favour  of  external
circumstances,  without  reactions  that  bear  the  stamp  of
living  activity,  and  accommodating  themselves  to  moderate
hange  of  such  circumstances,  but  helplessly  succumbing  to
he  effects  of  greater  change.  Hardly  anywhere  in  the
animal  world  is  the  satisfaction  of  natural  wants  attained
without  some  individual  effort  on  the  part  of  those  satisfied,
■land  in  some  kinds  of  animals  this  activity  is  so  developed  as
to  have  become  an  instinct  of  co-operative  labour.  But  in  these
very  operations — to  which,  indeed,  the  animals  are  stimulated
by  outward  impressions,  but  the  mode  of  which  is  determined
by  themselves  in  accordance  with  an  unalterable  impulse  of
their  nature  —  the  agents  seem  to  us  less  free  and  active
than  in  those  less  striking  performances  by  which  they  (within
narrow  limits)  modify  the  operations  referred  to  in  accordance
with  changing  circumstances. Mankind,  not  being  directed

li

V

224  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

and  restricted  to  one  definite  occupation  by  any  similar
prompting  of  Nature,  see  before  them  the  whole  earth  as  the
sphere  of  their  activity,  and  must  find  out  by  manifold
experience  that  which  Nature  itself  has  imprinted  on  the
souls  of  brutes ;  that  is,  necessary  ends,  efficient  instruments,
and  the  most  useful  division  of  labour.  They  do  not  come
to  this  task  unprovided,  but  they  come  without  having  received
an  impulse  from  Nature  to  use  these  means  in  some  one
direction  only ;  with  an  unbiassed  sensuous  receptivity  and
a  capacity  of  bringing  received  impressions  into  reciprocal
relations  of  inner  connection,  they  are  forced  by  their  wants
to  seek  out  unknown  sources  of  satisfaction.  It  is  certainly
true  that  instinct  leads  more  easily  to  the  satisfaction  of  wants
than  the  reflection  following  experience,  which  errs  in  a
thousand  ways ;  but  every  error  that  fails  of  the  end  at
which  it  aimed,  finds  in  its  path  truths  which  would  have
remained  undiscovered  if  an  infallible  natural  impulse  had  led
the  mind  straight  to  its  goal.  Hence  even  the  simplest
occurrences  of  daily  life  develop  in  the  most  uncivilised
nations  at  least  much  skill  in  using  the  properties  of  things
according  to  general  physical  laws,  even  though  these  laws  (as
e.g.  those  of  equilibrium  or  of  the  lever)  may  never  become  to
them  explicit  objects  of  consciousness.  And  all  knowledge
thus  gained,  just  because  it  did  not  exist  as  innate  endowment
of  the  mind,  but  came  to  be  formed  through  contact  with
things,  and  thus  was  matter  of  living  experience,  is  felt  to  be,
as  it  were,  the  production  of  our  own  activity.

At  first  the  individual  may,  by  a  kind  of  superficial  and
hasty  construction,  gain  shelter  and  support  from  his  imme-
diate surroundings;  but  a  growing  society,  with  its  ever-
increasing  multitude  of  wants  and  the  fresh  demands  which
it  develops,  finds  itself  obliged  to  appropriate  also,  by  weU-
considered  division  and  combination  of  its  powers,  the  less
obvious  utilities  of  natural  products.  By  bringing  large
extents  of  land  under  permanent  cultivation — by  connecting
distant  regions  for  exchange  of  commodities — by  increasing
the  value  and  convenience  of  their  immediate  surroundings

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT,  225

through  manifold  elaboration  of  the  material  they  have  appro-
priated— the  members  of  such  a  society  are  ever  transforming
larger  and  larger  extents  of  the  earth's  surface,  as  it  were  to
another  and  more  home-like  Nature,  to  the  scene  of  a  life  of
social  order.  In  proportion  as  this  happens,  the  dependence
of  man  upon  the  elementary  material  world  that  surrounds
him  becomes  lessened ;  he  becomes  accustomed  to  have  most
of  his  wants  satisfied,  not  by  direct  application  to  this  external
world,  but  at  third  hand  by  the  co-operation  of  social  labour ;
he  with  his  ideas,  feelings,  cares,  and  plans  belongs  far  more
to  this  new  and  secondary  order  of  things,  to  the  concatenated
whole  of  human  society,  than  to  primitive  Nature,  which,
while  it  is  the  basis  of  his  existence,  seems  ever  to  withdraw
further  and  further  into  the  background.

It  is,  then,  only  when  this  early  progress  has  transferred
the  centre  of  existence  from  the  natural  world  to  the  artificial
world  of  society  that  distinctively  human  life  begins,  and  the
possibility  of  its  further  development.  For  the  inferior
animals  are  as  capable  as  ourselves  of  enjoying  without
preparation  that  which  created  Nature  freely  offers ;  it  is  the
distinctive  task  of  humanity  to  create  for  itself  the  world  in
which  it  is  to  find  its  highest  enjoyments.  In  order  to  do
this,  mankind  had  to  restrict  the  manifold  possibilities  of
existence  and  action  contained  in  the  course  of  events  and  of
our  own  impulses  by  thoughts  of  what  is  right  and  fair ;  they
had  by  multiform  elaboration  to  transform  the  productions  of
Nature,  together  with  the  soil  which  brought  them  forth,  into
a  world  of  commodities,  the  attainment,  preservation,  and  use
IJflbf  which  combined  the  dispersed  powers  of  individuals  to  a
connected  whole  of  occupations  depending  upon  one  another ;
(put  of  the  social  contact  which  occurs  in  the  course  of  Nature,
nd  which  is  increased  by  the  dawning  community  of  labour,
community  of  life  had  to  be  developed  that  sacrificed  many
a  liberty  which  Nature  aUows  us,  and  imposed  on  itself  many
an  obligation  for  which  Nature  gives  no  reason.  So  the
human  mind  reared  above  the  tangible  sensible  world  of  that
I  MPhich  actually  exists  the  not  less  complex  ramifications  of
I  E VOL.  n.  P

226  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

a  world  of  relations  which  ought  to  exist  because  their  own
eternal  worth  requires  their  realization.  And  this  whole
artificial  order  of  life  which  man  had  to  create  in  addition  to
created  Nature  has  only  in  isolated  moments  of  despair,  due
to  conscious  failure,  seemed  to  the  minds  of  men  to  be  an
arbitrary  and  revocable  structure  of  their  own  invention ;  on
the  whole,  social  order  has  appeared  to  the  human  mind  to
be  an  altogether  irrevocable  natural  necessity.

Now  plainly  we  could  not  expect  the  construction  of  this
spiritual  cosmos  to  result  from  spontaneous  evolution  of  the
human  mind  without  the  stimulating  and  guiding  influence
of  various  external  causes. It  is  not  as  though  there  were  in
us  a  natural  impulse  to  progi-ess  which,  like  a  pressed  spring,
strains to the rebound; but like bodies that cannot of
themselves  quit  their  state  of  rest,  or  that,  when  once  set
in  motion,  exert  force  upon  the  obstacles  which  they  encounter,
80  the  impulse  to  progress  in  the  human  mind,  and  the  direc-
tion wliich it  will take, are due to the  velocity of the
evolutionary  movement  in  which  the  mind  is  already  involved.
It in  certainly  true  that  we may  regard the ideals  of  the
Beautiful,  the  True,  the  Good,  and  the Eight  as  an  innate
possession  of  our  soul,  but  only  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is
generally  allowable  to  use  this  expression  innate. They  are
not  presented to our consciousness  from the  beginning  as
distinct  representations,  but  only  after  our  moral  nature  has
been  stirred  on  many  occasions  to  approve  or  reject  various
modes of action do  we think of them and recognise  in
them  the  principles  according  to  which  our  judgment  had,
previously  proceeded. And  if  they  had  actually  been  innate
in  our  consciousness  as  living representations  that  were  in'
it  from  the  beginning,  of  what  value  would  they  be  for  our  j
development? The comparing activity of thought may,]
indeed,  separate  the  feeling  of  reverence  with  which  every- j
thing  that  is  beautiful,  right,  or  good  inspires  us  from  thesej
particular  occasions  of  its  exercise,  and  attach  it  to  the  general^
notions  of  beauty,  right,  and  goodness ;  but  as  none  of  these  \
ideals  has  reality  except,  when  embodied  in  definite  examples,!

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  227

to  which  it  gives  significance,  so  neither  would  any  of  them
have  for  us  a  definite  content  if  we  were  not  able  to  recollect
individual  instances  of  its  realization.  And  if  we  think  of  the
worth  of  all  ideals  as  united  in  the  unfathomable  wealth  of  the
divine  nature  to  a  blessedness  which  was  before  the  world
began,  we  are  used  to  expect,  even  of  this  nature,  that  it  should
manifest  itself  in  the  creation  of  a  world  of  varied  forms  ;  it  is
this  which  seems  first,  by  means  of  perceptible  relations  between
its  different  elements,  to  give  to  the  hitherto  formless  univer-
sality of  the  ideal  content  an  abundance  of  definite  characteristic
manifestations,  and  thereby  a  fulness  of  reality  which  it  had
seemed  to  lack  while  it  remained  self-contained.  The  human
mind  cannot  accomplish  such  a  mysterious  creative  act ;  it
would  have  been  vain  to  set  it  the  task  of  excogitating  with
inventive  fancy  from  the  formless  tendencies  in  which  its
innate  ideals  must  have  consisted,  a  multitude  of  cases  of
their  possible  realization.  For  in  fact  our  whole  existence,
historical  and  unhistorical,  is  occupied  in  receiving  the  influ-
ences exercised  upon  us  by  the  circumstances  of  the  material
world  in  which  we  are  placed,  these  circumstances  constituting
the  stimulations  which  first  call  forth  our  activity,  the  guiding
conditions  which  fix  the  possible  aims  and  content  of  our
being,  and  finally  the  material  on  which  we  are  continually
impressing,  in  individual  and  limited  forms,  the  image  of  the
ideal.  Much  that  is  beautiful,  much  that  is  good,  much  that
is  just,  admits  of  realization ;  but  only  such  beauty,  such  good,
and  such  justice  as  may  be  contained  and  comprehended  in  this
world  of  sense  and  the  relations  subsisting  between  its  perish-
ing inhabitants.  He  who  desires  to  see  realized  the  beautiful  in
itself,  or  the  good  and  the  just  as  they  would  be  in  themselves
without  the  realization  being  at  the  same  time  occasioned  and
restricted  by  some  actual  relation  for  which  it  is  valid,  deeires
something  as  contradictory  as  he  who  wishes  that  the  speed  of
any  movable  object,  the  movement  of  which  is  only  made  possible
by  that  contact  with  the  ground  which  at  the  same  time
retards  its  motion,  should  be  accelerated  by  the  total  removal
of  this  resistance.

228  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV,

Human  development,  then,  requires  occasioning  causes,  and
historical  idealism  is  wrong  if  it  takes  offence  at  this  depend-
ence of  the  progress  that  has  been  made  upon  conditious
which  the  human  mind  has  not  devised  for  itself,  but  has
found  upon  its  path.  But  the  conditions  of  the  begi::ning
and  of  the  progress  of  culture  are  not  quite  the  same.  When
mankind  have  actually  reached  any  stage  of  civilisation  they
are  generally  urged  on  by  the  impulsive  force  of  this  civilisa-
tion itself  to  a  further  stage,  in  which,  with  an  already
awakened  consciousness  of  ends  to  be  attained,  they  seek  the
satisfaction  of  yet  unsatisfied  wants ;  on  the  other  hand,  the
first  steps  towards  development  can  only  be  made  possible  by
the  favour  of  natural  circumstances,  by  which  also  their  direc-
tion is  in  the  first  instance  determined.  No  rules  of  justice
are  conceivable  at  the  beginning  of  civilisation  without  direct
reference  to  objects  of  need  or  enjoyment,  the  use  of  which
must  be  determined  by  a  consideration  of  various  claims ;  but
it  is  Nature  that  by  her  niggardness  or  bounty  must  fix  the
worth  of  the  productions  which  become  the  first  objects  of  the
dawning  sense  of  justice  with  its  regulative  activity.  There  can
be  no  individual  development  to  a  fixed  order  of  life  without
connected  labour;  and  it  is  external  Nature  which,  by  the
special  character  of  its  products,  and  by  the  necessities  which
it  imposes,  determines  how  great  a  share  of  life  is  to  be
devoted  to  the  task  of  mere  self-preservation,  and  how  much
is  to  be  left  for  enjoyment ;  determining  also  by  the  kind  of
work  which  it  allows  or  requires,  whether  the  human  mind
shall  be  pent  up  in  a  narrow  circle  of  ideas  and  activities,  or
shall  be  spurred  on  to  a  life  of  many-sided  and  inventive
action.  The  development  of  artistic  and  religious  views
depends  only  to  a  smaller  extent,  and  not  in  its  most  essential
features,  upon  the  immediate  impression  which  natural  sur-
roundings make  upon  human  imagination ;  yet  mediately  tho
influence  of  these  surroundings  is  great ;  for  upon  the  geniality,
ease,  and  elasticity  of  customary  life,  and  the  forms  of  inter-
course which  they  allow  of,  depend  the  variety  and  vigour  of
that  mental  reciprocity  within  a  society  which  is  indispensable

1

EXTEIINIL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  229

for  the  formation  of  any  coherent  philosophical  views.  As,
finally,  the  individual's  sphere  of  thought  becomes  impover-
ished when  it  lacks  the  stimulating  interruption  of  inter-
course with  others,  so  also  for  the  progressive  civilisa-
tion of  nations,  it  is  necessary  "that  their  different  modes  of
philosophic  thought  should  be  brought  into  contact,  and  per-
haps also,  according  to  an  oft-conjectured  natural  law,  that
there  should  be  a  physical  blending  of  races  not  too  alien
from  one  another.  Where  the  nature  of  the  country  affords
means  of  communication  that  facilitate  this  reciprocal  action
between  nations,  we  see  the  civilisation  of  mankind  fall
earliest  into  a  course  of  coherent  progress ;  on  the  contrary,
it  has  remained  for  thousands  of  years  in  the  same  uniform
condition  in  regions  whose  boundaries,  inhospitable  and
difficult  to  pass,  have  restricted  the  inhabitants  to  a  constant
employment  of  the  same  means  to  their  ends  and  the  same
conditions  of  life.

All  these  thoughts,  even  in  that  more  detailed  presentation
of  them  which  we  must  here  renounce,  have  long  lost  the
charm  of  novelty — they  have  lost  it  since  the  time  when  the
modern  realism  of  historical  investigation  began  to  make  the
dependence  of  progress  upon  the  geographical  conditions  of
the  earth's  surface  a  favourite  subject  of  its  inquiries.  Mean-
while, however  thankworthy  these  may  be,  they  do  not  quite
suffice  to  explain  the  capricious  course  that  history  has
actually  taken.  Mankind  cannot  accomplish  that  which  is
impossible ;  hence  we  see  how  it  is  that  a  country  of  which
the  poverty  and  ruggedness  make  life  difficult  can  produce
no  indigenous  culture,  but  can  only  adopt  one  which  has
germinated  and  grown  strong  elsewhere.  The  presence
of  favourable  conditions  in  other  places,  however,  by  no
means  explains  how  it  is  that  they  are  made  use  of.  The
human  mind  is  far  from  being  so  desirous  of  development
from  the  very  beginning  as  to  be  hurried  away,  by  the  favour
of  natural  circumstances,  to  make  all  the  progress  which  these
render  possible.  Men  may  for  long  periods  of  time  use  with
careless  indifference  natural  products  which  seem  directly  to

230

BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  IV.

suggest  some  definite  application  of  their  powers,  without
discovering  this  application ;  not  even  necessity  is  the  mother
of  invention  in  the  sense  of  leading  men  generally  to  seek
satisfaction  of  their  wants  by  reflection  which  may  be  the
herald  of  subsequent  progress  ;  on  the  contrary,  so  great  is
men's  natural  sluggishness  that,  satisfied  with  warding  off
the  most  extreme  misery,  they  will  long  endure  the  continual
recurrence  of  sufferings  which  it  would  be  by  no  means
difficult  to  avoid  by  a  moderately  intelligent  use  of  means
which  are  actually  at  their  command.  "We  deceive  ourselves
therefore  if  we  think  we  see  in  favourable  geographical  con-
ditions—  the  advantageousness  of  which  is  immediately
obvious  to  our  practised  observation — an  impelling  power
which  without  reckoning  upon  happy  receptivity  of  dis-
position in  men  could  force  them  to  develop,  as  if  by  natural
necessity,  in  some  definite  direction  and  at  some  definite  rate.
And  least  of  all  can  the  special  colouring  which  growing
culture  has  taken  among  different  nations  be  altogether
deduced  from  a  corresponding  speciality  of  external  conditions.
We  must  admit  that  similar  conditions  have  produced  different
results,  the  germ  of  which  must  be  sought  for  first  in  the
liistorical  lot  of  nations,  and  last  in  the  incalculable  aggregate
of  those  inner  springs  of  action  which  stirred  their  spiritual
life  and  in  turn  helped  to  determine  national  destiny.

§  4.  If,  without  any  pretensions  to  completeness  in  the
enumeration  of  infinitely  varied  facts,  we  now  take  a  glance  at
those  nations  whose  life— either  unhistorical,  or  if  historical
interrupted — will  afford  us  no  opportunity  of  considering
them  more  in  detail  at  a  later  stage,  we  shall  find  that  their
fate  is  partly,  but  only  partly,  explicable  by  reference  to  the
circumstances  of  their  external  condition.  Without  a  certain
density  of  population  which  brings  men  with  their  wants  and
claims,  and  their  varieties  of  temperament  and  experience,  not
only  into  frequent  contact  but  into  lasting  intercourse,  both
hostile  and  harmonious,  the  growth  of  higher  civilisation
among  men  is  impossible.  It  was  but  few  climates  that
afforded  to  infant  societies  the  favouring  conditions  necessary

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  231

for  this — making  life  easy  by  spontaneous  fertility  of  soil,  by
a  mixture  of  good  and  bad  in  the  climate  arousing  wants
without  making  the  satisfaction  of  them  very  difficult,  and
finally  (by  the  variety  of  the  products  and  impressions  which
it  afforded)  establishing  a  sufficient  variety  of  mutually  com-
plementary occupations  and  dispositions.

The  frigid  zone  cannot  be  like  a  home  to  its  inhabitants,  in
whom  want  does  indeed  rouse  ingenuity  in  satisfying  the  most
pressing  needs,  but  at  the  same  time  frustrates  every  effort
after  beauty  and  fulness  of  life.  Forced  dependence  upon
those  few  productions  of  a  niggard  Nature  which  it  is  possible
to  reckon  upon,  makes  the  labour  of  preserving  life  difficult
and  too  much  alike  for  all.  One  can  hardly  imagine  what  a
Greenlauder's  life  would  be  without  the  seal.  Shapelessly
huddled  up  in  furs  of  seal  and  reindeer,  and  tied  into  the  skin
covering  of  his  kayak,  a  narrow  pointed  hunting  boat  capable
of  holding  only  one  man,  he  navigates  the  Arctic  Ocean  in
pursuit  of  the  seal  with  inimitable  skill ;  then  he  creeps  back
into  his  winter  hut,  constructed  of  stones,  driftwood,  turf,  and
skins,  and  feeds  upon  his  greasy  spoil,  by  the  light  of  lamps
that  are  always  burning,  the  moss  wicks  of  which  are  fed  by
seal  fat ;  and  the  subject  of  conversation  is  a  description  of
the  hunt,  graphically  given  and  attentively  listened  to — "  Thu.""
he  sat — thus  he  stretched  himself  out  and  threw  the  harpoon."
And  in  the  happier  future  world  which  he  supposes  will  be
in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  he  expects  a  superabundance  of
birds,  fishes,  seals,  and  reindeer;  and  it  is  only  in  his  hope
that  the  short  summer  and  sunshine  of  his  present  home  will
there  be  continuous,  that  he  betrays  his  sense  of  the  climatic
burden  under  which  he  bends.  This  gloomy  picture  of  a
miserable  existence  is  pretty  much  the  same  for  all  the
northern  coasts  of  the  old  world,  amid  local  differences  of
position  and  instruments  ;  these  wildernesses  have  nowhere
been  able  to  produce  a  higher  condition  of  human  life,  and  to
those  races  which  by  some  unknown  fate  were  driven  into
them  they  have  only  left  the  remnants  of  civilisation  attained
previously  in  more  favoured  abodes. The  small  amount  of

i232

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

subsistence  furnished  by  a  wide  extent  of  country  has  every-
where prevented  the  density  of  population  necessary  for  the
beginning  of  political  organization  ;  all  having  to  work  at  very-
similar  occupations,  and  being  separated  from  one  another  and
from  all  foreign  culture  by  the  difficulty  of  intercourse,  the
scattered  families  have  neither  been  able  to  advance  to  an
educative  division  of  labour,  nor  had  they  any  motive  for
the  development  of  social  forms  and  ideas  of  right  for  the
application  of  which  no  cases  occurred.  Natural  goodness  of
disposition  and  various  mental  gifts  have  not  been  sufficient
to  prevent  men  in  this  existence  of  constant  bodily  hardship
from  coming  to  regard  the  coarsest  enjoyments  of  the  senses
as  the  only  really  good  things  in  life.

The  people  of  the  South  Sea  islands,  though  in  a  graceful
instead  of  a  repulsive  fashion,  are  really  quite  as  backward.
When  they  were  first  seen,  happily  disporting  themselves  in
the  sea  with  easy  agility — behaving  with  hospitable  and
gracious  sociality  on  land — passing  away  the  time  in  dancing,
round  games,  songs,  and  cheerful  talk — not  given  to  assiduous
labour  indeed,  yet  managing  their  small  plantations  with  skill —
liardly  needing  clothing  or  shelter,  but  showing  taste  in  what
Ihey  had — healthy,  strong,  and  active,  even  their  most  aged
men  contented  and  good-tempered — when  they  were  seen
thus,  they  seemed  to  have  retained  a  paradisiac  condition.  A
nearer  acquaintance  showed  the  dark  side  of  this  fair  picture.
The  confined  extent  of  the  islands  had  indeed  caused  greater
pressure  of  population  and  hence  active  commerce ;  but  the
fineness  of  climate  had  made  work  too  little  imperative,  and
the  uniformity  of  weather  and  natural  products  had  caused
the  lives  of  all  to  be  too  much  alike.  The  islands  were  too
small  to  be  the  scene  of  great  enterprises,  and  there  was  no
large  continent  accessible,  capable,  by  the  foreignness  of  its
natural  features  and  its  inhabitants,  of  giving  to  the  minds  of
the  islanders  d,  stimulating  enlargement  of  their  intellectual
horizon  ;  their  isolation  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  could  hardly
develop  anything  beyond  a  peaceful  and  unprogressive
existence. But  such  a  simple  idyllic  life  is  a  defensible  mode

^

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  233

of  existence  only  when  considered  as  a  temporary  withdrawal
from  some  familiar  civilisation  :  where  it  is  everything  it  is
not  an  existence  worthy  of  mankind.  Where  each  individual
brings  into  circulation  as  his  contribution  only  the  natural
capacities  of  his  kind,  without  having  worked  them  out  to  an
individuality  which  is  all  his  own  by  some  special  labour  of
development,  each  will  be  esteemed  as  nothing  more  than  a
mere  example  of  his  kind,  that  may  be  used  and  worn  out ;
and  the  life  of  the  whole,  like  that  of  a  herd  of  animals,  only
with  the  higher  mental  characteristics  of  the  human  race,  will
in  the  end  have  no  higher  sources  of  enjoyment  than  those
with  which  it  is  furnished  by  Nature.  Hence  neither  science
nor  art  nor  morality  has  been  developed  from  the  not  incon-
siderable mental  capacities  of  these  islanders,  and  it  is  but
few  who  have  lived  through  that  idyllic  life  in  innocence —
with  all  the  prevailing  good  nature  and  friendliness,  it  was
possible  for  societies  to  exist,  formed  for  the  indulgence  of
immoderate  sensuality  and  pledged  to  child-murder,  and
there  was  wide-spread  cannibalism.  So,  like  other  fair  pro-
ducts of  animate  Nature,  they  sported  together  with  all  the
gracefulness  of  their  kind,  only  to  devour  each  other  at  last.

There  was  added  another  source  of  misery  unknown  to  the
polar  nations.  It  was  said  that  at  an  early  period  there  had
come  from  the  north-west,  from  the  mythical  island  of
Bolotuh,  where  the  gods  feed  upon  ethereal  swine,  a  light-com-
plexioned  race  which  spread  over  the  islands  and  supplanted
and  enslaved  its  original  inhabitants,  who  were  of  darker
colour.  By  innumerable  intermarriages,  the  external  differ-
ences of  the  races  were  obliterated ;  but  a  strict  system  of
caste  was  kept  up,  not  founded  upon  differences  of  culture
and  hardly  upon  differences  of  occupation,  but  upon  degrees
of  purity  of  descent.  This  system  gave  to  the  nobility,  the
Eries,  rights  without  duties,  and  to  those  of  lower  rank  duties
without  rights;  to  the  former  immortality  and  deification
after  death,  while  to  the  latter  it  did  not  even  allow  a  human
soul  during  life.  Jealously  guarding  their  rank  among  them-
eelves,  the  nobles  on  the  whole  treated  the  people  without

234

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

cruelty,  although  occasionally  murdering  these  soulless  beings
without  hesitation ;  and  still  more  inexhaustible  than  the
arrogance  of  the  Eries  was  the  patience  of  the  subject  caste,
any  of  whose  possessions  a  noble,  by  the  taboo  which  contact
with  him  could  impart,  might  appropriate  to  himself  and
make  it  unlawful  for  the  former  owner  to  touch.  Secular
power  was  overridden  to  some  extent  by  priestly  influence,
as  is  the  case  with  all  uncivilised  nations  among  whom
pretended  mental  pre-eminence  is,  on  account  of  its  greater
rarity,  more  highly  esteemed  than  bodily  vigour,  which  is
common  enough ;  but  here  as  in  the  north,  this  priestly
influence  represented  not  moral  truth  but  that  superstition
which  arises  from  a  dread  of  the  unknown  powers  of  Nature,
and  which,  driven  by  an  ill-regulated  imagination  into  erratic
courses,  has  led  nearly  everywhere  to  a  multiplication  of
horrors  but  nowhere  to  any  wise  regulation  of  life.  So  that
here  we  find  subtle  complications  of  social  order,  attractiva
simplicity  of  life,  and  complete  absence  of  all  the  higher  aims
of  existence  combined  into  a  whole  that  abounds  in  con-
tradictions.

The  vivifying  contact  with  foreign  nations,  customs  and
views,  which  the  Polynesians  lacked,  was  enjoyed  in  vain  by
the  Negro  races  and  the  Indians  of  North  America.  The
shores  of  the  Mediterranean  beheld  one  after  another  the
brilliant  civilisations  of  the  Egyptians,  Phoenicians,  Greeks,
Piomans,  and  Saracens ;  they  were  certainly  separated  by  a
wide  wilderness  from  the  country  inhabited  by  the  Negroes,
yet  for  thousands  of  years  active  intercourse  was  carried  on
notwithstanding  this  obstacle.  All  this  influence  of  culturoJ
nations,  which  certainly  extended  far  into  the  interior  of
Negroland,  produced  no  civilisation  among  the  black  tribes,
neither  the  formation  of  great  states,  nor  a  dawn  of  native  art
and  science — at  the  most  nothing  more  than  some  scanty
industries  for  the  adornment  of  life.  The  same  passions  which
move  men  everywhere,  in  Africa  too  caused  wars  and  the
successive  predominance  of  the  various  tribes,  from  very  early
times;  but  whilst  in  the  history  of  white  men  the  dominion

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  235

of  each  great  nation  has  been  perpetuated  in  lasting  and
characteristic  monuments,  and  has  marked  a  memorable  stage
of  social  conditions,  all  these  changes  have  been  without
result  for  the  black  races,  and  the  tide  of  their  national
existence,  after  the  waters  had  been  disturbed  for  a  moment
by  some  unusual  undertaking,  went  on  rising  and  falling  again
just  as  they  had  done  before.

In  the  explanation  of  this  great  historical  fact,  opinions  are
still  found  violently  opposed  to  one  another.  The  assumption
that  black  men  have  less  capacity  of  development  is  scarcely
worthy  of  refutation,  if  it  is  understood  in  such  an  exaggerated
sense  as  would  justify  the  abomination  of  slavery.  There  has
been  sufficient  experience,  even  under  this  unfavourable  con-
dition in  America,  to  forbid  us  to  regard  a  fixed  limitation  of
intellectual  endowment  as  a  permanent  hindrance  to  the
development  of  the  black  races.  It  would  be  only  in  peculi-
arity of  disposition  which  everywhere  determines  the  force
and  direction  of  the  application  of  mental  capacity,  that  we
could  seek  for  conditions  that  have  made  an  independent
beginning  of  civilisation  impossible  for  the  Negro,  and  the
appropriation  of  an  alien  civilisation  difficult  for  him.  To  say
the  least,  good  nature,  by  which  he  is  distinguished,  is  in  the
early  stages  of  history  never  inventive ;  it  is  far  more  the  evil
desires  of  ambition  and  of  unscrupulous  egoism  that  nerve  all
the  forces  of  the  mind  to  attack,  and  induce  men  to  search  out
every  means  of  defence.  White  men  have  conquered  the
world,  not  by  their  superior  morality,  but  by  the  obstinate
perseverance  with  which  they  attacked  all  those  who  could
only  oppose  passionate  ebullitions  and  unconnected  sacrifices
to  their  merciless  penetration  and  the  consistency  of  their
well-laid  plans.  The  Negro's  temperament  gives  no  promise
of  any  such  results.  Sanguine  and  changeable  of  mood,  he
is  excited  and  diverted  by  every  fresh  impression,  and  is  just
as  little  disposed  to  steady  labour  as  he  is  to  pursuing  chains
of  thought  along  those  important  intermediate  links  which  do
not  charm  by  their  own  interest,  and  yet  are  indispensable  for
connecting  that  which  is  in  itself  more  valuable. His  warmth

236

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

of  heart  malces  him  accessible  to  religious  awakening; but
from  the  unruliness  of  his  imagination,  even  these  feelings  are
more  likely  to  be  the  source  of  acts  of  isolated  self-sacrifico
than  of  a  course  of  life  ordered  in  detail In  a  temperament
of  this description there  are,  without  doubt,  many  features
unfavourable to an independent commencement of higher
civilisation,  but  also  some  which  are  sufficiently  favourable  to
subordination  under  powerful  and  originative  minds,  to  justify
us  in  expecting  either  an  imitation  of  foreign  culture,  or  a
gradual  indigenous  development  under  the  consolidating  pres-
sure of  an  intelligent  despotism. But  hitherto neither of
these  events  has  taken  place. The  incapacity  of  the  negro
state  of  Hayti  to  attain  a  condition  of  permanent  order  has
certainly  too many obvious causes in  its hasty  formation
amid  a  population  vitiated  by  slavery,  to  prove  conclusively
that  all  similar  attempts  of  coloured  men  must  be  equally
resultless,  supposing  they  were  made  under  more  favourable
circumstances,  such  as  have  hitherto  been  lacking. On  the
contrary,  in  Africa  itself  the  existence  partly  of  despotic  and
partly  of  more  democratic  polities,  shows  that  an external
formal  regulation  of  society  is  not  wholly  incompatible  with
the  genius  of  the  race,  only  there  lacks  that  content  of  life
which alone  is worthy of man, and is capable of high
development  by  means  of  these  forms. That  the  Negro  did
not  borrow  this  content  from  European  civilisation  is  expli-
cable partly  by  reference  to  the  hostile  fashion  in  which  this
came  to  him,  and  partly  by  the  too great  violence  of  the
contrast subsisting between the complex variety of this
civilisation  and  his  own  simple  way  of  life. We  see  the  hard-
living  masses  of  the  white  nations  retreating  with  a  similar
lack  of  receptivity  before  the  culture  of  the  higher  classes,  as
though  it  were  a  manner  of  life  belonging  to  a  different  species
of  animals, and living  on according  to their own  fashion,
which  they can  understand. Finally, that  in  their  native
countiy  Negroes  have  never  by any  progress  of  their  own
developed  germs  of  higher  civilisation,  may  be  to  an  important
extent,  though  hardly  altogether,  explained  by  the  geographical

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  237

conditions  of  that  country. We  find  these  conditions  partly
in  the  enervating  effect  of  the  hot  climate,  which  does  not
admit  of  the  vigorous  work  either  of  body  or  mind  that  is
possible  in  a  more  temperate region,  partly  in  the natural
fertility  of  the  soil,  which  too  easily  affords  satisfaction  of  the
few  wants  which  men  feel  in  tropical  countries,  partly  in  the
early  age  at  which  bodily  maturity  is  attained,  the  period  of
education  being  thus  abridged,  and  independent  life  allowed  to
begin  too  soon. Finally,  we  certainly  find  one  of  these  con-
ditions in  the  difficulty  of  carrying  on  communication  over
the  unbroken  stretches  of  the  African  continent,  a  difficulty  to
which  it  is  due  that  the  different  tribes  with  their  various
fashions  and  customs  (which,  however,  do  not  differ  to  any
great  extent)  cannot  come  much  into  contact  either  with  one
another  or  with  the  views  of  men  of  different  race. Whether
that  temperament  which  has  made  the  Negro  nations  so  little
fitted  to  advance  has  resulted  from  these  circumstances,  so  that
under  better  climatic  conditions  generations  which  have  had
time  to  get  rid  of  their  inherited  native  temperament  would
be  capable  of  much  progress ;  or  whether  there  is in  their
organization some  impassable barrier  to high  development,
which  will  compel  them  always  to  remain  at  a  low  level —
these  are  questions  which  can  only  be  decided  by  the  future
of  the  race  itself. It  would  certainly  be  unfair  to  conclude
from the  past  absence  to the  necessary future  absence of
historical development, and to seek the ground of this
absence  only  in  natural  incapacity  without  having  regard  to
obstructive  influences ;  but  when  men  (carried  away  by  the
certainly  not inevitable assumption that all mankind are
similarly  organized, and by  horror  of  the abominations  of
slavery)  forthwith  conclude  that  the  Negro  race  will  in  the
future  reach  that  higher  development  which  has not been
attained  all  through  the  many  centuries  of  past  history — then,
on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  to  us  that  the  conclusion  reached
is not convincing. With regard to morality, by which
the laws  of our future  conduct are determined,  this  last
assumption  may  be  preferable,  since  it  in  one  which  cannot  do

238

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

harm.  As  far  as  the  consideration  of  past  history  is  concerned,
the  point  in  dispute  is  not  so  interesting ;  for  an  originally
existent  capacity,  which  has  for  thousands  of  years  been  so
obstructed  by  unfavourable  conditions  that  it  could  never
attain  development,  is  in  an  historical  point  of  view  no  less
a  puzzle  than  an  originally  poorer  endowment  of  the  race
would  be.

S  5.  For  the  most  part  the  Eed  men  of  North  America
have  resisted  European  civilisation  even  more  expressly
than  the  Negroes,  and  have  not  themselves  developed  any
that  is  of  much  importance,  although  their  condition
may  have  been  better  before  their  social  relations  had
been  altogether  disturbed  by  the  ascendency  of  the  whites  and
their  perfidy.  The  superior  appliances  of  European  civilisa-
tion, matured  under  more  favouring  conditions,  have  made
North  America  a  rich  country ;  the  densely- wooded  nature  of
those  regions,  with  lack  of  water  in  the  west  and  cold  in  the
east,  put  difficulties  in  the  way  of  an  indigenous  civilisation.
Our  cereals  were  not  produced,  and  the  scanty  crops  of  maize
in  the  north  did  not  lead  to  permanent  cultivation  of  the  soil ;
potatoes  and  the  domestic  animals  of  the  old  world  were
unknown,  and  the  allied  native  kinds  of  animals  not  very  easy
to  tame.  But  there  was  a  superabundance  of  game,  and  the
hunter's  life,  everywhere  for  the  sake  of  self-preservation  the
primitive  form  of  existence,  continued  here  to  be  the  sole
form.  This  was  unfavourable  to  civilisation  in  every  way.
"Without  other  sources  of  supply,  even  the  best  hunting
grounds  could  support  only  a  few  persons  to  the  square  mile  ;
populations  never  reached  the  degree  of  density  necessary
for  the  development  of  society,  and  were  kept  from  the
stationary  form  of  life  and  its  educative  influences.  The
tortures  of  hunger,  which  are  depicted  terribly  enough  in  their
legends,  made  the  care  of  a  family  a  burden;  the  noble
liberality  which  the  less  skilful  hunter  expected  from  the
more  fortunate,  and  which  the  latter  cheerfully  exercised,
deprived  the  unskilful  of  motives  to  greater  exertion,  and  the
skilful  of  that  useful  egoism  which  attracts  to  further  enter-

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  239

prise  by  the  pleasure  which  increase  of  gain  awakens.  The
necessity  that  the  men  should  always  be  ready  to  fight  caused
all  the  ordinary  work  of  life  to  fall  upon  the  women,  while
the  poorness  and  scantiness  of  the  goods  which  they  had  to
take  care  of,  afforded  them  no  opportunity  of  making  their
womanly  guardianship  of  much  account.  The  wide  dispersion
of  the  population  and  ignorance  of  the  use  of  metals  prevented
any  great  development  of  manufacturing  industry.  Eestricted
to  the  most  childish  modes  of  sticking  and  joining  things
together,  even  fastening  the  laboriously  cut  stone  heads  of
their  axes  into  the  cleft  of  the  wooden  handles  with  strips  of
leather  or  fibres  of  plants,  they  busied  themselves  only  in  the
weaving  and  plaiting  of  ornamental  stuffs,  which  was  an  affair
of  patience  and  of  simple  taste.  The  only  things  on  which
they  expended  labour  were  arms,  ornaments,  and  the  most
indispensable  implements,  being  generally  more  inclined  to
suffer  than  to  take  much  trouble  for  their  own  relief.  The
custom  of  shedding  blood  in  the  chase,  and  the  unavoidable
disputes  concerning  the  boundaries  of  hunting  grounds — a
serious  matter  for  people  to  whom  hunting  was  a  bitter  necessity
of  existence — ^gave  them  a  fierceness  of  disposition  which  led
to  mutual  destruction.  Thus  their  life  went  on  without  his-
torical progress,  like  the  movement  of  a  man  who  is  swimming
against  the  stream — movement  which  suffices  indeed  to  keep
him  up  but  does  not  carry  him  forward.

They  are  not  universally  ignorant  of  the  sources  of  their  ill-
fortune.  "  Do  you  not  see,"  said  one  of  their  chiefs,  "  that  the
white  men  live  upon  corn,  and  we  upon  meat — that  meat
requires  more  than  thirty  moons  to  come  to  maturity,  and
often  fails — that  each  of  the  wondrous  grains  which  they  plant
in  the  earth  gives  them  back  more  than  a  hundred-fold — that
the  animals  upon  whose  flesh  we  live  have  four  legs  to  escape
with,  while  we  have  only  two  to  follow  them  with — that
wherever  the  grains  of  corn  fall,  there  they  remain  and  grow —
that  for  us  winter  is  a  time  of  toilsome  hunting,  for  the  white
men  the  time  of  rest  ?  That  is  why  they  have  so  many
children  and  live  longer  than  we. Truly  before  the  cedars  of

240

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  IV.

our  village  die  of  old  age,  and  before  the  maples  of  the  valley
have  ceased  to  yield  sugar,  the  race  of  the  corn-sowers  will
have  supplanted  the  race  of  the  meat-eaters,  unless  the
hunters  make  up  their  minds  to  sow  too."

It  was  but  few  who  did  make  up  their  minds.  The  free
life  of  the  wilderness  has  often  had  a  permanent  attraction
even  for  Europeans ;  the  real  benefits  of  our  mode  of  life
pass  away  almost  untasted  even  by  many  among  ourselves,
being  buried  under  a  multitude  of  small  restraints  ;  to  the
Indian  especially  the  latter  must  have  been  more  obvious  than
the  former.  And  strange  enough  in  other  respects  is  the
temper  with  which  he  meets  foreign  influence,  whether  this
temper  is  an  original  endowment  of  the  race  or  results  from
the  long-continued  action  of  the  circumstances  of  his  life.
The  silence,  the  reflective  humour,  the  immovable  pride  of
the  red  warrior  may  have  been  produced  by  the  hunter's  life,
with  its  requirements  of  patience,  attention,  and  foresight,  of
presence  of  mind  under  surprises,  of  fortitude  under  suffering ;
but  both  the  customs  and  legends  of  the  Indians  show  an
inclination  to  fanaticism  which  does  not  seem  to  result  alto-
gether from  these  habits,  nor  to  be  due  to  the  mere  brooding
of  an  unoccupied  mind.  "  Ah,  my  brother,"  said  a  chieftain  to
his  white  guest,  "  thou  wilt  never  know  the  happiness  of  both
thinking  of  nothing  and  doing  nothing  ;  this,  next  to  sleep,  is
the  most  enchanting  of  all  things.  Thus  we  were  before  our
birth,  and  thus  we  shall  be  after  death.  Who  gave  to  thy  people
the  constant  desire  to  be  better  clothed  and  better  fed,  and  to
leave  behind  them  treasures  for  their  children  ?  Are  they
afraid  that  when  they  themselves  have  passed  away  sun  and
moon  will  shine  no  more,  and  that  the  rivers  and  the  dews  of
heaven  will  be  dried  up  ?  Like  a  fountain  flowing  from  the
rock,  they  never  rest ;  when  they  have  finished  reaping  one
field,  they  begin  to  plough  another,  and  as  if  the  day  were  not
enough,  I  have  seen  them  working  by  moonlight.  What  is
their  life  to  ours — their  life  that  is  as  nought  to  them  ?
lUind  that  they  are,  they  lose  it  all !  But  we  live  in  the
present. The  past,  we  say,  is  nothing,  like  smoke  which  the

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.  241

wind  disperses ;  and  the  future — where  is  it  ?  Let  us  then
enjoy  to-day ;  by  to-morrow  it  will  be  far  away."

This  is  not  the  language  of  stupidity.  On  the  contrary,  if
it  were  presented  to  us  in  Greek  verse,  we  should  admire  in
Latin  commentaries  the  fineness  with  which  it  derides  the
perversity  of  the  white  men  of  whom  so  many  in  their  haste
to  get  forward  lose  all  remembrance  of  their  goal.  But  it  is
certainly  true  that  this  mode  of  thought  could  not  be  favour-
able to  the  development  of  social  life,  as  long  as  it  held  its
ground  and  was  supported  by  the  combined  influence  of  all
surrounding  circumstances.  Meanwhile  the  attraction  south-
wards which  animated  the  migrations  of  the  European  nations,
moved  these  tribes  also  in  ancient  times,  and  whilst  North
America  saw  no  indigenous  political  development,  we  are
dazzled  by  the  splendid  spectacle  of  the  kingdom  of  Mexico
in  the  central  region  of  the  great  continent,  and  numerous
ruins  bear  witness  that  there  once  flourished  other  centres  of
civilisation,  of  which  the  history  is  lost  to  us.

The  mild  climate  of  Mexico,  where  the  land  is  narrowed
between  two  great  oceans,  the  four-hundredfold  return  which
maize  not  unfrequently  yields,  and  the  banana,  which  in  a
given  space  of  ground  produces  twenty  times  the  nutritive
matter  of  wheat,  here  admitted  of  a  settled  population
increasing  till  it  became  very  numerous.  Life  was  divided
between  work  and  leisure,  and  division  of  labour  became
possible ;  wants  grew  with  the  production  and  offering  for
sale  of  goods  ;  there  came  into  existence  nearly  all  the
arrangements  which  conduce  to  social  intercourse  and
luxurious  enjoyment  of  life.  A  disposition  to  cultivate
flowers  began  to  appear  in  addition  to  careful  husbandry  and
orcharding  and  culture  of  medicinal  herbs ;  the  weaver's  art
produced  magnificent  garments  of  gorgeous  colouring  com-
posed of  cotton  interwoven  with  feather-down  ;  gold  ornaments
and  precious  stones  faultlessly  cut  might  be  put  on  before
obsidian  mirrors.  At  feasts  the  tables  were  decked  with
costly  utensils,  and  these  feasts  were  conducted  according  to
a  complicated ceremonial,  and with all the adjuncts of

VOL.  IL  Q

242  BOOK  VII. CHAPTEE  IV.

civilised  entertainment ;  the  general  tone  of  society  was
courteous,  and  the  morality  of  domestic  life  (which  was  held
in  great  honour)  was  marked  by  propriety  and  moderation
and  was  a  subject  of  instruction.  The  exchange  of  products
was  accomplished  by  means  of  markets  held  at  fixed  times.
At  these  times  in  the  large  and  populous  towns,  of  which
more  than  one  seemed  to  the  Spaniards  to  emulate  Granada  in
its  palmy  days,  many  thousands  of  persons  moved  about
among  the  various  stalls  which  belonged  to  different  trades
and  were  arranged  in  orderly  fashion,  and  in  this  busy  mart
there  was  wanting  neither  police  supervision,  nor  a  special
Court  of  Justice  that  sat  continuously  for  the  settlement  of
any  disputes  that  might  arise.

According  to  the  Toltekian  legend,  the  founder  of  this
civilisation  was  the  hero  Quetzalkohuatl,  with  fair  face  and
long  beard,  who  came  to  the  country  from  some  unknown
and  distant  region,  accompanied  by  many  followers  clothed  in
long  garments.  Whatever  may  be  the  historic  kernel  of  this
tradition,  the  limitations  of  Mexican  civilisation  seem  to  bear
witness  to  its  native  origin.  Quetzalkohuatl  was  said  to
have  come  over  the  sea ;  but  the  Mexican  merchants,  in  other
respects  so  enterprising,  did  not  navigate  the  ocean  ;  there
had  not  come  into  the  country  from  over  the  water  any  of
the  domestic  animals  of  the  old  world,  nor  even  the  thought
of  taming  native  species  ;  the  bales  of  goods  were  conveyed
by  human  carriers  along  the  broad  highways ;  our  cereals
remained  unknown,  maize  being  the  only  grain  until  the
Spanish  conquest.  The  Mexicans  did  not  know  how  to
obtain  iron,  they  worked  the  land  with  implements  of  copper
and  bronze  without  the  help  of  draught  animals,  setting  not
sowing  the  seed,  providing  for  irrigation  by  dikes  and  trenches;
finally,  they  did  not  adopt  any  of  the  modes  of  writing
employed  by  earlier  civilised  nations,  but  developed  for  them-
selves a  system  of  written  signs.  Thus  none  of  the  elements
which  are  generally  most  easily  communicated  by  foreign
civilisation  came  to  them  from  without,  and  we  may  regard
their  civilisation  as  the  native  development  reached  by  the

EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF  DEVELOPMENT.

243

genius  of  the  Indian  race  under  favourable  climatic  con-
ditions.

On  the  other  side  of  the  equator  similarly  favouring
natural  conditions  enabled  the  seaboard  country  of  Peru  to
attain  a  remarkably  flourishing  civilisation ;  but  the  pastoral
nomads  who  in  the  old  world  seem  to  have  been  the  first  to
undertake  the  task  of  bringing  several  centres  of  civilisation
into  communication  with  each  other,  did  not  exist  in  America,
and  no  intercourse  took  place  between  Mexico  and  Peru.  On
the  other  hand,  in  the  great  eastern  half  of  South  America
the  spirit  of  man  was  cowed  by  the  overpowering  might  of
natural  phaenomena.  Monstrous  rivers  with  resistless  inun-
dations, vast  and  trackless  forests,  the  irrepressible  vegetative
vitality  which  causes  every  cultivated  piece  of  land  to  be
quickly  overgrown  with  a  rank  luxuriance  of  weeds,  the
number  of  large  beasts  of  prey,  and  the  countless  multitude
of  insects,  winged  or  creeping,  which  speedily  devour  a
whole  harvest — all  these  hindrances  still  stand  in  the  way
of  development  in  Brazil,  notwithstanding  the  European
industry  which  has  long  flourished  there,  and  much  ,  more
must  they  have  frustrated  the  early  attempts  of  isolated
tribes.

If  it  were  necessary  to  make  this  hasty  sketch  complete,
Europe  and  Asia  might  increase  the  aggregate  of  unhistoric
life  by  the  addition  of  many  nations  who  still  live  on  in
their  old  abodes  with  the  same  manners  and  customs  which
they  had  at  the  beginning  of  history.  They  would  thus
confirm  afresh  the  impossibility  of  speaking  of  a  past  History
of  Mankind,  since  it  is  only  among  a  small  fraction  of  the
human  race  that  that  connected  series  of  events  has  occurred,
which  with  an  unwarrantable  generalization  we  sometimes
call  the  History  of  Mankind,  and  sometimes  under  the  name
of  Universal  History  regard  as  signifying  the  development  of
all  reality  and  the  unfolding  of  the  World-spirit.  Erom  the
future,  however,  we  may  expect,  as  the  best  which  it  can
bring,  the  difi'usion  of  European  civilisation  over  the  whole
earth. Eor the only  native  dawn of  development of  the

244  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  17.

1

coloured  race  in  America  was  completely  destroyed  by  the
bloody  hand  of  Europeans,  before  the  time  to  come  could
decide  what  were  its  capabilities  of  further  development ;
and  no  one  will  imagine  that  the  Negro  race,  being  every-
where exposed  to  the  injfluences  of  European  culture,  is  now
likely  to  develop  a  special  national  civilisation.  But  the
Negro  has  at  least  some  reason  to  hope  that  his  race  will  be
perpetuated,  while  according  to  a  very  general  opinion
Indians  and  Polynesians  are  doomed  by  the  very  genius  of
history  to  die  out  before  the  higher  race  of  the  Caucasians.
The  truth  is  that  those  coloured  races  were  reduced  to  such
an  extreme  degree  of  weakness  simply  by  the  frightful  cruelty
of  their  white  conquerors  and  the  numerous  diseases  which
they  introduced,  or  which — from  some  unexplained  causes —
are  usually  developed  when  races  of  men  that  are  widel;y
different  first  come  into  contact.  In  the  Middle  Ages  a
similar  fate  befel  European  nations  more  than  once ;  but  they
had  time  to  recover,  for  there  was  not  in  their  rear  any  race
still  more  Caucasian  than  themselves,  seeking  with  the  same
consistent  cruelty — partly  natural  and  partly  doctrinaire — to
execute  upon  them  a  supposed  sentence  of  history.  Where
such  a  chance  of  recovery  has  been  given  to  the  coloured
races,  they  also  have  begun  to  slowly  increase  again  ;  where
they  are  really  melting  away  like  snow,  there  are  to  be  found,
first  and  foremost,  frightful  secrets  of  European  colonial
government — but  the  fulfilment  of  an  historic  doom  will  be
found  only  by  him  who  counts  every  accomplished  matter  of
fact  among  the  necessary  phases  of  development  of  an  Idea
that  rules  the  world.

CHAPTER V.

THE  DEVEEOPMENT  OF  HISTOET.

Stationary  Civilisation  and  Nomadic  Life  in  the  East — Semitic  and  Indo-
Germanic  Races — Ancient  Greece  and  Rome — The  Hebrews  and  Chris-
tianity—  Character  and  Early  History  of  the  Germanic  Nations  —  The
Germanic  Nations  in  the  Middle  Ages — The  Characteristics,  the  Problems,
and  the  Difficulties  of  Modern  Times.

^  1.  TN  the  old  world,  too,  we  see  how  the  beginnings  of
-*-  human  civilisation  depend  upon  the  favour  of
natural  circumstances.  It  is  between  the  Yangtsekiang  and
the  Hoangho,  in  the  lowlands  of  the  Indus  and  Ganges,  in
the  plain  that  lies  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  and
in  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  that  we  find  the  nurseries  of  the
earliest  civilisations.  Fertilized  by  regular  inundations,  in
restraining  and  utilizing  which  men's  powers  were  for  the
first  time  combined  for  the  co-operative  production  of  careful
hydraulic  constructions,  these  river-lands  brought  forth  in
luxuriant  abundance  the  vegetable  products  that  were
sufficient  for  human  support  in  those  climates  which  by  their
mildness  reduced  all  physical  wants  to  a  minimum  of
complexity.  In  China  and  India  the  yield  of  rice  was  far
above  a  hundredfold ;  the  quantity  of  fruit  borne  by  the  date-
palms  in  Mesopotamia  and  Egypt  was  enormous ;  Herodotus
extols  the  splendid  crops  of  corn  and  barley  in  the  Babylonian
plains ;  he  is  silent,  he  says,  regarding  the  wonderful  growth
of  millet  there,  because  he  does  not  wish  to  be  disbelieved.
Such  an  abundance  of  edible  natural  products,  besides  which
each  country  possessed  also  some  special  advantages,  favourable
to  civilisation  in  other  respects,  allowed  these  countries  to
attain  a  density  of  stationary  population  which  early  led  to
a  complex  development  of  social  relations.

The  accounts  given  by  ancient  writers,  and  a  consideration

243

246

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

of  the  monuments  which  have  been  discovered,  equally  con-
vince us  how  early  the  civilisation  which  grew  up  in  these
countries  attained  that  perfection  in  the  adornment  and
re<Tulation  of  the  surroundings  of  man's  life  which  we  some-
times consider  to  be  an  exclusive  privilege  of  the  enlightened
present.  Of  the  dim  shadow  that  in  our  thought  is  wont  to
lie  upon  the  gray  and  distant  past,  not  much  could  have  been
observable  in  that  past  itself ;  it  was  bright  and  noisy,  and  in
many  places  the  externals  of  civilisation  were  developed  with
a  perfection  which  could  only  be  attained  in  an  age  sensible
of  having  awakened  to  full  consciousness,  in  contrast  to  the
unawakened  life  of  the  past.  Partly  collected  in  large  and
populous  towns,  clothed  in  garments  of  cotton,  or  silk,  or'
linen — sometimes  simple,  sometimes  a  marvel  of  taste  and
splendour — these  nations  walked  the  earth  with  a  most  lively
susceptibility  to  all  the  grace  and  beauty  of  existence ;  the
habitations  of  the  rich  were  devoid  neither  of  the  variety
of  household  furniture,  which  self-indulgent  ease  requires,
nor  of  the  mere  embellishments  of  luxury,  and  the  thousand
charming  trifles  which  imagination  asks  for  the  beautifying
of  life;  their  social  meetings  lacked  hardly  any  of  those
means  of  amusement  with  which  modern  times  are  familiar,
nor  was  their  intercourse  devoid  of  that  ceremony  which
distinguishes  human  converse  from  the  gregariousness  of
beasts.  But  all  this  brightness  was  not  without  its  shadows ;
tDn  the  contrary,  even  in  those  times,  the  splendid  remains  of
v/hich  we  admire,  men  suffered  under  the  pressure  of  the
same  social  evils  from  which  in  the  later  periods  of  history
they  have  never  been  able  wholly  to  get  free.

The  fewer  the  indispensable  necessities  of  life  are,  the  more
easily  they  are  satisfied  by  the  spontaneous  productiveness  of
the  soil,  the  more  mildness  of  climate  tends  to  make  these
natural  productions  sufficient,  and  the  less — in  fine — general
civilisation  (as  yet  undeveloped)  requires  provident  care  for
the  future  and  for  descendants :  so  much  the  more  rapid  will
l)e  the  multiplication  of  an  impoverished  population,  who  will
be  forced  by  every temporary  deficiency  of their  ordinary

I

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

247

sustenauce,  and  by  every  unusual  disaster,  to  offer  their
services  to  those  who  have  property,  each  underbidding  the
other.  Even  if  it  had  ever  been  the  case  that  a  society,  of
which  all  the  members  had  perfectly  equal  rights  and  claims,
had  shared  equally  in  the  means  of  production  in  a  new
country,  the  natural  course  of  things,  by  the  different  increase
of  different  families  and  a  thousand  other  accidents,  would
soon  have  introduced  inequality  of  fortune.  But  it  hardly
seems  that  this  eve"  has  been  the  case,  the  first  permanent
settlements  having  apparently  grown  up  under  other  conditions
more  adverse  to  equality.

Those  favoured  river- valleys  of  which  the  luxuriant  fertility
invited  to  steady  cultivation,  are  in  Asia  separated  from  the
inhospitable  north  by  an  extensive  zone  of  steppes  and
pasture  lands  which,  solely  by  their  innumerable  flocks  of
tameable  and  useful  animals,  afford  support  to  a  numerous
population.  Men  have  dwelt  here  from  time  immemorial ;
pastoral  tribes  who  still  in  many  particulars  remind  one  of
the  customs  with  which  their  most  remote  ancestors  first
appear  in  history.  Made  hardy  by  the  discomforts  of  their
roving  life,  and  brought  up  to  warlike  vigour,  and  many  of
them  being  tribes  of  horsemen,  in  ancient  times,  as  now,  they
moved  about  as  nomadic  hordes  among  the  settlements  of
fixed  civilisation.  The  chief  towns  of  the  latter  were  secured
by  impassable  mountain  boundaries  from  the  continued
repetition  of  petty  attacks,  to  which  perhaps  they  would
have  succumbed :  but  any  considerable  natural  calamity
which  lessened  the  number  of  the  flocks  upon  which  the
nomads  depended,  or  any  increase  of  population  making  richer
sources  of  supply  necessary,  induced  large  bodies  of  the  war-
like shepherd  tribes  to  make  incursions  into  the  countries  of
developed  civilisation.

The  history  of  Asia  is  full  of  the  conflict  between  these
two  forms  of  life.  Often  in  ancient  times  have  the  rich  lands
of  Western  Asia  been  trodden  under  foot  by  hordes  of
mounted  Scythians;  the  growing  prosperity  of  China  was
threatened  by  Mongol  attacks ;  the  already  highly  developed

248

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

civilisation  of  Egypt  was  subject  for  centuries  to  the  assaults
of  the  Hyksos ;  it  was  with  the  warlike  nomads  of  Central
'Asia  that  there  began  that  migratory  movement  which,  after
the  fall  of  the  West  Eoman  Empire,  initiated  a  new  period  of
European  history ;  and  not  much  more  than  five  hundred  year?
have  passed  since  there  broke  upon  the  eastern  confines  of
Germany  the  last  billows  of  that  tremendous  storm  which  the
mighty  spirit  of  Genghis  Khan,  supported  by  the  united
strength  of  all  his  tribes  of  wild  horsemen,  had  brought  upon
the  world.  Thus  the  impulse  which  the  unceasing  restless-
ness of  these  nomadic  races  has  communicated  to  the  external
destinies  of  mankind  seems  to  be  extraordinarily  great ;  but
on  the  other  hand,  in  the  history  of  civilisation  no  remini-
scence of  progress  is  attached  to  their  name.  In  this  region
they  have  only  made  destructive  incursions,  and  then  have
either  sunk  back  again  into  their  unhistoric  existence  or  have
fallen  in  with  the  civilisation  of  the  nations  with  whom  they
mixed,  without  giving  it  any  new  direction.  It  was  only  the
Arab  nomads,  who  were  of  another  complexion — burning
religious  zeal  transformed  them  with  amazing  rapidity  into
conquerors  of  a  great  part  of  the  civilised  world.  Without
possessing  advanced  native  civilisation,  they  appropriated
many  elements  of  western  culture  with  a  receptivity  due
perhaps  to  their  southern  origin,  and  gave  to  that  which  they
had  appropriated  the  characteristic  stamp  of  their  own  mind.

These  occurrences  of  later  times  must  have  had  their
analogues  also  in  the  earliest  historic  ages.  Most  civilised
nations,  according  to  their  traditions,  consider  themselves  as
settlers  and  not  aborigines  in  the  countries  which  they  have
made  famous.  In  many  cases  they  came  with  an  already
developed  civilisation  to  these  countries,  and  found  them
inhabited  by  aborigines  who,  notwithstanding  favourable
natural  conditions,  retained  the  savagery  of  their  primitive
condition.  So  the  Aryan  Indians,  when  they  spread
south  of  the  Himalayas,  drove  out  a  native  race  of
blacks,  who  retreated  to  the  most  inaccessible  mountains  of
the Deccan;  and  so  in  Egypt  some  Negro  race  may  have

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

249

enjoyed  the  first-fruits  of  the  rich  soil,  though  the  develop-
ment of  its  historical  life  may  have  begun  with  the  im-
migration into  the  country  of  men  of  Caucasian  race  who
later  regarded  themselves  as  autochthonous  ;  and  traditions
concerning  the  settlement  of  the  Mediterranean  coasts  are
full  of  the  struggle  between  alien  civilisation  and  aboriginal
barbarism.  But  the  converse  process  has  also  occurred ;  it
has  repeatedly  happened  that  tribes  from  pastoral  districts  or
mountain  regions,  men  of  natural  vigour  and  capable  of
development  though  as  yet  undeveloped,  have  fallen  upon  the
more  enervated  inhabitants  of  the  plains,  and  have  carried  on
in  their  own  name  the  civilisation  which  the  latter  had  first
established.  It  is  not  the  more  frequent  but  the  rarer  case
when  those  nations  which  have  first  expended  their  labour
on  the  soil  of  any  country,  have  subsequently  maintained
themselves  in  possession  of  it,  and  kept  in  the  van  of  the
civilisation  which  its  gradually  unfolded  resources  have  made
possible.  These  circumstances  have  been  influential  in  the
formation  of  social  order.

Tribes  of  hunters  and  of  nomads  are  apt  to  develop  at  a
somewhat  early  stage  of  civilisation  an  aristocracy  of  rich  and
leading  families ;  and  just  as  naturally  are  they  inclined  to
regard  mental  endowment  which  boasts  connection  with  an
unseen  power,  with  greater  awe  than  bodily  strength  and
warlike  courage,  which  for  them  are  quite  in  the  ordinary
course.  Nomad  life  offers  but  few  inducements  for  developing
these  differences  of  social  consideration  into  really  valuable
privileges ;  but  in  the  transition  to  stationary  life,  the  heads
of  tribes  and  the  priests  have  always  drawn  tighter  the  loose
reins  which  they  held,  and  have  succeeded  by  various  means  in
bringing  the  fertile  land  entirely  into  their  own  power,  and  in
compelling  the  great  majority  into  their  service  as  unpropertied
labourers  or  dependent  tenants.  Among  nomads  the  interests
of  all  are  too  similar,  and  their  simple  way  of  life  too  readily
scrutinized  by  all  for  it  to  be  easy  for  budding  despotism  to
make  the  individual  members  of  the  tribe  permanently  ser-
viceable to  its  own  ends;  but  a  settled  population  involved

250

BOOK  Vn CHAPTER  V.

in  a  multiplicity  of  complicated  relations,  soon  becomes  unable
to  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  its  own  capacities  and  wants,
and  the  difficulty  for  each  individual  of  reckoning  with
certainty  upon  the  intentions  of  others  causes  them  collec-
tively to  fall  an  easy  prey  to  the  narrow  class-interest  of  the
few  who  understand  one  another.  So  it  came  to  pass  that  in
the  most  fertile  regions,  stationary  life  fell  under  the  power  of
the  priesthood,  and  of  an  hereditary  nobility  belonging  to
the  order  of  chieftains ;  where  the  nature  of  the  country  was
favourable,  the  next  step  in  advance  concentrated  the  secular
power,  which  is  always  jealous  of  partners,  in  one  person,
and  produced  the  knitting-up  of  the  spiritual  power  (which
is  everywhere  conscious  that  it  can  only  be  effective  as  a
combined  unity)  into  an  orderly  system  of  strong  corporations.
The  inequality  of  splendid  and  wretched  lots,  which  thus  arose
in  society,  was  finally  only  intensified  when  a  conquering
nation  oppressed  the  conquered  with  the  right  of  the  stronger
and  the  pride  of  nobler  blood.

Hereditary  callings  are  natural  to  dawning  civilisation.
Partly  with  the  object  operated  upon,  as  in  the  case  of  tillers
of  the  soil,  partly  with  the  instruction  which  coincides  with
family  education,  where  the  transmission  of  knowledge  by
schools  separate  from  the  home  is  as  yet  non-existent,  the  calling
of  the  parents  is  transmitted  to  the  children ;  free  choice  of
some  other  employment  is  prevented  both  by  the  narrowness
of  men's  intellectual  horizon,  which  embraces  only  that  which
is  famiKar,  and  forces  them  to  attach  themselves  thereto,  and
by  the  natural  jealousy  with  which  not  only  the  different
classes  of  society,  but  also  the  various  trades,  strive  to  keep
themselves  exclusive.  These  customs  have,  moreover,  swayed
in  many  ways  the  civilisation  of  later  times.  They  occurred
in  the  dawning  culture  of  Egypt  and  India ;  but  it  was  only
in  India  that  the  contrast  between  the  conquered  race  and  the
native  population  (which  here  was  even  greater  than  in  the
valley  of  the  Nile),  and,  moreover,  the  influence  of  priestly
views,  developed  such  customs  into  those  irremovable  dis-
tinctions of  caste,  which,  while  they  made  certain  callings

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

251

obligatory,  oppressed  all  lower  castes  with  the  graduated
contempt  of  those  which  were  above  them.  China  alone
never  laid  these  fetters  of  caste  and  status  on  its  industrial
population,  knowing  no  hereditary  differences  of  rank  and
calling,  and  all  being  under  general  state  guardianship  ;  this
was  perhaps  a  happy  incidental  effect  of  the  absence  of
religious  fanaticism  and  warlike  thirst  for  glory.  It  was  only
here  that  access  to  learning  (though  to  learning  of  not
much  value)  was  thrown  open  to  all,  and  instruction  early
diffused  and  favoured.  In  India  there  stirred  an  infinitely
deeper  intellectual  life,  that  with  its  strange  mixture  of
extravagant  imagination  and  penetrating  subtlety,  embracing
the  secrets  of  heaven  and  the  vanity  of  earthly  life,  affected
only  the  favoured  upper  classes  of  society ;  in  Egypt  and
Babylon  science  and  writing,  the  laboriously  developed  means
of  communication,  were  in  the  hands  of  the  priests.  Common
life  lacked  the  stimulus  which  might  have  been  given  to  it  by
the  wisdom  which  was  kept  secret,  and  this  in  its  turn
certainly  lacked  quite  as  much  the  impulse  to  progress  which
it  might  have  received  from  intercourse  with  the  thought  of
the  people.  Industry  was  not  backed  by  any  knowledge
worth  mentioning  of  the  efficient  powers  of  Nature ;  it  was
facilitated  by  but  few  technical  artifices,  and  animated  by  no
spontaneous  artistic  impulse.  Astronomy  alone  became  early
a  subject  of  instruction,  but  it  teaches  only  what  happens  and
cannot  be  altered ;  a  knowledge  of  mechanical  forces  which
man  may  use  for  his  advantage  was  still  wanting  ;  lucky
discoveries  might  be  treasured  and  transmitted,  but  no  know-
ledge of  the  principles  of  mechanical  action  invited  men  to
progressive  improvement  in  practice.  The  want  of  instru-
ments similar  to  our  machinery  obliged  actual  manual  labour
to  be  employed  everywhere,  with  a  disproportionate  expendi-
ture of  time  and  strength,  and  however  great  might  be  the
luxury  of  the  wealthy,  the  growing  increase  of  remuneration
could  not  repay  the  arduous  labour  expended  on  the  pro-
ductions required.  Artistic  activity  was  soon  drawn  into
the  service  of  religion  ;  and  hence,  and  from  love  of  splendour

252  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

on  the  part  of  despots,  it  was  stimulated  to  great  works,  though
limited  to  certain  established  forms.  Some  few  of  these,  as
waterworks  and  roads,  were  of  general  utility ;  most,  like  the
Pyramids  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  new  world  the  Teocallis  of
Mexico,  and  enormous  temples  and  palaces,  only  bear  witness
to  the  harsh  oppression  which,  when  there  was  no  advanced
knowledge  of  practical  mechanics,  extorted  such  prodigious
results  by  lavish  expenditure  of  human  strength.

It  is  with  varying  feelings  that  we  transport  ourselves  into
these  times.  As  long  as  it  is  only  their  productions  that  are
before  us,  we  admire ;  these  seem  to  our  imagination  to  bear
witness  to  a  mighty  creative  impulse  in  which  all  men  with
one  accord  must  then  have  revelled.  If  we  consider  the
means  by  which  it  was  all  produced,  then  it  seems  to  us  that
any  state  of  society  must  have  been  unspeakably  miserable
which  allowed  the  sorely  oppressed  majority  to  be  tyrannically
used  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  aimless  fantastic  vanity  of  a
few,  which  abolished  the  natural  equality  of  men  by  cruel
distinctions,  and  restricted  their  activity  by  innumerable
checks  and  hindrances.  But  it  may  be  doubted  whether
history  would  have  made  any  progress  if  its  beginning  had
been  a  quiet  and  peaceful  sort  of  life  in  which  every  individual
produced  and  consumed  undisturbed  whatever  was  necessary
for  the  satisfaction  of  his  frugal  wants ;  mankind  needed  to
be  made  aware  that  their  vocation  is  not  the  mere  supply  of
physical  needs.  The  systematizing  division  into  castes  cer-
tainly restricted  men,  but  then  it  also  first  brought  into  the
world  the  idea  of  a  vocation,  and  it  taught  men  not  to
think  that  in  merely  being  men  they  had  attained  the  end
of  their  existence.  The  iron  oppression  of  despotism  used
men  as  mere  instruments,  but  it  also  was  first  to  combine
them  together  as  members  of  one  whole;  the  extravagant
pride  of  rulers  dragged  men  away  on  expeditions  that  aimed
at  conquering  the  world,  but  this  thought  of  the  sovereignty
of  the  world  was  perhaps  the  only  way  in  which  hostile
tribes,  still  in  conflict  with  one  another,  could  be  brought
partly  to the  enjoyment  of  comparative  prosperity  by  the

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  253

attainment  of  external  order  and  security,  and  partly  to  a
feeling  of  the  connection  of  all  mankind — a  connection  which,
as  with  a  binding  law,  overrides  the  caprice  and  hatred  of  indi-
vidual races.  And  finally,  the  petty  restrictions  with  which
priestly  ordinances  beset  life  in  all  directions  have  in  the  East
given  rise  to  and  maintained  in  the  most  effective  manner  the
feeling  of  a  constant  connection  between  earthly  existence  and
a  universal  history  extending  beyond  mundane  limits.  The
school  of  this  first  stage  of  education  was  hard  and  bloody ;
but  on  the  one  hand  the  progress  of  mankind  for  a  long  time
dragged  on  the  same  social  evils  under  other  forms,  and  on
the  other  hand  without  such  a  school  the  beginning  of  civilisa-
tion is  even  harder  to  conceive  than  its  progress.  It  was
through  it  that  there  arose  for  mankind  the  first  really  valuable
content  of  life ;  extolled  by  one,  cursed  by  another,  having  for
the  great  majority  the  imposing  aspect  of  natural  necessities
of  inscrutable  origin,  established  social  organizations  captivated
the  imagination  by  the  splendour  of  their  monumental  con-
Btructions,  and  the  will  by  the  force  of  their  attraction.

This  it  is  that  we  are  accustomed  to  point  out  as  the
characteristic  feature  of  the  East  and  of  its  philosophy.  The
ordering  of  life  which  men  established  seemed  to  them — that
is,  the  thing  created  seemed  to  the  creators — to  be  a  self-
evident  and  unconditional  necessity,  and  the  freedom  of  the
individual  seemed  to  be  swallowed  up  by  the  superior  power
of  that  universal  the  outlines  of  which  each  individual  must
help  to  fill  in.  Social  arrangements  were  regarded  not  as
historical  and  alterable  human  constructions ;  all  seemed
to  bear  the  stamp  of  supramundane  sanctity ;  whether  the
whole  order  of  existence  appear  as  in  China  to  be  an  im-
press of  the  being  and  rule  of  an  impersonal  Supreme,  the
copying  of  which  restricts  all  caprice  of  personal  activity
to  a  faithful  following  of  ancient  customs  and  transmitted
wisdom  ;  or  whether,  as  in  India,  acquiescence  in  the  melan-
choly condition  of  oppression  was  due  to  the  mystic  tradition
according  to  which  different  sorts  of  men  proceed  from  more
and  less noble  parts of  the  deity ;  or  whether, as  in the

254

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

pompous  inscriptions  with  which  the  kings  of  Egypt  and
Persia  used  to  cover  the  rocks,  the  ruler,  as  the  direct  repre-
sentative of  the  Most  High  God,  considered  his  commands  to
be  binding  on  all  the  world.  And  as  each  private  individual
was  reckoned  as  of  little  account  in  himself,  so  it  was  even
with  these  rulers ;  it  was  not  as  persons  but  as  office-bearers
that  they  stood  at  the  head  of  humanity.  In  the  East,  when
the  insignia  of  supreme  power  have  passed  from  one  person
to  another,  obedience  and  submission  have  always  been  trans-
ferred along  with  them,  apart  from  any  fidelity  to  individuals.
This  sense  of  being  embraced  in  a  vast  and  predestined  order
was  on  the  whole  undisturbed  by  any  spirit  of  disintegrating
criticism ;  the  vast  extent  of  the  countries,  the  difficulty  of
communication,  and  the  want  of  means  of  intellectual  inter-
course prevented  this  feeling  from  bsing  opposed  by  any
flexible  and  progressive  public  opinion.  Customs  and  sys-
tems of  thought  were  maintained  unaltered  by  tradition ;
morality  and  secular  law  were  not  separated  from  religion
and  worship.  Great  as  was  the  division  of  industrial  labour
into  distinct  callings,  in  practical  politics  the  most  diverse
governmental  functions  overlapped ;  general  abstract  points  of
view  for  the  treatment  of  similar  problems  were  not  de-
veloped, and  even  in  its  most  craftily  contrived  arrangements
the  oriental  art  of  government  (like  the  lives  of  individuals)
shows  a  matter-of-fact  simplicity  which  aims  solely  at  its
particular  end,  without  any  attempt  at  shortening  the  way  by
the  help  of  general  maxims.

Though  this  is  the  general  character  of  the  impression
produced  on  us  by  a  consideration  of  eastern  nations,  yet  that
impression  must,  of  course,  include  many  strong  contrasts  and
counter-currents,  since  the  men  who  lived  there  and  then
were  in  all  respects  the  same  manner  of  men  as  ourselves.
The  oriental  character  was  not  so  wholly  immovable  and
torpid  as  it  seems  to  us  at  this  distance  of  time.  The  ancient
civilised  states  of  Asia  were  not  without  mental  revolutions,
which  for  us,  indeed,  do  not  materially  alter  their  general
aspect,  but  for  the  men  who  experienced  them  were  just  as

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTOKY.

255

much  periods  of  active  progress  as  European  development  is
for  us.  Our  attention  is  diverted  from  these  circumstances  by
the  consideration  that  but  very  few  of  them  have  been  of
service  to  the  subsequent  progress  of  mankind.  Almost  all
those  civilisations,  shut  up  in  themselves,  passed  through  their
various  phases  of  development  in  isolation;  China,  on  the  eastern
edge  of  the  continent,  was  from  the  beginning  out  of  com-
munication with  the  rest  of  the  world;  India  did  indeed
come  in  various  ways  into  contact  with  other  countries,  but
without  any  important  effects ;  it  was  only  Egypt  and  Asia
Minor  that  gave  to  the  West  most  of  the  elements  of  their
civilisation.

§  2.  Only  two  great  families  of  people — long  in  conflict  with
one  another — the  Semitic  and  the  Indo-Germanic,  have  been
instrumental  in  the  further  progress  of  history ;  and  even  of
them  many  branches  have  diverged  from  the  main  line  of
development,  some  continuing  the  practice  of  old  accustomed
forms  of  life,  some  in  course  of  time  disappearing  altogether.
In  ancient  times  the  south  of  Western  Asia,  from  the  moun-
tains of  Armenia,  belonged  to  Semitic  races.  And  even  if  we
leave  undecided  whether  the  primitive  culture  and  the  lan-
guage of  Egypt  were  attributable  to  them,  yet  the  high
development  of  Mesopotamia,  the  mighty  Babylon,  remains  an
early  monument  of  their  strength.  From  the  narrow  coast-
land  of  Phoenicia  Semitic  merchants  went  forth  on  bold  and
adventurous  voyages  to  all  the  islands  and  shores  of  the
Mediterranean  Sea,  and  beyond  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  and
the  traces  of  industrial  settlements  which  they  left  behind  in
then  obscure  Europe  may  have  guided  in  many  ways  the
later  civilisation  of  the  Grecian  world.  When  the  rich  cities
of  the  little  Phoenician  mother-country  had  fallen  from  the
giddy  height  of  luxury  and  self-indulgence  which  they  had
reached,  and  had  succumbed  to  an  invading  and  hardier  race,
the  colony  of  Carthage,  the  mistress  of  the  Western  Mediter-
ranean and  its  coasts,  long  withstood  in  tremendous  conflicts
the  growing  might  of  Eome;  when  this  struggle,  too,  was
decided,  and  the  secular  power  of  the  Indo-Germanic  races

256

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  7.

was  firmly  estaUislied  in  Europe,  the  whole  of  the  western
world  gradually  submitted  to  the  spiritual  supremacy  of
Christianity,  which  took  its  rise  and  found  its  first  advocates
and  ambassadors  among  a  Semitic  people.  And  even  once
again,  in  the  Middle  Ages  it  seemed  doubtful  whether  the  van
of  historical  progress  would  henceforth  be  led  by  the  still
oriental  genius  of  the  Semitic  race  through  the  incursion  of
the  Arabs,  or  by  Indo-Germanic  vigour,  which  had  first  attained
full  development  in  the  West.

Whether the nations which now possess Europe were

preceded  by  an  aboriginal  population  of  different race,  we

know  not. Comparative  philology  teaches  that  the  European

nations  are,  with  few  exceptions,  branches  of  one  stock,  which

more  than four  thousand  years  ago  fed  their  flocks  in  the

favoured  regions  on  the  western  slo^e  of  the  Himalayas. One

branch  of  this  stock  of  Aryans,  the  "  excellent,"  as  they  called

themselves,  gained  possession of  the land watered by the

Indus  fifteen  hundred  years  before  the  commencement  of  oui

chronology,  and  about  the  same  time  another  branch  developed

into  a  well-ordered  and  flourishing  nation  in  the  more  westerly

Iranian  highland. India  soon  dropped  out  of  the  course  of

history  in  the  isolation  of  its  own  fantastic  development ;  on  the

other  hand,  the  Iranian  tribes  succumbed  to  the  attacks  of

their  Semitic  neighbours  on  the  west,  before  the  permanent

supremacy  of  their  race  was  established  in  the  great  Persian

Empire. If  we  lack  historical  information  concerning  even

this  first  division  of  the  two  tribes  which  were  nearest  to  one

another  locally,  and  which  likewise  continued  to  be  in  language

and  thought  most  closely  allied  both  to  one  another  and  to

the  parent  stock,  still  more  obscure  are  the  times  at  which

and  the  paths  by  which  the  migrations  of  others  to  the  far

west  took  place. The  Celtic  tribes  which  pushed  on  as  far

as  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  hence  were  probably  the  earliest

among  those  who  immigrated  westwards  through  the  continent

of  Europe,  have  won  no  special  place  among  the  great  civilised

nations. Their  development  (in  which  at  one  time  in  their

Gallic  abiding-places  they  were  certainly  in  advance  of  their

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

257,

Germanic  neighbours)  was  interrupted  by  the  impulsive  force
of  Eoman  civilisation ;  the  remains  of  their  dialects  and
customs  are  dying  out.  Later  the  Germanic  immigration,
and  later  still  the  Slavonic,  reached  Central  Europe ;  earlier
than  this,  the  as  yet  combined  Greek  and  Eoman  branches  of
the  Aryan  stock  had  spread  over  the  ^gean  Archipelago,
the  Hellespont,  and  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  and  split  up
into  those  two  nations  to  which  belongs  the  first  brilliant
instalment  of  European  development.

§  3.  The  great  Asiatic  civilisations  have,  it  is  true,  developed
many  a  treasure  of  knowledge,  of  order,  and  of  beauty ;  but
it  was  among  the  Greeks  that  mankind  first  opened  their  eyes
full  upon  earth  and  heaven  with  that  fresh,  lucid,  priceless
awakedness  of  the  whole  living  mind  that  we  ourselves  can
feel  and  sympathize  with.  The  various  tribes  of  the  Greek
race  lived  through  a  long  period  of  somewhat  slow  develop-
ment, the  beginnings  of  which  are  obscure,  until  the  exertion
of  united  strength,  called  forth  by  the  pressure  of  foreign
power,  accelerated  the  onward  impulse  of  that  marvellous
civilisation  which,  though  its  vital  strength  was  soon  exhausted,
long  continued  to  scatter  its  blossoms  far  and  wide  over  the
world.

As  blazing  suns  may  have  been  produced  by  the  condensa-
tion of  fiery  vapour,  so  in  Greece  we  see  the  immensity  of
oriental  dimensions  reduced  to  moderate  and  proportioned
forms  instinct  with  the  most  intense  life.  The  theatre  of
development  was  a  small  district  that  could  never  boast  any-
thing like  the  number  of  inhabitants  that  an  oriental  monarch
would  have  been  content  to  rule  over.  Greece  did  not  possess
the  fantastic  wealth  of  alluring  and  terrifying  wonders,  which  in
the  East  had  an  enervating  influence  on  organized  energy,  and
amid  which  imagination  ran  riot ;  the  nature  of  the  soil —
which  yielded  a  good  return  to  labour  without  being  luxu-
ridntly  fertile — accustomed  men  to  industry ;  a  mild  climate
and  bright  atmosphere  were  favourable  to  fine  physical
development  and  to  the  training  of  the  senses  to  accurate
observation. The conformation of  the  country,  which  was

VOL.  IL  K

25d  BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  V.

broken  into  deep  valleys  and  numerous  mountains,  caused
small  communities  to  be  shut  up  together  in  the  closest
proximity;  the  unequalled  extent  of  coast-line  and  the
rich  profusion  of  islands  were  favourable  to  intercourse
between  the  inhabitants,  whilst  here  —  as  everywhere  —
nearness  to  the  sea  was  decidedly  inimical  to  lasting  union
under  one  government.  Thus  did  this  land,  a  rare  jewel  of
terrestrial  conformation,  nourish  many  independent  commu-
nities, within  the  narrow  bounds  of  which  the  awakened
nationality  of  the  Greek -speaking  race  early  developed
extremely  active  public  life  —  the  Greek  mind  esteeming
comprehension  by  means  of  language  and  knowledge  of
causes  to  be  the  crowning  excellences  of  man,  and  social
communion  and  intercourse  with  one's  fellows  to  be  the  very
flower  of  life's  happiness.  The  age  which  regarded  the
heroic  times  as  having  immediately  preceded  it,  and  which
celebrated  in  song  the  deeds  of  the  heroes,  was  not  without
graceful  forms  of  intercourse  and  demeanour;  the  continual
friction  and  reciprocal  action  produced  by  interchange  of  opi-
nions caused  the  nation  to  withdraw  itself  ever  more  and  more
from  the  yoke  of  transmitted  custom  as  it  gained  new  points
of  view,  and  it  began  to  reconstruct  with  conscious  art  all  its
social  and  political  relations  ;  soon,  having  become  accustomed
to  doubt  and  to  critical  analysis,  it  called  in  question  all  the
foundations  of  ordered  human  existence,  and  was  ruined  by
a  sophistical  excess  of  free  thought,  which  here  rose  supreme
over  all  constancy  of  existing  relations  and  duties,  just  as  in
the  East  the  traditional  objective  order  of  things  had  fettered
all  freedom  of  subjective  conviction.

To  indicate  to  some  extent  in  a  single  phrase  the  historical
position  of  a  phsenomenon  so  complex  and  full  of  life,  is  what
we  can  hope  to  do  only  if  we  attempt  not  to  exhaust  its
many-sided  content,  but  merely  to  emphasize  the  difference
between  it  and  preceding  times.  Considered  in  this  restricted
sense,  those  no  doubt  are  right  who  find  in  Greek  life  the
first  youthful  self- comprehension  of  the  human  mind  and  the
first  dawning  of  that  light  of  self-consciousness  by  which  man

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

259

examines  both  his  own  destiny  and  the  claim  which  existing
natural  relations  have  upon  him.  In  the  most  various  depart-
ments we  see  both  this  critical  impulse  and  its  youthful
freshness.

However  much  of  knowledge  and  of  skill  and  of  wise
maxims  earlier  nations  may  have  possessed  and  employed
both  in  the  regulation  of  social  relations  and  in  systematic
art,  the  thought  of  seeking  out  the  very  grounds  and  bases  of
our  judgment  of  things,  and  of  combining  them  demonstra-
tively and  deductively  in  a  system  of  truths — the  foundation
of  science  in  fact — will  for  ever  remain  the  glory  of  the  Greeks.
The  immortal  services  which  they  rendered  in  this  direction
belonged  certainly,  then  as  nowj  to  individuals,  tiot  to  the
crowd.  However,  to  have  produced  the  individuals — and
of  them  not  few — who  aimed  at  and  accomplished  such
great  things,  belongs,  whether  as  good  fortune  or  as  merit,
to  the  historic  idea  of  the  Greek  nation.  Among  the
special  national  characteristics  of  the  Greeks  were  always
that  active  insight  and  dispassionate  spirit  of  investigation
which  examines  every  fact  on  all  sides,  tests  every  dictum,
analyses  every  prepossession,  and  by  an  ineradicable  inclina-
tion to  try  and  understand  every  particular  by  reference  to
general  causes  and  in  its  connection  with  the  whole,  led  to
the  conscious  formation  of  general  notions^  to  proof,  to  classi-
fication, and,  in  short,  to  all  those  methodical  forms  of  thought
by  which  the  theory  and  science  of  the  West  will  be  for  ever
distinguished  from  even  the  most  imaginative  sagacity  and
the  most  intellectual  enthusiasm  of  the  East.

They  brought  this  spirit  of  investigation  into  all  depart-
ments. Not  only  did  they  lay  the  foundations  of  logic  and
mathematics  with  remarkable  exactness,  but  at  the  same  time
they  interested  themselves  in  the  exhaustive  treatment  of
domestic  economy,  the  organization  of  the  body  politic,  and
the  problems  of  moral  education,  as  subjects  of  systematic
science.  A  quick  and  unbiassed  eye  for  matters  of  immediate
experience  helped  them  to  free  themselves  from  slothful
acquiescence in inherited prejudices and  the unreasoning

260  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

passion  of  superstition,  which,  mixiDg  things  human  ai"n3
divine  with  confused  ardour,  furnishes  neither  peaceful  faith
as  regards  the  one,  nor  intelligent  equanimity  as  regards  the
other.  They  shook  off  ever  more  and  more  the  influence  of
oriental  mysticism,  which,  with  rank  growth,  everywhere
sees  and  shuns  incomprehensible  and  oppressive  secrets  in
the  smallest  trifles,  and  created  what  was  to  this  as  prose  is  to
dithyrambic  verse.  I  do  not  mean  prose  composition,  which
also  they  did  at  last  laboriously  develop,  but  the  judicious
way  of  looking  at  the  world  which  receives  that  which  is
inspiring  with  enthusiasm,  that  which  is  sober  with  sobriety,
that  which  is  earthly  as  earthly,  that  which  is  mechanical  as
mechanical — which  does  not  treat  everything  with  the  same
excitement  and  grandiloquence,  but  calmly  estimates  different
things  according  to  their  degree  of  importance.  Thus  they
early  separated  the  secular  life  from  the  religious,  as  far  as
the  two  can  be  separated,  and  freed  themselves  from  oriental
theocracy ;  thus  their  impulse  towards  political  freedom  sup-
pressed by  degrees  all  those  differences  in  the  rights  of  indi-
viduals which  they  had  received  by  tradition ;  thus  in  art
much  which  was  great  and  splendid,  which  the  East  cherished
passionately  but  expressed  chaotically,  they  preferred  to  leave
altogether,  in  order  to  devote  themselves  to  more  manageable
tasks  in  which  they  could  make  the  special  orderly  rhythm
of  beauty  as  supreme  as  they  tried  to  make  the  laws  of  truth
over  the  facts  of  science.

But  this  spirit  of  investigation  is  in  its  very  nature  of
double  significance.  It  must  assume  an  unconditioned  and
objective  truth  in  things  themselves,  for  without  this  its
critical  labour  would  be  aimless ;  at  the  same  time  it  must
be  the  individual  subject  who  by  his  recognition  and  confirma-
tion first  establishes  this  truth.  The  Greeks  were  not  able  to
escape  the  influence  of  the  double  impulse  here  involved — the
impulse  on  the  one  hand  to  reverence  for  that  which  is  in
itself  true,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  the  ever-busy  search  for
a  truth  that  is  yet  more  true  ;  and  herein,  as  in  their  bright
artistic freshness  of  life,  they  exhibit  the  youthful  age  of  the

THE  DEVELOrMENT  OF  HISTORY.

261

human  race.  For  youth  in  struggling  upwards,  often —
when  it  has  thrown  aside  the  dreamy  prejudices  of  child-
hood— hecomes  presumptuously  doctrinaire,  over-estimating,
in  the  consciousness  of  growing  insight,  the  instruments
of  knowledge,  thinking  little  of  the  immediate  and  indemon-
strahle  evidence  of  obvious  truths  and  feelings ;  and  while
seeking  ideals,  unable  to  recognise  as  ideal  anything  that  it
cannot  by  proof  and  deduction  transform  into  a  product  of  its
own  reason.  This  over-estimation  of  pure  thought  and  its
instruments,  logical  forms,  itself  in  many  ways  impoverished
the  science  of  the  Greeks ;  they  too  often  thought  that  they
knew  the  thing  itself  when  they  had  merely  analysed  the
movement  of  thought  by  which  we  seek  to  approach  the
thing.  In  practice,  however,  reverence  for  individual  dex-
terity of  thought,  and  for  dialectic  skill  in  dealing  with  things,
far  exceeded  respect  for  the  nature  of  things  themselves.
The  active  Greek  mind  had  discovered  in  rapid  succession
a  multitude  of  standpoints  from  which  to  estimate  all
human  affairs,  and  sometimes  the  establishment  and  develop-
ment of  art,  sometimes  any  novel  paradox  was  held  to  be
of  more  consequence  than  the  approval  of  an  incorruptible
conscience,  the  simple  sense  of  duty,  or  immediate  con-
viction. They  thought  that  they  could  everywhere  begin
afresh  from  the  very  beginning,  and  that  they  both  could
prove  everything  and  needed  to  do  so;  they  connected  moral
teaching  with  theoretic  speculation  and  its  uncertainties ;
they  had  little  feeling  for  historical  relations  which  cannot
be  charmed  away  by  the  magic  of  a  theoretic  dictum ;  every
fresh  fancy  to  which  any  logical  support  whatever  could  be
given,  seemed  to  them  entitled  to  be  tested  as  a  new  principle.
We  often  hear  them  enjoining  upon  one  another  respect  and
reverence  towards  ancestral  traditions  and  the  historical
continuity  of  social  conditions;  but  a  glance  at  the  multi-
tudinous variety  of  political,  social,  and  ethical  experiments
made  by  them  as  time  went  on  shows  how  little  these
admonitions  were  attended  to;  and  when  by  some  chance
they  were attended  to,  this  was  due to their having  the

262  BOOK  VIL CHAPTEE  V.

attraction  of  presenting  some  other  momentarily  new  point  of
view.

It  had  not  always  been  so.  Before  the  Persian  wars  the
undeveloped  state  of  society,  and  the  prevalence  of  a  busy,
hard-working  way  of  life  had  counterbalanced  this  excessive
mental  activity;  but  at  that  time  the  Greeks  had  not  yet
reached  the  turning-point  of  the  historic  race  they  had  to  run.
The  score  or  so  of  years  that  elapsed  between  their  conflict  for
freedom  and  the  Peloponnesian  war  comprise  the  time  of  short
but  brilliant  bloom  when  the  Greek  spirit  of  liberty  in  its
onward  evolutionary  struggle  had  not  yet  developed  pernicious
fruits.  But  lasting  prosperity  was  impossible ;  the  distin-
guishing excellences  of  the  people  were  ruined  by  their
unbridled  sophistry.  None  of  their  virtues  touches  us  more
or  was  more  of  a  novelty  in  history  than  their  patriotism,  and
their  readiness  to  sacrifice  themselves  for  the  good  of  a  com-
monwealth that  was  founded  on  freedom  of  intercourse  between
the  citizens  and  on  comprehension  of  the  benefit  resulting  from
participation  in  common  joy  and  labour  and  recreation  and
danger.  But  however  highly  they  esteemed  their  fatherland
and  national  freedom,  yet  each  one  understood  national  pro-
sperity after  his  own  fashion,  and  sought  to  realize  this  ideal
after  his  own  fashion ;  there  were  incessant  revolutions,  and
these  caused  the  rights  of  individuals  to  be  in  a  state  of  con-
stant fluctuation,  and  often  produced  such  terrible  crimes  that
the  bloody  history  of  real  events  forms  a  melancholy  contrast
to  the  splendid  insight  which  we  admire  in  the  works  left  by
Greek  genius  to  posterity.  Without  the  individualist  spirit
which  impelled  single  towns  to  emulation  for  the  palm  in
civilisation  and  artistic  distinction,  Greece  would  not  have
reached  the  eminence  which  she  did ;  but  when  there  came
changed  conditions,  not  admitting  of  such  a  dissipation  of
strength,  the  Greeks  did  not  learn  to  suppress  that  selfish
envy  which  had  everywhere  associated  itself  with  the  less
ignoble  form  of  the  affection.  Their  imagination,  indeed,
continued  susceptible  to  the  great  national  thought  of  the
freedom  of  all  Greece  j  but  they  knew  too  many  points  of

!

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  263l

view  from  which  it  was  possible  to  justify  anything  and
everything,  and  they  had  lost  the  simple  sense  of  duty  which
robs  all  sophistry  of  its  strength.  They  had  early  allowed
to  the  Persian  king  an  influence  in  their  internal  affairs  which
Ptome  never  granted  to  the  Punic  enemy  of  her  kingdom ;
and  Greece — abounding  in  examples  of  treachery  on  the  part
of  her  distinguished  men,  depopulated  by  constant  dissensions
and  by  immorality  that  was  sometimes  sophistically  justified
and  sometinaes  practised  shamelessly,  and  lacking  steady  dis-
cipline— fell  an  inglorious  prey  to  the  attacks  of  Italy.

§  4.  We  are  accustomed  to  regard  the  Eoman  nation  as
the  potent  temporal  power  which,  after  it  had  destroyed  the
independence  of  the  Greeks,  afforded  protection  to  Greek
genius,  enabling  it,  as  it  were,  to-  concentrate  itself,  and
laying  at  its  feet  a  conquered  world.  And,  in  fact,  what  the
Eomans  contributed  from  their  own  resources  to  the  treasures
of  civilisation  may  soon  be  reckoned  up ;  but  the  worth  of
what  they  did  contribute  is  not  lessened  by  its  lack  of  variety.
They  accomplished  a  work  which  was  impossible  for  the
Greeks ;  they  combined  the  nations  of  the  earth  in  the  com-
munity of  a  vast  political  life,  and  in  the  most  diverse  countries
left  seeds  of  civilisation  which  were  not  slightly  sown,  but
took  such  deep  root  that  their  living  branches  have  ramified
through  the  whole  history  of  later  times.  When  Alexander
of  Macedon,  leading  the  combined  forces  of  Greece,  and
dreaming  of  a  union  between  East  and  West,  sought  in  his
rapid  triumphal  progress  through  conquered  Asia  to  spread
Greek  civilisation  to  the  confines  of  India,  the  dazzling
splendour  of  his  individuality,  so  strange  and  full  of  genius,
blinds  us  to  the  hopelessness  of  an  undertaking  of  which  very
soon  the  only  traces  were  to  be  found  in  legends  in  which  the
wondering  nomads  of  Asia  praised  the  hero  who  had  come
from  afar.  The  Eomans  never  indulged  projects  to  be  carried
out  at  such  a  distance  from  their  natural  sources  of  supply;
after  they  had,  in  hard-fought  struggles  for  their  own  independ-
ence, subdued  Italy  and  warded  off  Carthaginian  supremacy  in
Europe,  they  progressed  but  slowly — impelled  by  circumstances

264

BOOK  Vn. CHAPTER  V.

and  lingering  by  the  way — to  that  universal  dominion  which,:
when  once  established,  was  maintained  for  centuries.  Such
great  historical  results  indicate  the  historical  significance  of|
the  nation  itself,  and  indeed,  compared  to  Rome,  Greece  lived
from  hand  to  mouth,  passionately  pursuing  immediate  ends,
while  the  political  activity  of  the  Eomans  was  guided  by  a
wider  view,  taking  in  the  future,  in  which  they  were  con-
scious that  their  destiny  lay.  The  Greeks  lived,  as  on
some  terrestrial  Olympus,  only  for  the  sake  of  beauty  and
of  working  out  their  own  development ;  to  the  Romans  the
known  world,  all  the  countries  bordering  the  Mediterranean
Sea,  seemed  to  be  an  actual  field  of  labour,  setting  before  them
definite  tasks  of  acquisition,  guardianship,  and  government.
From  ancient  Italian  civilisation  they  had  received  the  idea
of  a  mysterious  lapse  of  time  through  ages  marked  by  distinct
characteristics ;  they  felt  themselves  to  be  the  bearers  of  this
historical  development  and  co-operators  in  its  production,  and
their  poets  are  hardly  so  loud  in  praising  Rome's  existing
greatness  as  in  emphasizing  perpetually  its  undying  future.
And  the  result  has  proved  that  they  were  right.  Greece,
having  perished  as  a  terrestrial  power,  still  lives  on  in  the
mind  of  the  civilised  world,  though  without  any  striking
influence  upon  the  conditions  of  our  lives ;  but  a  countless
number  of  our  social  and  political  arrangements,  and  a  great
part  of  our  mental  life,  may  be  traced  back  along  a  line  of
unbroken  tradition  to  Rome ;  and  to  places  where  there  are
no  flourishing  towns  that  owe  their  origin  to  her,  modern
civilised  nations  have  carried  with  their  language  the  lasting
influence  which  they  themselves  received  from  her;  Latin
words  and  forms  of  speech  are  heard  on  the  banks  of  the
Ganges,  and  mingle  on  American  plains  with  the  labials  of
Indian  dialects.

Human  action  is  either  guided  directly  by  the  idea  of  some
desired  result,  and  then  easily  comes  to  consider  the  means
as  sanctified  by  the  end,  or  it  follows  general  principles  of
universal  validity,  and  will  refrain  from  carrying  out  an
intention  as  long  as  this  can  only  be  done  by  transgressing

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

265

them.  The  artistic  bent  of  their  minds  inclined  the  llreeks
to  the  first  way ;  the  Eomans  are  distinguished  by  the  con-
viction that  a  valid  result  can  only  be  attained  by  respecting
the  fixed  relations  prescribed  by  the  nature  of  those  elementa
which  co-operate  in  its  production.  We  shall  have  occasion
later  to  see  how  far  this  thought  penetrated  their  whole  life
and  action  ;  in  the  present  rapid  survey  we  only  wish  to  recall
to  mind  the  pearl  of  Roman  civilisation — the  development  of
law.  For  knowledge  of  the  truth  that  is  and  operates  in
things  and  events,  the  Eomans,  as  compared  with  the  Greeks,
did  nothing;  but  the  thought  that  the  world  of  relations
brought  into  existence  by  our  actions,  is  just  as  much  governed
by  a  complex  and  inviolable  order  independent  of  our  will  as
the  forces  of  external  Nature  are  in  their  general  statical  and
dynamical  relations — this  thought  owes  its  existence  to  the
Eomans.  They  did  not,  like  the  Orientals,  regard  existing  rela-
tions as  irrevocable  decrees  of  fate ;  neither  did  they,  after  the
fashion  of  the  Greeks,  consider  actual  rules,  established  insti-
tutions, and  acquired  rights  as  having  the  pliability  of  wax^
and  a  capability  of  being  moulded  differently  according  to
men's  caprice,  if  they  hindered  the  realization  of  an  ideal  j
the  Eomans  regarded  both — both  the  variation  which  the
needs  of  human  nature  demand,  and  the  fixed  condition  which
refuses  change — as  two  valid  forces  between  which  men  had
to  steer  by  means  of  law.  They  did  not  begin  at  the  apex  of
the  pyramid — at  the  ideal  or  desirable  form  of  the  state  as  a
whole,  logically  deducing  from  this  the  just  rights  of  the
citizens,  but  they  first  of  all  established  on  general  principles
those  relations  between  individuals  which  arise  in  the  living
intercourse  of  daily  life.  It  was  real  needs,  the  requirements
of  circumstances,  which  subsequently  impelled  them  to  limita-
tions of  those  private  rights,  in  order  to  attain  the  prosperity
of  the  whole  which  is  itself  the  sum  of  all  the  individuals ;
and  the  final  form  of  commonwealth  aimed  at  was  in  every
age  that  which  combined  in  satisfactory  practice  respect  for
transmitted  rights,  provision  for  new  wants,  and  the  conditions
required  for  the  growth  and  continuance  of  the  whole. Thus

266

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

there  arose  that  unparalleled  social  struggle  between  the
patricians  and  plebeians,  in  which  violent  passions — on  the  one
hand  a  haughty  insistence  on  privileges,  and  on  the  other  a
consciousness  that  participation  in  these  privileges  must  be
got  by  fighting  for  them — were  held  in  check  by  regard  to  the
necessary  stability  of  political  life,  by  recognition  of  the
sacredness  of  law,  though  it  were  only  formal  law,  by  un-
swerving obedience  towards  governmental  authority  which
had  once  been  recognised,  and  finally,  by  a  stern  patriotism
from  which  all  thought  of  treachery  was  far  removed.

The  results of this evolutionary struggle were not as
fortunate  as  the  character  which  found  expression  in  it  was
noble. The  inadequacy  of  the  republican  political  construc-
tion which  had  been  suited  to-  earlier  and  more  limited  rela-
tions was  only  compensated,  as  the  state  grew  and  enlarged,
whilst  the  great  men — of  whom  the  patrician  race  produced
many — used  the  space  for  independent  action  which  was  left
to them to show brilliant  examples of self-sacrifice and
inherited political wisdom. This famous aristocracy fell
into  the  background,  as  circumstances  came  to  require  rathei
the  concentration  of  power  in  one  hand  than  a  general  dis-
tribution of  rights. In  contrast  to  a  new  nobility  of  wealth
without  ennobling  traditions  that  began  to  arise,  the  numbers
of  the unpropertied increased. The almost uninterrupted
state  of  war  which  marked  the  early  days  of  Rome  had  never
favoured  peaceful  labour  and  industry ;  when  at  a  later  date
Greek  civilisation  and  acquaintance  with  the  customs  of  so
many  different  nations  had  undermined  the  old  simplicity  and
strictness,  when  the  treasures  of  the  East  and  the  products  of
the  pre-eminently  industrial  countries  poured  in,  and  swarms
of  slaves  in  the  palaces  of  the  rich  practised  every  kind  of
craft,  a  class  of  free  labourers  could  find  neither  respect  for
their  position  nor  a  market  for  their  products ; even  the
ancient  agriculture of Italy  and  the  independence of  the
country  population  suffered  from  the  accumulation  of  enormous
wealth  in  the  hands  of  individuals,  and  the  expenditure  of
this  wealth  on  useless  luxuiy. Between  the  inordinate  self-

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

267

indulgence  and  ambition  of  the  aristocrats,  and  the  bessrar-
liness  of  a  populace  that  could  be  won  over  to  aid  in  any
destructive  project,  the  order  of  free  citizens,  which  was  the
strength  of  the  state,  disappeared ;  and  after  long  and  bloody
conflicts,  the  republic,  shaken  by  the  unprincipled  struggles
of  individuals  after  power,  fell  under  the  dominion  of  the
emperors,  with  undeveloped  or  impoverished  forms  of
government.

For  centuries  as  these  rulers  succeeded  one  another,  mad-
ness alternated  with  discretion,  cruelty  with  clemency,  and
Eoman  civilisation  had  an  opportunity  of  showing  what
power  of  endurance  and  of  resistance  there  was  in  it  and  in
its  creations,  even  after  the  animating  impulse  had  died  out.
Whilst  general  enervation  went  on  increasing,  the  discipline
of  the  Eoman  armies  still  continued  for  a  long  time  victorious
over  external  foes ;  under  the  pressure  of  arbitrary  political
rule,  the  legal  consciousness  still  went  on  developing  to
scientific  clearness  and  completeness ;  amid  the  decay  of
morals  there  shine  forth  many  examples  of  noble  manliness
that  bear  witness  to  the  enduring  power  of  a  great  past;  and  by
similarity  of  regulations,  by  great  roads  of  communication,  by
the  general  diffusion  of  one  language  and  of  one  culture
taught  in  numerous  schools,  all  the  countries  bordering  the
Mediterranean  Sea  were  connected  together  into  one  great
whole  of  common  life,  which  in  the  isolated  happy  intervals
of  peace  and  benignant  government  might  with  justice  rejoice
in  the  consciousness  of  such  a  degree  of  human  happiness  as
had  never  before  been  attained.  If,  however,  this  state  of
society  still  contained  the  seeds  of  permanence,  yet  as  far  as
human  eyes  can  see,  there  were  in  it  no  elements  of  fresh
progress ;  it  was  from  outside  the  circle  of  nations  which
had  thus  far  developed  civilisation,  that  there  came,  through
Christianity,  the  shock  with  which  ancient  history  concludes
and  a  new  period  begins.

§  5.  Among  the  theocratically  governed  nations  of  the  East,
the  Hebrews  seem  to  us  as  sober  men  among  drunkards  ;  but
to  antiquity  they  seemed  like  dreamers  among  waking  folL

268

BOOK  Vn. CHAPTEE  V.

"With  thoughtful  imaginativeness  these  latter  had  considered
the  causes  of  the  world  and  the  sources  of  their  own  life  and
death  ;  and  feeling  themselves  to  be  parts  of  the  great  divine
universal  frame,  they  accompanied  with  wild  rituals  of  sensu-
ality or  self-torture  all  the  convulsions  of  its  mysterious  life —
the  yearly  change  of  decay  and  revival  in  Nature,  the  struggle
of  the  bright  and  beneficent  with  the  dark  and  hostile  powers  ;
and  over  and  above  this  wisdom  which  was  current  in  daily
life,  the  exclusive  learning  of  the  priests  seemed  to  hide
innumerable  further  secrets.  All  this  was  regarded  by  the
Hebrews  with  the  most  extreme  indifference  ;  the  mighty  and
jealous  God  who  desires  uprightness  of  heart,  who  pursues
sin,  and  is  avenged  on  iniquity — He  indeed  it  is  who  has
created  the  world  and  has  caused  all  kinds  of  herbs  and
animals  to  spring  up,  and  has  formed  the  stars  of  heaven,
because  He  willed  that  everything  should  be  very  good.  But
the  imagination  of  the  people  was  not  absorbed  in  the  con-
templation of  this  creation,  in  which  His  glory  was  expressed
only  as  it  were  by  the  way;  to  them  God  was  a  God  of
history,  to  whom  Nature  is  as  the  mere  footstool  of  His  power,
but  the  life  of  men,  the  life  of  His  chosen  people,  the  one
object  of  His  providential  care.  The  whole  superfluity  of
mystic  natural  philosophy,  which  so  uselessly  burdened  the
other  religions  of  antiquity,  was  cast  aside  by  the  Hebrews,
that  they  might  devote  themselves  to  the  great  problem  of
the  spiritual  world — the  problem  of  sin  and  of  righteousness
before  God ;  they  felt  themselves  involved,  not  in  the  whirl
of  everlasting  natural  cycles,  but  in  the  advance  of  historical
progress ;  they  did  not  trouble  themselves  about  secrets  which
concerned  only  past  events,  but  all  the  more  deeply  were  they
interested  in  the  problems  of  the  future ;  and  these  problems
were  not  to  remain  hidden,  but  the  prophets  were  impelled
by  divine  inspiration  to  announce  to  all,  for  their  comfort  the
final  attainment  of  a  heavenly  kingdom,  for  their  repentance
the  commands  of  God.  After  the  times  of  the  first  patriarchs
with  whom  God  had  entered  into  covenant,  the  national  mode
of life had undergone many changes. The patriarchal

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  269

sheplierds  of  the  early  times  had,  after  the  Egyptian  oppres-
sion, become  a  warlike  nomadic  race ;  they  had  then  formed
])ermanent  settlements  and  cultivated  the  land ;  finally,  they
were  inspired  with  the  commercial  spirit  of  their  Semitic
neighbours,  and,  like  the  Phoenicians,  became  scattered  over
all  parts  of  the  then  known  world ;  the  fundamental  thought
of  their  national  life — their  covenant  with  God,  the  conscious-
ness of  an  historical  destiny,  and  the  hope  that  this  would  be
realized — they  had  not  forgotten,  but  on  the  contrary  had
become  more  and  more  confirmed  in  after  many  waverings  at
the  outset.  The  civilised  nations  of  antiquity,  whose  ingenious
mythology  and  philosophical  notions  of  divinity  lacked  no-
thing but  simple  faith  in  their  reality,  began  to  have  their
attention  drawn  to  a  nation  that  possessed  in  so  high  a  degree
the  living  conviction  of  which  they  themselves  were  destitute,
and  to  which  the  ideas  of  God  and  His  kingdom  were  not  the
mere  ornamental  poetical  framework  of  a  wholly  secular  view
of  life,  but  the  most  deep  and  serious  reality.  In  the
gradually  sinking  Eoman  Empire  the  Jewish  faith  gained
consideration  and  adherents,  although  its  national  character
was  a  drawback  to  it.  But  now  the  predictions  of  a  Messiah
had  been  suddenly  fulfilled  ;  the  new  covenant  w'th  God  was
proclaimed  by  enthusiastic  disciples  as  an  historical  reality,
and  not  merely  a  new  doctrine  added  to  the  many  other
doctrines  of  the  past ;  and  the  tenor  of  their  announcement
did  not  contradict  the  hope  of  finding  the  true  satisfaction  of
lonfjinfi  desire  in  the  final  union — of  which  the  secret  had
been  long  lost — of  mundane  and  supramundane  existence.
The  excellences  and  the  weaknesses  of  existing  Eoman  civili-
sation combined  with  some  special  historical  circumstances  to
favour  the  spread  of  Christianity;  but  of  more  efficacy  than
all  these  was  its  own  inherent  power,  due  to  its  startling
contrast  with  the  hitherto  received  view  of  the  world,  and  its
consoling  agreement  with  the  secret  thoughts  that  had  been
wont  to  rise  in  rebellion  against  that  view.

Everything  which  a  religion  has  to  give  it  offers  to  the
understanding  in  doctrines,  to  the  heart  in  its  characteristic

270

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

tone,  its  consolations,  and  its  promises,  and  to  the  will  in
commands.  The  original  doctrines  of  Christianity  were  not
very  multifarious.  All  those  questions  concerning  the  origin,
coherence,  and  significance  of  Nature  which  Judaism  had
already  passed  over  were  also  left  undecided  by  the  Gospels.
Speaking  only  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  it  exalted  the
community  of  spiritual  life  as  the  true  reality,  in  the  glorious
light  of  a  history  embracing  all  the  world,  and  let  Nature  and
its  evolutions  quietly  glide  back  into  the  position  of  a  place
of  preparation,  the  inner  regulation  of  which  will  be  revealed
in  due  time.  Neither  did  it  speak  of  divine  things  as  if  it
would  measure  out  the  Infinite  demonstratively  in  concepts
of  human  reason ;  all  questions  concerning  the  relation  of
God  to  mankind,  which  had  already  exercised  in  various  ways
the  ingenuity  of  ancient  culture,  it  passed  lightly  over  with
figurative  phrases  borrowed  from  human  relations.  Thus  it
seemed  to  reveal  even  less  than  that  culture  had  already  dis-
covered. But  in  speaking  of  the  sacred  love  which  wills  the
existence  of  the  world  for  the  sake  of  that  world's  blessedness,
and  has  its  justice  restrained  by  pardoning  grace,  it  emphasized
so  much  the  more  certainly  that  one  thought  the  uncondi-
tioned and  ever  self-asserting  worth  of  which  can  do  without
the  confirmation  of  proof  (which  is  very  foreign  to  the  nature
of  religion) ;  and  the  content  of  that  thought  as  the  only
thing  that  is  really  certain,  at  the  same  time  guides  the
activity  of  sagacious  investigation  in  a  definite  direction.

So  Christianity  ofiered  infinite  stimulus  to  the  under-
standing without  binding  it  down  to  a  narrow  circle  of
thought;  and  to  the  heart  it  offered  full  as  much.  For,
according  to  Christianity,  the  sole  truth  and  the  source  of
reality  with  all  its  laws  was  something  of  which  the  eternal
worth  must  be  felt  in  order  to  be  known ;  from  the  reality
thus  known  through  feeling,  man's  understanding  can
reach  back  to  that  which  is  divine,  and  can  very  often
conclude  from  it  to  the  divine,  as  from  the  ground  of
demonstration  to  that  which  is  demonstrable.  In  this  it
met  the  eternal  longing  of  the  human  heart,  and  satisfied  it

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  271

in  a  fashion  wholly  new.  The  consciousness  of  finiteness  has
always  oppressed  mankind ;  but  however  much  moral  con-
trition we  may  find  in  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Indians,  how-
ever much  dread  of  self-exaltation  in  Greek  circumspection,
however  much  fidelity  to  duty  in  Eoman  manhood,  yet  every-
where this  finiteness  was  felt  to  be  merely  a  natural  doom
by  which  the  less  is  given  into  the  power  of  the  greater,  and
its  existence  irrevocably  confined  within  limits,  whilst
within  these  limits  the  finite  is  destined  to  attain  by  its
own  strength  its  highest  possible  ideal.  The  Indian  sought
to  extort  eternal  life  by  frightful  penances;  the  Greek  was
afraid  of  rousing  the  envy  of  the  gods  by  pride,  but  he  aimed
at  perfecting  himself  as  man,  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  virtue
might  be  taught  as  any  craft  may  be  ;  the  Eoman,  knowing
nothing  of  a  blissful  life  of  the  gods  beyond  his  own,  went
self-renouncingly  to  death  for  duty's  sake,  an  honest  man
whom  yet  no  god  had  helped  to  be  what  he  was.  The
characteristic  of  humility  and  submission,  that  is  lacking
even  in  the  most  mournful  expressions  of  this  sense  of
finiteness  in  antiquity,  was  brought  for  the  first  time  by
Christianity  into  the  heart  of  men,  and  with  it  hope  came
too.  It  was  a  redemption  for  men  to  be  able  to  tell  them-
selves that  human  strength  is  not  sufficient  for  the  accom-
plishment of  its  own  ideals ;  hence  from  this  time  mankind
no  longer  seemed  to  be  an  isolated  species  of  finite  being,
turned  out  complete  by  the  hand  of  Nature,  and  destined  to
reach  unaided,  by  innate  powers,  definite  goals  of  evolution.
Freed  from  this  isolation,  giving  himself  up  to  the  current  of
grace,  which  as  continuous  history  combines  infinite  and
finite,  man  is  enabled  to  feel  himself  in  community  with  the
eternal  world,  which  he  must  stand  outside  of  as  long  as  he
desired  to  be  independent  or  believed  that  he  must  be  so.
And  since  the  mere  belonging  to  a  particular  race  was  row
no  longer  a  source  of  justification  or  condemnation — salvation
needing  to  be  taken  hold  of  by  the  individual  heart,  which
must  be  willing  to  lose  its  life  in  order  that  it  might  find  it
again — there  now  began  to  be  developed  for  the  first  time

272

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

tliat  personal  consciousness  which  thenceforward  with  all  its
problems — freedom  of  the  will  and  predestination,  guilt  and
responsibility,  resurrection  and  immortality  —  has  given  a
totally  different  colouring  to  the  whole  background  of  man's]
mental  life.  This  momentous  content  has  indeed  never
reached  the  clearness  of  calm  comprehension  in  the  minds  of
all  mankind  to  whom  it  was  proclaimed ;  but  even  those  who
tried  to  resist  it  have  never  been  able  to  get  rid  of  itai
influence ;  it  has  remained  the  centre  about  which  the
civilisation  of  later  times  has  always  revolved,  in  hope  or
doubt,  in  assurance  or  fear,  in  zeal  or  scorn.

To  him  who  so  regarded  the  eternal  connection  between
earth  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  all  earthly  history  must
seem  but  as  a  preparation  for  the  true  life,  not  valueless,
since  it  aims  at  this  goal,  nor  yet  burdened  by  the  tremendous
seriousness  of  absolute  irrevocability.  Therefore  Christianity
proposed  to  the  will  only  such  commands  as  require  per-
manent goodness  of  disposition ;  from  the  ordering  of  human
affairs  by  ceremonies,  law,  and  government,  it  stood  indefi-
nitely far.  It  could  do  without  that  which  the  heathen
theocracies  were  compelled  to  demand ;  since  what  it  asked
for  God  was  God's,  it  could  give  to  C£esar  that  which  was
Caesar's.  As  for  it  God  was  not  primarily  revealed  in
Nature  in  the  manifold  forms  of  His  creation  from  which  the
grounds  of  reverence  might  be  deduced,  so  life  was  not
primarily  an  established  order  of  moral  relations  within  which
man  might  walk  with  a  sense  of  security  along  paths  definitely
marked  out ;  but  to  man's  inner  life  was  entrusted  the  work
of  gradually  raising  the  forms  of  society  to  relations  which
were  in  harmony  with  his  spirit.  Therefore  the  attitude  of
Christianity  towards  the  external  conditions  of  mankind  was
not  that  of  a  disturbing  and  subversive  force,  but  it  deprived
evil  of  all  justification  for  its  permanent  continuance.  It  did
not  forthwith  abolish  the  slavery  which  it  found  existing,  but
in  summoning  all  men  to  partake  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  con-
demned it  nevertheless ;  at  first  it  let  polygamy  continue  where
it  existed ;  but  this  must  necessarily  disappear  spontaneously

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

273

when  the  spirit  of  Christian  faith  made  itself  felt  in  all
relations  of  life.  And  this  conflict  is  still  carried  on  in  many-
directions,  for  the  perversity  of  human  nature,  which  is  ever
much  the  same,  opposes  to  the  better  way  all  the  resistance  of
which  it  is  capable ;  but  there  is  one  permanent  advantage  by
which  the  new  age  is  distinguished  from  antiquity.  That
which  is  better  and  juster  did  indeed  make  a  way  for  itself  in
ancient  life,  but  almost  exclusively  in  those  cases  in  which
the  oppressed  struggled  manfully  with  the  oppressor;  the
provident  humanity  which,  without  seeking  its  own  happiness,
takes  the  part  of  the  suffering  section  of  mankind,  and  requires
and  exercises  deeds  of  justice  and  of  mercy,  was  something
very  foreign  to  the  ancient  world,  and  in  the  new  world  it  has
no  more  powerful  source  than  Christianity.

In  conflict  with  mundane  circumstances  and  human  passions,
and  yet  linked  to  both  as  the  instruments  of  its  realization,
no  ideal  can,  in  the  course  of  its  historical  development,
remain  faithful  to  its  full  perfection.  Christianity,  forced  to
justify  itself  to  the  civilisation  of  the  ancient  world,  became
entangled  in  the  attempt  to  establish  dogmatically  the  articles
of  its  belief,  in  the  hopeless  effort  to  force  upon  its  professors,
instead  of  the  inexhaustible  fulness  of  living  thoughts  which
the  gospel  can  arouse  in  each,  a  complete  system,  many  of
the  regulations  of  which  were  as  barren  in  regard  to  practice  as
the  productions  of  ancient  sophistry.  The  simple  division  of
labour  which  had  arisen  in  the  primitive  Churches  from  the
duties  of  the  society  in  regard  to  worship  of  God  and  ordinary
life,  was  transformed  into  a  gradation  of  fixed  offices  as  the
diffusion  of  Christianity  increased ;  in  opposition  to  the
universal  human  priesthood  of  the  gospel,  there  was  a  fresh
separation  from  the  laity  of  an  order  of  priests,  and  in  the
edifice  of  the  hierarchical  church  the  empire  of  the  Holy
Ghost  stiffened  into  a  slavish,  earthly  mechanism.  But  these
deformities  of  Christian  life,  which  a  later  age  might  imder-
take  to  rectify,  were  but  as  the  tough  rind  which  alone
enabled  that  life,  amid  the  ruins  of  the  falling  Eoman  empire,
to  save  itself  for  its  future.

VOL.  II.  S

274  BOOK  Vil. CHAPTER  V.

S  6.  The  Germanic  nations  —  the  often  victorious,  often
conquered,  but  never  subdued  enemies  of  Eome  —  at  last
completed  the  work  to  which  they  seemed  destined,  by  dis-
integrating that  empire  of  ancient  civilisation  which  had
lasted  for  a  thousand  years.  But  they  were  not  in  a
condition  to  substitute  from  their  own  resources  a  new
civilisation  for  that  which  was  passing  away.  The  long
death  struggle  of  the  Eoman  empire — which  the  Germans
themselves,  as  the  most  valiant  of  the  auxiliary  troops,
prolonged  for  a  considerable  time — had  indeed  brought  them
into  many-sided  contact  with  the  elements  of  ancient
civilisation  and  the  teachings  of  Christianity,  but  the  mass
of  that  great  people  which  spread  victoriously  over  the
Eoman  provinces  had  yet  remained  true  to  the  simple  life
which  they  had  lived  on  without  historic  record  from  time
immemorial.  No  one  knows  what  events  filled  up  the  long
succession  of  centuries  which  lay  between  their  first  detach-
•  ment  from  their  original  abode  in  Asia  and  their  appearance
in  the  history  of  European  civilisation.  It  is  probable  that
being  long  without  a  settled  home,  harassed  by  tribes  who
were  pressing  on  them  in  their  wake,  they  maintained  their
valour  and  warlike  vigour  in  the  struggle  for  existence ;
but  that  in  the  northern  settlements,  where  they  finally  estab-
lished themselves,  they  made  little  progress  towards  polite
manners.  At  the  time  that  the  Eoman  empire  began,  and
was  revelling  in  all  the  treasures  of  the  known  world,  the
Germanic  tribes  still  lived  by  the  chase,  by  the  produce  of
their  herds  of  cattle,  and  by  a  somewhat  rudimentary
agriculture ;  they  no  longer  roamed  about  homeless,  but  had
fixed  dwellings  ;  as,  however,  their  settlements  were  much
dispersed,  and  they  had  no  towns,  they  had  none  of  that
industry  \^hich  is  developed  as  a  consequence  of  density  of
population  and  division  of  labour.  Accustomed  to  hard
simplicity  in  food  and  raiment — having  even  to  economize
the  iron  which  they  used  in  their  weapons,  since  they  did
not  know  how  to  procure  it  for  themselves — they  braved
the  inclemencies  of  the  weather  in rude  huts,  being  some-

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  2V5

times  driven  by  hard  winters  into  subterranean  caves.
Inclined  to  sociability,  they  yet  found  little  to  occupy  them
except  fighting,  games,  carouses,  and  listening  to  heroic
songs  which  repeated  the  great  deeds  of  that  same  simple
life.  But  with  this  meagre  culture  they  yet  combined
qualities  of  character  which  were  destined  under  more  favour-
able future  conditions  to  bring  special  benefits  to  mankind
in  the  course  of  history.  They  possessed  in  high  measure
the  love  of  freedom  which  contents  itself  with  guarding
from  foreign  influence  its  own  liberty  of  choice  in  the
conduct  of  life,  but  they  had  not  the  envious  impulse
towards  equality  which  cannot  endure  that  others  should
have  the  advantage  in  anything.  It  seems  as  though  for
the  sake  of  that  independence  they  had  purposely  refrained,
in  the  simple  arrangements  of  their  society,  from  numerous
steps  in  advance  which,  while  bringing  greater  fulness  and
development  of  life,  would  have  prejudiced  the  independence
of  many  ;  but  they  submitted  to  the  superior  power  of  gifted
leaders  of  their  own  free  will,  and  with  the  most  perfect
fidelity ;  and,  without  recognising  hereditary  sovereignty  or
nobility,  they  yet  had  high  respect  for  the  heroic  blood  of
famous  families.  This  trait  of  willing  service  and  absolute
personal  devotion  is  widely  noticeable  throughout  their
history,  and  as  this  is  only  possible  in  personal  relations  it
has  in  later  times  always  made  the  German  nations  more
disposed  to  associate  in  somewhat  small  circles  than  to
combine  into  one  great  whole.  In  the  same  way  it  always
remained  difficult  for  them  to  become  enthusiastic  about
general  principles  which  were  not  presented  to  them  embodied
in  some  personal  form  ;  but  when  such  an  enthusiasm  did
take  possession  of  them,  it  was  all  the  more  lasting,  for  it  was
a  long  time  before  they  came  to  know  how  to  take  up  any
cause  half-heartedly.  They  were  bound  to  give  their  whole
soul  to  anything  which  they  took  in  hand.  It  may  be
admitted  that  with  such  a  disposition  they  were  well  pre-
pared for  the  reception  and  inner  elaboration  of  Christianity,
without  denying that in  the early ages of  the  Church  it

276  BOOK  VII, CHAPTER  V.

was  the  more  southern  nations  of  the  Eoman  provinces  that
produced  those  men  of  lofty  enthusiasm  and  deep  earnestness
who,  as  Fathers  of  the  Church,  were  the  forerunners  of
Christian  life  in  the  north.

The  tremendous  movement  of  national  migration  now
caused  the  Germanic  peoples  to  spread,  in  successive  great
waves,  repeatedly  breaking  one  upon  another,  over  all  the
provinces  of  the  Eoman  empire.  They  were  not  able  to
hold  any  of  these  southern  conquests,  being  everywhere  in
a  minority  compared  with  the  native  population ;  but  for  a
long  time  the  union  of  the  civilised  world  was  broken  by
them,  and  over  the  rich  countries  bordering  the  Mediter-
ranean Sea,  which  Eome  had  brought  together  in  the  noon-
tide light  of  organized  intercommunication,  there  fell  a  long
twilight,  in  which  some  countries  disappeared  from  the  view
of  the  others,  and  many  elements  of  a  previous  common
civilisation  were  lost.

The  great  and  varied  admixture  of  peoples  and  modes  of
life  which  the  increase  of  the  Eoman  empire  and  the  grow-
ing development  of  intercourse  had  produced,  had  already  in
the  closing  period  of  ancient  civilisation  begun  to  disturb
the  simple,  pliable,  and  self-confident  spirit  of  antiquity,  the
one  condition  of  which  had  been  an  isolated  national  develop-
ment in  accordance  with  a  natural  bent.  Before  the  period
of  this  disturbance  a  system  of  consistent  philosophic  views
had  been  instrumental  in  causing  the  production  of  finished
works  of  art  exquisitely  proportioned;  clear  and  definitely
determined  tasks  had  given  harmony  and  character  to  life
itself ;  notwithstanding  the  inexhaustible  variety  of  detail,
reality  as  a  whole — with  its  store  of  attainable  good  things
and  those  desirable  forms  of  human  life  to  which  it  gave
scope — was  spread  before  men's  eyes  with  the  perfection  and
completeness  of  a  well-arranged  picture.  Yet  this  whole
mode  of  thought  had  certainly  rather  suppressed  than  satisfied
the  wants  of  the  human  heart  The  self-distrust  which  had
earlier  overtaken  Greek  life  found  its  way  into  the  Eoman
world  too  in  the  time  of  the  emperors. Unquestioning  faith

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTOEY.

277

in  tlie  supremacy  of  Eome  gave  way  to  cosmopolitan  con-
siderations ;  the  narrow  but  robust  system  of  tliought  which
constituted  national  morality  was  invaded  by  philosophic
reflection ;  artistic  imagination,  which  suffers  most  of  all  from
mental  indecision,  changed  its  calm  mirroring  of  reality  for
dissatisfied  and  passionate  flights  beyond  the  world  of  fact,
and  commingled  accepted  forms  of  representation  in  attempts
of  a  new  kind.  Eeligious  belief  had  long  since  lost  its
certainty ;  with  the  most  baseless  superstition  was  com-
bined a  restless  longing  to  win  back  from  any  known  or
unknown  worship  prevailing  among  men  the  certainty  which
had  been  lost.  Then  Christianity  came,  and  the  new
spiritual  growth  had  to  force  its  way  up  through  the  rents
of  the  ancient  system  of  thought,  the  external  integrity  of
which  was  finally  destroyed  by  the  invading  torrent  of  the
German  barbarians.  If  this  blending  of  all  imaginable  forms
of  life  could  not  fail  to  change  fundamentally  the  genius  of
what  remained  of  the  ancient  nations,  it  could  likewise  not
fail  to  be  difficult  for  the  conquerors  to  know  what  attitude
to  take  towards  such  boundless  variety.  These  conquerors
came  down  upon  the  Eoman  empire  without  any  definite  aims,
partly  yielding  to  necessity,  partly  urged  by  the  struggles
towards  expansion  of  a  strong  nature  that  sought  to  appease
its  impulse  to  action  by  violent  and  powerful  but  yet  object-
less exercise.  Now  there  lay  before  them  the  down-trodden
classic  world,  with  all  its  rich  treasures  of  Nature,  of  art,  and  of
life,  and  with  the  countless  elements  of  civilisation  which  it
still  contained ;  in  exercising  themselves  upon  this  battle-field
they  for  a  long  time  gave  to  history  that  stamp  of  adventurous
romance  which — with  its  wealth  of  free  and  original  powers,
its  inharmonious  struggle  after  great  and  passionately  pur-
sued yet  mutually  inconsistent  ends,  its  variety  of  strange
forms  of  life,  and  its  incoherence — distinguishes  the  Middle
Ages  from  the  period  of  ancient  history.

§  7.  When  after  three  centuries  the  stream  of  national
migration  had  come  to  a  stand,  there  had  become  united  under
Frankish  rulers  districts  in  which  indeed  Germanic  blood  pre-

278

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

pondorated,  but  the  inhabitants  of  which  could  hardly  feel
themselves  bound  together  by  any  common  tie  except  when
they  were  obliged  to  take  the  field  together  against  an  external !
foe.  Especially  in  those  German  countries  which  had  only
come  into  contact  on  their  confines  with  Eoman  dominion,  the
absence  of  towns  caused  the  continuance  of  that  old  life  of
meagre  social  intercourse  natural  to  a  sparse  and  scattered
population.  The  differences  of  disposition  of  different  races,
the  lack  of  common  administrative  interests,  and  the  difficulties
in  the  way  of  exchange  of  thought,  prevented  the  development
of  any  active  public  spirit.  Charlemagne  was  able  by  his
individual  power  to  hold  all  these  provinces  together  by  help
of  arms,  and  in  peaceful  activity  to  enrich  them  with  the
germs  of  a  subsequent  flourishing  civilisation ;  but  to  breathe
the  vital  strength  of  a  self-maintaining  political  whole  into  a
society  of  which  the  constituents  had  so  little  need  of  one
another  and  so  little  dependence  upon  one  another,  was  a  task
beyond  his  strength.  Hence,  when  the  re-establishment  of
the  Eoman  imperial  dignity  in  him  once  more  gave  a  supreme
ruler  to  the  world,  the  new  unity  of  the  human  race  was  just
us  much  the  imaginative  ideal  summit  of  a  not  yet  existing
society,  as  previously  the  first  institution  of  the  same  dignity
had  been  the  natural  conclusion  of  a  long  social  history,
from  which  it  grew  without  any  appearance  of  novelty.  And
this  character  the  empire  of  the  Middle  Ages  maintained
throughout.  It  only  temporarily  possessed  the  power  corre-
sponding to  its  ideal  position ;  but  though  this  was  a  merely
imaginary  picture,  it  yet  really  lived  in  the  imaginations  of
men ;  the  thought  of  the  majesty  of  a  single  temporal  govern-
ment was  by  no  means  an  empty  dream,  even  although  it
could  not  be  carried  into  effect,  but — like  conscience,  against
which  the  passions  are  always  in  rebellion  without  being  able
quite  to  silence  its  enunciations — this  ideal  picture,  while
lacking  actual  power,  hovered  before  men's  minds  in  the
Middle  Ages,  and  reverence  for  it  always  kept  much  self-
will  within  bounds  and  called  forth  many  an  act  of  self-
sacrifice.

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  279

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  real  articulation  of  life  did  not  start
from  this  point,  and  hence  work  itself  out  to  unity,  but  it
worked  up  from  below,  developing  into  innumerable  small
circles,  with  different  degrees  of  slowness  and  difficulty  in
different  countries.  Italy,  with  its  long  cultivated  soil,  with
many  ancient  towns  still  existent  though  depopulated,  with  its
commerce  which  partly  had  been  preserved  and  partly  was
growing  up  afresh,  and  with  the  civil  organization  of  its  com-
munities which  had  never  been  quite  destroyed,  was  the  first
to  collect  together  these  rich  remains  of  former  culture,  and
developed  a  vigorous  intellectual  life  in  numerous  small  states,
the  emulation  of  which  was  favourable  to  culture  whilst  it
hindered  political  unity.  The  great  inland  countries  of  the  Con-
tinent, on  the  other  hand,  suffered  from  the  ungenial  nature
of  their  more  northerly  climate,  from  the  difficulty  of  internal
communication,  from  the  want  of  great  social  centres,  from  the
inconvenient  character  of  their  medium  of  exchange,  in  short,
from  all  that  torpor  of  existence  in  which  consists  the  dark-
ness that  generally  seems  to  us  to  brood  over  the  Middle  Ages.
Thus  the  inland  countries  too,  like  Italy,  but  from  different
causes,  were  at  first  able  to  form  only  small  states.

The  original  communities  had  consisted  of  free  owners  of
the  soil ;  in  conquered  territories  the  victors  were  rewarded
and  their  wants  supplied  by  enfeoffment  of  tenements  and
lands  ;  the  undeveloped  state  of  society  made  it  necessary  for
the  guidance  of  affairs  that  there  should  be  personal  representa-
tives of  the  supreme  power,  and  these  held  office  at  first
temporarily  and  afterwards  permanently ;  they  too  were
provided  for  partly  by  property  in  land,  partly  by  rights  over
certain  districts  ;  finally,  in  developed  feudalism,  the  once
homogeneous  community  was  transformv3d  into  a  complicated
and  graduated  system  of  persons  endowed  on  the  one  hand
with  privileges,  and  on  the  other  hand  burdened  with  obliga-
tions, both  privileges  and  obligations  binding  those  to  whom
they  attached  to  some  definite  parcel  of  land.  The  country
was  covered  with  countless  strongholds  of  the  feudal  lords ;
in  the  solitude  of  these  the  sense  of  family  unity,  of  honour>

280

BOOK  711. CHAPTER  V.

of  purity  of  blood,  and  of  reverence  for  tradition  grew ;  tlie
position  of  wives  and  mothers  increased  in  importance ;  a  feel-
ing of  solidarity  among  persons  of  the  same  rank — carrying
with  it  in  the  knightly  order  a  consciousness  of  having  some
duties  with  regard  to  human  culture — bound  individuals
together  into  a  certain  community  of  life ;  traditions  of  romantic
reverence  and  of  uncompromising  manly  fidelity  gave  some
moral  content  to  life ;  and  there  even  revived  a  taste  for  poetry.
But  neither  general  culture  nor  the  development  of  public
life  made  much  advance  under  this  form  of  society.  National
life  had  ceased  to  exist ;  the  chasm  between  the  feudal  lord
and  his  vassals  was  bridged  over  by  no  recognised  law  and
seldona  by  kindly  care ;  between  the  individual  communities
of  serfs  there  existed  no  bond  of  common  consciousness  or  of
legal  connection.  Even  the  order  of  feudal  lords,  united  by
social  intercourse  and  similarity  in  mode  of  life,  felt  only  that
'hey  were  an  order,  not  that  they  were  part  of  a  political
"vhole  for  the  benefit  of  which  it  was  their  duty  to  make  sacri-
fices. Few  territories  were  large  enough  for  the  development
of  a  civilised  life  of  their  own ;  the  co-operation  of  several
was  hindered  by  the  independence  of  the  lords — ^the  obscurity
of  their  mutual  obligations — the  lack  of  a  general  and  unques-
tioned system  of  law  which  as  these  obligations  gradually
grew  up  should  have  developed  along  with  them — the  impossi-
bility of  carrying  out  sentences,  when  they  had  been  pronounced,
in  any  other  way  than  by  the  exercise  of  force — and  the  ease
with  which  a  number  of  individuals  about  equal  to  one  another
in  power  could  combine  to  resist  legal  force,  which  could  be
brought  to  bear  only  with  extreme  difficulty.  It  was  only
within  very  small  communities  that  definite  and  intelligible
relations  existed,  the  state  as  a  whole  possessing  only  the  most
unwieldy  machinery  ;  care  for  the  general  welfare  was  crippled
by  the  want  of  an  established  and  regulated  system  of  taxa-
tion, and  external  policy  by  the  lack  of  a  standing  army  and
by  the  intricate  arrangements  of  the  feudal  host ;  for  the
administration  of  justice  there  were  wanting  established
tribunals  representative  of  the  general  sense  of  justice,  and  in

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

281

almost  all  cases  legal  jurisdiction  was  disputable,  or  actually
disputed,  or  owed  its  recognition  to  force.

In  this  state  of  things,  notwithstanding  all  its  disorder,  a
certain  characteristic  sense  of  justice  was  not  lacking.  The
Germanic  nations,  with  no  inherited  treasure  of  ancient  civilisa-
tion, no  gift  of  abstraction  due  to  such  an  inheritance,  no  eye
for  principles,  had  been  placed  historically  in  circumstances
which  forced  them  to  rapid  development.  They  could  not
discover  the  universal  principles  of  justice  offhand,  but  every
relation  which  had  become  historical  forthwith  seemed  to  them,
whatever  its  irrationality,  to  be  de  facto  just ;  it  would  not
have  arisen  if  it  had  not  at  the  time  corresponded  to  existing
needs.  Added  to  this  was  the  fact  that  Christianity  appeared
to  them  less  as  a  body  of  doctrine  than  as  a  history  of  past
events — as  among  those  transactions  by  which  Providence,  and
not  the  nature  of  things  themselves,  gives  laws  to  the  course
of  human  affairs.  All  that  we  are  now  accustomed  to  judge
by  universal  laws  of  morality  and  justice  was  regarded  in  the
Middle  Ages  as  dependent  upon  divine  institution,  upon
human  appointment,  upon  investitures  and  treaties,  upon  the
significance  of  particular  occurrences.  On  account  of  the
continual  change  of  circumstances  such  a  foundation  for  the
arrangements  of  human  life  could  not  fail  to  be  a  most  fruit-
ful source  of  incessant  opposition  to  justice  which  had  become
unjust ;  it  produced  the  countless  outbreaks  of  unbridled
caprice  which  mark  the  Middle  Ages.  But  where  the  opposi-
tion took  a  more  peaceable  course,  this  too  did  not  proceed  from
abstract  principles,  but  sought  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
hour  by  transforming  particular  existing  laws  through  fresh
enactments,  which  were  themselves  of  equally  restricted  applica-
tion. This  kind  of  procedure  pervaded  in  the  most  various
forms  every  department  of  life.  When  towns  began  to  flourish,
and  redeemed  their  territories  from  complicated  obligations
towards  the  feudal  lords,  and  love  of  work  and  the  moral
deepening  of  character  gained  in  busy  spheres  of  labour  became
the  fairest  adornment  of  the  closing  period  of  the  Middle
Ages,  then  we  see  this  full  life  crystallize  into  a  multitude  of

282  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

sharply  defined  corporations,  each  having  its  own  internal
system  and  legal  relations  to  others,  both  regulated  by  contract,
and  all  surrounding  themselves  with  innumerable  trade  cus-
toms and  symbols,  and  as  a  whole  developing  into  organisms
of  which  the  real  significance  was  sometimes  clouded  by
numerous  irrational  additions  having  a  merely  historical  justi-
fication, yet — taken  altogether — becoming  individualized  into  a
most  intense  life.  And  in  the  imagination  of  the  Middle  Ages
it  was  not  men  only  but  things  also  which  had  special  rights
— rights  which  were  not  merely  measurable  by  natural  qualities,
but  were  in  a  sense  historic  ;  to  times  and  places  were  attached
privileges,  obligations,  and  liberties  of  all  descriptions.

Within  this  world  of  external  life  mental  culture  was  for

a  long  time  attended  to  only  by  the  Church. The  Eoman

empire,  after  the  recognition of  Christianity,  had  begun  to

give important political posts to the clergy, who were

gradually forming  themselves  into a separate body ; their

activity,  stirred  up  by  lively  enthusiasm for  what  gave  so

much  worth  to  life  or  by  aspiring  ambition,  in  many  ways

took  the  place  of  the  slack  civil  authority ;  rich  endowments

gave  them  independence  and  the  means  of  doing  good  works.

Although  it  was  a  long  time  before  the  hierarchical  edifice  was

complete,  the  authority  of  the  Eoman  chair  soon  took firm

root  in  the  West,  and  the  numerous  missions  which  went  out

from  every  newly-established  settlement  felt  themselves  to  be

members  of  one  whole. Without  having  been  thus  organized

into  a  church,  Christianity  would  hardly  have  weathered  the

storms  of  those  times,  and  could  have  exercised  but  little  of

its  beneficent  influence  upon  temporal  life. By  the  help  of

transmitted culture,  and  through  the  resources  (whether  its

own  or  not)  which  its  authority  enabled  it  to  command,  the

Church  was  able  partly  to  keep  invading  barbarism  at  bay,

partly  to  press  forward  itself  and  fill  the  still  darkened  northern

countries  with  those  churches,  monasteries,  episcopal  residences,

and  agricultural  settlements  from  which  there  were  diffused

not  only  the  art  of  husbandry,  but  also  that  of  gardening,  not

only  the  elements  of  knowledge,  but  also  those  of  technical

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

283

crafts,  and  under  the  walls  of  which  gradually  reviving  trade
held  its  markets,  whilst  within  their  gates  the  sick  and  weary-
found  tendance  or  healing.  Thus  in  the  early  period  of  the
Middle  Ages  the  Church  was  in  many  respects  at  the  head  of
progress  and  of  civilisation;  from  it  proceeded  the  majority
of  such  establishments  as  were  of  general  utility ;  from  it  the
ignorant  sought  teaching,  for  it  alone  possessed  the  treasures
of  transmitted  learning ;  to  it  alone  could  the  longing  go  for
consolation  and  for  the  resolution  of  their  doubts,  for  it  alone
had  studied  all  the  relations  of  human  life,  and  with  active
enthusiasm,  combined  the  results  of  its  reflection  into  one
comprehensive  philosophy ;  finally,  it  was  to  the  Church
that  the  oppressed  appealed  for  help,  for  it  was  the  Church
alone  that,  amidst  the  general  licence  and  the  thirst  for
adventure,  recognised  and  taught  a  truth  that  was  valid  for
all  men  and  a  divine  order  of  things  independent  of  all  human
caprice,  obeying  these  in  a  life  of  strict  discipline,  and  not
unfrequently  asserting  them  with  courageous  self-sacrifice  in
defending  the  weakness  of  the  oppressed  against  the  violence
of  the  strong.

Passing  lightly  over  the  eventful  history  of  the  Church
during  the  Middle  Ages,  we  find  that  at  the  end  of  this  period
its  relation  to  secular  life  had  very  much  changed ;  whilst  the
latter  was  making  remarkable  advance,  the  Church  had  fallen
into  the  rear,  and  had  become  a  hindrance  to  progress.  It
no  longer  led  the  van  of  science  ;  the  religious  philosophy
which  formerly,  in  contrast  to  the  scattered  and  wholly  secular
culture  of  antiquity,  had  so  beneficially  striven  to  grasp  all
reality  and  to  embrace  and  classify  all  knowledge,  was,
after  the  slow  decay  of  that  culture,  incapable  of  giving  any
satisfactory  insight  into  the  connection  of  the  external  world  ;
and  at  the  same  time  the  secular  learning  of  antiquity  which
continued  to  be  propagated,  being  merely  transmitted  and  not
cultivated  with  that  zealous  interest  which  has  re-creative
efficacy,  lost  in  breadth  and  precision :  whilst  in  secular  life
new  relations  were  being  formed  and  new  facts  discovered,  the
ecclesiastical  sources  of  instruction  were  becoming  impoverished.

284

BOOK  VII. CHA.PTER  T.

Even  the  cure  of  souls  had  lost  its  energy.  With  penetrating
zeal  the  fathers  of  the  Church  had  once  defended  the  faith
against  all  the  doubts  of  ancient  culture  ;  and  it  was  certainly
advantageous  to  Germanic  barbarism  that  there  should  bei
presented  to  it  some  definite  profession  of  belief,  but  the  hard
and  fast  formulation  of  dogmas  which  thus  became  the  cut
and  dried  content  of  tradition,  diminished  even  among  the
clergy  the  intensity  of  spiritual  life ;  and  the  people  were
deprived  of  the  little  that  still  remained  of  such  activity,  by  the
use  of  the  Latin  language  and  the  care  with  which  the  Church
reserved  to  itself  the  secrets  of  religion  and  the  administration
of  the  means  of  grace,  no  longer  preaching  to  the  laity  of  the
inner  life  of  faith  and  of  a  new  birth  of  the  soul  resulting
from  its  own  struggles,  but  denying  them.  Grievous  faults
had  also  appeared  in  the  lives  of  the  clergy,  and  they  were  no
longer  either  the  recognised  pattern  of  conduct  or  the  hope  of
the  oppressed.  They  had  not  indeed  become  an  hereditary
ecclesiastical  caste,  but  recruited  their  ranks  from  among  the
people,  although  no  longer  by  means  of  congregational  election ;
but  the  inferior  clergy  who  lived  among  the  people  were
wanting  in  influence  and  insight ;  those  who  were  invested
with  superior  dignity,  and  as  feudatories  occupied  many
political  posts,  often  favoured  insubordination  to  secular
rule,  but  not  the  freedom  of  the  laity  in  ecclesiastical
relations.

There  had  never  been  any  lack  of  vigorous  struggles  between
these  two  great  powers.  The  conflict  between  the  empire  and
the  Eoman  Church  had  led  to  no  decisive  victory  of  the  one
or  the  other.  The  empire,  with  its  claim  of  sovereignty  over
nations  between  which  there  was  no  bond  of  union  except
Christianity,  could  not  on  such  grounds  be  triumphant  over
the  Church  which  demanded  the  same  supremacy  in  the  very
name  of  Christianity ;  the  Church  had  on  its  side  the  naturally
unifying  power  of  religion,  and  used  the  national  differences
to  which  in  their  secular  development  freedom  should  be
allowed,  as  an  instrument  against  the  defectively  established
supremacy  of  secular  power. But  when  the  empire  had  been

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

285

obliged  to  let  its  claims  drop,  secular  life  had  attained  an
importance  of  its  own  in  a  number  of  national  developments,.
as  the  natural  representatives  of  which  the  princes  of  the
different  countries  could  more  efficiently  resist  the  encroach-
ments of  the  Church.  The  opposition  of  these  temporal
powers  to  the  attempts  at  renewing  a  theocracy  succeeded  in
proportion  as  they  identified  themselves  with  the  national  life
of  their  respective  countries ;  they  disabled  themselves  where
they  joined  with  the  spiritual  power  of  the  Church  in  the
obstruction  of  progress.  This  progress  itself  was  due  partly
to  a  further  development  of  previous  conditions  which  had
gone  on  unnoticed,  and  had  also  been  favoured  by  a  striking
succession  of  historical  events  and  discoveries.  Unceasing
wars,  which  no  longer  had  the  character  of  national  migrations,
had  kept  the  nations  in  reciprocal  contact ;  the  internal  action
and  reaction  of  society  was  increased  by  the  revival  of  trade
and  the  growth  of  flourishing  towns ;  the  Crusades  had  for
a  long  time  united  Christian  nations  in  common  enterprise ;
not  only  were  Italy  and  Byzantium,  with  their  inherited
culture,  again  brought  into  contact  with  the  more  northern
nations  through  these  causes,  but  the  East  also,  with  its  dif-
ferent customs  and  its  treasures  and  marvels,  roused  in  the
nations  of  Christian  Europe  a  spirit  of  emulation  and  a  doubt
as  to  the  exclusive  validity  of  the  state  of  things  which  had
been  established  among  them  by  custom  and  tradition  ;  the
geographical  horizon  was  still  further  enlarged  by  the  discoveries
of  the  Portuguese  navigators ;  and  finally  the  discovery  of
America  presented  to  human  imagination,  to  the  spirit  of
adventurous  enterprise  and  to  industrial  activity,  openings  un-
dreamt of  before,  and  which  were  to  help  men  to  become  both
externally  and  mentally  wholly  detached  from  the  traditions
of  antiquity.  At  first,  indeed,  they  tried  to  bring  their  new
life  into  connection  with  antiquity,  whose  treasures  of  thought
liad  never  quite  vanished  from  human  memory ;  but  now,  on
the  one  hand,  they  entered  with  greater  zeal  into  the  growing
activity  of  mental  life,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  increasing
danger  from  the  Mohammedans  with  which  Byzantium  was

286

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

threatened,  and  its  subsequent  fall  caused  what  remained  of
Greek  learning  to  be  transferred  to  Italy.  Then  began  that
revival  of  learning  which  first  restored  to  thought  (which  had
grown  stiff  and  clumsy)  formal  flexibility  and  adroitness,  and
inundated  life  at  once  with  great  Ideas,  with  comprehensive
views,  with  critical  contempt  for  all  existing  goodness  and
beauty,  and  with  an  audacious  imitation  of  the  errors  of  anti-
quity. The  creative  force  which  might  have  given  worthy
content  to  the  new  forms  was  very  backward  in  most  directions ;
in  Italy  alone  the  confusion  of  social  conditions  was  to  some
extent  compensated  by  a  magnificent  flight  of  creative  art ;  yet
there  were  laid  those  foundations  of  higher  mathematics  and  of
natural  science  which  were  destined  to  produce  the  most  im-
portant instruments  of  the  new  civilisation.  Finally,  the  torpor
which  had  long  hung  about  the  exchange  of  thought  was
removed  by  the  discovery  of  printing ;  from  that  time  public
opinion  could  exercise  its  influence  upon  all  the  relations
of  life,  and  the  awakening  spirit  of  criticism  which  was  to
distinguish  the  period  just  beginning  was  armed  with  its  most
powerful  weapon.

§  8.  The  various  germs  which  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages
had  produced,  gradually  bore  fruit  in  a  succession  of  great
revolutions.  They  did  not  develop  simultaneously  or  alto-
gether in  harmony  with  each  other ;  the  human  mind  in  its
onward  struggle  is  capable  of  the  inconsistency  of  maintaining
in  one  department  the  same  new  views  which  in  others,  yielding
to  old-established  custom,  it  eagerly  persecutes.  But  amidst
all  such  contradictory  and  retrogressive  currents  there
developed,  with  ever-increasing  power,  as  the  distinguishing
characteristic  of  the  new  age,  that  Enlightenment,  destroying
in  order  to  reconstruct,  which  sought  to  h'eak  the  dominion  of
all  prejudice  and  to  undermine  every  ill-founded  belief.  The
spirit  of  modern  times,  to  which  it  is  essential  to  be  con-
stantly reflecting  upon  itself,  has  often  enough  used  these
phrases  as  watchwords  indicative  of  its  own  characteristics,
and  the  indication  is  perhaps  accurate  for  good  as  well  as  for
ilL Por  both  the  strength  and  the  weakness  of  our  position.

THE  DEVELOPilENT  OF  HISTORY.

287

both  our  hopes  and  our  fears  as  regards  the  future,  depend
equally  upon  that  unchained  spirit  of  criticism  which,  investi-
gating all  the  relations  of  life  with  self-conscious  purpose,
more  easily  accomplishes  the  inevitable  demolition  of  error,
than  the  reconstruction  of  truth,  and,  in  the  zeal  of  its
analytic  incursions,  runs  the  risk  of  injuring  unperceived  the
most  necessary  foundations  of  ordered  human  existence.  We
have,  perhaps,  reason  to  give  more  scope  to  hope  for  the  future
than  to  fear ;  but  above  all  it  seems  clear  to  us  that  we  have
not  yet  seen  the  conclusion  of  the  developmental  struggles  into
which  the  impulses  of  the  immediate  past  have  plunged  us.

It  was  religious  needs  that  first  kindled  the  flame.  The
Reformation  sought  to  lead  men  back  from  the  secularization
Df  the  Church  and  the  externalizing  of  ecclesiastical  life  to  the
purity  of  primitive  Christianity.  Though  the  positive  teaching
of  the  Reformation,  far  from  professing  to  be  a  production  of
individual  reason,  was  in  fact  mere  submission  to  the  authority
of  revelation,  yet  being  in  declared  opposition  to  the  existing
order  of  things,  it  could  not  avoid  formally  recognising
individual  examination  and  decision  as  the  starting-point  even
of  religious  life.  It  freed  conscience  from  the  obligation  of
submission  to  commands  (proceeding  not  from  the  gospel  but
from  tradition  and  from  ecclesiastical  speculation)  which  it
was  attempted  to  force  upon  men;  and  laid  upon  them  instead
the  obligation,  which  was  at  the  same  time  a  privilege,  of
appropriating  to  themselves  the  content  of  faith  by  their  own
struggles  towards  development  and  their  own  inner  experience.
In  doing  this  it  ventured  to  hope  that  the  result  of  this
struggle  would  be  agreement  with  that  which  it  esteemed  to
be  eternal  truth,  and  to  which  it  held  fast ;  but  it  was  bound
to  acknowledge  that,  though  it  might  lament,  yet  it  could  net
condemn  the  opposite  result.  The  principle  of  free  investiga-
tion of  the  gospel  could  not  escape  expansion  into  perfect
freedom  of  conscience,  in  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  all
Christian  and  finally  of  all  religious  truth  whatever.  For  a
long  time  the  Reformation,  conscious  of  the  value  of  its  faith,
struggled  against  this  conclusion ;  to  it  too  the  disposition  to

288

BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  V.

persecute  for  faith's  sake  was  not  unknown,  and  when  the
battle  for  the  freedom  of  personal  conviction  had  been  fought
out,  there  remained  doubts  as  to  the  legitimate  sphere  of  thisl
freedom.  And  these  occurred  first  in  the  renewed  Church
itself.  The  very  investigation  of  Scripture  as  the  sole  founda-
tion of  faith  required  the  co-operation  of  subjective  interpreta-
tion ;  a  Church  which  adopted  this  principle  could  neither
exclude  all  variation  of  dogmatic  conviction,  nor  could  it
easily  mark  out  definitely  the  limits  within  which  such
variation  should  be  allowed  for  the  future.  In  such  doubts
we  ourselves  are  still  involved ;  the  only  men  who  are  sure  of
themselves  are  those  who  hold  the  most  extreme  views,  either
demanding  a  stricter  unity  of  the  Church  at  the  expense  of
individual  freedom,  or  an  atomistic  dispersion  into  innumer-
able small  communities  in  favour  of  individual  freedom  at  the
expense  of  the  universal  Church.  And  yet  between  these  two
extremes  Protestantism  has  gone  on  living  and  developing ;  for
in  holding  fast  to  the  principle  of  free  investigation  notwith-
standing all  the  perplexities  and  difficulties  of  its  ecclesiastical
polity,  it  has  secured  the  adherence  of  all  the  rich  culture
which  has  arisen  from  the  stimulus  given  by  itself  and  from
the  schools  which  were  for  the  most  part  established  by  it.

The  relation  of  religious  profession  to  the  state  was  affected
by  the  changes  which  the  state  itself  experienced,  or  through
which  it  was  first  developed.  In  the  Middle  Ages  influential
connection  between  the  different  departments  of  life  and
the  consciousness  of  solidarity  occurred  almost  exclusively
in  individual  minor  communities,  the  praiseworthy  and
active  public  spirit  of  which  could  not  make  up  for  the
absence  of  important  and  varied  relations,  and  the  external
connections  between  which  remained  uncertain  and  un-
organized. From  this  incoherent  condition  there  sprung  up
the  formally  systematized  State,  with  its  comprehensive
administration  of  differently  endowed  and  mutually  com-
plementary districts,  and  its  regulated  employment  of  means.
It  arose  first  in  the  form  of  that  absolutism  which  regarded
the  country  and  the  people  as  the  private  property  of  the

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTOET.  289

ruler,  and  either  used  them  despotically  for  the  glorification  of
the  throne,  or  filled  the  part  of  guardian  towards  them  with
well-meaning  carelessness.  Certainly  in  the  suppression  of
innumerable  petty  sovereignties  by  a  few  great  ones  there  was
a  gain  in  general  order  and  security ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,
the  pressure  exercised  downwards  by  these  great  powers  was
continued,  and  the  independence  of  the  several  communities
disappeared  before  the  centralization  of  national  power.  The
age  of  the  Eevolution  in  shattering  despotism  shattered  also
those  limits  of  free  movement  which  it  should  have  allowed
to  remain ;  in  demanding  equal  justice  and  equal  rights  for
all,  an  unlimited  field  for  all  activity  and  an  open  course  for
talent  of  every  description,  it  took  a  hostile  attitude  towards
all  specialities  of  historical  development  in  which  it  saw  only
hindrances  to  that  freedom  at  which  it  aimed,  and  it  carried
on  the  work  of  centralization  to  the  point  of  planing  down  as
far  as  possible  all  characteristic  differences.  After  men  had
seen  how  in  the  wide  workshop  of  America  success  had
followed  the  attempt  to  build  up  a  construction  of  social  order
without  restraint  from  historic  tradition,  and  guided  purely
by  the  needs  of  the  moment,  without  any  greater  limitation  of
personal  freedom  than  those  needs  made  necessary,  and  after
France  had  gone  back  to  the  universal  rights  of  man  for  the
foundation  of  society,  and  had  broken  with  history  even  in
the  externals  of  life,  it  seemed  as  though  for  the  future  the
State  would  be  only  a  great  society  for  gathering  in  the  treasures
of  Nature  and  carrying  out  the  exchange  of  varying  produc-
tions, established  and  governed  by  the  wiU  of  all,  and  really
without  any  moral  duty  of  self-preservation,  being  indeed
entitled  to  dissolve  itself  at  any  moment ;  yet  with  all
this  the  fact  was  that  the  real  freedom  of  individuals  was
tyrannized  over  by  the  common  will  of  the  majority.  But
the  glory  of  the  tremendous  results  which  France  achieved
in  its  defensive  struggle,  soon  brought  back,  in  the  national
pride  which  it  stirred  up,  a  new  and  deeper  consciousness
of  political  coherence ;  other  countries  had  not  to  atone  so
severely  for  the  mistake  of  setting  equality  above  personal
VOL.  II.  T

290  BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  V.

freedom,  but  tliey  attained  more  slowly  to  the  development  oV
this  freedom  and  to  the  rejection  of  many  limitations  which
had  grown  up  historically,  and,  without  any  absolute  right,
obstructed  social  movement.

The  history  of  these  struggles,  which  is  full  of  vicissitudes,
does  not  come  within  our  present  hasty  survey ;  that  they  are
not  even  yet  ended  is  a  wide-spread  and  oppressive  conviction
of  the  present  age.  The  spirit  of  criticism  which  called  them
forth  has  triumphantly  maintained  many  general  principles,  but
has  not  been  very  happy  in  the  discovery  of  living  forms  in
which  these  principles  might  receive  a  satisfying  realization  in
fact.  It  has  been  established  that  the  outline  of  the  State  is
not  irrevocably  sketched  out  beforehand  by  history,  to  be  merely
filled  in  by  the  living  activity  of  the  people,  but  that  the  State
is  rather  the  comprehensive  final  form  v/hich  social  order  has
to  take  on  in  order  to  satisfy  those  aims  of  national  life  which
are  historically  possible — that  State  guidance  and  administration
must  always  have  regard  to  the  changing  needs  of  the  hour,  as
well  as  to  that  connection  with  the  historic  past  by  which  the
nation  is  constituted  a  nation — that  there  is  necessary  a
division  of  power  which  on  the  one  hand  allows  to  existing
men  (who  have  a  right  to  live)  a  modifying  and  innovating
influence,  and  on  the  other  hand  allows  to  the  representatives
of  the  permanent  element  in  historical  development  a  restrain-
ing and  guiding  influence — that  as  much  scope  must  be  given
to  voluntary  combination  and  the  self-government  of  com-
munities as  is  necessary  for  the  production  of  all  the  com-
modities and  the  satisfaction  of  all  the  wants  which  they  are
naturally  able  to  produce  and  to  satisfy,  and  that  just  as  much
must  this  freedom  submit  to  the  limitations  which  the  safety
of  the  whole  requires.  But  in  the  representative  constitutions
of  our  own  time  political  art  has  either  not  yet  attained  to
adequate  forms,  capable  of  ensuring  the  fulfilment  of  these
ideal  ends,  or  the  forms  appeared  too  soon,  before  the  spirit
that  knew  how  to  make  a  perfectly  right  use  of  them  was
developed.  And  as  an  effect  of  the  oppression  that  has
gone  before,  mistrust  and  not  trust  still  continues  to  be  the

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  291

Lul  of  co—o.alH.;  the  jealous  gua^amg  of  fo„„.
political  rights  still  outweighs  understanding  of  and  sympathy
with  the  real  ends  for  the  attaining  of  which  the  existence  of
these  rights  is  necessary ;  qualification  for  taking  part  in
public  business  has  not  increased  in  the  same  proportion  as
the  extension  of  the  right  to  do  so.  Neither  life  nor  education
accustom  the  people  sufficiently  to  the  consciousness  of  im-
portant national  ends.  Skilfulness  of  co-operation  in  the
prosecution  of  particular  undertakings  has  no  doubt  increased ;
but  the  nature  of  trade,  which  connects  the  subsistence  of  the
individual  with  a  wide-spreading  ramification  of  remote  and
foreign  conditions,  uproots  the  sense  of  citizenship  which
existed  in  earlier  times,  and  which,  arising  from  having  all  the
interests  of  life  in  common,  bound  together  the  members  of
local  communities ;  the  diffusion  of  information  has  certainly
made  progress,  but  the  inner  progress  of  knowledge  has  been
all  the  greater,  because  notwithstanding  this  diffusion  the
greatest  part  of  the  culture  of  which  nations  are  proud  remains
wholly  unknown  to  the  majority  of  the  people.  How  very
indeterminate  the  line  still  is  between  what  government  should
reckon  among  its  duties  and  what  should  be  left  to  the
voluntary  activity  of  th&  subject  is  shown  by  the  unsettled
disputes  about  free  education,  the  political  rights  of  different
religious  professions,  and  the  necessity  or  dispensableness  of  a
coincidence  between  political  boundaries  and  the  geographical
limits  of  unmixed  nationalities.

Not  only  lifci  but  science  also,  has  felt  the  influence  of
awakening  criticism.  During  the  Middle  Ages  minds  had  been
ruled  by  traditions  handed  down  from  antiquity,  and  for  a  long
time  but  little  fresh  result  of  investigation  was  added  to  them.
From  this  time  forward  there  comes  out  in  ever  growing
strength  that  critical  impulse  of  the  Enlightenment,  which  in-
deed could  never  be  so  wholly  absent  in  science  as  in  other
departments  of  life ;  the  ingenuous  setting  forth  of  truth  of
which  men  believed  themselves  to  be  in  possession  gave  place
more  and  more  to  questions  concerning  the  general  cognisa-
bHity of truth and the final principles of all  judgment.

292

BOOK  VIL CHAPTER  V.

Science  now  first  began  to  assume  the  character  of  an  investi-
gation which  tests  with  careful  exactness  the  worth  and
trustworthiness  of  its  sources,  considers  the  possible  paths  of
progress,  and  is  anxious  to  confirm  its  results  by  proofs  and
counter-proofs  of  every  description,  estimating  even  the
amount  of  error  which  it  is  in  danger  of  making  in  these
proofs  themselves,  and  allowing  for  such  error  in  its  deduc-
tions. By  this  procedure  science  has  introduced  into  even  the
most  familiar  departments  of  human  thought  the  idea  of
universal  laws  to  which  reality  is  obedient  in  all  particulars,
and  a  lively  conviction  that  results  can  only  be  obtained  by
using  things  according  to  these  laws.  In  doing  this  it  has
been  able  not  indeed  to  destroy  superstition,  but  to  set  bounds
to  its  public  and  formerly  bloody  activity ;  by  its  astrono-
mical discoveries  it  has  given  to  imagination  a  new  and
enlarged  background  for  cosmic  theories ;  and  by  the  develop-
ment of  mechanics  and  chemistry  it  has  produced  a  boundless
supply  of  instruments  for  the  production  of  new  commodities
and  the  enlargement  of  commerce,  and  hence  for  the  enlarge-
ment of  men's  intellectual  horizon  altogether,  and  for  the
increase  of  general  wellbeing.  And  whilst  finally  it  came  to
make  not  only  external  Nature,  but  also  the  course  of  events
in  history  more  and  more  the  object  of  reflection,  and  sought  to
trace  back  to  universal  laws  the  action  and  reaction  of  human
activities,  and  the  production  and  exchange  of  commodities,  it
gave  rise  to  that  progressive  spirit  of  conscious  calculation  that
is  not  content  to  continue  passively  in  any  merely  instinctive
condition  of  being  or  doing,  but  must  actively  mould  the
future  by  independent  use  of  all  available  means.  Even
within  the  range  of  this  cheering  human  progress,  sceptical
and  materialistic  ideas  and  the  dreams  of  socialism  and  com-
munism show  that  neither  firm  foundations  of  knowledge  nor
practicable  plans  for  the  removal  of  undeniable  social  evils
have  as  yet  been  in  all  cases  discovered.

§  9.  The  hasty  survey  of  the  external  course  of  human
development  upon  which  we  have  ventured  has  convinced  us
how  far  hitherto  human  conditions  have  been  from  attaining

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  293

tlKit  satisfactory  state  of  equilibrium  which  may  be  regarded

as  the  completion  of  historical  development  needing  only  to

be  kept  up  and  worked  out,  not  to  be  wholly  transformed.

Will  this  development  progress  steadily,  or  will  it  share  the

fate  of  those  great  civilisations  which  have  preceded  us  in

history,  and  which,  destroyed  partly  by  internal  dissolution

and  partly  by  external  force,  have  had  a  fertilizing  influence

ipon  the  renewed  attempts  of  later  times  only  when  they  had

^fallen  into  ruin,  and  even  then  very  gradually  ? No  one  will

[profess  to  foreknow  the  future,  but  as  far  as  men  may  judge,

it  seems  that  in  our  days  there  are  greater  safeguards  than

there were in antiquity against unjustifiable excesses  and

•  against  the  external  forces  which  might  endanger  the  con-

itiuued  existence  of  civilisation.

The  civilisations  of  antiquity  existed  in  national  isolation  ;

the  general  difficulty  of  intellectual  intercourse  diminished,  in

the  Middle  Ages,  the  benefits  which  might  then  have  been

derived  from  the  unifying  power  of  faith ; now  at  last  the

different  divisions  of  the  world  which  have  so  long  lived  on  in

f separation  are  striving  to  be  something  to  one  another;  and

the  all-pervading  current  of  interested  traffic  and  of  zeal  for

[discovery  is  beginning  to  establish  that  external  coherence  of

the  human  race  by  which  the  hitherto  disconnected  develop-

:  ment  of  different  sections  may  in  the  future  become  combined

iinto  a  history  of  mankind. Already  the  wide  diffusion  of  a

'Culture  which  is  on  the  whole  homogeneous,  and  in  which  so

many  nations  with  all  the  varieties  of  national  temperament

participate,  will  prevent  disturbances  of  development  which

may  befall  any  of  them  in  particular  from  becoming  hindrances

to human progress in general. And  thus the power of

barbarism over  culture  is  broken. In consequence  of the

defective development of their knowledge of Nature, the

civilisations  of  antiquity  had  not  the  weapons  which  would

have  enabled  them  in  all  cases to  defend  their  intellectual

wealth  successfully  against  the  savagery  of  the  uncivilised

world ; modern culture has through the progress of the

technical  arts  become  so  well  armed  and  so  warlike  that  the

294  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

inundation  of  civilised  countries  by  tribes  in  a  state  of  Nature
has  long  ceased  to  be  a  probable  danger ;  on  the  contrary,  the
assuredness  of  the  influence  exercised  by  civilisation  as  a
whole  upon  the  destinies  of  all  parts  of  the  world  grows  from
day  to  day,  though  the  regions  thus  affected  may  be  too
extensive  to  be  as  yet  thoroughly  pervaded  individually  by
such  influences.

And  if  by  this  extension  in  space,  human  culture  has
become  established  on  too  broad  a  basis  to  be  easily  washed
away  altogether  even  by  a  tremendous  wave  of  barbarism,  it
has  also  attained  internally,  as  the  result  of  all  its  evolutionary
struggles,  a  balance  which  throws  its  centre  of  gravity  deeper
than  in  the  past,  below  the  surface  depth  which  is  commonly
disturbed  by  sudden  currents.  From  the  best  features  of
many  scientific  researches  which  have  failed  in  detail — from  the
increasing  clearness  of  our  retrospective  survey  of  history  and
of  human  error — from  the  experiences  of  life  itself  which
teaches  us,  in  the  exchange  of  necessaries,  to  have  a  due
appreciation  of  what  is  foreign — from  the  wonderful  advance
in  interchange  of  opinion  which  disturbs  the  one-sideduess  of
narrow  intellectual  views,  bringing  many  currents  of  thought
into  beneficial  mutual  action,  and  unceasingly  urging  men  to
the  exercise  of  comparison — from  all  these  roots  there  has
grown  up,  in  the  spirit  of  the  present  age,  that  peculiar
temperament  or  dominant  mood  which  we  may  distinguish  by
the  name  of  Modern  Humanism.

The  difference  between  human  development  and  the  mental
constitution  of  the  lower  animals  consists  chiefly  in  this,  that
the  soul  of  animals  is  roused  directly  by  a  limited  circle  of
perceptions  to  sudden  and  disconnected  action ;  whilst  the
human  spirit,  far  less  endowed  by  Nature  with  instincts  con-
sciously directed  towards  their  ends,  has  first  to  collect  a
copious  store  of  experiences  in  the  daily  school  of  life,  and  by
calm  elaboration  of  them  to  work  out  gradually  the  motives
of  coherent  action.  An  intensification  of  this  self-control
which  distinguishes  human  activity  as  a  whole  from  animal
impulse  is in a certain sense,  and  to  a  certain  extent, a

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  295

distinguishing  characteristic  of  modern  civilisation.  Not
indeed  by  any  means  because  greater  thoughtfulness  is  among
the  special  merits  of  modern  men  and  women,  but  because
without  any  merit  of  theirs  all  the  circumstances  of  life,
education,  and  tradition  under  the  influence  of  which  they
find  themselves,  are  full  of  motives  adverse  to  precipitate
action,  exercising  externally  as  much  influence  in  hindering
the  unrestrained  outbreak  of  individual  desires  as  they
exercise  internally  in  diminishing  the  effect  upon  the  mind
of  innumerable  exciting  impressions.  After  all  imaginable
interests  in  life  have  been  discussed  and  criticised  from  the
most  different  points  of  view,  and  all  these  discussions  and
criticisms  have,  however  much  weakened  and  obscured,
become  part  of  the  common  consciousness,  the  world  is  less
easily  interested  and  less  credulous  than  it  was  before;  always
indeed  fertile  in  the  production  of  strange  views  and  heady
schemes,  but  more  moderate  in  its  admiration  for  and  its
devotion  to  the  improbable.  In  its  bad  form — that  used-wp
condition  in  which  all  higher  aims  and  all  motives  to  action
generally  have  lost  their  stimulative  force — we  may  find  this
peculiarity  of  our  own  age  repulsive,  and  all  the  more  so  in
proportion  as  we  know  it  only  in  the  present  and  from  living
experience ;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  the  case  that  this
aweary-ness  of  a  great  part  of  mankind  has  not  been  lacking
in  any  age  which  has  produced  a  multiform  civilisation
abounding  in  sharp  contrasts.  And  it  has  never  either  now
or  earlier  taken  possession  of  the  whole  race ;  but  now  more
than  previously  there  has  developed  alongside  of  this  sterile
passionlessness  an  allied  but  more  earnest  temper — tolerant,
circumspect,  and  self-controlled — which  among  so  many  un-
finished social  constructions  yet  makes  possible  for  us  a  life
abounding  in  worthy  pleasures,  and  keeps  up  our  hopes  of
continuous  progress.

This  refined  conscience  of  modern  society  makes  itself  felt
in  the  most  various  departments  of  life.  Not  that  it  is  able
to  get  its  commands  obeyed  without  any  trouble,  or  that  the
men  of  to-day  are  incomparably  superior  to  those  of  the  past

296

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

in  tlie  excellence  of  their  private  morality ;  on  the  contrary,
human  nature  is  ever  the  same,  and  continues  to  resist  the
restraints  imposed  upon  it  with  all  its  inherited  passion  andj
perversity,  and  evil  and  folly.  But  now  it  feels  the  reins
drawn  tighter ;  while  every  new  generation  is  born  with  the
old  impulses  and  the  old  imperfections  of  its  kind,  each  is
forced  to  recognise  the  truth  of  the  progressive  moral  insight
with  which  growing  civilisation  gradually  interpenetrates  all
the  relations  of  life,  as  with  a  conscience  that  is  ever
becoming  more  fully  awakened,  and  the  utterances  of  which
force  themselves  even  upon  the  unwilling.  Perhaps  modern]
humanity  falls  further  short  of  the  increased  demands  of  this
conscience  than  the  humanity  of  previous  times  did  of  the
simpler  and  less  complex  demands  of  the  conscience  of  its j
day,  and  a  desponding  view  may  attempt  to  depreciate
modern  civilisation  even  in  comparison  of  the  natural  open
savagery  of  past  times,  regarding  such  civilisation  as  mere
surface  polish  and  hypocrisy;  but  to  us  it  seems  that  the
very  fact  that  hypocrisy  is  needed  is  a  mark  of  progress,  and
that  much  that  is  base  is  now  obliged  at  least  to  cloak  itself,
whereas  formerly  it  would  have  ventured  to  show  in  its  true
colours.  Upon  the  steady  progressive  development  of  this
conscience,  upon  the  pressure  which  it  exercises  on  willing
and  unwilling  alike,  our  hopes  for  the  future  rest ;  to  a  certain
extent  human  action  will  be  obliged  to  conform  to  it.
Ambition  with  its  lust  of  oppression  will  always  remain ;  but
the  days  are  numbered  in  which  men  will  attempt  to  justify
slavery  as  such  in  the  eyes  of  public  opinion.  The  political
destiny  of  nations  may  yet  have  many  melancholy  revolutions
in  store,  for  in  order  that  practical  injustice  may  be  effectually
prevented,  comprehension  of  the  existing  position  of  affairs  in
any  particular  case  and  the  improvement  of  favourable
opportunities  must  be  in  accordance  with  the  general  con-
viction ;  still  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  sentence  of  condemnation
has  already  been  passed  on  all  invasions  of  the  freedom  and
honour  of  individual  life.  Many  attempts  to  interfere  with
liberty  of  conscience,  to  re-establish  exploded  religious  dogmas.

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  297

and  to  revive  strange  forms  of  worship  may  yet  be  made  ;  but
they  will  never  permanently  succeed  beyond  the  lines  which
some  will  find  drawn  by  the  spirit  of  independence,  others  by
scientific  taste,  and  the  rest  by  the  general  sense  of  moral
fitness  which  belongs  to  modern  Humanism.

Such  are  our  hopes  for  the  future ;  but  what  is  the  end
of  all  ?  Is  there  any  such  end  in  the  sense  of  a  goal  which
is  to  be  reached,  of  a  state  of  perfection  which  will  be  the
conclusion  and  as  it  were  the  final  accomplishment  of  all
preceding  historical  struggles — and  if  such  a  perfect  condition
of  things  should  be  reached,  will  it  last  on  to  all  eternity  ?  Or
is  there  no  such  goal,  and  will  the  progress  of  mankind  cease
for  no  other  reason  than  that  of  having  exhausted  all  external
means  of  advance,  and  will  the  imperfect  condition  then
reached  (which  the  inherent  defects  of  human  nature  will  not
permit  it  to  transcend)  present  that  action  of  mankind  (at
last  become  uniform)  which  it  is  destined  to  carry  on  ad
infinitum  ?  Or,  finally,  may  not  things  go  on  for  ever  as  they
have  done  in  the  course  of  history  hitherto  ?  Will  not  every
civilisation  that  seemed  to  have  been  destined  for  eternal
duration  always  be  brought  to  ruin  by  some  unexpected  fate,
and  with  every  advance  in  one  direction  will  there  not  be
bound  up  a  loss  in  some  other  direction,  so  that  the  sum  of
human  perfection  and  of  human  happiness  may  always  be
a  tolerably  constant  quantity,  if  we  take,  one  with  another —
success  and  the  exertion  it  necessitates,  gain  and  loss,  the
growing  wealth  of  civilisation  and  the  increasing  difficulty  of
full  participation  in  it  ?

The  boastful  days  are  over  in  which  speculation  flattered
itself  that  it  possessed  the  answers  to  these  questions.  Our
intellectual  horizon  has  gradually  become  wider  again.  We
have  bethought  us  that  the  history  to  which  we  can  look  back
as  sufficiently  well  known  to  form  a  judgment  upon  is  of  very
limited  extent ;  it  embraces  the  classical  nations,  the  European
Middle  Ages,  and  the  immediate  past.  In  this  small  and
coherent  fragment  of  development  in  which  the  parts  are  con-
nected by  tradition,  it  may  well  be that we  can trace  a

298

BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

progressive  advance.  "We  do  indeed  all  lament  that  the]
beauty  of  antique  life  has  passed  away — a  beauty  which  meaj
have  never  been  able  to  recover  in  modern  times,  in  whicl
more  northern  countries  have  become  the  scene  of  the  most
active  development ;  but  seeing  that  the  ruin  of  antique  life
lies  before  us  as  an  accomplished  fact,  we  might  easily  point
out  the  defects  of  civilisation  from  which  that  ruin  proceeded.
These  were  only  partially  avoided  in  the  Middle  Ages — a  period
which,  notwithstanding  its  want  of  political  and  social  stability
and  unity,  notwithstanding  its  strange  mixture  of  profound
mental  life  and  indescribable  barbarism,  yet  shows  us  a  splendour
of  Christianity  and  a  variety  of  individual  development  with
which  we  can  sympathize ;  and  shows  them  as  being,  though  not
perhaps  themselves  actually  higher  stages  of  development,  yet
hopeful  steps  toward  such.  Far  other  was  the  aspect  which
this  period  wore  in  its  own  estimation;  more  than  once  it
seemed  to  the  minds  of  men,  horror-struck  by  the  boundless
misery  which  existed,  that  the  end  of  the  world  must  be  close
at  hand.  The  gradual  development  of  the  modern  European
political  systems  and  of  modern  society  was  without  doubt
another  swiftly  advancing  wave  of  evolution,  when  looked  at
in  comparison  with  the  immediately  preceding  period ;  borne
upon  its  summit  the  speculation  of  the  age  might  momen-
tarily have  taken  a  view  of  history  according  to  which  it
would  seem  that  no  further  development  was  to  be  attained  in
the  future,  but  that  the  evolution  of  the  human  race  had,  in
kind  at  least,  reached  its  conclusion,  and  that  the  only  growth
remaining  for  it  was  an  extension  on  all  sides.  But  since
then  we  have  become  more  cautious  with  regard  both  to  the
past  and  to  the  future.

Growing  acquaintance  with  pre-classical  civilisations  is
already  beginning  to  arouse  in  us  misgivings  of  having  under-
valued them  in  many  respects.  It  is  certain  that  they  exhibited
such  a  full  and  complex  and  active  life  that  it  is  impossible
to  regard  them  as  a  mere  unimportant  prelude  to  European
history.  Our  acquaintance  with  them  is  still  but  too  meagre,
since  their  literatures,  which  are  the  only  thoroughly  trustworthy

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.  299

witnesses  of  tlie  depth  and  character  of  mental  life,  are  partly
lost  to  us  and  partly  are  difficult  of  access ;  hence  we  are  now
unquestionably  as  much  in  danger  of  over-estimation  as  we  were
formerly  in  danger  of  inconsiderate  neglect.  But  a  philosophy
of  human  history  can  give  no  satisfactory  results  concerning  the
course  and  the  amount  of  its  actual  progress  before  these  long  ages
of  past  time  have  become  known,  and  their  performances  been
compared  with  what  we  have  hitherto  regarded  as  the  advances
of  later  periods.  On  the  other  hand,  the  progress  of  mechanical
art  which  has  provided  new  means  and  resources,  and  of  the
economic  sciences  which  have  produced  a  better  adjustment  to
human  needs  of  the  means  for  their  satisfaction,  has  caused
our  attention  to  be  directed  more  than  ever  towards  the  future  ;
the  aggregate  of  all  that  it  has  to  do,  alter,  procure,  and
arrange  has  never  been  present  in  such  distinctness  and
importance  to  the  consciousness  of  any  previous  age ;  no  time
has  lived  so  fully  as  the  present  in  definite  plans  for  the  future  ;
we  feel  ourselves  more  stirred  up  to  try  and  promote  progress
for  the  future  than  to  investigate  the  steps  it  has  made  in
past  history.

So  now  again  the  future  stretches  out  before  us,  more  full  of
significance  than  ever,  and  we  can  fill  it  with  dreams  of  bound-
less progress.  But  the  course  of  history  has  already  been  so  long
that  in  looking  back  upon  it  we  shall  soon  find  ourselves  obliged
to  confine  our  hopes  within  a  narrower  compass ;  for  plainly
the  regions  within  which  there  is  any  great  probability  of
unlimited  progress  are  very  definitely  circumscribed,  and  for
all  others  the  probability  is  but  very  slight.  The  splendid
initiation  of  the  rule  over  matter  and  its  forces  which  rejoices  us
in  the  natural  sciences,  having  been  made  once  for  all,  we  may
reckon  upon  a  rapid  succession  of  new  discoveries.  Trom  these
may  be  anticipated  a  varied  increase  in  the  conveniences  of
life,  greater  facility  in  the  satisfying  of  our  wants,  and
purposive  alteration  of  many  of  our  customs ;  the  enriching  of
some  favourably  situated  countries  by  increased  use  of  natural
resources  and  the  addition  of  others  to  the  abodes  of  civilisa-
tion ;  increase  of  the  population  of  the  earth,  and  a  manifold

300  BOOK  VII. CHAPTER  V.

heightening  of  the  activity  of  commerce.  All  sciences  which
combine  facts  of  experience  according  to  clear  and  simple
laws  of  thought  have  the  prospect  of  making  continuous
advances  towards  perfection ;  they  will  not  only  extend  their
knowledge  of  particulars,  but  will  also  learn  by  the  discovery
of  new  laws  to  understand  better  the  coherence  of  all  reality.
These  general  results  may  be  expected  to  exercise  a  favourable
and  gradually  increasing  influence  even  upon  those  sciences
which,  transcending  experience  and  real  existence  and  search-
ing after  God  and  divine  things,  early  accumulated  a  store  of
valuable  thoughts,  but  during  the  thousands  of  years  that  have
passed  since  then  have  not  been  able  to  make  any  important
addition  to  their  early  stock ;  and  the  progress  may  also  be
shared  by  that  practical  wisdom  which  has  to  deal  with  the
necessary  aims  of  our  action,  the  binding  commands  of  con-
science, and  beneficent  social  constructions.

But  whilst  this  world  of  truth  and  of  Ideas  increases,  human
nature  will  not  change,  and  life  will  always  remain  a  long  way
behind  the  ideals  that  are  set  before  successive  generations.
There  will  never  be  one  fold  and  one  shepherd,  never  one
imiform  culture  for  all  mankind,  never  universal  nobleness ;
but  strife  and  inequalities  of  condition  and  the  vital  strength
of  evil  will  always  continue.  And  we  do  not  think  this
prospect  desperate ;  for  it  does  not  seem  to  us  that  aU  history
is  so  bounded  by  the  limits  of  earthly  life  that  we  needs  must
see  the  dawn  upon  earth  of  its  brilliant  closing  scene,  that
golden  future  which  we  dream  of.  On  the  contrary,  as  long
as  men  are  bound  by  their  bodily  organization  to  the  material
wants  of  life,  their  perfection  and  happiness  must  also  be
bound  up  with  imperfection  and  iU,  just  as  inevitably  as  any
of  our  modes  of  progression  both  presuppose  and  at  the  same
time  overcome  external  friction.  Both  our  virtues  and  our
happiness  can  only  flourish  in  the  midst  of  an  active  conflict
with  wrong,  in  the  midst  of  the  self-denials  which  society
imposes  on  us,  and  amid  the  doubts  into  which  we  are
plunged  by  the  uncertainty  of  the  future  and  of  the  results  of
our  efforts. If  there  were  ever  to  come  a  future  in  which

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HISTORY.

301

every  stumbling-block  were  smoothed  away,  then,  indeed,
mankind  would  be  as  one  flock ;  but  then,  no  longer  like  men
but  like  a  flock  of  innocent  brutes  they  would  feed  on  the
good  things  provided  by  Nature,  with  the  same  unconscious
simplicity  as  they  did  at  the  beginning  of  that  long  course  of
civilisation,  the  results  of  which,  up  to  the  present  time,
wo  shall  now  briefly  consider,  as  a  sequel  to  the  review
we  have  already  taken  of  the  external  destinies  of  the  human
race.

BOOK YIII.

PROGRESS.

SOS

CHAPTEE I.

TRUTH AND SCIENCE.

Stages  of  Philosophic  Thought:  Mythologic  Fancy;  Cultured  Eeflection ;
Development  of  Greek  Thought ;  Science — Over-estimation  of  Logical
Forms  and  Confusion  of  them  with  Matter-of-Fact — Philosophic  Problems
of  Christian  Thought  —  Limitation  of  Thought  to  the  Elaboration  of
Experiences — The  Exact  Sciences — The  Principal  Standpoints  of  Philo-
sophy, and  its  Efforts  in  trying  to  reach  a  Knowledge  of  the  Nature  of
Things — Idealism  and  Realism.

§  1.  rriHOSE  various  embryon  impulses  from  the  develop-
JL ment  of  which  all  human  civilisation  has  grown
lip,  have  always  sprung  to  life  simultaneously  as  products  of
one  common  root,  the  unchanging  nature  of  mind. Different
periods  of  history  may  be  pointed  out  in  which  one  after  the
[other,  religion,  art, science,  law,  and social problems, have
become  for  the  first  time  so distinctly  present  to the  con-
sciousness of  mankind,  that  they  seem  to  have  been  then  first
[discovered  or  invented,  to  the  advantage  of  future  ages ;  but
!  even  in  the  very  beginning  of  civilisation  there  could  not  have
Been altogether absent any one  of  those  activities of  the
human  soul  which  later  became  more  clearly  differentiated  one
[from  another,  taking  separate  paths  to  various  ends. And  all
are  in  continual  mutual  action  as far  as  their  requirements
and  results  are  concerned ;  and  this  most  actively  in  just  those
times  of  dawning  civilisation  in  which  as  yet  none  of  them
have  found  either  cause  or  possibility  of  independent  further
development,  in  the  possession  of  the  wealth  of  some  special
department  and in the  peculiar mode of procedure made
necessary  by  the  nature  of  that  department.

So  if  we  try  to  survey  this  complicated  whole  of  human
civilisation  as  far  as  lies  within  the  scope  of  our  general
intention,  we  cannot  follow  any  one  of  the  stems  from  which
it  has  sprung  without  meeting  ramifications  by  which  each

VOL.  II.  u

306

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

communicates  with  the  rest.  Yet  still  in  the  history  of  the
development  of  the  whole  mind,  the  development  of  scientific
knowledge  takes  a  certain  specially  favoured  position.  What-
ever may  be  the  several  roots  from  which  spring  the  creative
impulses  of  art,  or  the  moral  convictions  of  religious  belief,
they  are  all,  as  regards  the  fulness  and  trustworthiness  of  their
development,  dependent  partly  upon  the  extent  to  which  this
knowledge  subordinates  reality  to  its  sovereign  influence,  and
partly  upon  the  clearness  with  which  each  has  come  to  com-
prehend itself,  its  tasks,  and  its  instruments.  To  scientific
knowledge  therefore  as  the  general  form  under  which  all
activities  of  the  mind  reciprocally  test  each  other,  reflect  upon
themselves,  and  bring  their  results  together  for  transmission,
the  beginning  of  the  present  considerations  may  be  devoted.
In  view  of  the  immensity  of  the  subject,  we  shall  only  briefly
refer  to  that  gradual  extension  of  cognitive  knowledge  which
with  every  fresh  conquest  both  furnishes  human  activity  with
new  aims  and  also  gives  a  different  colouring  to  our  whole
philosophy.  But  even  the  progressive  self-comprehension  of
scientific  knowledge,  and  the  development  of  a  definite  con-
ception of  truth  for  which  we  are  seeking,  and  enlightenment
concerning  the  intellectual  means  to  these  ends  which  are  at
our  command — even  these  points  we  shall  only  be  able  to  con-
sider with  a  one-sidedness  of  which  we  are  fully  conscious,
selecting  a  few  points  of  view  specially  suited  to  our  purpose.
Of  three  essentially  different  ways  of  looking  at  reality
which  the  awakening  consciousness  of  mankind  has  gradually
come  to  adopt,  we  find  the  earliest  in  that  mythologic  philo-
sophy to  which  at  the  very  beginning  of  this  work  our  attention
was  directed  by  more  restricted  considerations.  Intensifying
the  impressions  of  perception  so  as  to  influence  the  whole
mental  mood,  imagination — here  going  beyond  perception —
makes  to  the  reality  which  it  finds  those  additions  which  seem
to  be  demanded  by  the  vague  feeling  of  a  contradiction
between  that  reality  and  the  tacit  presuppositions  of  our
minds.  For  every  myth  which  gives  a  new  and  poetic
form  to  some  phsenomenon,  bears  witness  to  the  activity  of

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  307

human  cognition,  that  can  seldom  be  satisfied  with  direct  per-
ception because  the  content  of  this  but  seldom  harmonizes
with  those  unanalysed  demands  which  our  mind  brings  with  it
to  the  comprehension  of  reality,  whether  as  innate  endowment
or  as  the  rapidly  acquired  fruit  of  previous  experience.  But
mythologic  fancy  has  not  a  clear  consciousness  either  of  the
full  content  of  the  truth  which  it  thinks  it  must  recognise  in
phsenomena,  or  of  the  definite  contradictions  of  truth  v/hich  cause
mere  facts  to  seem  to  demand  some  mythical  and  explanatory
transformation.  The  soul  rejoices  in  the  enjoyment  of  its  own
activity,  and  is  without  suspicion  of  the  numerous  conditioning
causes  which  go  to  produce  its  happiness — a  happiness  which,
though  it  seems  to  arise  without  trouble  and  as  a  matter  of
course,  is  yet  a  result  laboriously  produced ; — it  is  accustomed
to  see  changes  of  the  external  world  arise  from  its  own
activity,  and  hence  as  yet  it  knows  no  truth  other  than  life,  and
no  problem  of  cognition  other  than  that  of  recognising  in  all  the
forms  and  events  of  Nature  an  energy  analogous  to  its  own.  It
seems  to  it  that  nothing  has  a  claim  to  exist  except  that  which,
if  not  itself  mental  energy,  may  yet  be  understood  as  the
action  of  some  mind  or  as  the  traces  left  by  some  such  action ;
only  those  qualities  and  events  seem  to  it  natural  which
have  sprung  from  the  activity  of  a  living  soul,  or  which
have  arisen  in  some  course  of  events  incidentally  set  going
by  spiritual  activity  intentionally  or  unintentionally.  It  is
true,  indeed,  that  the  unfamiliar  character  of  particular  natural
phsenomena  may  cause  the  attention  of  the  imagination  to  be
specially  directed  to  them,  but  that  which  incites  men  to  give
them  mythic  expression  is  to  be  found  not  so  much  in  the
particular  characteristics  which  constitute  their  unfamiliarity
as  in  the  fact  that  they  seem  to  appear  without  any  explana-
tory history,  which  by  connecting  them  with  spiritual  life
should  afford  a  justification  for  their  existence.  The  notion
of  an  unconditioned  factual  self-dependent  existence  remains
unaccepted ;  unrecognised  the  thought  of  a  nature  of  things
which,  independent  of  all  spiritual  life  and  preceding  it  as  oi
much  more  primary  necessity,  should  produce  the  succession  of

308  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEE  L

plisenomena  as  its  own  inherent  logical  consequence. Not  that
the  assumption  of  such  a  necessary  connection  of  things  has  not

(  constantly  afforded  secret  aid  to  mythology  in  the  combination  of
its  personifying  ideas.  For  in  fact  the  briefest  account  cannot
explain  any  striking  natural  phaenomenon  by  a  history  of  how
it  arose  without  assuming  that  the  connection,  transition,  and
succession  between  any  two  events  which  it  brings  together
are  to  be  comprehended  by  reference  to  an  order  of  events
which  is  of  universal  validity.  But  fancy  (whilst  in  all  its
flights  it  tacitly  relies  upon  that  necessary  connection  of  all
things  ujjon  which  also  ordinary  practical  life  must  depend
at  every  step)  altogether  overlooks  this  part  of  its  own  pro-
cedure, and  is  not  conscious  of  the  indispensable  help  which
this  nature  of  things  affords  in  giving  reality  to  imaginative
constructions ;  for  such  a  philosophy  anything  which  seems
full  of  meaning  and  significance  has  within  itself  all  necessary

I. guarantees  of  its  truth  and  reality ;  and  it  is  that  which  is

V  living,  or  produced  by  what  is  living,  that  is  pre-eminently  full
of  meaning.

If  this  way  of looking  at  the  world  were  something  that

i  merely  had  heen,  it  would  be  hardly  worth  this  renewed
mention ; but  the  same impulses  which led to  it at  the

I  beginning  of  civilisation  still  continue  to  influence  every
human  mind,  even  after  the  discovery  of  other  points  of  view^
In  all  ages  the  popular  imagination  explains  the  phaenomena
of  Nature  as  resulting  from  something  that  had  previously
occurred.  Since  this  or  that  happened,  the  bird  sings  such  a
song,  the  blossoms  of  such  a  plant  are  white  instead  of  red ;
since  something  else,  the  bean  has  been  slit  in  two  and  the
salamander  has  had  a  spotted  skin.  But  this  tendency  of
thought,  which  in  such  examples  pleases  us  as  poetic  licence
for  which  we  make  allowance,  has  a  much  stronger  hold  upon
us  in  other  ways.  There  comes  to  all  of  us  a  time  in  our  life
in  which  a  general  dissatisfaction  begins  to  overshadow  the
reality  which  we  had  previously  accepted  and  enjoyed  in  all
simplicity,  while  yet  a  hitherto  hidden  light  seems  to  shine
through the gloom. Innumerable particular perceptions

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  309

'  ^  which  we  have  not  specially  noted  have  filled  us  with  a
feeling  of  the  surpassing  reality  of  beauty  and  goodness  and
holiness ;  innumerable  others,  just  as  unanalysed,  have
produced  in  us  disconnected  impressions  of  the  confusion  and
uncertainty  and  evanescence  under  the  burden  of  which  all
reality  suffers.  And  now  this  world  of  perception  is  to  us  no
longer  the  world  of  truth,  but  a  mere  world  of  perplexed
phsenomena ;  but  we  are  able  to  look  through  it  to  another
and  better  world  of  real  and  ideal  existence,  to  which  the
enthusiasm  of  our  soul  would  fain  take  flight.  We  of  the
present  day,  however,  are  in  our  education  and  the  conditions
of  our  life  in  the  midst  of  the  results  of  a  labour  of  thought
that  has  lasted  for  centuries — results  which  surround  us  like
an  atmosphere  of  the  presence  of  which  we  are  not  conscious ;
and  we  are  thus  not  likely  to  be  carried  by  any  flight
of  such  enthusiasm  to  a  mythology  which  would  be  dispersed
and  dissipated  if  brought  into  contact  with  daily  experience,
with  which  it  is  in  contradiction.  But  still  we  find  ourselves
travelling  the  same  path  which  fancy  took  when  it  created
such  a  mythology,  in  our  youthful  attempts  to  transform  the
supposed  real  world  of  our  dreams  and  forebodings  into  a  shape
in  which  it  may  become  an  object  of  distinct  intuition.

Youth  strives  to  get  from  particulars  to  the  whole,  and  not
to  the  universal ;  it  seeks  more  earnestly  for  the  one  meaning
of  any  phaenomenon  than  for  the  numerous  conditions  of  its
realization  ;  and  it  would  always  much  sooner  discover  the
unity  of  the  thought  which  binds  together  the  disconnected
fragments  of  the  cosmic  course  as  living  members  of  a  beauti-
and  harmonious  whole,  than  inquire  after  the  unattractive
conditions,  upon  the  universal  validity  of  which  depends  the
possibility  of  all  beauty  and  of  all  connection  of  parts  into  a
whole.  Memory  will  tell  each  of  us  that  our  youthful  dreams
took  this  turn.  We  should  hardly  have  been  able  to  say  why
exactly  it  was  that  we  were  not  satisfied  with  what  reality
ofiered ;  still  it  was  the  case  that  reality  could  not  justify
itself  to  our  unanalysed  dissatisfaction,  and  still  less  was  it
comparable  with  the  indescribably  fair  content  of  the  dream

r

V

310

BOOK  VHL CHAPTEK  I.

\

which  hov-ired  before  us  in  indistinct  splendour.  And  then
led  away  by  the  splendour  of  this  dream  we  set  to  work  to,
as  it  were,  develop  afresh  from  it  the  whole  fulness  of
reality ;  for  what  else  could  the  unrest  be  which  filled  us
and  urged  our  imagination  to  artistic  production,  than  that
very  creative  principle  itself  which  is  embodied  in  this  world
of  phsenomena  ?  And  what  we  attempted  seemed  to  succeed ;
as  note  can  be  joined  to  note  to  frame  a  melody,  so  one  form
gave  rise  to  another,  and  one  thought  to  another,  and  seemed
to  interpret  to  us  the  secret  meaning  and  the  inner  connection
of  phsenomena.  With  the  most  unsuspecting  confidingness
we  put  our  trust  in  the  poetic  justice  which  was  the  law  of
our  imaginative  constructions,  and  accepted  it  in  lieu  of  that
proof  of  their  truth  which  we  lacked ;  deaf  to  every  reminder
of  universal  laws  (which  without  being  themselves  the  highest,
seemed  to  limit  that  which  was  highest),  we  passed  by  with
utter  disregard  those  actual  facts  which  were  in  contradiction
to  our  dreams.  Thus  we  shared  the  conviction  of  mythology
that  that  alone  which  is  worthy  truly  exists  ;  only  that  while
mythology  sought  the  worth  of  all  existence  in  the  joy  of
some  animate  life  which  it  conceived  of  as  similar  to  our  own,
the  present  more  advanced  development  of  thought  led  us  to
other  ways — less  obvious,  though  perhaps  not  more  true — of
embodying  the  ideal,  which  we  reverenced  as  exercising  un-
conditioned power  over  all  reality  and  as  the  secret  source  of
its  evolutionary  energy.  And  just  as  mythology  forced  the
analogies  of  human  spirit-life  upon  natural  objects  the  furthest
removed  from  any  likeness  to  us,  so  we  have  imposed  upon
the  nature  of  things  the  meaning  and  connection  which  our
mind  in  moods  of  dream  and  misgiving  demands  for  the
satisfaction  of  its  unanalysed  needs.  And  in  this  lies  the
strength  as  well  as  the  weakness  of  these  attempts,  which  are
not  peculiar  to  youth  but  are  frequently  repeated  by  science,
chough  in  the  more  modest  forms  which  an  increased
experience  of  life  forces  them  to  assume.  Their  strength,  I
say ;  for  having  sprung  from  a  powerful  agitation  of  the  soul,
which  intensifies  all  the  deepest  longings  of  the  mind  so  that

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  311

they  become  a  living  mood,  these  efforts  are  real  experiences
in  quite  another  sense  than  the  thoughts  which  calm  reflection
attaches  to  phsenomena  at  a  later  stage,  with  greater  reserve,
and  as  it  were  more  on  the  surface ;  this  living  intuition
may  divine  many  a  truth,  many  a  relation  between  things
which  more  deliberate  thought  would  discover  either  laboriously
or  not  at  all.  For  in  truth  it  must  be  even  as  we  were
taught  by  the  feeling  which  animated  our  dreams — it  must  be
that  that  which  is  worthy  is  that  which  truly  is,  and  there
will  come  a  time  when  the  soul  which  has  learnt  to  know
itself  will  be  able  to  return  to  this  re-acknowledgment  of  its  ^
primal  faith.  But  it  will  have  to  overcome  the  weakness
which  led  its  early  efforts  astray.  Instead  of  being  as  it  were  )
mastered  by  the  feeling,  it  must  seek  to  become  master  of  it ;  )
it  must  not  let  the  seeds  of  truth  spring  up  from  the  soil  of  a
passionate  mood,  in  a  series  of  poetical  developments,  along
with  seeds  of  the  most  casual  errors  and  of  "idols  of  the
cave,"  but  must  learn  to  follow  the  course  of  things  along  the
path  which  it  really  takes.

\  2.  Helped  by  the  thought  of  long  ages  of  past  time,  a  rich
inherited  stock  upon  which  we  can  draw,  it  is  easy  for  us  to
give  up  an  inadequate  standpoint — a  standpoint,  however,  after
reaching  which  historical  development  of  human  consciousness
had  to  traverse  a  long  distance  before  attaining  a  more  tenable
position. The  mythological  beginning,  both  in  history  and  in i
the  life  of  the  individual,  is  followed  by  a  period  of  active  and V
inquisitive  reflection;  meditation,  no  longer  supplementing  the -j
world  by  poetic  inventions,  gives  itself  to  a  consideration  of
the course of  events, and  gradually  works out  to  greater
clearness  the  idea  of  a  nature  of  things,  with  regard  to  which /
the proper  attitude of the human mind  is one  of  docile
recognition. In  mythological philosophy it was only the
notion  of  Destiny which had any  reference  to  a  necessity
regulating  the  connection  of  things ;  but  this  view  of  necessity
was  not  such  as  to  be  favourable  to  the  development  of  know-
ledge. For  Destiny,  wholly  devoid  of  cause  or  reason,  did  not \
bind  the  course  of  events  to  general  laws,  which  ad  universally J

#

312  BOOK  Vni. CHAPTER  L

valid  truth  would  rule  in  unnumbered  similar  cases,  but  it
connected  together  particular  events  by  a  link  which,  because
destitute  of  law,  must  be  also  incomprehensible.  Not  know-
ledge but  prophetic  inspiration,  not  thought  which  from  a|
basis  of  reason  calculates  what  must  happen  but  intuition
that  becomes  aware  by  signs  of  some  approaching  event,  was  the
faculty  to  which  this  necessity  revealed  itself.  Gradually  ati
first,  by  steps  which  cannot  be  historically  traced  but  may  be
conjectured,  a  fitful  awe  of  incomprehensible  fate  passes  into
the  clearer  thought  of  a  necessity  which  as  being  the  nature
of  the  thing  is  no  longer  regarded  as  joining  things  together
fortuitously,  but  as  joining,  according  to  general  points  of  view,
things  which  have  a  connection  with  each  other.  This  trans-
formation of  view,  with  which  for  the  first  time  self-existent
truth  as  an  object  of  scientific  knowledge  is  brought  face  to
face  with  intelligent  cognition  as  the  instrument  of  its  com-
prehension, was  no  doubt  due  to  an  impulse  originating  in  the
fact  that  life  itself  urges  men  on  the  one  hand  to  an  industrious
-y  cultivation  of  Nature,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  the  establish-
ment of  social  relations.  Both  were  impossible  without  the
practical  application  of  general  rules  of  judgment,  of  which,
later  on,  dawning  reflection  had  to  become  conscious  as  forming
the  principles  of  its  procedure.  And  these  rules  denied  equally
both  the  unregulated  supremacy  of  a  blind  fate,  and  the  self-
sufficiency,  the  power  of  self-realization,  which  had  been
attributed  to  everything  that  had  intrinsic  worth.

In  contrast  to  the  temper  of  youth,  this  new  conception  of
the  world  commonly  appears  in  the  development  of  the
individual  as  the  culture  which  results  from  life  and  the
experience  of  life,  and  there  is  between  the  two  phases  an
undeclared  hostility.  The  idealism  of  youth,  with  its  confidence
of  being  able  to  bring  all  reality  into  subjection  to  its  fairest
dreams,  is  broken  in  upon  by  the  realism  of  riper  age  which
gives  calm  recognition  even  to  what  is  unimportant  when  it
occurs  as  a  fact,  as  one  of  the  unalterable  fashions  of  the
world's  course.  Tor  there  comes  a  time  in  our  lives  when  the
heart  grows weary of  fiction,  and hungers  and thirsts for

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.

313

reality ;  there  is  an  indescribable  joy  in  the  consciousness  of
having  gained  insight  into  a  part  of  that  which  not  only  stirs
our  longing,  but  surrounds  and  upholds  us  with  the  incom-
prehensible charm  of  reality,  and  the  mind  of  the  observer  is
conscious  that  such  a  feeling  raises  it  infinitely  above  the
pleasing  but  unstable  moods  which  once  filled  its  being.  To
the  reproach  of  having  become  unreceptive  to  the  ideals  of
youth,  it  rejoins  that  it  has  now  learnt  instead  the  virtue  of
renunciation,  and  does  not  forcibly  transfer  to  the  world  the
results  of  subjective  intuition,  but  is  content  to  learn  with  awe
and  humility,  from  a  comparison  of  experiences,  as  much  of
the  nature  of  things  as  they  themselves  reveal.  And  now
indeed  the  individual  can  hardly  expect  that  in  his  limited
sphere  of  experience  the  secrets  of  the  universe  should  be
fully  unveiled  to  him.  Fixing  his  attention  at  different  points
of  experience,  he  will  have  to  content  himself  with  discovering
the  proximate  causes  of  some  special  groups  of  phaenomena
without  reaching  the  ultimate  principles  upon  which  their
whole  variety  depends.  This  fragmentary  method  charac-
terizes the  teaching  of  life  throughout.  Many  trains  of
thought  starting  from  particular  natural  processes,  energetically
follow  out  the  connected  course  of  these  processes  for  a  time,
but  come  to  an  end  when  they  have  found  the  axiomata  media,
beyond  which  abstraction  from  perception  cannot  proceed.
Various  maxims  arise  from  the  consideration  of  conduct,  often
bringing  together  and  answering  cognate  questions  with  great
acuteness  of  discernment,  but  unconcerned  both  about  first
principles  and  about  their  own  contradictions  of  one  another.
But  even  in  the  very  want  of  connection  and  unity  which
marks  this  living  development  there  is  a  charm  which  fills  it
with  a  sense  of  wellbeing — the  charm  of  half  revelation.  If
to  our  view  the  topmost  summits  of  reality  are  veiled  in  mist,
they  appear  as  a  whole  only  so  much  the  vaster  and  more
infinite  ;  even  the  contradictions  to  which  we  are  led  by  a
consideration  of  its  diflferent  parts  strengthen  the  sense  of
submissive  security  with  which  we  consider,  and  merge  our-
selves in,  a  world  so  vast  as  to  be  able  to  present  to  us  such

^

314

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

different  aspects  on  the  different  sides  which  it  turns  towards
us.  Eeverence  for  the  inherent  truth  of  anything  is  greater
in  this  mood  than  it  was  in  the  enthusiasm  of  youth,  and  he'
who  has  experienced  it  will  find  that  the  suggestive  poetry  of
this  prose  is  more  profound  and  more  full  of  content  than  the
sparkling  foam  of  youthful  dithyrambs.

S  3.  In  the  history  of  mankind  we  can  trace  this  evolution
of  consciousness  nowhere  but  in  the  gradual  development  of
Greek  science. It  seems that  Greek  philosophy,  following
this path of a living development having  many starting-
points,  was  occupied  (until  it  reached  its  culminating  point
in Plato  and  Aristotle)  in  trying  to  arouse everywhere a
consciousness  of  the  existence  of  a  truth,  and  of  a  nature  of
things,  which  constituted  possible  objects  of  human  cognition.
Making  guesses  and  using  the  analogies  of  perception  with
more  or  less  penetration,  it  made  repeated  attempts  to  obtain
a  provisional  formula  for  the  content  of  truth  before  it  turned
its  attention  to consciousness  itself,  and  inquiring  into  the
nature  and  instruments  of  human  cognition,  passed  from  the
fragmentary  activity  of  living  development  to the  coherent
method  of  scientific  investigation. For the rapid survey
which  it  is  our  present  object  to  make,  its  particular  doctrines
are  indifferent ;  what  is  important  is  the  general  condition  of
human  culture  and  insight  which  its  procedure  reveals.

Poetry  had  early  succeeded  in  expressing  the  results  of
life's  experiences  in  striking  pictures  and  in  general  reflec-
tions. And  when  the  first  Greek  sages  appeared  enunciating
gnomes — such  as  that  which  blames  all  excess,  or  that  which
connects  every  suretyship  with  some  fatality,  or  that  which
exhorts  men  to  self-examination — what  they  said  seemed
to  contain  much  less  than  was  already  familiar  to  the  poetic
consciousness  of  the  nation,  and  thus  they  appeared  to  be
behind  the  civilisation  of  their  own  time.  But  if  this  had
really  been  the  case,  they  would  not  have  received  the
admiration  which  has  connected  their  names  with  the  dawn
of  philosophy.  The  first  awakening  of  the  scientific  spirit
always  causes  surprise, not  by its  unusual wealth  of  new

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  315

matter,  but  by  its  special  mode  of  regarding  that  wliicb  is Y'
already  known. Compared  with  the  wealth  of  thought  which
the  national  mind  possesses  in  its  poesy  and  employs  in  life,
the  infancy  of  science  always  appears  inexplicably  meagre  ;  >(

it  is  only  a  high  degree  of  perfection  which  enables  it
(by  means  of  discoveries  which  it  alone  can  then  make)
to  be  supreme  among  the  mental  activities  of  life.  The
rich  variety  of  Homeric  characters  and  the  soul-painting  of
Sophoclean  art  had  caused  the  Greeks  to  see  clearly  and
sympathize  warmly  with  all  the  depths  of  spiritual  life,  long
before  its  dawning  speculation  could  answer  (even  with  the
most  inadequate  and  superficial  conjectures)  the  question  \ '
what  the  soul  is  in  itself.  But  such  special  instances  are
unnecessary.  Language  itself  shows  in  its  structure  and  use
the  great  chasm  that  exists  between  the  wealth  of  spontaneous
living  thought  and  the  poverty  of  reflection  which  strives  to
analyse  its  own  procedure.  Without  the  trouble  of  seeking,
and  with  the  certainty  of  a  somnambulist,  the  most  uncul-
tured mind  finds  and  uses  forms  of  expression  which  language
has  invented  for  him,  indicating  the  finest  shades  of  difference
in  the  relations  of  things,  of  events,  and  of  thoughts;  but
even  with  the  help  of  the  most  complete  apparatus  of  words
of  "  second  intention,"  he  would  be  wholly  incapable  of
rendering  to  himself  or  others  any  precise  account  of  the
content  of  the  thoughts  which  he  expresses  (as  easily  as  he
breathes)  in  forms  of  language  the  use  of  which  has  become
a  living  habit  to  him.  From  this  mere  thinking  life  to  self-
conscious  thought  a  decisive  step  was  taken  by  those  first
sages.  When  they  expressed  their  familiar  and  to  some
extent  unimportant  truths  as  simple  sayings  detached  from
poetical  surroundings,  constantly  repeating  them  with  the  same
emphatic  simplicity,  they  gave  to  their  content  a  new  form
and  with  this  a  new  value.  They  roused  the  attention  of  the
mind  to  the  fact  that  the  general  maxims  with  which  so
often  before  it  had  as  it  were  toyed  unsuspectingly  are  not
mere  breathing-places  for  the  soul  when  roused  to  excitement
by  a  consideration  of  events ;  but  that  they  are  in  all  serious-

316

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

ness  real  laws  of  the  cosmic  order,  fragments  of  that  self-
existent  truth,  that  nature  of  things,  to  the  recognition  of
which  the  fully  awakened  consciousness  had  to  apply  itself.
Hence  these  sayings,  although  founded  on  particular  cases  of
experience  and  referring  to  them  in  their  phrasing,  plainly
had  a  general  symbolic  meaning ;  they  showed  that  in  other
departments  as  well — everywhere  in  fact — similar  conditions
governed  the  connection  of  events.

The  study  of  Xature  passed  through  the  same  stages  as
the  study  of  human  life.  When  we  see  all  phsenomena
derived  sometimes  from  water,  sometimes  from  air,  now  from
fire,  and  then  from  the  confusion  of  chaos,  or  by  determination
of  the  indeterminate,  we  are  surprised  at  the  poverty  of  this
conception  of  Nature  when  compared  with  mythology,  which
knew  all  this  and  much  more,  and  which  reproduced  the
characteristics  of  phsenomena  with  much  more  penetrating
subtlety.  We  may  think  it  strange  that  when  Anaxagoras
declared  vov<;  to  be  the  principle  of  the  universe,  without
being  able  to  apply  this  thought  to  any  particulars  of  per-
ception, he  should  have  seemed  to  his  contemporaries  to  be
announcing  something  great  and  new;  for  not  only  had
mythology  always  had  the  same  notion,  but  it  had  also
been  able  to  show,  after  its  own  fashion,  how  vov'i  works  in
Nature  in  individual  cases.  But  only  after  its  own  fashion ;
it  is  easily  seen  that  notwithstanding  all  the  poverty  of  its
content  the  dawning  philosophy  was  new  because  of  the
different  mode  in  which  it  apprehended  things.  Whilst
fancy  hitherto  had  merely  gone  on  to  dream  after  dream
of  phsenomenal  beauty,  reflection  now  became  ever  more
and  more  conscious  of  that  universal  necessity  which,  as  the
nature  of  things,  gives  order,  tension,  and  stability  to  the
whole  world  of  phaenomena ;  and  the  unskilful  essays  which
followed  one  another  in  rapid  succession  helped  to  form  ever
clearer  and  clearer  notions  of  primal  matter,  primal  force,  and
universal  modes  of  motion  from  which  individual  creatures
and  events  proceeded,  as  results  brought  about  after  various
fashions. But  there  still  went  on  working  the  youthfulness

TKUTH  AND  SCIENCE.

317

of  thought,  which  hankers  after  intuitive  perception  and  is
led  away  by  circumstantial  histories  of  the  origin  of  things
from  investigating  the  final  conditions  of  their  reality.  In
order  to  indicate  that  content  of  the  really  existent  which  it
strove  to  grasp,  the  mind  turned  at  first  to  remarkable
pheenomena  of  internal  and  external  experience  ;  and  brought
into  prominence  as  the  essential  principles  of  the  universe
those  comparatively  permanent  and  universal  phsenomena  by
which,  as  Matter  or  Cause,  the  rest  were  in  various  ways  con-
ditioned. From  such  notions  as  that  the  really  existent  is
water  or  air,  more  practised  reflection  has  in  course  of  time
risen  to  more  abstract  determination ;  the  Infinite,  the  One,
Measure,  Order,  gradually  took  the  place  of  the  more  sensuous
early  notions.  But  all  these  changing  dicta  belonged,  as  far
as  form  went,  to  the  "  contingent  aspects  "  of  growing  develop-
ment. Of  course  each  of  these  principles  was  chosen  because
it  seemed  to  possess  the  qualities  which  the  prejudices  of
natural  thought  require  in  that  which  is  to  be  accepted
as  the  supreme  principle.  But  these  principles  were  not
analysed,  nor  comprehended  in  all  their  fulness,  and  one  or
another  guided  individual  thought  according  as  it  seemed
from  some  accidental  cause  to  be  more  clear  to  consciousness ;
the  particular  thought  which  corresponded  to  his  own  obvious
requirement  was  one-sidedly  regarded  by  each  as  the  whole
content  of  the  supreme  principle,  and  he  thus  came  to  regard
the  whole  principle  as  being  embodied  in  the  phaenomenon
which  rendered  that  thought  most  strikingly  perceptible  to
the  senses.

In  this  process  of  reflection  there  were  traces  of  recent
emergence  from  mythical  philosophy  ;  from  which  also  another
heritage  had  descended  to  it — that  reverence  for  symmetrical
and  rhythmical  forms  of  occurrence  in  the  order  of  events
which  would  very  naturally  arise  when  the  mind,  though  it  no
longer  sought  in  the  world  a  direct  copy  of  its  own  spiritual  life
and  its  own  joy  in  existence,  yet  strove  to  find  (as  it  were  in
compensation  for  this)  in  the  independent  nature  of  things
which  it  began  to  recognise,  a  perfection  peculiar  to  that  nature.

318

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

In  the  real  existence  which  men  sought  for,  the  ideas  of  all
goodness  and  beauty  and  holiness  were  so  blended  with  the
idea  of  reality,  that  the  aesthetic  relations  of  form  indicated  by
the  former  expressions,  seemed  to  belong  also  to  the  essential
nature  of  reality  itself.  This  notion  of  the  necessary  symmetry
of  the  really  existent  (which  no  doubt  contains  a  kernel  of
truth  the  more  exact  determination  of  which  is  worth  a
searching  investigation)  is  an  assumption  which  has  influ-
enced the  philosophic  conceptions  of  aU  periods,  and  it  has
not  lost  its  power  in  modern  times  ;  the  early  ages  of  antiquity
were  wholly  swayed  by  it.  Long  after  people  had  begun  to
speak  of  the  laws  of  things,  these  laws  were  not  understood
as  general  rules  of  the  behaviour  of  phsenomena  which  did
not  in  themselves  require  any  definite  form  of  phaenomenal
occurrence,  this  being  determined  by  the  peculiarities  of
the  special  cases  to  which  they  were  applied  ;  they  were,
on  the  contrary,  regarded  as  definite,  symmetrically  ordered,
harmonious  rhythms  in  the  occurrence  of  phaenomena —
rhythms  intuitively  perceptible  which,  since  they  embrace
the  universe,  determine  the  direction  of  every  individual's
movement.  For  a  long  time  the  tendency  of  reflection
was  to  class  the  fates  of  individuals  under  great  existential
habits  of  the  universe ;  the  attempt  to  explain  the  final
form  of  cosmic  order  as  resulting  from  the  reciprocal  action
of  individual  circumstances,  was  made  later.  At  the  stage
to  which  we  are  now  referring,  the  thought  of  the  whole
which  with  predetermined  form  and  development  precedes
the  parts,  quite  outweighed  the  thought  of  general  laws,
which  first  enable  the  parts  to  form  a  whole  or  the  whole
to  be  built  up  of  parts.

§  4.  Tradition  connects  with  the  name  of  Socrates  the
record  of  the  step  by  which  living  reflection  was  first  led  into
the  methodical  path  of  scientific  cognition.  Earlier  specula-
tion had  imagined  that  it  could  only  discover  that  nature  of
things  which  is  the  source  of  all  concrete  objects  by  a
process  of  g«essing,  which  had  to  penetrate  through  all  kinds
of  phaenomenal  obscuration,  in  order  that,  far  behind  them,  it

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  319

might  find  the  being  itself. The  objects  of  Nature  that  sur-
round us,  and  the  events  that  take  place  among  them,  were
then  connected  with  the  real being,  not  indeed  by  something
that  had happened,  but  by  something  that  was  continually
happening — whether  this  was  conceived  under  the  form  of  an
element  that,  passing  through  many  intermediate  stages,  had
transformed  itself  into  the  multiplicity  of  individual  things,  or
as  an  order  and  a  rhythm  that  can  only  be  fully  perceived
in  the  great  whole,  and  that  seems  to  vanish  in  parts  and
individuals  of  that  whole,  through  inexplicable  contradictory
fluctuations. Now for  the first  time  it became  clear to
men's  minds  that  the  nature  of  things  is  present  everywhere,
that  its  connection  with  the  existing  world  is  not  a  connection
dependent  on  history,  but  is  of  the  essence  of  the  world — that '^
this  nature  consists  not  in  any  one  element,  not  in  any  one l
definite form  of  existence,  but  in  a  Truth  which,  ever  the /
same  in small things  and  in great,  joins  all  parts  of  the
world,  and  is the  very  nerve  of  connection  between  them.
It  was  from  this  third  standpoint  that  cognising  knowledge
first  became  possible  ;  for  now  for  the  first  time  there  was  a
cause  and  basis  for  ever-present  necessities  of  thought,  instead
of  the  merely  historical  cosmic  facts  which  formerly  men  had
been  able  to  guess,  to  describe,  or  to  observe  without  com-
prehending them. Yet  it  was  very  long  before  the  fruits  of
this  new  standpoint  became  to  any  extent  matured,  and  the
injurious  effects,  which  the  deficiencies  of  the  first  historical
harvest  in  this  field  left  to  posterity,  have  not  even  yet  all
disappeared.

That  the  objects  of  observation  and  the  various  images
which  fill  our  thoughts  may  be  co-ordinated  under  general
class  concepts,  and  that  the  content  of  these  concepts  is
eternally  the  same,  and  is  what  it  is,  freed  from  all  the
mutation  and  change  to  which  its  particular  manifestations
in  actual  fact  are  subject — these  two  apparently  insignificant  I
discoveries  mark  the  beginning  of  the  new  period.  These  '
two  insignificant  discoveries,  I  say;  for  they  on]j-  revealed
what  the  living  course  of  human  thought  had  always  pos-

320  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEB  L

sessed ;  and  yet  they  both  had  very  important  results.  For
long  as  it  was  since  language  had  begun  to  indicate  in  words
the  general  concepts  of  things  (as  indeed  it  was  inevitable
that  it  should),  consciousness  had  still  continued  unaware  of
what  it  was  about;  and  even  for  the  contemporaries  of
-Socrates  it  was  hard  to  see  that  the  convenience  of  using  a
-common  name  for  different  things  arose  from  their  depend-
ence upon  something  which  was  common  to  them  all,  and  in
all  self-identical.  And  inevitably  as  both  reflection  and
practice  had  tacitly  assumed  the  unchanging  self- identity
of  every  notion  and  every  determination  of  things,  yet  the
theoretic  consideration  of  reality  had  led  to  confused  ideas  of
an  eternal  flux  of  all  things,  in  which  the  mutability  of
reality  had  come  to  be  regarded  as  involving  also  the  muta-
bility of  truth,  and  every  fixed  standard  of  fluctuating
particulars  was  lost  sight  of.  As  opposed  to  this  incapacity
and  that  confusion,  the  conscious  emphasizing  of  universally
valid  truth  (narrow  as  the  view  of  its  content  might  as  yet
be)  appeared  as  the  first  basis  on  which  a  firm  position  might
be  taken  up,  and  from  which  further  advances  might  proceed.
After  men  had  long  been  striving  to  grasp  the  highest  real
existence  at  one  bound,  as  it  were,  there  began  the  logical
period  of  thought,  in  which  it  became  possible  for  men  to
attempt  first  of  all  to  make  clear  what  must  necessarily  be
required  in  that  which  was  the  goal  of  their  desires  ;  and  then,
and  only  then,  to  ask  whether  that  which  satisfies  these
requirements  is  to  be  found,  and  if  so,  where  ?

This  newly-gained  insight  set  two  tasks  for  further  develop-
ment to  accomplish :  first,  that  of  becoming  conscious  of  the
forms  and  principles  of  procedure  which  are  indispensable  for
observation  and  for  the  connection  of  our  thoughts  in  order
to  reach  that  which  the  thinking  mind  should  accept  as
truth ;  the  foundations  of  this  logical  science  were  laid  in  a
masterly  manner  by  antiquity,  but  the  science  was  left  far  from
complete.  Just  as  unavoidable  was  the  second  problem —
the  inquiry  as  to  the  worth  which  all  these  laws  of  thought
(inevitable  for  our  intelligence)  possess  as  regards  the  compre-

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  321

heiision  of  truth  and  acquaintance  with  things  themselves  ;
and  neither  in  ancient  times,  nor  in  the  long  course  of
development  which  science  has  since  then  passed  through,
has  this  investigation  reached  a  solution  of  manifold  doubts,
which  in  their  most  general  form  we  must  now  consider,  as
far  as  they  can  be  made  intelligible  without  systematic  scien-
tific investigation.

If  in  common  life  we  seek  by  a  comparison  of  apparent
signs,  by  the  use  of  numerous  analogies,  and  by  inferring
back  from  results  to  their  causes,  to  ascertain  some  secret,
hidden,  or  forgotten  fact,  we  do  not  doubt  that  all  the  indirect
courses  thus  taken  by  our  thought  are  means  which  are  only
necessary  for  us  who  seek ;  necessary  because  of  the  position
we  are  placed  in  as  regards  the  object  of  our  search;  we  do
not  suppose  that  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself  which  we  are
desirous  of  explaining  has  gone  through  a  similar  series  of
steps  in  the  course  of  its  development.  The  course  which
our  thought  has  taken  is  therefore  regarded  by  us  as  merely
our  subjective  mode  of  procedure,  and  as  the  result  of  this  we
hope  indeed  to  arrive  finally  at  a  knowledge  of  the  nature  of
our  object ;  but  we  do  not  imagine  that  our  labour,  while  it
is  in  progress,  is  an  exact  reflection  step  for  step  of  that  inner
process  of  development  by  which  the  object  was  formed,  or  of
the  inner  coherence  by  which  its  actual  existence  is  main-
tained. This  notion  of  the  relation  of  thought  to  its  object,
which  appears  unsought  in  such  cases,  contains  in  combina-
tion two  assertions  which  are  sometimes  separated  into  two
opposed  views.  Every  useful  instrument  must  fulfil  two
requirements  ;  in  the  first  place  it  must  be  suited  to  the  hand
that  is  to  use  it,  and  in  the  second  place  it  must  be  suited  to
the  nature  of  the  object  to  which  it  is  to  be  applied.  Just  in
the  same  way  the  processes  of  thought  must  be  determined
both  by  the  nature  of  the  thinking  subject,  and  also  by  the
nature  of  its  objects.  But  the  peculiarities  imposed  upon  it
by  these  several  conditions  cannot  be  quite  the  same.

The  intelligence  of  finite  beings  is  not  placed  at  the  centre
of  the  universe,  and  cannot  grasp  at  once  the  whole  of  reality

VOL.  II.  X

322

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

in  the  true  and  natural  relations  of  dependence  which  suhsist
between  all  its  parts ;  placed  amid  phsenomena  it  finds  itself
face  to  face  rather  with  the  derivative  properties  of  things
than  with  their  nature,  and  much  oftener  with  results  than
causes ;  it  is  forced  to  become  acquainted  successively  with
the  parts  of  a  coexistent  whole.  Thus  there  arise  in  our
thought  an  immense  number  of  necessary  activities  of  dis-
crimination, combination,  and  relation,  which  are  all  merely
preparatory  formal  means  of  knowledge,  and  to  which  we  can
by  no  means  ascribe  real  validity  in  the  sense  that  their
succession  presents  a  reflection,  exact  or  resembling,  of  the
internal  processes  and  reciprocal  action  upon  which  the  reality
and  development  of  objects  themselves  depend.  But  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  just  as  plain  that  when  these  laws  of  thought
are  capable  of  leading  to  a  knowledge  of  things,  they  cannot
be  mere  subjective  forms  in  the  equally  one-sided  sense  that
they  arise  from  the  organization  of  our  mind  as  innate  modes
of  its  activity  without  having  any  original  relation  to  the
nature  of  the  objects  with  which  they  are  destined  to  deal
On  the  contrary,  thought  and  existence  certainly  seem  to  be
BO  connected  as  that  they  both  follow  the  same  supreme  laws ;
which  laws  are,  as  regards  existence,  laws  of  the  being  and
becoming  of  all  things  and  events,  and  as  regards  thought,
laws  of  a  truth  which  must  be  taken  account  of  in  every
connection  of  ideas.  All  reality  is  connected  according  to
these  laws  in  such  a  thoroughgoing  fashion,  and  with  such
unbroken  logical  consistency,  that  our  thought  may  at  its  own
choice  use  any  mesh  in  the  network  as  its  point  of  departure,
and  proceed  therefrom  in  any  direction  it  will ;  and  as  long  as
on  its  part  it  makes  those  laws  the  rules  of  its  progress,  it
will  always  be  sure  to  arrive  at  any  other  point  of  reality
which  it  seeks,  however  much  the  direction  and  the  windings
of  its  own  motion  between  the  two  points  differ  from  the
real  connections  by  which  reality  itself  connects  one  of  its
divisions  with  another  or  causes  one  to  proceed  from  another.
The  calculation  of  the  peculiar  properties  of  a  plane  figure  by
means  of  a  diagram  may  serve  as  an  illustration  of  this. To

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  323

help  our  demonstration  we  draw  lines  in  the  figure,  and  the
larger  the  number  of  equally  useful  constructions  among  which
we  can  choose,  the  less  can  we  regard  any  of  them  as  essential
parts  of  the  figure.  We  attain  the  correct  conclusion  by  a
concatenation  of  propositions  which  does  not  in  the  least  follow
any  real  process  of  construction  in  the  object;  but  so  in-
exhaustible are  the  possibilities  of  connection  in  any  geo-
metrical object,  that  our  thought,  setting  out  from  any  selected
point,  may  take  the  most  various  ways  of  covering  the  object
with  a  network  of  relations,  and  can  always  rest  assured  that
at  every  halting-place  in  its  circuitous  course  it  will  find  some
essential  relation,  and  that  at  the  end  of  the  whole  methodical
procedure  it  will  infallibly  reach  the  truth  for  which  it  was
seeking.

But  this  relation  of  thought  to  its  objects  is  clear  to  us  only

so  long  as  we  can  keep  in  view  the  complicated  whole  of  such

considerations,  in  the  order  in  which  we  used  them  in  our

demonstration; for  there  arises  the appearance of  quite  a

different  state  of  things  if  we  go  back  to  the  separate  elements

of  thought  from  the  combination  of  which  that  whole  has

grown  up,  that is, to  the forms  of the  idea,  the  concept,

the  judgment,  the  syllogism. It  will  seem  to  us  as  though

a  complex  train  of  reasoning  can  only  take  an  arbitrary  course

on  the  whole  (arbitrary,  that  is,  within  wide  limits),  because

it  directly  expresses  and  realizes  in  these  its  component  parts

those  laws  which  thought  has  in  common  with  existence ;  and

it  will  seem  that  the  circuitous  course  of  our  thought  can

^coincide finally  with  the  nature  of  the  thing  only  because

[those  component  parts  harmonize  with  it ;  hence  allowing  only

[of  such  modes  of  combination  as  belong  to  the  logical  con-

'sistency  of  this  nature  of  the  thing,  however  much  freedom

there  may  be  in  other  respects. Therefore  when  our  thought

combines  individual  ideas  into  one  whole,  when  it  integrates

[many  similar  ideas to one  general concept,  joins concepts

!to  make  judgments,  and  judgments  to make  syllogisms,  it

will  easily  believe  that  in  these  processes  it  is  copying  the

very  inner  relations  of  its  object;  and  each  of  these  logical

324

BOOK  Vlir. CHAPTER  I.

-^

forms  will,  on  account  of  the  mutual  relations  into  wliich  it
brings  the  component  parts  of  the  train  of  reasoning,  he
regarded  by  thought  as  a  reflection  of  some  element  of  the
relationship  which  exists  between  the  constituent  parts  of  the
object.

I  reserve  for  the  present  the  proof  of  the  illusiveness  of
this  semblance ;  if  for  the  moment  we  assume  its  decep-
tiveness,  the  injurious  consequences  in  which  it  involves
us  are  clear.  For  whenever  we  consider  the  reciprocal
relations  of  those  parts  of  ideas  which  we  have  combined  into
one  whole,  or  the  process  by  which,  dropping  or  adding
characteristics,  we  transform  one  idea  into  another,  we  shall
be  inclined  to  believe  that  we  are  thereby  enabled  to  under-
stand not  only  the  structure  of  our  idea,  but  also  the
inner  articulation  of  the  object  ideated,  not  only  the
procedure  of  our  own  thought,  but  also  the  course  of  the
facts  which  actually  occur,  as  the  object  comes  into  existence
and  develops.  This  confusion  between  clearing  up  our  con-
cepts and  analysing  the  corresponding  objects  is  an  error  of
reflection  which  is  very  natural,  and  recurs  in  the  most  varied
forms;  and  it  may  be  allowed  to  occupy  a  certain  phase
in  which,  when  men's  attention  has  been  fiist  called  to  the
presence  in  our  mind  of  a  reign  of  law  to  which  all  truth
must  conform,  they  are  very  easily  led  to  over-estimate  a  dis-
covery so  important.  If  we  say  that  the  knowledge  of  things
belongs  to  Metaphysics,  and  that  the  doctrine  of  the  forms
of  thought  to  be  used  in  knowledge  belongs  to  Logic,  then  we
may  say  that  antiquity  has  very  generally  erred  in  thinking
that  it  could  answer  metaphysical  questions  by  logical
analyses  of  ideas.  And  in  this  lies  the  cause  of  the  unfruit-
fulness  which  strikes  us  when  we  look  to  antiquity  for  any
furtherance  of  knowledge  as  regards  facts — an  unfruitfulness
which  we  find  side  by  side  with  a  splendid  exhibition  of
intellectual  strength.  Being  quite  unable  in  this  hasty  survey
to  give  any  account  of  the  latter,  we  must  content  ourselves
with  indicating  some  of  the  by-ways  into  which  later  times
have  been  misled  through  the  influence  of  antiquity.

b

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  325

Plato's  doctrine  of  Ideas  was  the  first  attempt  to  grasp  the
nature  of  the  thing  in  general  concepts — a  grand  attempt
which,  though  unsuccessful,  yet  exercised  an  influence  for
long  ages  to  come.  There  were  strong  inducements  of  two
kinds  to  make  such  an  attempt.  In  the  first  place,  observa-
tion of  living  creatures  has  in  all  times  given  rise  to  the
thought  that  nothing  but  the  living  generic  concept  can  be
the  combining  force  which  in  every  individual  unites  pro-
perties and  vicissitudes  into  one  whole  of  orderly  development,
causing  in  each  the  realization  of  the  same  form  of  life,
notwithstanding  the  transforming  influences  of  varying  an(J
casual  external  conditions.  But  again  Plato's  doctrine  of
Ideas,  as  opposed  to  the  sophistry  which  was  analysing  away
all  sense  of  duty,  rendered  splendid  service  by  attempting  (in
obedience  to  the  second  and  equally  strong  motive)  to  point
out  that  the  worth  of  human  actions  is  not  temporarily
determined  by  arbitrary  institutions  of  local  prevalence  or
changing  taste,  but  that  it  depends  on  universal  immutable
moral  Ideas  of  an  absolutely  good  and  just  and  beautiful,
and  only  exists  in  proportion  as  these  Ideas  which  are  always
self-identical  are  reflected  in  the  various  and  changing
forms  of  action.  In  these  two  cases  the  question  is  of
phaenomena  and  events  which  we  can  easily  imagine  to  be  the
work  or  aim  of  reality  ;  we  find  no  difficulty  in  understanding
the  generic  concept  of  living  creatures  as  a  type  which  the
cosmic  order  seeks  to  realize  in  innumerable  copies ;  still  more
are  we  inclined  to  do  homage  to  the  other  conviction  (to
which  enthusiastic  expression  has  so  often  been  given) — the
conviction  that  universal  original  types  of  the  Good  and  the
Just  and  the  Beautiful,  are  to  be  conceived  as  the  exalted
patterns  which  our  actions  have  to  imitate.  So  that  here
general  concepts  seemed  to  contain  the  essence  of  the  thing,

I  because  this  very  essence  consisted  in  the  universality  of  an
ideal which was intended to be realized  in  innumerable
particular  cases.
But  it  is  not  all  the  objects  of  reflection  of  which  we  can
frame  universal  concepts  that  favour  this  way  of  looking  at

g26  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

them ;  so  that  if  we  disregard  the  fact  that  in  the  instances
sited  the  nature  of  the  content  ennobles  the  form  of  the  con-
cept, and  look  at  this  form  as  indicating  universally  the
essential  nature  of  things,  then  in  consistency  we  must  go
further  than  we  would.  That  every  particular  thing  which  is
beautiful  and  good  and  just,  is  beautiful,  good,  and  just  only
through  participation  in  eternal  Ideas  of  Beauty  in  itself,  Good
in  itself,  and  Justice  in  itself,  was  a  notion  which  could  inspire
Plato  with  enthusiasm  ;  but  that  a  table  is  only  a  table  and
that  dirt  is  only  dirt  through  participation  in  the  eternal  Idea
of  the  Table  or  of  Dirt  was  a  difficulty  which  Plato  himself
encountered  but  did  not  remove  ;  these  concepts  of  common-
place realities  which  from  a  logical  point  of  view  are  just  as
legitimate  concepts  as  any  others,  could  not  well  be  reckoned
as  imperishable  original  types  in  that  world  of  Ideas  of  which
the  phaenomenal  world  is  but  a  dim  copy.  These,  however,
were  just  the  cases  which  early  directed  attention  to  the  fa  ;t
that  the  realm  of  thoughts  and  concepts  with  the  whole
ordered  system  of  its  internal  connections  is  not  a  reflex  of
the  realm  of  existence,  but  bears  to  it  that  different  relation
which  we  referred  to  above.  Our  own  voluntary  actions
adapt  the  materials  of  Nature  to  our  ends  in  many  ways,  and
thus  among  other  things  produce  the  table,  of  which  there  was
no  original  type  among  the  integrating  constituents  of  universal
order;  but  everything  in  the  world  is  so  connected  according
to  law  and  rule,  that  of  these  products  of  art  with  which  we
enrich  reality  there  may  be  just  such  concepts  as  of  the
original  constituents  of  reality,  and  general  logical  laws  are  no
less  applicable  to  these  concepts  than  to  the  Ideas.  And
further,  the  course  of  our  thought  arbitrarily  compares  together
things  which  are  quite  unaffected  by  the  comparison,  or  brings
them  into  relations  which  are  quite  unessential  to  them,  and
thus  produces  the  concept  of  dirt,  which  certainly  does  not
express  the  nature  of  anything ;  and  yet  such  a  notion  is  a
help  to  thought  which  we  are  justified  in  using;  for  as  long
as  we  use  it  with  reference  to  those  considerations  to  the
arbitrary  prominence  of  which  it  owes  its  existence,  all  the

1

TFvUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  327

laws  that  thought  prescribes  to  concepts  hold  of  it,  and  their
application  leads  to  correct  conclusions.

Between  truths  which are  valid and  things which exist  ^

Greek  philosophy always made very  inadequately  the  dis-
tinction which  our  language  marks  plainly  enough  by  these
two expressions ;  valid truth  always  seemed to it  to  be  a v
particular  department  of  existence. And  it  is  with  this  very  f  •%

distinction  that  we  are  here  concerned.  It  is  upon  the  fact
that  the  same  supreme  truths  hold  of  the  ultimate  bases  of
both  thought  and  existence  that  the  general  possibility  of
their  mutual  relation  depends ;  but  the  relation  does  not
consist  in  this,  that  a  fixed  number  of  concepts  as  existing  are
to  us  things,  and  as  thought  are  the  ideas  of  things  ;  on  the
contrary,  our  concepts  may  be  increased  indefinitely  without  j

any  addition  to  the  sum  of  existence.  And  further,  setting  out
from  innumerable  arbitrarily  chosen  standpoints,  we  may
build  up  the  same  whole  by  constructions  of  particular  ideas,
varying  according  to  the  variety  of  these  standpoints ;  and
thus  there  may  be  many  definitions  which  define  the  same
object  with  equal  accuracy  and  exhaustiveness.  None  of
these  definitions  is  the  nature  of  the  object,  though  each  is
valid  as  to  it,  because  there  is  no  object  of  which  the  nature
can  be  conceived  by  means  of  an  Idea  that  is  isolated,  and
unconnected  with  all  others,  and  characterized  only  by  eternal
self-identity  ;  but  each  object  has  its  nature  and  its  truth
only  in  as  far  as  there  are  general  laws  of  reciprocal  behaviour  i\/
which  are  valid  as  to  it  and  all  others,  and  according  to
which  it  not  only  is  distinguished  from  others  as  a  coherent
whole,  excluding  all  others  from  itself,  but  also  reveals  itself
and  enters  into  connection  with  others.  Thanks  to  these
laws,  thought  can  form  innumerable  new  concepts,  since  under
their  guidance  it  makes  arbitrary  lines  of  communication
between  things,  and  is  conscious  of  each  movement  which  it
thus  accomplishes  as  the  idea  of  a  certain  connection  between
the  things.  Of  these  new  concepts,  Plato's  great  successor  i
Aristotle  would  perhaps  have  said  that  they  were  indeed
potential  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  but  in  point  of  fact  were

328

BOOK  VIII. CIIArTER  L

first  made  actual  by  the  subjective  procedure  of  thought.  A
consideration  of  this  relation  would  have  led  in  the  first  place
to  a  clearer  distinction  between  that  aristocracy  of  Ideas  on
the  one  hand  which  (as  the  generic  concepts  of  living
creatures  and  of  determinations  of  moral  value)  are  among
the  eternal  types  that  are  original  constituents  of  the  cosmic
order,  and  on  the  other  hand  that  proletariat  of  concepts  that
increases  indefinitely  the  more  curiously  thought  plays  with
the  infinite  possibilities  of  comparison  and  connection  among
things.  But  this  distinction  (as  to  the  first  part  of  which  we
reserve  some  important  doubts)  would  have  been  crowded  out
by  a  second,  which  admonishes  us  to  consider  not  only  the
form  of  the  concept,  but  also  the  form  of  thought  of  the
judgment,  and  to  search  for  the  truths — expressible  only  in
this  form — without  which  no  intercourse  between  existing
things  and  no  cosmic  order  is  conceivable,  one  of  the  things
which  we  owe  to  this  form  of  judgment  being  the  possibility
of  valid  concepts.

§  5.  This  world  of  concepts  not  only  could  not  be  brought
into  adequate  connection  with  reality,  but  further,  it  did  not
attain  the  internal  articulation  necessary  for  a  typal  world  of
Ideas.  It  remained  a  collection  of  motionless  Ideas  between
which  nothing  takes  place  in  the  present,  and  nothing  is  fore-
shadowed as  about  to  take  place  in  the  future,  and  which  only
cohere  among  themselves  by  means  of  logical  connections  of
subordination,  and  compatibility  or  incompatibility.  All  the
transitions  from  one  to  another  which  thought  finds  or  estab-
lishes between  the  objects  of  perception  are  but  misused  by
having  their  meaning  likewise  petrified  into  eternal  and  ever-
lasting Ideas,  which  take  their  places  calmly  beside  the  rest
without  thinking  that  their  business  was  not  to  be  links,
members  of  the  series,  but  only  copulas  between  other  members.
Thus  the  eternal  self-identical  Idea  of  identity  stands  beside
the  equally  eternal  and  self-identical  Idea  of  unlikeness,  and
along  with  them  the  eternally  motionless  Idea  of  movement  ;
none  of  them  makes  an  effort  to  exist  after  a  fashion  suited  to
its  content,  as  a  relation  of  predication  between  two  other

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  32S

points,  or  as  the  movement  of  sometliing  in  some  direction.
Aristotle  was  sensible  of  these  deficiencies;  a  taste  for  the
observation  of  Nature,  and  systematic  occupation  with  the
forms  of  thought,  drew  his  attention  to  the  numerous  relations
which  connect  the  individual  elements  of  reality  into  one  living
whole,  and  to  the  ways  in  which  these  relations  are  expressed
by  our  thought.  He  knew  that  Ideas  are  not  existent  but
valid,  that  a  truth  is  expressed  not  by  a  concept  but  by  a
proposition  ;  he  searched  language  for  all  those  expressions
by  which  we  indicate  the  manifold  relations  between  things
which  we  find  or  assume ;  he  frequently  distinguishes  between
the  dependence  upon  one  another  of  the  different  parts  of  a
complex  thought  and  the  order  in  which  the  elements  of  the
corresponding  reality  condition  one  another.  But  his  practical
philosophizing  no  more  avoided  confusion  between  the  logical
analysis  of  thought  and  the  investigation  of  things  with
reference  to  the  form  of  judgment,  than  Plato  did  with
reference  to  the  concept.

In  the  judgment  we  combine  two  ideas  by  means  of  a
third ;  we  attribute  to  an  object  a  property  or  a  condition  or
the  manifestation  of  an  activity.  As  long  as  these  predicates
have  once  for  all  been  received  as  unchanging  and  belonging
to  the  subject  in  its  integrity,  the  judgment  expresses  no
event,  but  only  analyses  our  idea  of  an  unvarying  content ;
and  as  long  as  this  is  the  case,  it  may  escape  our  notice
that  there  is  need  to  ask  specially  what  exactly  there  is  in
the  object  itself  correspondent  to  that  which  (with  obviously
figurative  expressions)  we  call  its  possession  of  some  property,
its  sufferance  of  some  condition,  or  its  manifestation  of  some
activity.  If  on  the  contrary  we  attribute  to  a  subject
assumption  or  loss  or  alteration  of  predicates — that  is,  when
we  describe  an  event — we  have  a  more  unmistakeable  interest
in  knowing  what  it  is  that  actually  happens  to  this  subject
— the  very  object  itself — to  justify  our  imitative  thought  in
now  conceiving  of  it  under  a  second  idea  which  has  arisen
from  a  previous  idea  of  the  same  object  by  the  addition  of
new  or  the  dropping  out  of  old  marks. It  would  be  difficult

330  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

to  show  that  the  Aristotelian  philosophy  generally  satisfies  this
requirement.  Much  occupied  with  the  concepts  of  change
and  of  becoming,  it  yet  in  analysing  them  makes  no  inquiry
as  to  what  it  is  that  justifies  us  in  their  application.  We  are
told  indeed  that  in  change,  properties  always  pass  into  their
opposites  ;  for  a  brief  moment  we  indulge  the  hope  that  this
remark  indicates  at  least  the  path  and  direction  which  are
taken  when  there  is  alteration,  thus  revealing  a  truth  which,
since  it  could  not  have  been  the  product  of  mere  thought,
must  have  been  directly  gathered  from  the  nature  of  the
thing ;  but  it  speedily  appears  that  nothing  more  was  meant
than  that  naturally  nothing  can  become  what  it  already  is,  but
only  something  that  it  previously  was  not.  Thus  this  some-
what inadequate  information  merely  expresses  the  result  of  an
analysis  of  our  idea  of  becoming,  announcing  that  in  it  two
different  individual  ideas  succeed  one  another  in  such  a  way
that  when  the  one  comes  the  other  goes.  But  what  is  it  that
in  existence  and  reality  so  corresponds  to  this  course  of  out
ideas  that  we  are  able  to  believe  that  the  ideas  are  a  copy  of
the  reality  ?  We  do  not  know ;  the  transformations  which
our  idea  of  an  object  undergoes  when  the  object  changes,  are,
in  the  last  resort,  regarded  as  if  the  alterations  of  the  object
itself  on  which  they  depend  were  quite  similar  to  them,  and
as  if  a  knowledge  of  them  could  take  the  place  of  a  knowledge
of  the  objective  alterations.  When  a  white  object  becomes
black  then  in  our  representation,  in  the  mosaic  of  marks  which
constituted  its  mental  counterpart,  we,  as  it  were,  erase  the
mark  of  white  colour,  and  replace  it  by  one  of  black ;  if  we
then  ask  what  has  happened  to  the  object  itself,  in  virtue  of
which  we  have  been  able  by  this  alteration  to  make  our  idea
correspond  to  it  again,  it  seems  that  the  process  was  essentially
just  the  same;  the  white  departed  from  it,  and  the  black  came
instead.  That  properties  inhere  in  and  are  connected  with  the
thing  quite  otherwise  than  the  marks  (or  parts  of  presented
ideas)  are  related  to  the  concept,  is  a  fact  of  which  now  and
then  a  theoretic  suspicion  has  been  expressed,  but  this  has  had
no  important  effect  upon  practical  philosophic  investigation.

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  331

The  celebrated  concepts  of  Bvvafit<i  and  ivipyeia,  M^liich  as
Potentiality  and  Actuality  are  still  favourites  of  philosophical
dilettanteism,  bring  these  barren  considerations  systematically
to  the  investigation  of  all  objects.  If  a  thing  passes  from  one
state  into  another,  the  conditioning  causes  of  the  later  state
are  contained  never  wholly  but  always  partially  in  the  earlier
state ;  if  they  had  been  contained  wholly  in  it,  then  the
earlier  state  could  never  have  been,  but  the  later  would  have
existed  from  all  eternity  without  any  need  of  coming  into
existence ;  since  they  were  only  contained  in  it  partially,  there
was  something  in  the  earlier  state  which  contributed  to  the
later  without  actually  bringing  it  into  existence.  If  we  com-
pare the  two,  the  ingenuity  of  thought  cannot  fail  to  set  down
the  possibility  that  the  second  state  may  at  some  future  time
arise,  as  an  actujil  mark  of  the  first  state.  The  nature  of  such
an  abstract  concept  as  that  of  possibility,  which  makes  it  very
difficult  to  handle,  here  conceals  the  barrenness  of  this  pro-
cedure which  in  other  and  similar  instances  is  very  obvious.
In  any  case  of  a  &  that  was  greater  than  c  and  less  than  a,
these  properties  of  relation  were  regarded  by  the  ancients  as
characteristics  originally  existing  in  h,  and  they  greatly
wondered  how  it  was  that  b  could  be  at  the  same  time  a
greater  and  a  smaller.  In  the  view  of  modern  thought,  these
same  properties  of  relation  belong  to  h  only  when  it  is  com-
pared with  a  and  c,  being  then  new  expressions  for  its  really
unchanging  magnitude.  It  is  after  an  equally  shallow  fashion
that  the  possibility  or  SvvafiK  of  the  later  state  is  contained
in  the  first.  The  real  task  which  cognition  has  to  accomplish
in  comparing  the  two  is  to  indicate  definitely  what  the  earlier
state  was ;  and  to  prove  that  being  what  it  was  it  formed  a
part  of  that  circle  of  conditions,  which  (subsequently  com-
pleted by  the  accession  of  other  conditions)  helped  to  form
the  whole  cause  of  the  second  state,  and  hence  could  subse-
quently produce  the  realization  of  that  state,  which  earlier  in
the  absence  of  the  complementary  conditions  it  could  not  do.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  wholly  useless,  and  merely  produces
delusion as  to  the  real  problems of knowledge,  to  assume

332

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

generally  for  every  reality  merely  a  previous  corresponding
possibility  without  inquiring  what  are  the  actually  existing
facts  upon  which  the  possibility  of  the  subsequent  change
depends.

It  may  be  objected  that  Zvvafii<i  and  ipepjeva  or  iurekixeia
are  not  merely  the  bare  concepts  of  possibility  and  actuality
but  intuitions  of  something  more  profound.  It  is  true  that
as  Plato's  Ideas  sometimes  denoted  all  concepts  merely  as  such,
and  sometimes  denoted  a  selection  of  what  should  be  typical
concepts,  even  so  that  more  general  signification  of  the  tech-
nical terms  above  referred  to  which  follows  from  Aristotle's
own  illustrations,  is  limited  to  certain  actually  favoured  cases.
For  instance,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  our  regarding  the
state  of  rest  of  a  system  of  elements  as  its  ivTeXixeia,  and  the
motions  leading  to  this  as  its  hvvafii^  in  which  the  rest  is
already  present  but  not  realized.  But  this  is  not  Aristotle's
meaning.  In  his  view,  the  mind  that  can  penetrate  to
essential  assumptions  concerning  the  worth  of  things,  regards
activity  as  the  sole  and  only  reality  which  ought  to  exist,
inactivity  merely  as  movement  which  is  as  yet  undeveloped
Thus  with  the  concept  of  Bvvafj,i<;  as  a  possibility  which  in
itself  may  be  a  capacity,  not  only  of  action,  but  also  of  inac-
tion, there  is  blended  the  concept  of  force,  which  is  no  longer
a  mere  possibility,  but  an  impulse  to  realization,  a  living
faculty.  But  this  transformation  of  the  concept  makes  it  more
seductive  indeed,  yet  not  more  fruitful ;  it  only  beguiles  us
the  more  into  being  satisfied  with  explanations  which  are  no
explanations.  The  soul  is  in  this  sense  the  eVreXe^j^eta  of  the
organic  body.  If  we  interpret  this  to  mean  that  everything
which  is  found  in  the  body  as  an  actual  relation  of  the
elements  out  of  which  it  is  constructed,  is  used,  assimilated
or  enjoyed  by  the  soul  according  to  its  worth,  significance,
and  possible  results,  partly  in  conscious  perception,  partly  in
feelings  of  pleasure  and  the  reverse,  partly  in  free  activity —
then  we  have  a  proposition  which  sets  forth  the  problem  of
psychology,  but  does  not  furnish  that  explanation  of  it  which
we  desire. For  that  the  facts  are  thus  we  all  know  without

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  333

the  help  ol  philosophy ;  the  work  of  investigation  "begins  just
where  this  formula  ends ;  what  we  want  to  know  is,  by  what
concatenation  of  definite  and  assignable  actions  and  reactions
that  fact  of  the  translation  of  organic  outwardness  into  spiritual
inwardness  comes  to  pass.  In  a  similar  fashion  the  logical
analysis  and  comparison  of  our  concepts  are  but  too  often
proffered  as  real  explanations  of  their  content.

The  ancients  did  not  to  any  extent  worth  mentioning  develop
theories  which,  by  the  subordination  of  varying  circumstances,
present  a  circle  of  numerous  phsenomena  as  the  results  of
general  laws  or  as  deviations  from  a  type.  Hence  the  con-
fusion between  logic  and  metaphysics,  which  we  have  already
noticed  in  treating  of  concept  and  judgment,  meets  us  again
later  in  full  force  when  we  come  to  syllogism  and  the  sys-
tematic connection  of  objects.  For  undoubtedly  errors  are
committed  in  presenting  the  formulae  resulting  from  the
investigation  and  disentanglement  of  a  series  of  events  as  if
they  were  the  very  nerves  of  inner  connection  between  the
events  themselves — in  frequently  accepting  that  orderly  classi-
fication which  facilitates  the  survey  of  given  reality,  as  though
it  contained  the  essential  meaning  of  the  things  themselves —
in  often  regarding  the  insertion  of  some  definition  in  its  proper
place  in  any  system  as  being  in  itself  an  addition  to  real
knowledge,  even  when  it  adds  nothing  whatever  to  the  pre-
viously known  qualities  of  the  object  defined.  Moreover,  the
meshwork  of  the  draught-net  of  method  is  often  taken,  with-
out more  ado,  to  be  the  very  articulation  of  the  objects  which
it  encloses ;  and  not  a  few  philosophical  works  take  the
grouping  of  problems  for  their  solution.

This  kind  of  over-estimation  of  logical  forms  is  perhaps  not
the  least  injurious,  but  it  is  the  most  excusable.  He  who
takes  the  connections  between  ideas  in  concept  and  judgment
for  real  relations  between  the  things  presented  in  idea,  regards
as  a  process  in  things  that  which  by  its  very  nature  can  never
take  place  in  them  after  such  a  fashion,  and  is  wholly  mis-
taken. But  he  who  regards  the  connection  of  an  order  which
is  systematic  or  regulated  by  law,  and  which  he  can  transfer

V

334:

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  I.

to  given  facts  as  the  really  conditioning  principle  of  the  objec-
tive connection  of  things,  only  over-estimates  the  significance
of  a  proposition  which  is  valid  both  as  to  form  and  content.
For  as  to  form,  no  one  doubts  that  the  form  of  law  and
systematic  order  is  just  as  binding  and  valid  for  the  inner
coherence  of  reality  as  for  the  connection  of  our  ideas;  the
only  question,  therefore,  is  whether  the  content  of  the  laws  and
order  assumed  by  us  have  such  claims  to  objective  value.

Now,  supposing  that  a  is  the  principle — inaccessible  to  us
— by  which  the  phsenomena  w,  n,  o  are  really  conditioned,  but
that  &  is  a  circumstance  accessible  to  our  observation,  which
as  necessary  consequence  or  in  some  other  way  is  inseparably
connected  with  a,  we  may  succeed  in  representing  m,  n,  o  as
dependent  upon  &,  and  in  doing  so  continue  to  be  in  harmony
with  existing  facts.  The  law  expressing  this  dependence
would  be  perfectly  valid,  although  in  a  higher  sense  it  would
not  be  true,  for  it  would  derive  the  phaenomena,  not  from  their
really  supreme  principle,  but  as  it  were  from  a  vassal  thereof.
It  is,  however,  such  validity  as  the  above,  and  not  such  truth,
that  we  ascribe  in  a  general  way  to  the  laws  and  orderly
classifications  of  science ;  in  practice  they  merely  lead  from
some  point  of  departure  in  facts  to  some  conclusion  in  which
there  is  a  return  to  facts.  It  is  of  little  consequence  whether
any  one  thinks  that  the  course  of  reality  itself  between  those
points  of  departure  and  conclusion  is  also  determined  by  the
law,  or  that  the  real  inner  connection  of  the  manifold  is
expressed  in  systems.  Since  one  soon  sees  that  many  laws
may  be  expressed  differently  from  different  points  of  view,
and  that  the  same  group  of  phsenomena  may  be  arranged
with  equal  significance  in  various  classifications,  this  preten-
sion is  easily  given  up.  None  of  these  forms  and  laws  are
held  to  be  expressive  of  the  true  order  of  things  to  the  exclu-
sion of  all  the  other  forms  and  laws,  but  reality  is  understood
as  a  whole  that  from  very  different  points  of  view  may  be
represented  in  connections  ever  different  but  ever  orderly
The  traveller  who  goes  round  about  a  mountain,  if  he  goes
repeatedly  backwards  and  forwards  and  up  and  down,  sees  a

TEUTH  AKD  SCIENCE.  335

number  of  different  profiles  of  the  mountain  recur  in  an  order
which  might  have  been  foretold.  None  of  them  is  the  true
form  of  the  mountain,  but  all  are  real  projections  of  it.  But
the  true  figure  itself,  as  well  as  all  these  apparent  ones,
would  consist  in  some  relation  of  all  its  parts  to  one  another.
This  true  figure,  the  actual  inner  relation  of  things,  may  per-  ^jf
haps  also  be  discovered,  and  then,  of  course,  this  true  objective
law  of  reality  would  be  preferred  to  all  derivative  and  merely
partial  though  valid  expressions  of  it;  meanwhile  we  comfort
ourselves  with  the  thought  that  the  nature  of  truth  is  such  as
to  make  possible  innumerable  apparent  manifestations  of  itself,
and  a  valid  movement  of  knowledge  from  one  to  the  other.

§  6.  It  was  mythology  that  first  in  the  exercise  of  unre- %
strained  fancy  added  a  world  of  real  existence  to  the  world  of i  ^
ph.ienomena which had become  enigmatical ; with greater /
moderation the reflection of subsequent wider civilisation x
opined  that  there was a  nature  of  things  to the  heart  of I
which  we  cannot  penetrate  by  poetic  insight,  but  only  touch
here  and  there  at the  surface by means of a thoughtful
comparison of  facts ; finally  dawning  science  tried to  sub-
stitute for  the  uncertain  groping  of  these  attempts,  methodical
investigation,  which  was  guided  by  a  clear  consciousness  of
the  conditions  under  which  our  thought  can  contain  truth.
From  this position,  which  had  been  won  once  for  all,  and
could never be given up again, human knowledge was
hindered  from  making  further  advances  by  deficient  insight
into  its  own  relation  to  that  nature  of  things  for  which  it
sought,  and  it attributed  to  the movements of thought a
significance  with  regard  to  facts  which  they  did  not  possess.
It  was  only  at  a  comparatively  late  date  that  this  error  was
clearly  perceived  and  avoided — at  least  in  some  departments
of  human knowledge ; the old mistakes have never  been
universally remedied,  and there have  never been  wanting
acute minds which, deceived by the venerable rust of
antiquity which  has  accumulated upon  them,  have beheld
in those very errors  the  golden grains of a truth to bo
religiously  transmitted  and  further  developed.

336

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

Even  the  ancients  made  tlie  question  whether  we  are  capable
of  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  the  subject  of  wide-reaching  and
oft-repeated  reflection.  But  they  ended  in  scepticism  and  not  j
in  advance  towards  a  positive  conclusion ;  and  even  in  the
arguments  with  which  they  contest  or  doubt  that  capacity  of
knowing  the  truth,  they  frequently  betray  afresh  the  habit  of
refi'arding  the  logical  connections  between  our  concepts  of  things
as  real  states  of  the  things  themselves,  thus  creating  anew
difficulties  which  would  be  avoided  if  the  assumptions  made
were  better  grounded.  A  renewed  and  very  powerful  impulse
towards  the  prosecution  of  these  investigations  arose  in  the
world  of  Christian  thought,  when  Christianity  had  to  effect  a
reconciliation  between  the  content  of  its  own  practical  faith
and  secular  scientific  thought  —  doing  this  partly  in  the
struggle  with  heathen  civilisation,  and  partly  as  a  natural
result  of  men's  inextinguishable  impulse  towards  knowledge.

The  contrast  of  the  world  of  appearance  to  that  of  real
existence  had  among  the  ancients  arisen  chiefly  from  theoretic
considerations  ;  and  it  was  in  fact  only  the  really  existent
about  which  human  knowledge  (which  looked  for  nothing  in
real  existence  but  its  own  concepts)  ascribed  to  itself  clear  and
exact  cognition.  The  world  of  phsenomena  was  consigned  to
fluctuating  and  uncertain  opinion.  Christianity  developed
this  contrast  almost  entirely  from  moral  points  of  view ;  not
as  unknown,  not  as  empty  form,  no^  as  an  object  of  search,
but  known  through  revelation  and  experienced  by  faith,  the
world  of  real  existence  appeared  in  consciousness,  opposed  in
its  holiness  and  majesty  to  the  created  universe.  Yet  known
and  revealed  only  in  this  its  glory,  not  in  the  secrets  of  its
construction;  being  capable  of  having  its  value  experienced
in  feeling,  but  hard  to  be  grasped  by  the  thought  which
strives  to  ascertain  the  conditions  upon  which  this  value  de-
I'ends.  And  yet  the  call  to  do  this  was  more  pressing  than
ever;  the  true  world  was  no  longer  a  mere  holiday  thought
for  leisure  time,  which  people  might  entertain  or  not  as  they
liked ;  and  the  more  tasks  it  set  for  men  in  this  life,  the  more
indispensable  was  it  to  investigate  its  connection  with  the

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  337

everyday  world  of  appearance,  which  could  not  henceforth  be
neglected  as  simply  an  object  of  varying  opinion,  but  had  to
be  examined  into  as  the  soul's  sphere  of  work  on  earth.
This  new  seriousness  distinguishes  the  investigations  of  the
Christian  era ;  notwithstanding  the  increasing  clumsiness  of
thought,  they  seem,  as  compared  with  the  many  -  sided
dexterity  or  antiquity,  like  some  weighty  business  of  life
beside  some  sport  of  chivalry  by  which  men's  leisure  was
adorned.  Almost  wholly  occupied  with  the  most  difficult
problem  of  thought — the  question  concerning  the  connection
between  the  world  of  worth  and  the  world  of  fact — this  long-
continued  and  mighty  effort  of  the  human  mind  was  yet
unable  to  attain  its  object ;  and  it  was  prevented  by  this
predominant  direction  of  its  endeavours  from  providing  the
convictions  which  it  developed  concerning  the  relation  of
thought  to  existence  with  any  positive  results.

Conscience  and  revelation  held  up  to  consciousness  ideals
of  action  and  of  existence,  the  truth  and  eternal  validity  of
which  seemed  the  one  and  only  fixed  point  in  all  the
fluctuations  of  human  reason;  but  the  attempt  to  bring  the  con-
tent of  these  unchangeable  requirements  into  harmony  with  the
forms  of  thought  according  to  which  we  are  forced  to  appre-
hend reality  and  its  coherence,  revealed  the  impossibility  of
getting  near  to  that  immutable  goal  by  the  help  of  such
resources.  A  number  of  dogmas  arose  in  which  the  deep
conviction  of  the  worth  and  truth  of  an  intuition  which
is  rather  sought  after  than  experienced,  struggles  with  the
incapacity  of  thought  to  express  without  contradiction  that
which  men  had  in  their  minds  and  were  seeking  after.  But
the  burden  of  this  confusion  was  laid  not  upon  existence,  but
upon  cognition ;  assertions  of  the  absolute  unknowableness
of  God,  and  exaggerated  utterances  which  seek  for  the  marks
of  truth  in  that  which  is  repugnant  to  common  sense,  concur
in  bearing  witness  to  men's  conviction  that  the  worth  and  the
essential  truth  of  the  higher  world  are  indeed  revealed  in
faith,  but  that  the  laws  of  connection  obtaining  both  within
it  and  between  it  and  material  existence  remain  unattainable

VOL.  iL  y

338

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

by  science.  In  the  more  restricted  question  concerning
the  validity  of  general  concepts  which  was  debated  between
the  dijBferent  Nominalist  and  Eealist  sects,  these  investiga-
tions are  brought  into  closer  connection  with  the  questions
which  we  have  been  hitherto  considering.  Do  the  general
concepts  of  kinds  and  genera  exist  previously  to  the  individual
things,  as  etern£il  types  according  to  which  the  things  were
formed  by  God,  or  did  they  arise  in  our  minds  after  the
things  themselves  were  in  existence  ?  and  are  they  empty
names  which  signify  nothing,  or  do  they,  without  containing
the  essence  of  things  as  their  types,  yet  exist  in  things  after
such  a  fashion  that  they  can  spring  up  in  us  as  valid
modes  of  apprehending  things  ?  This  last  opinion  met  with
acceptance  as  well  as  the  others ;  but  the  germ  of  truth
which  it  contained  remained  undeveloped.  On  the  one  hand,
y  traditional  custom  directed  attention  almost  exclusively  to
the  concept,  the  most  unproductive  of  the  forms  of  thought ;
diverting  it  from  the  consideration  of  the  judgment  and  the
syllogism,  which  by  their  mode  of  connecting  their  content
f  would  have  made  more  clear  the  distinction  between  the
:  validity  of  a  truth  and  its  identity  with  the  object ;  and  on
the  other  hand,  the  investigation  of  the  world  of  outer  experi-
ence had  not  advanced  far  enough  to  assist  the  more  abstract
-^^  course  of  thought  with  the  illustrative  force  of  analogy.  It
was  not  until  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages  that  there  arose
this  new  kind  of  science,  which,  worthy  as  it  was  and  destined
to  give  a  new  form  to  all  investigation,  remained  for  a  long
time  restricted  to  the  domain  of  Nature.  Kespect  for  ex-
perience, the  idea  of  universal  law,  and  the  renunciation
^  involved  in  accepting  the  exact  investigation  of  the  connec-
\  tions  between  phaenomena  by  way  of  compensation  for  that
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  things  which  men  despaired  of
attaining,  are  the  characteristics  that  distinguish  the  spirit  of
the  new  movement.
^  Experience,  indeed,  could  never  have  been  a  matter  of
indifference  to  men  who  have  to  live  their  lives  and  find  their
way  in  the  world  of  facts,  and  the  little-regarded  wisdom  of

1

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  339

common  life had  even  in  ancient  times  gained  much  from
experience ;  but  the  more  exalted  wisdom  that  was  transmitted
in  the  schools,  in  its  attempts  to  build  up  a  copy  of  the  world
was  not  careful  to  test  by  observation  and  experiment  the
validity  possessed  by  its  assumptions  in  reference  to  existing
reality;  it  was  enough  if  these  could  justify  themselves  to
thought,  and the conclusion from the  conceivableness  of  a ^
proposition  to  its  validity  in  the  system  of  the  universe  was ^^
generally  drawn  without  any  hesitation. Thus  men  did  indeed
recognise  that  things  had  a  nature  of  their  own,  and  that  it
was  this  which  ought  to  constitute  the  object  of  knowledge ; ;
but  the  content  of  this  nature  was  determined  in  a  one-sided
fashion  by  reference  merely  to  subjective  thought  and  men's '
sense of probability. There  was  unquestionably  a  deeper
reverence  for  truth  in  the  newly  attained  consciousness  that, (
for  the  demonstration  of  any  thought  its  conceivability  needs j
to  be  supplemented  by  proof  of  its  efficacy  and validity  in
the  world  of  fact. Men  Jbegan  to  feel  the  charm  of  reality.
The  ancients  had  been  puffed  up  wuth  the  strange  notion  that
they  had  rendered  some  service  by  developing  a  world  of  pure ^
thought  that  needed  no  connection  with  experience ;  for  this
idea  there  came  to  be  substituted  the  conviction  that  knowledge
had  only  been  reached  to  the  extent  to  which  those  connec-
tions of  things  apprehended  in  thought  could  be  confirmed  by
fruitful  agreement  with  the  results  of  observation.

In  this  the  new  investigation  of  Nature  was  entirely  of  one <
mind  with  religious  reflection ;  it  took  its  stand  upon  external I
sensible  experience,  just  as  religious  reflection  did  upon  the )
inner  experience  of  the  life  of  faith ;  that  which  the  eye  saw
or  the  heart  felt  could  not  be  taken  away  or  diminished  by
any  subtlety  of  thought ;  on  the  contrary,  the  results  of  all

I  scientific  labour  must  be in agreement with these already
established  and  immoveable  positions. But  the  investigation <
of  Nature  had  an  advantage  over  the  examination  of  the  inner ^
life; there  were presented  to  the senses  an  immeasurable
variety  of sharply  defined  phsenomena  susceptible of exact
measurement ;  equally  perceptible by  all,  when  some  easily

340

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTEB  I.

recognised  sources  of  error  had  been  cut  off;  recurring  in
regular  series  corresponding  to  their  inner  coherence,  and
capable  of  being  freed  by  arbitrarily  chosen  experiments
from  the  ambiguities  to  which  direct  observation  is  subject  in
consequence  of  the  crossing  of  different  series  of  events.  The
experiences  of  the  inner  life,  neither  recurring  regularly  nor
separable  from  the  incalculable  peculiarity  of  the  individual
mind,  offered  much  greater  difficulties  to  investigation;  and  the
believing  heart  had  to  be  contented  to  hold  them  in  opposition
to  the  requirements  of  thought,  or  without  their  being  in
adequate  connection  with  these  requirements,  whilst  the
investigation  of  Nature  succeeded  in  developing  positive
methods  for  the  reduction  of  its  problems.

The  connection  of  natural  phsenomena  into  one coherent
whole  was  a  favourite  task among  the ancients also; but
they blended two questions with injurious effect. They
sought  first  of  all  to  grasp  some  primal activity or primal
event which should be not a  mere indifferent fact, but
should  also  produce  an  aesthetic  impression  of  its  value ;  from
this  beginning  the  particulars  of  reality  were  to  proceed  in  a
succession,  to  the  order  of  which  was  attributed  the  double
office  of  showing on  the  one  hand  how  the  significance  of
every  phaenomenon  depends  upon  preceding  ones,  and  how  on
the other  hand  in  its  realization  it  is  an effect of these.
This  mixing  up  of  an  ideal  interpretation  of  events  with  a'
causal  explanation  could  not  afford to  antiquity  the  fruits
which  in  our  own  time  it  has  always  refused. It  was  only
Atomism  that  even  among  the  ancients  took  another  course ;
favoured  by  fortune  which  is  not  always  gracious  to  the  mosba
deserving, minds  of a lower order  in this school — mindsJ
infinitely  inferior  to  the  incomparable  genius  of  Plato andij
Aristotle  —  yet  hit  upon  the  fertile  thought which  was
be  a lasting  gain  for  all  future  time. I  am  not  speakingj
of  their  direct  teachings  concerning  the  nature  of  things,  ofl
the  atoms  and  the void, and of  the  subsequent  rude and!
unskilful  working out of these  ideas  and  of  their conse-
quences ;  on  the  contrary,  the  only  important  thing  is  the

/

I

TKUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  341

fundamental  notions of  their  procedure  as  regards  method.  ^

They  first  of  all  laid  down  as  their  established  belief,  the
maxim  that  the  origin,  preservation,  mutation,  and  destruction
of  natural  objects  could  not  be  primarily  explained  by  means
of  Ideas  as  though  mere  significance  were  sufficient  to  trans-
form a  postulate  into  reality,  but  that  on  the  contrary  every-
thing that  happens,  whatever  its  significance  and  value  may  be,
whether  it  is  great  or  small,  noble  or  common,  right  or  wrong,
depends  for  its  realization  on  the  universal  rules  of  a  mechanism
working  uniformly  everywhere.  And  further,  they  accustomed
men  to  see  in  the  inexhaustible  multiplicity  of  mathematical
distinctions  which  may  be  applied  to  the  properties,  states,
and  movements  of  elements,  a  middle  term  (or  a  collection  of
infinitely  variable  middle  terms)  by  which  minor  premisses  may
be  supplied  to  major  premisses  expressing  universal  laws;  these
minors  affording  to  the  majors  not  only  definite  guidance
towards  the  establishment  of  various  results,  but  also  enabling
the  whole  special  and  definite  result  to  be  deduced  in  each
particular  case.

Later  times  learnt  the  value  of  these  fundamental  notions
in  the  development  of  the  idea  of  universal  natural  law.  For
although  the  general  concept  of  law  could  never  have  been
unknown  to  a  civilised  people,  yet  its  application  in  the
investigation  of  the  existing  world  required  that  it  should
have  assumed  a  particular  character  which  did  not  belong  to
it  till  a  late  period.  If  there  exist  between  two  real  elements
connections  which  vary  in  such  a  way  that  their  various
values  may  be  measured  by  a  common  standard ;  if  further
those  elements  can  experience  or  assume  states  or  properties
which  in  the  same  way  form  varying  series  of  members  sus-
ceptible of  comparison,  these  members  having  any  measur-
able differences ;  and  if  moreover  a  change  in  the  states  or
properties  of  the  thing  is  involved  in  any  change  in  the
connections  —  then  there  will  either  be  a  constant  formula
according  to  which  the  magnitude  of  the  change  of  states
depends  upon  the  magnitude  of  the  change  of  connections,  or
there  will  be  another  constant  formula  according  to  which

342

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

-^

the  ratio  of  this  dependence  itself  varies  regularly  with
the  change  of  any  condition  that  admits  of  degrees.  This
general  expression,  to  which  every  natural  law  is  reducible,
clearly  reveals  the  limitations  which  science  imposes  upon
itself,  its  tasks,  and  its  performances.

And  first  comes  its  dependence  upon  experience.  For
science  cannot  guess  what  elements  and  what  connections
between  them  must  be  contained  in  the  order  of  the  world ;
it  waits  to  learn  this  from  observation,  and  for  itself  desires  to
be  nothing  more  than  a  development  of  the  results  which
become  necessary  when  circumstances  actually  occur,  the
non-occurrence  of  which  would  involve  no  contradiction  in
thought.  And  it  is  not  sufficient  that  experience  should  show
to  science  determinate  elements  in  determinate  connections ;
for  even  what  will  happen  under  such  conditions  science  has
no  means  of  guessing ;  it  is,  again,  experience  which  must
teach  science  what  kind  of  change  in  the  states  of  things
is  produced  by  the  presence  of  this  determinate  connection,
and  it  is  the  comparison  of  many  observations  which  first
leads  to  a  knowledge  of  the  general  law  according  to  which
the  worth  of  these  results  depends  upon  the  worth  of  their
conditions.

But  the  possession  of  a  general  law  would  be  worthless  if
it  only  served  to  sum  up  the  particular  cases  from  which  it
had  itself  been  abstracted. What  is  much  more  important  is
to comprehend  the  whole varied  content  of  every  complex
phsenomenon  as  in  the  course  of  events  it  now  arises  and  now
passes  away  again,  owing  to  the  crossing  of  many  and  various !
conditions. Science  cannot  seek  the  solution  of  this  problem
by  reference  to  that  which  the  inner  nature  of  things  requires,
or  that  which  is  included  in  the  necessities  of  its  development,
or  in  the  reasoned  plan  of  the  universe. Science  does  not.:
know  what  it  is  that  is  valid  in  all  these  connections. But  it
knows  that  the  unknown  inner  being  of  things  (as  far  as  it  is
revealed  in  their  properties  and  connections,  which  are  quanti-
tatively comparable)  must  inevitably  have  the  consequences!
which accrue,  to  everything  that  has magnitude, from  the

TEUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  343

summation  of  similars,  the  cancelling  of  opposite  symbols,  and
the  combination  of  differences  so  as  to  produce  a  mean  result.
It  is  only  at  this  one  accessible  point  that  science  can  lay  hold  -)
of  reality,  and  hence  it  imposes  upon  itself  the  other  limita-  [
tion  of  being  only  a  mathematical  not  a  speculative  develop-  J
ment  of  given  data.  To  an  individual  connection  there
attaches  as  a  matter  of  fact  a  definite  result,  arising  we  know
not  how,  and  the  magnitude  of  which  is  dependent  upon  the
magnitude  of  the  connection ;  if  there  is  a  complication  of
many  such  connections,  science  deduces  a  new  connection  as
the  effect  of  this  complication,  and  from  this  proceeds  a  new
result  capable  of  predetermination  as  regards  form  and  magni-
tude, and  likewise  arising  we  know  not  how.  Thus  the  whole
theory  is  an  investigation  of  how  far  the  order  of  the  changing
course  of  the  world,  which  springs  from  the  varying  action  and
reaction  of  its  parts,  may  be  apprehended  by  means  of  empiri-
cally recognised  constant  connections  of  unknown  elements,
without  searching  into  the  inner  nature  of  things,  and  the
end  to  which  this  nature  is  destined.  As  far  as  variation  of
phsenomena  goes,  every  occurrence  is  for  science  a  result  the
producing  conditions  of  which  it  searches  out ;  as  soon  as
facts  and  connections  which  are  unchangeable  and  always
valid,  are  either  encountered  by  science  in  observation,  or
found  to  be  assumptions  on  which  existing  facts  may  be
adequately  explained,  these  facts  and  connections  are  regarded
by  science  as  ultimate  principles  at  which  its  investigations
may  stop.  It  does  not  seek  further  to  deduce  this  final
reality  itself,  for  the  domain  of  that  causal  connection  by
which  alone  it  is  led,  ends  where  change  ends ;  the  coherence
which  beyond  this  domain  may  subsist  between  the  unchange-
able elements  of  reality,  could  only  be  such  as  should  have  \
its  order  and  mode  of  connection  justified  by  the  worth  of  the  )
significance  which  they  possess.  Science  has  not  the  least  ,
reason  to  deny  such  a  coherence,  but  its  investigations  do  not
refer  to  this,  but  to  the  operative  economy  by  which
phsenomena  must  be  connected  in  every  case,  whether  an
intelligent  Idea  prescribes  the  work  of  the  world,  or  whether

(/

344

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

{

all  that  takes  place is  merely  the  result  of  causes  that  lie
behind,  and  does  not  work  towards  any  goal

Whilst  these  thoughts  had  been  gradually  developed  much
had  changed.  The  world  of  phsenomena,  once  the  object  of
obscure  and  varying  opinion,  had  become  the  field  of  the  most
exact  investigation.  Plato  and  Aristotle — in  opposition  to  the
Heraklitean  doctrine  of  the  eternal  flux  of  things,  which  as  it
seemed  to  them  unjustifiably  did  away  with  the  validity  of  all
immutable  truth — agreed  that  there  can  only  be  a  science  of
that  which  is  eternally  self- identical ;  more  modern  times
emphasized  the  opposite  doctrine,  saying  that  reality  is  of
interest  to  science  only  in  as  far  as  it  changes ;  of  that  which
is  eternally  self-identical  we  can  merely  have  cognisance;
eternal  truths  are  of  worth  not  under  the  form  of  a  motionless
order,  in  which  the  particular  occupies  a  fixed  position  of
subordination  to  the  universal,  but  only  as  principles  of
change  in  accordance  with  which  things  alter  their  states.
In  this  contrast,  the  meaning  of  which  cannot  be  here  guarded
against  all  misunderstandings,  is  to  be  found  the  real  advance  of
science  in  its  new  stage;  in  the  admission  that  only  phsenomena
can  be  developed  from  phsenomena,  and  that  we  remain  wholly
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  things,  we  find  the  limitation  under
which  this  advance  is  to  be  recognised.  To  describe  the  results
which  have  been  obtained  in  this  way  would  be  as  unneces-
sary as  it  is  impossible  ;  it  is  not  only  knowledge  of  Nature,
but  also  mental  and  social  life,  which  have  experienced  the
influence  of  the  new  mode  of  thought ;  and  even  where  its
more  concrete  instruments  of  search  have  not  yet  penetrated,
it  has  already  introduced  its  methods  and  spirit  of  investiga-
tion. The  manifold  procedure  of  induction,  the  subtle  devices
of  experiment,  the  fertile  ingenuity  of  calculations  in  pro-
bability, constitute  the  stock  of  an  inventive  and  active  art  of
knowledge  which  the  energetic  and  Promethean  spirit  of
modem  times  has  added  to  the  not  less  admirable  structure
of  ancient  logic.  By  these  means  science  advances,  whilst
unfortunately  the  traditional  philosophy  of  the  schools  knows
little  of  them,  and  satisfies  itself  with  continually renewed

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.

345

reflection  upon  the  wisdom  of  past  times,  pushing  aside  the
problems  which  this  cannot  advance.  And  finally,  these
investigations  which  primarily  concern  phsenomena  only,  have
not  been  unfruitful  even  with  regard  to  those  reflections
which  we  desire  should  be  carried  on  concerning  the  world  as
a  whole  and  the  significance  of  its  order,  and  concerning  real
existence.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  empirical  investigation
and  its  mathematical  interpretation  that  we  owe  our  only
trustworthy  view  of  the  magnitude  and  construction  of  the
universe,  the  connection  of  the  effects  that  take  place  in  it,
and  the  complete  circle  of  mutually  compensatory  processes
which  actually  occur — facts  that  have  not  indeed  received  an
interpretation,  yet  for  all  that  facts — facts  the  knowledge  of
which  has  provided  philosophy  with  a  basis  for  its  explanations
of  cosmic  order  quite  other  than  that  which  in  ancient  times
could  be  furnished  by  its  own  assumptions  concerning  the
necessary  nature  of  things,  and  real  existence.  To  know  facts
is  not  everything,  but  it  is  a  good  deal ;  to  despise  this  know-
ledge because  one  desires  something  more  befits  only  those
fools  mentioned  by  Hesiod  who  can  never  understand  that  the
half  may  be  more  than  the  whole.

§  7.  Philosophy  is  a  mother  wounded  by  the  ingratitude  of
her  children.  Once  she  was  all  in  all ;  Mathematics  and
Astronomy,  Physics  and  Physiology,  not  less  than  Ethics  and
Politics,  received  their  existence  from  her.  But  soon  the
daughters  set  up  fine  establishments  of  their  own,  each  doing
this  earlier  in  proportion  as  it  had  made  swifter  progress
under  the  maternal  influence ;  conscious  of  what  they  had
now  accomplished  by  their  own  labour,  they  withdrew  from
the  supervision  of  philosophy,  which  was  not  able  to  go  into
the  minutiae  of  their  new  life,  and  became  wearisome  by  the
monotonous  repetition  of  insufficient  counsels.  And  so  when
every  offshoot  of  investigation  which  was  capable  of  life  and
growth  had  separated  itself  from  the  common  stem  and  taken
independent  root,  it  fell  to  philosophy  to  retain  as  her
questionable  share  the  undisputed  possession  of  as  much  of  all
problems  as  remained still inexplicable. Eeduced to  this

V

346

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

^^

v/

dowager's  portion,  she  continued  to  live  on,  ever  pondering
afresh  over  the  old  hard  riddles,  and  ever  resorted  to  afresh  in
calm  moments  by  those  who  held  fast  to  a  hope  of  the  unity
of  human  science.

The  experiential  sciences  had  investigated  the  connection  of
phpenomena  ;  they  showed  how  many  and  what  kind  of  links
constitute  the  chain  of  events  which  connects  any  cause  with
its  final  effect ;  but  what  it  is  that  holds  together  any  two
contiguous  links  escaped  them ;  they  told  neither  what  things
are  in  themselves,  nor  in  what  consists  that  action  between
them  by  which  alone  the  condition  of  one  can  become  the
cause  of  a  change  in  the  condition  of  another,  Eeligious  and
moral  life  had  developed  the  belief  in  unconditional  worth — •
an  unconditional  ought,  which  if  there  is  any  meaning  in  reality
must  be  the  most  real  of  all  things ;  but  the  world  of
creatures  and  of  facts  in  which  alone  it  could  be  realized  was
opposed  to  it  as  quite  alien,  neither  derivable  from  it  nor,  as
it  seemed,  even  compatible  with  it.  This  condition  of  things
contained  incentives  to  a  constant  repetition  of  two  questions
— first  the  question  as  to  the  intrinsic  nature  of  existing  things
whose  manifestations  to  us  are  the  subject  of  our  observation,
and  secondly  the  question  as  to  the  connection  in  which  this
world  of  existing  reality  stands  to  the  world  of  worth,  of  what
ought  to  be.  And  all  attempts  to  answer  these  two  questions
always  stirred  up  forthwith  a  third  question,  that  as  to  our
capacity  of  knowing  truth,  and  the  connection  of  this  capacity
partly  with  existing  reality  and  partly  with  that  which  reality
ought  to  be  and  produce.

Our  thoughts  receive  the  stamp  of  certainty  by  being
reduced  to  either  the  already  proved  certainty  of  others,  or  to
that  of  immediate  truths  which  neither  need  nor  are  susceptible
of  proof.  The  trust  which  we  repose  on  the  one  hand  in  the
laws  of  thought  by  means  of  which  this  reduction  is  accom-
plished, and  on  the  other  hand  in  the  simple  and  immediate
cognitions  to  which  this  leads  us,  may  be  guarded  by  repeated
and  careful  proof  from  the  influence  of  prejudices  of  which  the
persuasive  force  is  accidental  and  evanescent ;  but  on  the  other

d

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.

34^

hand  no  proof  can  guard  against  a  doubt  which  suspects  of
possible  error  that  which  men  have  always  found  to  be  a  neces-
sity of  thought.  A  scepticism  that  does  not  demonstrate  from
individual  contradictions  which  may  be  cited  the  erroneous-
ness  of  specified  prejudices,  and  hence  the  possibility  of
correcting  them,  but  goes  on  causelessly  repeating  the  simple
question  whether  in  the  end  everything  is  not  really  quite
different  from  that  which  we  necessarily  think  it  to  be,  would,
in  banishing  certainty  wholly  from  the  world,  also  destroy  all
the  worth  of  reality.  That,  however,  this  cannot  be — that  the
world  cannot  be  a  mere  meaningless  absurdity — is  a  moral
conviction,  which  is  the  ultimate  ground  of  our  belief  in  our
capacity  of  cognising  the  truth,  and  in  the  general  possibility
of  scientific  knowledge.  But  this  conviction  does  not  define
the  extent  of  such  knowledge.

It  is  only  our  own  existence  of  which  we  are  immedi-
ately conscious ;  all  our  information  as  to  an  external  world
depends  upon  ideas  which  are  only  changing  conditions  of
ourselves.  What,  then,  is  our  guarantee  that  this  image
of  an  external  world  is  not  an  innate  dream  ?  He  who
is  cautious  asks  whether  this  is  so ;  he  who  is  incautious
asserts  that  it  is ;  he  forgets  that  our  experience  must
be  the  same  in  both  cases,  whether  there  be  things  without
us  or  not;  even  a  real  external  world  could  only  be
reflected  by  us  in  images  resulting  from  affections  of  our
own  beicg.  Hence  the  nature  of  all  our  ideation  being
subjective,  it  can  furnish  no  decision  concerning  the  existence
or  non-existence  of  the  world  which  it  believes  that  it  reflects.
But  the  attempt  to  regard  the  image  of  the  world  as  a  native
production  of  the  mind  alone  has  always  been  speedily  given
up  again  by  scientific^instinctu;- for  in  order  to  attain  this
end  it  has  always  been  necessary  to  assume  the  existence
in  ourselves  of  just  as  many  impulses  foreign  to  our
mind,  and  not  derivable  from  it  as  in  the  common  view
we  are  believed  to  receive  from  the  external  world.  Ee-
serving  for  future  consideration  the  important  points  in  this
view,  we  now  go on  to speak of  the  conviction  (to  which

K

^

c^-i-i:)

348  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

philosophy  has  always  speedily  returned)  that  our  ideas  arii
from  action  and  reaction  with  a  world  independent  of  ourselves,

But  if  this  is  so,  can  our  ideation  be  more  than  an  effect
of  thiugs,  can  it  be  a  copy  which  resembles  them,  and  can  the
truth  which  we  are  capable  of  knowing  consist  in  an  agree-
ment between  thought  and  thing  ?  We  speak  of  the  image
of  an  object  when  any  construction  of  other  material  makes
the  same  impression  upon  our  perception  which  the  object
itself  would  have  made ;  thus  as  far  as  we  are  concerned  one
thing  becomes  the  image  of  another  through  having  a  similar
effect.  But  can  the  effects  produced  in  us  by  both  be  ever  so
exactly  like  the  things,  that  the  eye  of  an  independent  observer
would  regard  our  cognition  as  an  image  of  the  object  ?
Wherever  action  and  reaction  take  place  (and  cognition  is
only  the  particular  case  of  such  action  between  things  and  the
ideating  mind),  the  nature  of  the  one  element  is  never  trans-
ferred, identical  and  unchanged,  to  the  other ;  but  that  first
element  is  but  as  an  occasion  which  causes  the  second  to
realize  one  single  definite  state  out  of  the  many  possible  for
it — that  state,  namely,  which  according  to  the  general  laws  of
the  nature  of  that  second  element  is  the  fitting  response  to
the  kind  and  magnitude  of  stimulus  which  it  has  received.
Hence  definite  images  in  us,  and  produced  by  us,  correspond  to
the  causes  which  act  upon  us ;  and  to  the  change  of  those
causes  there  corresponds  a  change  of  these  inner  states  of  ours.
But  no  single  idea  is  a  copy  of  the  cause  which  produces  it,
and  even  the  connections  which  we  think  we  cognise  between
these  still  unknown  elements  are  not  primarily  the  very
relations  that  really  obtain  between  the  elements,  but  only  the
form  in  which  we  apprehend  them — and  we  do  not  regard
this  state  of  things  as  human  weakness,  for  it  is  of  the  very
nature  of  all  cognition,  which  depends  upon  action  and  reaction
with  its  object.  All  creatures  that  are  subject  to  these  con-
ditions are  subject  also  to  this  consequence ;  they  all  see
things  not  as  they  are  in  themselves  when  nobody  sees  them,
but  only  as  they  appear  when  they  are  seen.

Though  limited  in  this  way  to  phaenomena,  yet  knowledge

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  349

is  not  devoid  of  all  connection  with  what  really  exists.  For
we  are  not  justified  in  complaining,  as  if  it  were  so  illusive
that  a  mere  appearance  only  is  shown  to  us,  the  nature
which  appears  (which  is  altogether  unsusceptible  of  comparison
with  the  appearance  and  of  which  even  the  very  existence  is
uouhtful)  lying  wholly  beyond  our  intellectual  horizon.  We
cannot  regard  our  fundamental  intuitions  as  merely  human
modes  of  apprehension  by  which  things  which  are  in  them-
selves of  wholly  different  form  are  taken  up,  and  under  which
they  appear  to  us  alone,  without  admitting  that  (in  order  that
they  may  be  able  to  be  taken  up  by  these  forms)  things  must
have  such  a  relation  to  them  as  any  object  must  have  to  the
meshes  of  the  net  in  which  it  is  to  be  caught.  Or  to  speak
plainly,  every  appearance  presupposes  as  the  necessary  con-
dition of  its  appearing  a  real  being  in  the  inner  relations  of
which  lie  the  grounds  that  determine  the  form  of  its  appear-
ance. From  the  analysis  of  the  forms  of  intuition  under
which  our  perception  immediately  apprehends  its  objects,  we
may  easily  attain  the  conviction  that  these  forms  do  not,  in
the  shape  in  which  they  are  familiar  to  us,  admit  of  applica-
tion to  things  themselves ;  but  we  shall  always  need  to  seek,
in  the  nature  of  things  and  in  their  true  mutual  connections,
the  conditions  which  admit  of  our  apprehending  them  under
those  forms.  Thus  it  may  be  doubtful  whether  space  and
time  do  not  exist  as  space  and  time  solely  in  that  ideating
activity  which  can  grasp  a  manifold  in  one  act  of  appre-
hension ;  but  we  cannot  doubt  that,  if  this  is  so,  that  which
exists  must  itself  be  subject  to  an  order  neither  spatial  nor
temporal,  which  acting  upon  us  is  by  us  translated  into  the
form  of  spatial  and  temporal  order.  It  is  certain  that  the
sensation  which  any  object  or  event  causes  in  us  is  not  exactly
like  its  cause ;  but  it  is  equally  certain  that  we  shall  regard
two  objects  or  events  as  exactly  like,  similar,  or  different,  if
the  impressions  they  make  upon  us  are  exactly  alike,  similar,
or  different,  and  we  shall  estimate  their  degree  of  relation-
ship by  the  amount  of  difference  between  their  impressions.
Thus  we  inevitably  regard  the  apparent  existence  and  event3

350

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  I.

which  we  perceive  as  being  proportional  throughout  to  real
existence  and  real  events  which,  belonging  to  or  occurring
between  things  themselves,  by  no  means  exclude  concepts  of
truth  and  order.  The  attempt  to  renounce  this  supposition
would  produce  not  any  increase  of  precision  but  fruitless  and
self-contradictory  agony  of  thought.

But  if  appearance  indicates  existence,  it  yet  indicates  only
formal  relations  of  existence  and  their  changes ;  the  nature  of
the  things  which  exist  and  act  under  these  relations  remains
inscrutable.  And  just  because  the  nature  of  things  remains
unknown,  we  are  also  unable  to  comprehend  the  occurrence  of
action  and  reaction  between  them  as  a  result  of  their  nature ;
it  is  only  appearance,  which  is  the  matter  of  experience,
that  can  lead  us  to  divine  this  true  action  and  reaction.
Thus  philosophy  takes  the  same  course  that  we  have  already
seen  taken  by  the  natural  sciences ;  it  begins  with  the
individual  enigmatical  and  contradictory  phsenomena  which
experience  offers,  and  guided  by  the  general  laws  of  thought
seeks  to  ascertain  the  form  of  real  existence  and  occurrence
which,  in  order  to  explain  wliat  is  strange  and  contradictory
in  facts,  must  be  supposed  to  underlie  these  as  their  efficient
cause.  It  must  be  admitted  that  some  admirable  results
may  be  attained  by  this  Eealism,  which  contents  itself  with
tracing  back  actual  facts  of  appearance  to  facts  of  existence
which  must  necessarily  be  assumed,  even  when  its  action
is  wholly  subject  to  this  limitation ;  not  only  may  it
succeed  in  throwing  light  upon  the  efficient  connections
in  particular  coherent  groups  of  phsenomena,  but  a  con-
sideration of  the  knowledge  attained  may  also  lead  it  to  a
view  of  that  which  as  true  reality  lies  at  the  foundation  of
the  whole  phaenomenal  world.  But  even  this  final  result  will
retain  the  character  of  mere  fact,  and  thus  Realism  will  always
arouse  the  opposition  of  that  idealistic  bias  of  the  human  soul,
which  recognises  real  existence  not  in  facts  which  only  are
because  they  are,  or  because  they  must  be  assumed  in  con-
sequence of  the  existence  of  something  else,  but  only  in  such
a  fact  as certifies  by the worth of  the thought  which  it

TEUTH  AND  SCIENCE.

351

represents,  its  vocation,  its  right,  and  its  capacity  to  appear  as
the  apex  and  crown  of  reality,  as  the  final  datum  and  the
highest  constructive  principle.

§  8.  Idealism  opposes  to  the  realistic  acknowledgment  of  the
unknowable  nature  of  things  the  bold  assertion  that  Thought
and  Existence  are  identical.  In  saying  this,  it  does  not
necessarily  mean  (what,  however,  it  is  occasionally  audacious
enough  to  assert)  that  human  cognition  will  some  time  succeed
in  penetrating  by  thought  the  existence  of  all  things,  and
recreating  it  in  idea ;  for  the  narrow  limits  of  our  finite
nature  which  hinder  this  extension  of  real  insight  are  but
too  obvious.  It  means  that  for  a  cognition  free  from  these
limitations  things  would  no  longer  be  insoluble  realities,  they
would  no  longer  be  as  unapproachable  and  incomprehensible
for  thought,  as  for  instance  light  is  for  the  ear  or  sound  for
the  eye ;  rather  thought  would  recognise  them  as  realized
ideas,  thus  recognising  itself  in  them.  So  this  proposition,
understood  as  not  properly  an  assertion  concerning  the  relation
of  knowledge  to  its  object,  but  much  rather  as  a  conviction
concerning  the  nature  of  existence  in  itself,  palpably  gives  to
the  existence  or  nature  of  things  a  different  meaning  from  that
given  to  it  by  common  opinion.  For  a  man  of  ordinary  intel-
ligence thinks  he  immediately  knows  that  matter  or  content
by  which  a  thing  as  such  or  such  is  distinguished  as  difi^erent
from  some  second  thing — knows  it  partly  in  the  impression
upon  the  senses,  and  partly  in  ideas  which  are  directly  con-
nected with  the  impression  and  hold  together  its  constituent
parts.  And  it  seems  to  him  all  the  more  difficult  to  see  how
it  can  happen  that  this  content  should  have  the  power  of
meeting  him  as  something  existing,  independent,  tangible,  as  a
Thing  in  short ;  he  who  should  discover  the  secret  spring  by
which  the  thinkable  to  t'l  of  existing  objects  is  endowed  with
the  extension,  body,  resistance  and  elasticity  of  Thinghood,
would  seem  to  unsophisticated  thought  to  have  found  the  real
and  very  nature  of  things,  not  that  which  distinguishes  one
thing  from  another,  but  that  in  which  they  are  all  alike,  the
essence  of  their  existence,  reality  itself. Now  can  Idealism

352

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

-^

maintain  that  it  can  solve  this  problem  ?  Certainly  not  to
any  greater  extent  than  Eealism,  in  its  own  view,  is  capable
of;  in  what  exactly  consists  the  existence  of  things,  what  is
meant  by  their  being  connected  with  one  another,  finally
how  it  comes  about  that  anything  results  from  these. con-
nections— all  this  is  as  impenetrable  to  Idealism  as  to  its
opponent.  Perhaps — to  admit  the  utmost  that  we  may — it  may
also  succeed  in  proving  that  there  exists — though  it  does  not
know  how — a  connection  in  accordance  with  which  if  there
exist  (in  some  incomprehensible  way)  a  being  of  such  and
such  a  description,  there  must  in  an  equally  incomprehensible
way  exist  such  and  such  change  and  activity,  and  no  other ;  but
even  if  we  admit  this.  Idealism  would  only  have  penetrated
the  meaning  and  the  intelligible  connection  of  the  individual
determinations  which  under  the  name  of  being  we  grasped
together  into  one  whole :  how  this  inner  connection  of
reality  could  le  would  still  remain  wholly  uncoraprehended. —
Yet  to  do  all  this  was  just  what  was  promised  by  the  bold  and
striking  expression  given  to  the  proposition  which  made
being  identical  with  thinking ;  it  led  one  to  expect  that  just
that  by  which  being  as  being  seemed  at  first  to  be  irrecon-
cilably differentiated  from  thinking  or  from  being  thought,
would  finally  be  presented  as  a  vanishing  distinction,  and  that
this  being  would  be  altogether  resolved  into  thoughts.  And
now  it  seems  that  of  the  two  ideas  which  we  regard  as
blending  to  produce  existence,  the  ideas  of  the  to  rl  and
of  its  existence.  Idealism  leaves  that  of  existence  just  as
unexplained  as  it  was  before.

But  just  as  no  end  was  gained  by  the  reference  to  being
in  the  proposition  to  which  we  have  alluded,  even  so  is  it
beside  the  point  to  speak  of  thought  as  that  with  which  it
should  be  identical ;  as  long,  at  least,  as  this  name  distinctly
signifies  activity  of  the  mental  life  as  distinguished  from  other
activities.  And  yet  this  seems  to  be  what  is  meant,  for  even
the  Idealist  does  not  allow  that  sensuous  intuition  and
perception  can  grasp  the  truth  of  things;  he  abandons  both
these,  and  reserves  to  thought,  as  a  special  and  higher  activity,

r

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  353

the  privilege  of  searching  out  real  existence,  behind  the  illusions
with  which  sensuous  intuition  and  perception  surround  us.
But  his  cvptctation  rests  upon  a  widespread  error.  Men  are
universally  much  disposed  to  regard  as  a  product  of  thought
anything  for  which  language  has  furnished  a  name,  although
what  thought  has  contributed  to  the  building  up  of  the  content
which  it  indicates  may  be  very  little,  and  sometimes  nothing
whatever.  As  long  as  we  are  considering  sensuous  impressions,
we  are  indeed  soon  convinced  that  no  skill  of  logical  operations
can  supply  the  place  of  sound  or  colour  to  him  who  is  blind  /
or  deaf  ;  that  thus  for  instance  blue  or  sweet  are  not  concepts
which  we  think,  but  impressions  which  we  experience,  and
their  names  merely  linguistic  signs  which  remind  us  of  a
content  for  which  all  that  thought  does  is,  at  the  outside,  to  ^
indicate  its  dependent  nature  by  the  adjectival  form  which  it
gives  to  it.  But  in  the  more  general  concepts  which  are
everywhere  interwoven  with  our  perceptions  and  give  them
form  and  stability — in  the  ideas  of  Being,  of  Becoming,  of
Action,  and  of  every  Connection  which  subsists  between  any
two  things — we  feel  more  assured  of  finding  the  genuine
•products  of  thought,  and  of  thought  alone.  And  yet  the
meaning  of  being  cannot  by  any  interpretative  activity  of
thought  be  made  intelligible  to  him  wlio  does  not  know
immediately  what  it  means ;  all  that  thought  can  do  is  by
proceeding  analytically  and  removing  all  accessory  ideas  which
are  not  signified  to  teach  us  to  distinguish  that  meaning  of  the
word  which  can  only  be  grasped  by  immediate  intuition.  No
one  will  ever  invent  a  definition  of  Becoming  which  does  not
contain  (under  some  other  name)  as  its  most  essential  con-
stituent the  idea  of  passing  from  one  to  another,  or  of  some-
thing happening  ;  thought  can  contribute  to  the  building  up
of  this  concept  only  by  illustration  of  the  two  points  between
which  the  nameable  but  unanalysable  enigma  of  transition  takes
place.  And  the  concept  of  Action  is  equally  incapable  of  being
approached  by  any  logical  operations.  It  is  easy  to  fancy
that  one  has  traced  it  back  to  the  more  abstract  concept  of
tliat  which  conditions — although  here  it  would  be  questionable
VOL.  n.  z

354  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

whether  the  converse  reduction  might  not  be  more  correct;
but  supposing  we  have  done  so  much,  can  we  then  analyse
further  in  thought  the  real  meaning  of  the  idea  of  conditioning?
Apparently  perhaps  we  may,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  we
certainly  cannot ;  for  in  the  last  resort  all  that  thinking  does
is  to  denote  by  this  or  that  name  the  idea  of  a  necessary
inner  connection  between  different  occurrences,  which  con-
nection it  cannot  by  its  own  activity  produce.

And  here  it  will  be  objected  that  I  lay  useless  stress  upon
that  which  is  self-evident ;  since  it  is  of  course  necessary  for
thought,  as  the  activity  which  connects  and  combines,  to  pre-
suppose as  given  from  elsewhere  the  elements  which  are  to
be  connected  and  combined.  My  real  object  has  only  been
to  make  this  conviction  very  vivid  for  a  moment,  and  to
deduce  the  consequences  which  it  involves.  For  with  a  little
attention  one  will  soon  be  convinced  that  these  elements,
which  thought  has  thus  to  take  up  as  coming  from  elsewhere,
comprise  nothing  less  than  the  whole  sum  of  that  knowledge
of  real  existence  and  occurrence  which  was  formerly  ascribed
to  thought  as  its  own  possession.  Thought  is  everywhere
but  a  mediating  activity  moving  hither  and  thither,  bringing
into  connection  the  original  intuitions  of  external  and  internal
perception,  which  are  predetermined  by  fundamental  ideas  and
laws  the  origin  of  which  cannot  be  shown ;  it  develops  special
and  properly  logical  forms,  peculiar  to  itself,  only  in  the  effort
to  apply  the  idea  of  truth  (which  it  finds  in  us)  to  the  scattered
multiplicity  of  perceptions,  and  of  the  consequences  developed
from  them.  Hence  nothing  seems  less  justifiable  than  the
assertion  that  this  Thinking  is  identical  with  Being,  and  that
Being  can  be  resolved  into  it  without  leaving  any  residuum ;
on  the  contrary,  everywhere  in  the  flux  of  thought  there
remain  quite  insoluble  those  individual  nuclei  which  represent
the  several  aspects  of  that  important  content  which  we
designate  by  the  name  of  Being.  It  would  be  more  simple
and  more  true  to  say  that  Being  contemplates  itself;  we — since
we  exist — feel,  perceive,  experience,  or  know  well  enough  what
it  is  to  exist ;  we — since  we  act — know  well  enough  what  v;e

I

4l

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  355

ean  (altliougli  it  is  unspeakable)  when  we  talk  not  only  of  a
temporal  succession  of  phsenomena,  but  also  of  the  one  beinfr
conditioned  by  the  other. And  in  this  sense  all  the  world
has  known  from  the  beginning  what  is  the  import  of  Being  or
Reality,  for  all  the world  has  lived  the meaning  of  these
words ;  but  if  it  has  always  been  difficult  or  impossible  to
express  by  determinations  of  thought  that  which  men  have  so \
plainly  experienced  in  their  lives,  philosophy  has  not  succeeded /
in  removing  the  need  for  such  expression ;  aU  she  has  done  has '  v
been  to  find  names  for  that  which  men  experience ;  and  since
it  is  in  a  world  of  names  that  she  lives  and  moves  and  has
her  being,  she  has  sometimes  had  less  vivid  experience  than
others  of  that  which  is  the  object  of  her  efforts.

It  will  be  demanded  on  the  part  of  Idealism  that,  as  far  as
all  such  scruples  are  concerned,  this  question  should  at  last
be  allowed  to  rest ;  it  is  admitted  that  we  do  not  know  how
things  can  be  and  act,  but  their  nature  is  said  to  consist,  not
in  their  reality,  but  in  what  they  are  and  what  they  do.  Now
is  this  content  of  things  really  more  accessible  to  thought  ?
Whatever  else  thought  may  be,  it  is  an  activity  of  tlie  mind ;
or  if  not  this,  it  is  at  any  rate  a  changing  succession  of  states
which  mind  experiences.  Now,  how  can  a  succession  of  states  {
copy  and  reproduce  anything  except  states  ?  Can  they  '
represent  the  nature  that  experiences  the  states  which  are
reproduced  ?  They  can  only  do  this  if  we  go  still  further  in
our  assumptions,  and  regard,  not  only  what  things  are,  but
what  they  experience,  as  their  innermost  nature,  and  as  that  real
existence  which  philosophy  seeks.  And  thus,  by  a  path  the
several  stages  of  which  we  must  here  refrain  from  describ-
ing. Idealism  would  reach  the  admission  that  in  truth  it
neither  knows  how  things  are  nor  what  they  are,  but  that  it
does  know  what  they  signify,  and  that  this,  their  real  exist-
ence, is  immediately  cognisable.  What  everything  is  in  itself,
what  its  nature  is  by  which  it  exists  and  is  capable  of
making  its  efficiency  felt  and  of  being  different  from  other
things,  this  may  remain  for  ever  inaccessible  to  thought.
But  with  regard  to the forms of  that  to  which they  are

/

356  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  L

destined,  the  forms  of  their  changes,  development,  activity,
and  of  their  several  contributions  to  the  sum  of  reality —
in  all  these  relations  things  are  comprehensible  to  thought,
and  are  comparable  among  themselves;  the  essential  sig-
nificance of  each,  as  far  as  it  consists  in  these,  is  in  itself
susceptible  of  exhaustive  expression  in  thought,  whether  or
not  we  men  are  capable  of  discovering  the  thought  which  does
express  it.  Thus  Idealism,  like  Eealism,  comes  to  acknowledge
that  it  is  limited  to  a  cognition  of  what  happens  in  and
between  things  that  remain  unknown ;  but  it  believes  that  in
knowing  the  import  of  what  thus  happens  it  possesses  all
essential  truth ;  that  it  is  only  for  the  realization  of  this  truth
that  things  exist.

Eeligious  belief  in  understanding  the  world  as  a  divine
creation  has  always  cherished  and  expressed  the  same  convic-
tion in  another  way.  It  denies  just  as  vigorously  as  philoso-
phic Idealism  that  there  is  in  things  a  nature  (or  any  part  of
their  nature)  which  they  have  of  themselves.  All  that  they
are,  they  are  by  the  will  and  intention  of  God ;  the  most
essential  part  of  their  nature  consists  in  what  God  meant  or
willed  that  they  should  be,  in  their  significance  in  the  unity
of  the  cosmic  plan.  Eeligious  belief  did  not  maintain  that  it
could  penetrate  the  plan  of  this  unity,  but  in  its  representa-
tion of  God  were  contained,  as  it  were,  centres  of  light  which
illuminated  each  other,  and  also  cast  enlightening  rays  upon
the  created  world.  The  strict  order  of  its  phaenomena  was
regarded  as  in  fitting  correspondence  with  the  immutability  and
justice  of  the  Creator,  its  beauty  with  the  infinite  fulness  of
His  blessed  nature,  the  order  of  events  in  the  moral  world
with  His  holiness.  To  trace  back  all  the  particulars  of  reality
to  these  creative  forces  in  God  was  neither  attempted  nor
regarded  as  possible ;  it  was  sufficient  to  believe  in  their
truth  on  the  wliole,  unmoved  by  the  apparent  contradiction
of  many  perceptions,  and,  as  regards  particulars,  to  be  ever
drawing  afresh  from  a  selection  of  favoured  phaenomena  the
living  feeling  of  their  universal  and  governing  efficacy.

Philosophic Idealism tried  to outbid this faith in two

«

TRUTH  AKD  SCIENCE.  357

Irections.  It  first  took  offence  at  the  unconcerned  way  in
which  religion  spoke  of  a  personal  God,  and  regarded  Him  as
creuting  things  out  of  nothing,  and  then  entering  into  a  rela-
tion of  reciprocal  action  with  these  realities  that  had  been
manufactured  out  of  nothing:  the  metaphysics  of  all  these
processes  needed  to  be  found  and  explained.  But  none  of  the
attempts  to  find  and  explain  them  (which  we  shall  have  to
consider  more  particularly  at  a  later  stage)  attained  its  end ;
since  they  were  destitute  of  all  ideas  concerning  the  relation
of  God  to  the  world  (ideas  which  religious  belief  had  framed
anthropomorphically),  they  have  left  as  their  only  result  the
assertion  (couched  for  the  most  part  in  artificially  obscure
forms  of  expression)  that  there  is  a  single  supreme  Idea  that
penetrates  all  the  phsenomena  of  reality  and  gives  them  form
and  order;  but  they  do  not  say  how  it  does  this.  And  just
because  it  was  at  most  the  meaning  of  the  universe  and  not
the  origin  of  its  reality  which  was  accessible  to  Idealism,
everything  that  might  remind  men  of  this  problem  seemed  to
fall  out  of  its  consideration.  God  was  no  longer  spoken  of,  for
this  name  signifies  nothing  without  the  predicates  of  real  and
living  power  and  efficiency ;  it  was  only  the  Idea  that  could
be  spoken  of,  the  content  of  which  was  supposed,  in  some
incomprehensible  way  or  other,  to  really  constitute  the  nature
and  significance  of  the  world.  But  the  idealists  hoped  to  be
able  to  express  the  whole  content  of  this  Idea  completely  and
systematically  in  thought,  and  by  this  second  performance  to
far  surpass  religious  belief,  which  only  knew  in  a  general  way
that  divine  purpose  which  in  particulars  was  inscrutable.

Even  this  promise  could  only  be  fulfilled  by  breaking  off
from  the  nature  of  the  thing  that  which  remained  incompre-
hensible to  thought.  For  in  fact  the  living  forces  which  had
been  beheld  by  faith  in  God  showed  themselves  as  inaccessible
to  thought  as  the  sensuous  impressions  which  occur  in  per-
ception ;  for  them,  too,  we  invent  names ;  and  their  content,  too,
is  known  to  us  through  living  experience,  and  not  through
thought.  What  is  good  and  evil  remains  just  as  incapable  of
being  reached  by  mere  thought  as  what  is  blue  or  sweet ;  it

358

BOOK  Vin. CHAPTER  I.

is  only  when  we  have  learnt  by  immediate  feeling  the  pre-
sence of  worth  and  of  unworth  in  the  world  and  the  gravity
of  the  difference  between  them  that  our  thought  is  able,  from
the  content  thus  experienced,  to  develop  signs  which  subse-
quently enable  us  to  bring  any  particular  case  under  the  one
or  the  other  of  those  two  universal  intuitions.  Can  one  find  in
concepts  the  real  living  nerve  of  righteousness  ?  Much  may
be  said  of  compensations,  of  the  correspondence  between  con-
ditions originated  and  endured,  of  the  return  of  good  and  ill
to  him  who  caused  them ;  but  what  movement  of  thought
explains  the  interest  which  we  feel  in  these  forms  of  occur-
rence when,  and  only  when,  they  indicate  what  we  call  a  retri-
bution ?  Are  love  and  hatred  thinkable  ?  Can  their  nature
be  exhausted  in  concepts  ?  In  whatever  combination  of
duality  to  unity,  or  whatever  division  of  that  which  might  be
one,  their  significance  may  be  found,  the  expression  of  that
combination  or  unity  will  never  do  anything  but  state  an
enigma.  For  an  enigma  is  the  specification  of  signs  which  do
not  of  themselves  set  forth  the  whole  living  content  to  which
they  relate,  this  having  to  be  guessed  because  it  is  not  plainly
contained  in  them.  Now  not  only  did  philosophy  hope  that
it  could  reproduce  in  thought  all  the  living  content  which
was  possessed  by  faith  in  a  personal  God,  but  it  imagined
that  it  was  applying  a  process  of  ennobling  clarification
to  Him  who  is  more  than  anything  that  can  be  called  an
Idea,  when  from  the  dimness  of  that  which  is  experienced  by
the  whole  heart  and  the  whole  soul,  it  raised  Him  to  the
dignity  of  a  concept  capable  of  being  an  object  of  pure
thought.

Both  the  natural  and  the  moral  world  received  this  treat-
ment, which  traced  back  the  real  content  of  all  things  and
events  to  what  was  formal  in  their  mode  of  appearance,  and
regarded  the  things  and  events  themselves  as  merely  destined
to  realize  these  forms.  The  creatures  of  Nature  existed  merely
in  order  to  take  their  place  in  a  classification,  and  to  provide
the  logical  degrees  of  universal,  particular,  and  individual
with  an  abundance  of  phoenomena ;  their  living  activities  and

TRUTH  AND  SCIENCE.  359

reciprocal  action  took  place  in  order  to  celebrate  the  mys-
teries of  difference,  of  contradiction,  of  polar  opposition,  and
of  unity ;  the  whole  course  of  Nature  was  destined  to  represent
a  rhythm,  in  the  movements  of  which  affirmation,  negation,
and  mutual  limitation  alternated  with  one  another.  Con-
sideration of  the  spiritual  world  sometimes  in  a  kind  of
realistic  fit  regarded  thought  and  all  spiritual  life  as  merely
the  highest  form  assumed  by  those  unfathomable  powers  of'
affirmation  and  negation,  opposition  and  its  removal ;  sometimes
in  a  more  idealistic  mood  it  regarded  thought  as  the  real
nature  and  goal  of  all  things,  and  those  forms  of  mere  blind
being  and  occurrence  as  imperfect  preludes.  But  it  never
succeeded  in  establishing  thought  as  what  is  most  essential  in
mind,  and  thinking  about  thought,  the  pure  self-reflection  of
logical  activity,  as  what  is  highest  in  thought.  The  existence
and  the  worth  of  the  moral  world  were  indeed  not  forgotten ;
but  even  that  which  ought  to  he  had  to  submit  to  this  reduction
to  form ;  it  seemed  as  though  it  only  ought  to  he  to  the
extent  to  which  it  reproduced  in  the  forms  of  its  realization
those  much-esteemed  relations  which  were  held  to  be  the  real
nature  of  being.

I  break  off  in  the  midst  of  an  enumeration  of  these  errors.
This  short  sketch  has  been  partial,  leaving  much  unmentioned
which  within  the  philosophic  school  itself  is  regarded  as
weighty  and  important,  and  laying  stress  only  upon  what
could  serve  as  an  introduction  to  the  end  aimed  at  by  our
present  inquiry.  Philosophy  is  not  at  present  exclusively
ruled  by  the  false  Idealism  with  which  we  have  just  been
confronted,  nor  is  it  impossible  to  avoid  the  errors  which
deform  it ;  but  this  is  not  the  place  for  developing  the  convic-
tion which  we  wish  to  maintain.  Here  we  can  only  give  it
provisional  expression,  and  affirm  that  the  nature  of  things
does  not  consist  in  thoughts,  and  that  thinking  is  not  able  to
grasp  it ;  yet  perhaps  the  whole  mind  experiences  in  other
forms  of  its  action  and  passion  the  essential  meaning  of  all
being  and  action,  thought  subsequently  serving  it  as  an
instrument by  which that  which is thus experienced is

SCO

BOOK  Vlir. CHAPTEK  I.

brought  into  the  connection  which  its  nature  requires,  and  is
experienced  in  more  intensity  in  proportion  as  the  mind  is
master  of  this  connection.  The  errors  which  stand  opposed
to  this  view  are  very  old.  It  was  a  long  time  before  living
fancy  recognised  in  thought  the  bridle  which  guides  its  course
steadily,  surely,  and  truly ;  perhaps  it  will  be  as  long  again
before  men  see  that  the  bridle  cannot  originate  the  motion
which  it  should  guide.  The  shadow  of  antiquity,  its  mischievous
over-estimation  of  reason,  still  lies  upon  us,  and  prevents  our
seeing,  either  in  the  real  or  in  the  ideal,  what  it  is  that  makes
.^ both  something  more  than  reason.

CHAPTEE IL

WOPtK  AND  HAPPINESS.

Pleasure  and  the  Means  to  Pleasure — The  PatriarcTiate — The  Adventures  of  the
Heroes— The  Liberal  Culture  of  Antiquity — Slavery — The  Growth  and
Preponderance  of  the  Industrial  Classes — Economic  Character  of  the
Present  Time,  and  its  Causes  and  Effects — The  Modern  Forms  of  Labour
and  their  Social  Consecjutncee.

§ 1. IVTATUEE with  its unchanging order,  and  Society
-^  ^ with the variability  of its internal relations,
have from  the  beginning been spread  out before men  as
the  great  fields  of  all  activity. It  was  need  —  partly  the
urgent  need  of self-preservation,  partly  the  more calm  but
not  less  powerful  need  of  mental  satisfaction — which  in  the
one  field  as  in  the  other  gave  birth  to  the  first  action  along v
with  the  first  reflection,  and  did  not  permit  the  deferring  of y.
reaction until the completion  of all science. Men  were
obliged  to  begin  to  work  upon  things  and  to  use  or  construct
the  relations  of  human  society,  while  their  store  of  cognitions
was as yet incomplete ; but the tentative effort enriched ^
scientific  knowledge  by  its  results,  and  the  increase  of  know-
ledge  enlarged  the  sphere  of  men's  powers  and  the  spirit  of )
enterprise. Thus  science  and  life  were  developed  in  constant
action  and  reaction. It  was  only  while  thus  occupied  with
the  whole  wealth  of  experience,  that  knowledge  developed  by
degrees  all  the multiplicity  of its modes  of investigating,
analysing,  and combining  ; it  was only  through  the  wide
extension  of  its  contact  with  the  most  varied  kinds  of  objects
that  it  discovered  its  own  instruments,  and  learned  to  com-
prehend its tasks  (which  were presented to it  at first  in
isolation)  in  that connection  which as  perfected science  it
ultimately  seeks  to  reflect  in  the  form  of  a  systematic  com.- f
bination  of  all  truth. However  attractive  the  history  of  this

^

362  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  11.

development  may  be,  we  must  renounce  any  more  detailed
consideration  of  it  than  has  been  given  in  the  brief  survey
which  we  have  just  concluded. Since  the  general  purpose  of
our reflections has regard to the totality of human de-
velopment, we  have  no  further  space  for  the  representation
of  the  inner  regularity  and  beauty  with  which  the  edifice  of
science — a self-sufficing whole — grows up from its own
principles  and  becomes  articulated  ;  our  attention  is  due  in
greater  measure  to  the  other  division  of  this  reciprocal  action
between  knowledge  and  life — that  is,  to  the  fertilizing  stimulus
, which  life  itself,  the  customs  of  commerce,  the  spirit  of  social
) institutions,  and  the  enjoyment  of  existence,  receive  from  the
I gradual  development  of  the  world  of  thought.

Human  life  being  dependent  upon  Nature  for  its
(jp  continuance,  men  had  first  of  all  to  attend  to  the  business  of
self-preservation  by  satisfying  external  needs,  in  order  that
they  might  then  be  at  liberty  to  devote  themselves  to  their
real  vocation  in  enjoyment  of  beauty,  delight  in  holiness,  and
practice  of  what  is  right.  Now  a  consideration  of  the  efforts
which  have  been  directed  to  the  production  and  perfecting,
the  administration  and  diffusion  of  material  goods  might
easily  allure  us  into  a  wide  and  brilliant  region  of  scientific
development  which  touches  life  at  innumerable  points — might
allure  us,  that  is,  to  the  history  of  the  Natural  Sciences.
Yet  we  forbear  a  systematic  exploration  of  this  region.  For
why  attempt  to  repeat  in  a  narrow  and  insufficient  compass
what  has  already  been  given  in  detail  in  innumerable  delinea-
tions ?  The  triumphs  of  human  sagacity  in  the  investigation
of  the  celestial  regions  and  the  remote  parts  of  the  earth,  in
the  explanation  of  the  chemical  transformations  of  bodies  and
of  the  processes  of  life,  in  determining  the  conditions  of  action
of  all  forces,  and  analysing  composite  forces  into  their
elements — all  these  are  in  our  times  favourite  subjects  of
triumphant  exposition  and  eager  attention ;  lauded  in  a
thousand  ways,  it  is  not  they  themselves  but  the  blessing  that
they  have  conferred  on  human  life  which  stands  in  need  of
mention. And  in  saying  that  this  needs  mention,  I  do  not

\[

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  36^

mean  that  it  would  be  worth  while  to  repeat  the  enumeration
of  those  countless  individual  benefits,  concerning  which  (after
the  numerous  accounts  that  have  been  given)  we  now  know
to  what  principles  of  natural  science  and  to  what  inventive
application  of  those  principles  they  are  due.  Let  us  suppose
the  place  which  I  here  leave  vacant  to  be  filled  by  one  of  those
easily  obtainable  descriptions  which  show  us  how  the  progress
of  knowledge  of  Nature,  lingering  at  first,  has  in  modern  times,
advancing  with  greatly  accelerated  speed,  given  new  develop-
ments to  life — how  we  have  learnt  to  overcome  innumerable
obstacles  which  Nature  opposes  to  human  activity — and  how
increased  insight  into  the  connection  between  different  effects
in  Nature  has  put  us  in  a  position  to  produce  with  ease,  from
despised  material  which  in  former  times  was  thrown  away  as
refuse,  instruments  of  enjoyment  which  in  those  times  were
either  not  known,  or  could  only  be  procured  with  difficulty
from  some  few  sources  which  Nature  voluntarily  set  at  man's
disposal.  Having  supposed,  then,  that  this  picture  of  an
increasing  dominion  of  Mind  over  Nature  stands  clearly  before
our  eyes,  in  what  is  it  that  the  blessing  of  this  dombaion
consists  ?  And  in  asking  this  question  we  refer  not  only  to
the  fact  of  dominion,  but  also  to  the  advantage  which  increased
power  over  Nature  affords  for  the  attainment  of  that  which  is
the  special  destiny  of  man.

Unless  I  am  mistaken,  the  answers  to  this  question  will
not  be  harmonious.  In  moments  of  deliberation,  in  which  we
survey  with  a  comprehensive  glance  th'ese  achievements  of
human  intelligence,  the  undeniable  advance  which  they  show
may  rejoice  us  with  the  feeling  of  satisfaction  which  naturally
springs  from  every  increase  in  efficient  strength.  But  if
looking  at  life  as  a  whole  we  seek  there  the  useful  results  of
this  progress,  it  may  seem  doubtful  whether  this  greater
dominion  over  Nature  of  which  we  boast,  does  not  result  for
us  in  a  greater  dependence  upon  that  power  over  which  we
are  continually  victorious.  For  every  fresh  commodity  that
we  produce  immediately  becomes  a  necessity,  and  entangles  us
in  new  efforts — on  the  part  of  the  community  to  produce  and

36i

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  II.

y-

exhibit  it,  and  on  the  part  of  the  individual  to  obtain  it.
Every  new  discovery  of  science  that  has  splendidly  abridged
laborious  modes  of  attaining  some  definite  end,  has  forthwith
exhibited  as  necessary  a  multitude  of  new  ends  which  the
new  resources  tempted  men  to  aim  at.  Hence  though  much
labour  has  certainly  been  materially  simplified,  as  science
taught  nieu  better  combinations  of  the  means  by  which  all
effects  are  produced,  it  is  plain  that,  taking  life  altogether,
labour  instead  of  becoming  gradually  less  has  become  greater.
The  old  complaint  that  so  large  a  part  of  men's  time  and
strength  must  be  sacrificed  to  the  mere  maintenance  and
securing  of  existence,  is  not  allayed  but  sharpened ;  ever  more
and  more  room  is  taken  up,  in  our  short  span  of  life,  by  the
preparations  and  equipment  required  for  life  itself ;  the  sunny
strip  of  leisure  seems  ever  to  grow  narrower  and  further  away
on  our  horizon — the  leisure  in  which,  in  quiet  communion
with  self  or  cheerful  intercourse  with  others,  we  hope  to  enjoy
the  final  net  result  of  so  much  effort — a  result  worthy  of  our
human  nature.  Thus  it  seems  as  though  the  enlarged
possibility  of  satisfying  a  multitude  of  wants,  taken  in  con-
junction with  the  amount  of  work  necessary  for  the  realization
of  this  possibility,  did  not  make  us  happier  on  the  whole  than
men  were  in  the  times  when  those  wants,  the  means  of  their
satisfaction  and  the  labour  required  for  this,  were  all  alike
unknown.

But  equally  old  with  this  complaint  is  the  rejoinder  that  it
is  erroneous  to  try  and  divide  labour  and  enjoyment  by  a
sharp  boundary  line,  as  if  they  were  as  opposite  as  com-
modities and  the  prices  which  are  paid  for  them  ;  not  only
the  possession  of  the  enjoyment,  but  also  the  receptivity  for
it,  is  given  to  leisure  as  the  result  of  what  has  been  experienced
and  gone  through  in  labour;  labour  is  itself  a  source  of
enjoyment,  and  not  merely  the  road  thereto.  We  do  not
need  to  draw  out  in  detail  the  universal  truth  of  this  remark ;
we  have  already  had  frequent  occasion  to  consider  how  little
the  spiritual  content  of  life  in  an  unlaborious  state  of  Nature,
and  the  enjoyments  of  leisure  in  such  a  state  can  be  compared

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  • 365

to  those  with  which  culture  rewards  the  exertions  of  a  life's
hard  work.  The  human  soul  is  not  like  a  plant  which
requires  only  that  the  universal  conditions  of  its  existence
should  be  favourable  in  order  to  exhibit  in  succession  the
several  beauties  of  its  cycle  of  development — bud,  blossom,
and  fruit ;  it  is  only  the  ever-changing  struggle  for  external
necessities  that  stimulates  us  to  acquire  knowledge,  that
furnishes  our  leisure  with  subjects  for  reflection,  and  at  the
same  time  deepens  the  value  which  we  set  upon  those  social
relations  of  which  natural  order  lays  the  foundations — deepen-
ing it  until  it  becomes  that  refined  moral  feeling  which  finds  >
the  most  stirring  interest  of  life  and  the  most  elevated  enjoy-  \
ment  in  the  discussion  of  varied  views  of  life,  and  in  j
emerging  victorious  from  its  moral  conflicts.  We  desire
f^ven  for  the  individuals  who  are  the  inheritors  of  some  long-
establislied  civilisation,  the  education  which  only  life  can  give;  ik^
the  traditional  ideals  of  all  that  is  good  and  beautiful,  although
even  in  tradition  itself  they  have  long  been  bound  up  with
representations  of  those  definite  relations  of  life  in  which  they
are  to  be  realized,  yet  seem  to  stir  the  soul  vaguely,  hovering
before  it  formlessly  and  without  being  seriously  apprehended,
until  incessant  contact  with  the  hindrances  of  real  life  and
with  the  claims  of  others  reveals  the  full  significance  of  their
content — the  content  that  is  of  the  traditional  ideals — and
makes  the  contemplation  and  realization  of  them  a  life-work
which  is  self-sufficing  and  self-rewarding.  Without  this
complication  and  intensifying  of  stimulations  and  hindrances
which  culture  brings  with  it,  the  isolated  experiences  and
activities  of  men  would  hardly  have  produced  even  an  in-
definite sense  of  something  really  worthy.  Thoroughgoing,
however,  as  the  superiority  of  culture  to  a  state  of  Nature  is
in  a  general  way,  yet  it  is  not  equally  indubitable  that  its
internal  progress  involves  in  itself  a  continuous  heightening  of
the  enjoyments  of  life,  and  that  there  is  not  a  point  beyond  which
the  increase  of  labour  of  all  kinds  leads  men  in  living  and
in  maintaining  life  to  lose  sight  of  the  ends  of  life.  At  all
events,  in  all  periods  of  many-sided  civilisation  there  seems

iC

X

^'

J

366  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IL

to  remain  a  longing  after  the  simpler  conditions  of  past  times —
a  proof  that  it  is  not  easy  for  men  to  bring  the  results  of
their  own  progress  into  harmony  with  the  wishes  which  they
call  upon  life  to  fulfil.

In  the  patriarchal  state  which  the  Old  Testament  writings
describe,  there  is  presented  to  Christians,  as  it  were  a  com-
pendium of  simple  and  noble  life,  which,  glorified  by  the
idealizing  power  of  distance  and  of  poetic  representation,  may
well  seem  to  this  retrospective  longing  to  be  an  exemplar  of  life.
Certainly  traditions  of  earlier  civilisations  and  the  possibility
of  contact  with  the  developed  culture  of  neighbouring  countries
was,  even  so  early  as  this,  at  the  foundation  of  that  which
interests  us  in  the  patriarchal  life  ;  this  life  being  not  so  wholly
self-dependent  as  it  seems  in  the  Scriptural  picture,  where  it
is  presented  in  strong  relief  detached  from  its  surroundings.
But  external  relations  were  still  so  slack  that  friendly
obscurity  veiled  the  surrounding  regions,  and  all  the  problems
and  all  the  enjoyment  of  life  remained  concentrated  within  a
narrow  circle  that  could  be  taken  in  at  a  glance.  Men's
wants  were  provided  for  by  a  labour  that  was  light,  or  in
which  there  was  as  yet  little  complication  and  little  division
of  employments — labour  that  consisted  chiefly  in  the  nn-
irksome  tendance  of  living  creatures  ;  if  want  occurred  it  was
regarded  rather  as  the  disfavour  of  Nature  than  as  the  result
of  social  evils.  As  the  division  of  labour  had  not  yet
taken  place,  life  had  not  yet  the  aspect  of  an  uncertain  and
ingenious  struggle  for  existence;  careers  were  marked  out
upon  which  each  entered  with  a  regularity  as  great  as  that
with  which  Nature  develops  corporeal  life;  the  differences
of  social  consideration  which  inevitably  appear  at  an  early
stage  were  not  yet  combined  with  such  intellectual  and
philosophic  differences  as  might  make  one  man's  interests
in  life  unintelligible  for  another;  connected  chiefly  with
family  relations,  they  were  yet  important  enough  to  introduce
into  life,  instead  of  an  enervating  equality  of  claims,  a  variety
of  reciprocal  moral  obligations  which  were  profoundly  felt.
There  were  united  in  the  head  of  the  tribe  all  those  functions

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  367

of  work  and  action  which  give  worth  to  human  life ;  father i
and  master,  law-giver  and  judge,  prince  and  priest,  all  in  one, \\
he  experienced  in  himself  the  full  and  undiminished  enjoy- 'i
ment of that mental power which lifts man above all i
Nature,  and  set  before  his  people  this  unity  of  life  in  visible
embodiment. If  to  all  this  we  add  that  to  the  religious  belief
of  this  time  and  of  these  tribes  their  connection  with  God
was  an  experience  that  was  ever  being  renewed,  we  may  well
admit  that  we  find  in  the  patriarchal  period  a  concentration
and  intensifying  of  consciousness  and  of  life  whicli  prevented
the  attention of  individuals  from passing over unobserved
any  attainable  happiness  or  any  recognised  duty.

Doubtless  this  form  of  life  could  not  be  maintained  for
ever  in  its  completeness ;  the  greater  concentration  of  popula-
tion and  the  transition  to  stationary  life  developed  new  needs
and  required  new  kinds  of  labour,  which  led  to  different
social  arrangements  ;  also  we  would  not  conceal  from  ourselves
that  in  reality  the  spiritual  content  of  the  patriarchal  life  •\\
must  have  been  poorer  than  it  appears  in  the  poetic  represen-  H
tation  whicli  emphasizes  its  bright  parts  and  says  nothing  of  ^
the  duller  intervals  that  come  between.  Certainly  the  moral
significance  of  all  individual  relations  of  life  was  sounded  to
its  depths  and  reflected  upon  with  remarkable  refinement  of
feeling,  but  the  relations  themselves  were  too  simple  to  produce
that  complex  and  varied  wealth  of  thought,  in  the  possession
of  which  advanced  civilisation  always  feels  in  the  end  that  it  is
superior  to  those  simple  states  of  society  which  in  other
respects  are  envied.  But  the  patriarchal  form  of  life,  the
self-centred  completeness  and  isolation  of  the  family  and  the
home  which,  being  self-dependent  to  an  extreme  degree,  pro-
vides for  all  its  own  necessary  wants,  and  is  able  in  its  own
little  circle  to  find  a  solution  of  all  essential  problems — this
form  of  life  must  always  be  regarded  by  us  as  the  type  to
which  we  must  seek  to  revert,  in  opposition  to  that  unattached
condition  that  in  a  more  complicated  state  of  society  makes
the  individual  feel  like  a  lost  atom,  tossed  hither  and  thither
by  the  wholly  incomprehensible  forces  of  a  great  all-embracing

J

1

3G8  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  II.

external  world.  Let  us  now  see  whether  increasing  civilisa-
tion has  brought  with  it  the  conditions  of  an  inner  enrichment
of  this  form  of  life  or  only  causes  of  its  disintegration.

8  2.  To  reap  without  having  sown  is  naturally  man's
original  mode  of  existence.  When  the  simplest  appro-
priation of  natural  products  no  longer  sufficed,  the  labour  that
tends,  transforms,  and  produces,  with  all  the  patience,  self-
denial,  and  steadiness  which  it  requires,  long  continued  to  be
held  in  contempt  as  compared  with  the  destructive  activity
which  in  the  chase,  in  robbery,  and  in  war  took  possession  of
finished  products  capable  of  ministering  to  human  enjoyment.
The  period  of  Life  according  to  Nature  was  succeeded  by  the
Heroic  Age — an  age  in  which  men's  mode  of  life  was  an
imitation  of  that  of  beasts  of  prey,  from  the  weakness  of
admiring  which  the  human  mind  will  never  be  wholly  free.
For,  indeed,  the  struggle  in  which  one's  own  existence  is
staked  for  speedy  gain,  and  one's  whole  nature  is  roused  to
all  the  activity  of  which  it  is  capable,  not  only  swells  the  con-
sciousness of  the  combatant  with  proud  and  passionate  excite-
ment, but  offers  to  imitative  poesy  much  more  picturesque  and
intelligible  images  than  the  quiet  industry  which  transforms
a  peaceful  society  merely  by  conquering  the  inertia  of  intract-
able objects.  The  ambition  of  emulating  the  lion  or  the  eagle
developed  indeed  all  the  natural  beauty  of  the  human  race,
and  all  those  traits  of  capricious  magnanimity  and  uncertain
generosity  which,  combined  with  just  as  inexplicable  fits  of
savagery,  makes  the  "king  of  beasts"  such  an  attractive  object  of
contemplation  to  us ;  but  human  capacities  were  not  moulded
by  this  kind  of  life  for  their  own  special  ^nd  appropriate
work.  At  all  times  this  mode  of  thought — this  emulation  of
the  beasts — has  been  powerful  enough ;  in  the  most  remote
antiquity  it  shows  itself  openly  in  robbery  by  land  and  sea ;
sword  and  lance  were  to  the  Greek  Klephthen  as  plough,  sickle,
and  wine- press  with  which  to  sow  and  reap  and  press  the  wine
from  the  cluster;  the  Eomans,  in  their  legends,  claimed
robbers  as  their  ancestors ;  and  to  the  Germanic  nations  it
Beenied  unworthy  to  seek  by  labour  for  that  which  might  be

L

WOEK  AND  HAPPINESS.  369

gained  by  the  sword;  the  highway  robber  of  the  Middle  »
Ages,  and  the  runaway  vassal,  acted  from  the  same  feel-
ing. All  of  them  were  right  in  so  far  as  this,  that  labour
is  apt  to  enslave  the  mind  when  it  requires  exclusive
occupation  with  objects  to  the  peculiarities  of  which  the
labourer  must  accommodate  himself,  by  narrowing  his  circle
of  thought  to  but  few  trains  of  ideas;  on  the  one  hand  it
destroys  receptivity  for  the  various  enjoyments  of  life,  and  on
the  other  hand  may  paralyze  the  elasticity  of  his  powers,
which  are  naturally  inclined  to  exercise  themselves  upon
reality  in  various  ways.  But  they  forgot  that,  notwithstanding
all  this,  it  is  only  labour  which  can  develop  a  coherent  human
character,  and  that  the  unrestrained  exercise  of  strength
which  they  thought  so  splendid  is  only  superior  to  the  savage-
ness  of  wild  beasts  when  it  lays  aside  that  character  of
adventure  which  employs  strength  only  for  the  sake  of  sub-
jective enjoyment,  and  takes  on  the  character  of  protective
service,  which  applies  the  same  powers  for  the  defence  of  V
interests  that  are  worthy  in  themselves,  doing  this  under  '
a  sense  of  obligation.

The  ends  of  human  life,  and  the  means  of  attaining  them, j^
were  thought  over  by  the  Greeks  more  eagerly  than  by  other
nations. In  the  world  of  the  Homeric  poems  there  appears  a
dark  stratum  of  labouring  bondmen  as  the  foundation  upon
which  rests  the  serene  and  gracious  happiness  of  the  nobles ;
but  either  there  is  as  yet  too  little  difference  of  needs  and  of >
cultivation  to  embitter  this  contrast,  or  else  tradition  is  so
obscure  that  it  does  not  make  plain  to  us  the  sharpness  of  the )
contrast. Of  Labour,  which had not  yet split up  into a
number  of branches  dependent upon one another,  it  was
therefore  still  easy  to  take  a  comprehensive  view,  and  it  was
regarded  with  honour,  especially  in  as  far  as  it  stimulated  the
early-dcA  eloped  artistic  sense  of  the  people,  not  supplying  a -^
foreign  d^!mand,  but  serving  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  a  great  and
self-sufficing  domestic  economy. When  the  brilliant  develop-
ment of  mental  life  in  Greece  began,  these  relations  gradually
changed. In proportion as there  was an increase  in  the

VOL.  II.  2  A

370  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IL

significance  and  excellence  of  the  enjoyment  which  advancing

sulture  promised  to  him  who  had  time  for  it,  men  sought  to

"4i shorten  the  labour  necessary  for  supplying  the  needs  of  life ;

^ human  life  properly  so  called  had  its  beginning  in  leisure,  and

. to  learn  how  to  occupy  and  enjoy  leisure  in  a  way  worthy  of

humanity  was  the business  of  Greek education,  which, in

: order  to  attain  this  end,  not  only  did  not  shun  the  labour  of

1 severe  and  long-continued  discipline,  but  even  undertook  it

'  with  eagerness.

I  will  not  here  inquire  whether  the  symmetrical  develop-
ment and  exercise  of  all  the  bodily  and  mental  powers  with
which  Nature  has  endowed  us — in  other  words,  whether  being
educated  to  the  perfection  of  human  kind — is  in  reality  the
whole  destiny  of  man.  But  it  is  certainly  correct  to  hold  that
the  essential  difference  between  the  maxims  of  this  antique
art  of  education  and  of  that  of  modern  days,  consists  in  this,
that  in  the  education  of  the  ancients  the  cultivation  and  per-
fection of  skill  were  esteemed  more  highly  than  the  labour  to
which  the  skill  was  applied,  and  the  products  of  that  labour,
w^  Every  individual  was  to  be  formed  into  a  perfect  specimen  of
(  his  race,  the  race  itself  having  nothing  to  do  but  to  exist  and
^  rejoice  in  its  capacities  of  enjoyment.  Education  fulfilled
its  task  in  producing  the  attitude  of  perfect  humanity —
that  reposeful  and  plastic  stamp  of  character  which  hence-
forward in  all  the  occurrences  of  life  with  which  it  meets  or
by  which  it  allows  itself  to  be  reached,  maintains  an  un-
changed mien,  and  employs  its  skill  to  raise  itself  to  inde-
pendence of  material  things.  To  this  many-sided  and
self-contained  development  the  spirit  of  modern  education  is
certainly  less  disposed ;  it  favours  more  than  is  right  an  exten-
sive acquaintance  with  facts  as  compared  with  general  cognitive
ability,  productive  and  monotonous  labour  as  compared  with
the  free  exercise  of  all  man's  powers,  the  narrowness  of  efforts
restricted  to  a  definite  occupation  as  compared  with  interest
in  all  human  relations.  Yet  there  is  at  the  bottom  of  all
these  errors  one  characteristic  which  is  not  to  be  despised —
the  conviction  that  man's  destiny  is,  not  to  present  a  perfect

^

i

I

WOEK  AND  HAPPINESS.  37l

embodiment  of  all  the  beauty  of  his  kind,  but  to  develop  into
an  unique  individual — a  development  which  cannot  be  attained
by  aimless  exercise,  however  splendid,  of  the  capabilities
common  to  all,  but  only  by  devoting  these  in  earnest  labour
to  the  accomplishment  of  some  individual  life-work.  Only  in
such  voluntary  devotion  of  the  powers  bestowed  by  Nature
and  developed  by  education,  to  the  laborious  pursuit  of  some
definite  end  can  the  individual  win  as  his  personal  property
the  endowments  of  the  race,  developing  them,  in  a  course  of
evolution  which  extends  through  life,  to  an  individuality  in
virtue  of  which  he  becomes  something  more  than  a  perfect
exemplification  of  a  general  concept.

We  by  no  means  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  active
political  feeling  and  the  love  of  art  of  the  Greek  nation  and
its  receptivity  for  science  provided  very  worthy  occupation  for
leisure  time,  and  that  in  the  eager  and  steady  pursuit  of  great
enterprises,  or  the  constant  but  more  calm  interest  taken  in
public  business,  life  found  a  sufficing  content  and  vocation.
But  the  contempt  which  was  felt  for  common,  rough,  hard
work,  and  the  low  estimation,  extending  even  to  artists,  in
which  all  handicrafts  were  held,  did  not  fail  to  exercise  an
injurious  influence.  Much  as  men  laboured,  there  was  not
formed  in  any  degree  worth  mentioning  that_love  of  work
which  is  jealous  of  the  honour  of  its  handicraft,  which  is  able
to  find  sufficient  sources  of  mental  satisfaction  within  the
narrow  limits  of  a  monotonous  occupation,  which  delights  in
colouring  the  whole  of  life  with  the  ways  of  thought  peculiar
to  its  calling,  and  loves  to  glorify  its  mental  gain  in  song.
This  was  chiefly  the  reason  why  there  was  lacking  in  public
life  that  fidelity  to  duty  and  conscientiousness  bordering  on
rigidity,  which  is  more  surely  produced  by  the  steady  exercise  >.  /
of  a  modest  calling  than  by  the  pride  of  a  culture  which  can
take  any  point  of  view,  and  has  no  moral  obligation  to  take
one  rather  than  another.  Oiilj  where  morality  requires
fidelity  in  small  things  can  great  things  be  secure.  The  new
culture  estranged  even  family  life  from  the  beautiful  and
simple  patterns  of  the  Homeric  age. For  the  more  exclusively

^kr

372  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  II.

that  culture  was  directed  to  political  interests  and  scientific

^  occupations,  the  further  wer.j  women  from  keeping  up  with
it  and  participating  in  it.  The  society  of  ancient^Greece  was
exclusively  masculine.  It  was  only  in  assemblies  of  men  that
there  was  the  pulsation  of  that  which  we  call  ancient  life ;  the
women  lived  in  domestic  seclusion,  relieved  from  burdensome
supervision  in  Sparta  only,  and  even  there  they  did  not  gain
much  from  that  life  of  the  time  in  which  they  were  allowed
to  share.  The  absence  of  community  of  labour  entailed  also
absence  of  the  feeling  of  equal  human  rights ;  and  of  the  gain
which  woman's  mind  can  contribute  to  life,  little  accrued  to
the  Greeks.  I  do  not  mean  that  the  natural  good  disposition
of  the  people  did  not  afford  room  for  the  exercise  of  all  the
love  and  tenderness  of  family  feeling  which  we  admire  even
in  the  beasts;  but  still  in  common  opinion  the  female  sex

1 was  regarded  as  the  less  perfect  creation. Plastic  art  knew
how  to  honour  its  beauty,  and  poetry  its  charms  ;  but  we  need
only  remember  the  evil  sophisms  by  which,  in  the  Eumenides,
jp' I -^schylus  (by  no  means  an  isolated  example)  proves  of  how
^fy  ) much  less  consequence  the  mother  is  than  the  father,  in  order

I  to  recognise  the  insulting  contempt  with  which  Greek  civilisa-
tion on  the  whole  looked  down  upon  women.  It  has  nowhere
produced  a  conception  which  in  seriousness  and  human  worth

^ is  comparable  to  the  noble  ideal  of  the  Eoman  matron.

The  worldly  wisdom  of  the  Indian  gives  to  the  man  the
toil  and  the  exciting  enjoyment  of  combat  and  to  the  woman
hard  and  stupefying  labour.  The  Greeks  did  not,  indeed,  make
such  a  division  ;  but  not  less  superficially  and  mechanically
did  they  solve  the  problem  of  determining  the  relation
between  labour  and  a  liberal  enjoyment  of  life,  since  they

*  solved  it  by  the  institution  of  slavery,  and  this  without
reference  to  any  natural  relation  which  (as,  e.g.,  difference
of  sex  or  of  race)  seems,  to  the  untutored  mind  at  least,
to  furnish  some  justification  of  such  an  arrangement.  When
Hector  and  Andromache  with  foreboding  sadness  lament  the
misery  of  slavery  which  awaits  the  widow  and  orphan,  not
only  are  we  somewhat  reconciled  by  the  melancholy  beauty

1

•

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  373

of  tlie  verse,  but,  moreover,  in  this heroic  age  such  misery

appears  as  an  event  which  naturally  occurs  in  the  order  of  life

and  for  which  the  as  yet  unfurnished  social  science  of  men iir —

knew  no remedy. In the noontide  of  Greek  civilisation,

a time  of political insight and  reflection  upon  the order

of  society,  we are  revolted  by  the  calm  way  in  which  even

the  noblest  minds regard slavery  as  being,  as a  matter  of

course,  a  constituent  part  of  their  political  structure. "  When  ^

the  shuttles  set  to  work  of  themselves,"  says  Aristotle,  "  then  I

we  shall  no  longer  need  slaves." It  is  not  the  first  clause  of
this  sentence  (which  has  so  often  been  regarded  as  an  inspired
anticipation  of  future machine-labour) which  seems to  me
remarkable ;  for  Aristotle is  here  giving  expression  not  to
any  anticipation  but  to  a  recollection  of  the  dsedalian  works
of  art  which  mythology  had  extolled. But  what  is  remark-
able is  how  wider  development  (governed  by  the  idea  of  the
advantage  to  be  expected)  seeks,  under  a  condition  of  things
in  which  slavery  exists,  to  realize  the  contradictory  notion  of
an  instrument  that  acts  intelligently  and  yet  remains  a  mere
instrument. With  much  adornment  of  logical  periphrasis  it
veils  but  slightly  the aristocratic egoism, which from  the
self-regard  of  the  favoured  individual,  from  the  requirements
of  the refined  and  liberal  culture of  one man, infers the rf
servitude  of  others  as  a  matter  of  course. The  capabilities 1
of  men are various  ; Aristotle distinguishes kingly souls
which are capable of living nobly and worthily  in their
own  strength,  from  others  which  can  neither  set  before  them-
selves any  intelligent  aims  in  life,  nor  if  they  had  such  could
find  the  means  of  working  them  out. But  the  moral  duty  of v
careful  teaching  of  the  w^eak  and  compassionate  love  towards I
them  is not assigned  to the strong  as a  consequence of )
their  superiority ;  the  title  of  "  kingly  souls  "  once  bestowed
introduces unperceived into the discussion the claim of
sovereignty, and the weak become the chattels of the x
strong.

Such  a  foundation  would  be  even  worse  than  the  reality.
Debt  and  capture  in  war  were  everywhere  the  most  frequent

374

BOOK  Vni. CHAPTEE  II.

causes  of  slavery.  In  the  first  case,  the  harshness  of  the
victor  may  be  understood  as  a  result  of  the  hatred  which
survives  the  contest,  this  hatred  at  any  rate  being  a  passionate
emotion ;  and  in  the  second  case,  a  series  of  deductions  which
are  not  without  some  show  of  justice,  easily  leads  to  the
conclusion  that  the  debtor  who  is  unable  to  pay  off  his  debt
should  with  his  capacities  of  labour  be  made  attachable.
Then  in  order  to  secure  the  use  of  these  capacities  his
freedom  should  be  restricted,  so  that  finally,  in  order  that
they  may  be  exchangeable  for  money,  his  person  should  be,  not
indeed  immediately  vendible  but  liable  to  be  bound  to  render
an  equivalent  in  labour  to  any  third  person  in  return  for  the
payment  by  that  person  of  the  sum  owed  by  him.  In  both
cases  there  is  wanting  the  indispensable  recognition  that  the
dignity  of  human  personality  does  not  allow  either  of  such
a  satisfaction  of  the  victor's  passion  nor  of  such  a  mode
of  carrying  out  legal  claims;  but  the  cold-bloodedness  of
Aristotle's  sophistical  deduction  is  without  even  the  feeble
excuse  which  may  be  made  for  these  two  historical  causes
of  slavery.

The  harshness  of  theory  was  only  partially  mitigated  in
practice.  What  was  the  sign  by  which  those  kingly  souls
were  distinguished  from  the  souls  that  were  born  to  serve  ?
In  the  first  place  of  course  Hellenic  pride  regarded  those  who
were  not  Greeks  as  destined  by  Nature  to  slavery ;  not  be-
cause they  were  incapable  of  being  civilised,  for  even  the
barbarian  slaves  who  had  been  purchased  were  educated  in
order  to  make  them  more  useful,  but  simply  on  account  of
their  descent.  In  the  endless  internal  wars,  however,  inhabit-
ants of  conquered  towns  were  sold  as  slaves,  Greek  was
enslaved  to  Greek  in  spite  of  the  condemnatory  public  opinion
of  those  not  concerned  in  the  traffic  and  of  occasional  laws
forbidding  slavery  or  requiring  that  redemption  should  be
allowed.  For  the  rest  the  condition  of  slaves  was  various
enough.  Cruelty  and  delight  in  torture  were  not  prominent
national  faults  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  but  just  as  little  were
they  a  tender-hearted  race ;  what  was  most  important was

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  375

that  their  moral  principles  depended  upon  the  existing  con-
dition of  their  speculative  convictions  without  any  active  and
immediate  sense  of  duty.  Athens  treated  her  slaves  mildly,
and  it  may  be  that  their  condition  was  happier  than  that  of
the  free  proletariat  of  more  modern  times;  Sparta  had  a
doctrinaire  tendency  to  inhumanity  due  to  her  principles
of  statecraft;  the  Lacedaemonian  youths  roaming  steathily
through  the  forests  and  plains  in  order  to  slay  secretly
the  discontented  helots,  present  in  the  midst  of  fair  Greece  a
dark  picture  which  is  genuinely  Indian  in  character.

Upon  this  foundation  of  deep  dark  shadow  there  rested
the  brilliant  development  of  liberal  culture  which  has  made
Athens  and  some  other  of  the  Greek  states  an  imperishable  ex-
ample to  posterity.  The  avrdpKeia,  the  self-sufficingness  which
Greek  philosophy  so  often  extolled  as  the  crown  of  human
perfection,  was  by  no  means  to  be  found  in  this  constitution
of  society,  for  here  the  enjoyment  of  some  depended  on  the
labour  of  others.  Therefore,  however  great  the  mental  develop-
ment might  be  which  was  so  won  (and  it  can  hardly  be
proved  that  it  could  have  been  won  in  no  other  way),  yet  in
the  clear  recognition  by  the  common  consciousness  of  the  un-
suitableness  of  such  a  foundation  for  the  highest  human  per-
fection there  is  certainly  involved  a  great  and  perceptible
advance  in  human  progress — an  advance,  however,  that  only
came  slowly  and  that  is  not  yet  complete.

In  the  period  succeeding  that  of  which  we  have  just
spoken,  the  Roman  Empire  only  developed  further  the  per-
nicious germs  referred  to.  The  Italian  tribes  being  actively
disposed,  and  not  much  inclined  to  the  cultivation  of  a
variety  of  industries,  were  all  the  more  attached  to  the
unvarying  pursuits  of  agriculture ;  to  this  kind  of  labour  even
the  Eomans  continued  for  a  long  time  to  recur  with  liking
and  esteem.  But  the  continuous  wars  in  which  the  growing
state  was  involved  prevented  manufactures  from  flourishing,
and  gradually  led  to  a  habit  of  taking  possession  of  the
necessaries  of  life  by  force  of  arms  instead  of  producing  them  j
and  subsequently  led  the  Eomans  to  treat  the  greatest  part

376

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  II.

\

of  tlie  known  world  as  though  it  had  been  a  mere  store-
house for  themselves,  thus  dulling  their  own  liking  foi
labour.  The  way  in  which  the  Eoman  donjinion  spread,  not
through  plunderiug  expeditions,  but  with  regular  admini-
stration and  exaction,  easily  explains  how  the  gains  of  con-
quest led  to  the  disproportioned  wealth  of  a  few,  whileJ
the  majority  became  poor.  The  Eomans  had  to  spend]
their  own  strength  in  the  labours  of  unceasing  military
service,  and  the  home-returned  veteran  lamented  that  he
could  no  longer  find  a  clod  of  earth  on  which  to  rest  his
head,  and  that  there  was  not  even  room  for  him  to  work  for
wages,  since  all  labour  was  in  the  hands  of  the  multitude
of  slaves  taken  in  war.  Society  was  shaken  by  repeated
attempts  to  regain  the  lost  basis  of  economic  equilibrium  by
means  of  repartitions  of  land ;  the  state  was  forced  to  bestow
in  benefactions  of  food  and  money  the  fatal  gift  of  unmerited
alms  (instead  of  wages  gained  by  labour)  upon  a  multitude
who  soon  ceased  to  demand  anything  but  bread  and  thea-
trical representations.  Public  life  certainly  continued  for  a
long  time  to  have,  in  the  greatness  of  political  activity,  an
interesting  and  important  content ;  the  strict  family  morality
of  former  times  long  continued  to  exercise  its  educative  influ-
ences ;  but  rigid  legality  had  in  Eome's  early  days  im-
posed even  upon  Eomans  harsh  restrictions  of  liberty  and
bondage  to  creditors,  and  made  the  power  of  the  father  and
master  unlimited,  at  least  in  theory.  The  same  disposition,
not  softened  by  any  varied  and  humane  culture  of  native
growth,  and  having  once  for  all  missed  the  true  principles  of
morality,  led  to  the  extreme  of  doctrinaire  and  systematically
regulated  cruelty  in  the  judicial  and  legal  ordering  of  the
condition  of  slaves.

I  3.  Antiquity  did  not  succeed  in  dividing  labour  and
commodities  so  as  to  produce  universal  happiness,  or  even  so
as  to  escape  the  reproach  of  avoidable  injustice.  But  it
witnessed  a  many-sided  mental  development  in  which  men
sought  to  find  the  aim  of  life  and  the  way  to  enjoy  life
worthily,  and  if  minds  had  not  derived  much  benefit  from  the

WOKK  AND  HAPPINESS.  377

educative  effects  of  labour,  yet  on  the  other  hand  the  developed
taste  of  the  liberal  ancient  culture  had  a  stimulative  effect
upon  labour  by  setting  before  it  an  abundance  of  interesting
tasks.  We  see  this  effect  in  a  pervading  artistic  grace
and  in  the  harmonious  style  of  treatment  to  which  it  is
owing  that  even  in  our  view  the  numerous  small  remains  of
antique  labour  seem  to  represent  a  coherent  wealth  of  ordered
beauty  in  the  surroundings  of  life.  "We  see  it  also  in  the
splendid  works  in  which  the  organizing  activity  of  political
administration  combined  a  multitude  of  subject  powers.  This
condition  of  things  was  changed  by  the  storms  of  national
migration.  The  vague  adventure-loving  impulse  of  the  heroic
age  again  obtained  ascendency  over  significant  mental  culture ;
slavery  as  a  legally  existing  institution  did  indeed  gradually
disappear ;  but  the  labouring  section  of  mankind,  as  contrasted
with  those  who  carry  arms,  sank  into  a  state  of  dependence
which  in  many  respects  was  hardly  different  from  slavery.
Neither  in  detail,  however,  nor  on  the  whole,  did  the  newly
dominant  element  afford  to  labour  the  stimulus  of  interesting
tasks.  For  the  requirements  of  private  life  were  neither  so
varied  nor  so  refined  as  before ;  the  degeneration  of  political
life  into  a  multitude  of  territories  loosely  federated,  and  con-
stantly at  war  with  one  another,  prevented  any  of  those  great
enterprises  which  had  been  the  pride  of  antiquity.  Yet
ancient  art  and  its  productions  lived  on  as  well  as  they  could  ;
and  these  transmitted  remains  subsequently  furnished  an
animating  stimulus  to  renewed  advance ;  but  for  a  long  time
nothing  new  arose,  and  no  age  is  so  poor  in  progressive
discoveries  and  inventions  as  the  interval  which  divides  the
downfall  of  the  classical  world  from  the  renascence  of  the
sciences.

And  it  was  just  labour  which  by  its  peculiar  development,
especially  in  the  more  northern  countries  of  Europe,  was  to
change  the  whole  aspect  of  life,  and  to  give  it  a  new  and  -^
permanent  direction.  When  the  storms  which  stirred  the
nations  had  subsided,  commerce  which  again  began  to  traverse
the  different  countries  awoke  new  wants  by  the  commodities

^

L

378

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  11.

(

CjIJ.

which  it  introduced,  and  new  efforts  to  satisfy  these  wants  at
the  price  of  native  productions.  At  the  places  where  men
met  to  carry  out  these  exchanges  of  commodities,  settlements
were  formed  with  which  by  degrees  the  native  industries  of
the  surrounding  country  became  permanently  connected.  Both
the  absence  of  legal  security  in  those  times,  and  the  imper-
fection and  awkwardness  of  communication  with  distant
countries,  necessitated  close  combination  between  related
industries,  and  at  an  equally  early  date  made  these  combina-
tions inclined  to  exclude  any  workman  who  had  not,  by
undertaking  the  duties  of  the  brotherhood,  also  acquired  its
rights.  These  noteworthy  historical  circumstances  caused  a
man's  chosen  work  to  become  a  fixed  calling,  which  determined
for  each  individual  his  rank  in  the  society;  for  in  fact  his  work
was  to  him  no  longer  a  mere  quantum  of  labour  which  he  had
to  get  through,  and  by  which  an  equally  definite  quantity  of
enjoyment  was  to  be  purchased,  but  by  his  having  on  his
part  voluntarily  taken  up  this  work  he  had  become  instead  ot
a  mere  specimen  of  the  race  an  authorized  constituent  of
human  society.  The  same  articulation  of  society,  which  in
oriental  caste  had  become  as  it  were  hardened  into  a  natural
distinction,  irremovable  and  extending  from  one  generation
to  another,  was  reproduced  here,  with  the  difference  that  it
was  now  an  order  in  which  the  individual  was  entitled  to
freely  choose  his  own  place ;  just  as  much  a  matter  of  course
as  that  each  naturally  belonged  to  one  family  was  it  that  he
should  not  only  do  work  or  carry  on  business  as  a  member  of  the
society,  but  that  he  should  also  follow  a  definite  calling,  sharing
its  duties,  rights,  customs,  and  enjoyments.  Thus  all  labour
was  systematized  into  guilds  ;  even  beggars  and  vagabonds
were  regarded  as  constituting  a  fellowship,  having  like  the
others  a  right  to  exist,  and  having  to  establish  this  right  by
the  observance  of  certain  customs.  These  combinations  which
first  arose  from  community  of  labour  soon  involved  a  com-
munity of  all  the  interests  of  life ;  at  social  entertainmenta,
and  in  the  administration  of  civic  business,  men  took  part  not
simply  as  men  and  as  citizens,  but  they  felt  both  that  it  was

WOEK  AND  HAPPINESS.  379

from  the  rank  to  which  they  belonged  and  from  the  guild
that  their  right  arose  to  participation,  and  also  that  the  same
source  furnished  them  with  the  characteristic  and  expressive
forms  of  such  participation.

Much  in  this  constitution  of  society  may  now  appear  to  us
as  arbitrary  restrictions ;  but  that  which  makes  us  feel  it
restricted  then  existed  either  not  at  all  or  only  in  a  very
slight  degree ;  and  it  is  really  doubtful  whether  our  feelings  m/^
in  the  matter  are  quite  justified.  That  remembrance  of
differences  of  rank  should  be  dragged  into  free  social  inter-
course may  easily  seem  to  us  preposterous ;  but  there  was
then  no  general  culture  which  could  make  the  interchange  of  >^
opinion  interesting,  and  no  generally  accepted  code  of  morality  |
capable  of  imposing  fixed  and  beneficent  forms  of  intercourse.
Still  less  active  was  the  consciousness  of  a  political  order
representing  social  advantages  of  more  than  mere  local  interest ;
on  the  contrary,  those  town  communities  which  had  arisen
from  definite  departments  of  labour  were  the  only  living  wholes
which  being  united  by  reciprocal  needs  pursued  common  ends.
Thus  it  was  natural  that  political  importance  should  accrue  to
individual  trades  in  the  localities  where  they  flourished — an
importance  by  no  means  correspondent  to  the  nature  of  the
labour  in  which  they  were  engaged,  but  quite  appropriate  to
a  society  of  men  bound  together  among  themselves  by  similar
habits  of  life  and  reciprocal  duties  and  rights.

The  results  of  this  relation  were  of  advantage  to  labour
itself  as  well  as  to  public  life.  Consolidation  of  a  trade  into
guilds,  beside  which  others  exist,  roused  natural  emulation  and
made  men  desire  to  be  esteemed  for  the  sake  of  that  condition  in
life  which  they  had  chosen.  There  was  developed  that  sturdy
temper  which  makes  men  seek  to  maintain  before  all  the
world  the  honour  of  their  handicraft,  and  makes  them  give
themselves  to  their  work  with  heart  and  soul,  in  order  that
they  may  increase  its  excellence;  slowly  and  with  difficulty,
not  as  yet  helped  and  supported  by  any  science,  artistic  fancy
once  more  gained  a  footing  upon  this  path  of  thoughtful
labour. Public  life  gained  in  prosperity  and  beauty  by  the

/

380

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  II.

humane  institutions  primarily  founded  by  the  brotherhoods
for  the  sake  of  their  members  and  by  the  contributions
which  they  vied  with  each  other  in  rendering  for  the
advancement  of  the  common  good ;  national  codes  of  morals'
having  long  ago  fallen  into  disuse,  family  life,  principally
under  the  influence  of  this  industry,  developed  the  new
growth  of  civic  discipline,  the  strictness  and  steadiness  of  which
recall  the  golden  age  of  Eoman  honour;  and  yet  being  pervaded
on  the  one  hand  by  Christian  thought  which  tends  to  freedom,
and  on  the  other  hand  by  the  spirit  of  active  industry,  it  shows
in  not  a  few  points  an  undoubted  advance  of  the  human  race.
For  a  long  time  this  form  of  life,  in  which  work  and  enjoy-
ment are  blended  as  much  as  possible,  was  opposed  to  the
adventurous  spirit  of  chivalry,  which  found  that  as  society
became  gradually  consolidated,  occasions  of  knightly  deeds  began
to  fail,  society  having  even  to  defend  itself  against  the  attacks
of  the  knightly  order ;  but  the  new  view  of  life  made  its  way
notwithstanding,  and  if  political  independence  or  a  recognition
amounting  to  the  same  thing  were  not  very  rapidly  reached,
yet  this  philosophy  soon  began  to  determine  the  general  forms
of  society.  It  is  by  it  that  the  material  wealth  of  modern
countries  has  been  won ;  from  it  proceeded  at  a  later  period
the  revival  of  learning  and  art ;  so  to  it  was  due  nearly  the
whole  content  of  life ;  and  it  was  but  natural  that  it  should
also  influence  the  external  character  of  life,  even  to  costume
and  the  tone  of  conversation.  But  it  did  not  reach  this
supremacy  until  influential  circumstances  of  all  kinds  had
^  already  begun  to  produce  an  essential  alteration  of  its  character.
§  4.  The  great  geographical  discoveries  with  which  the
Middle  Ages  closed,  the  rapid  development  of  the  physical
sciences  which  soon  followed,  the  extraordinary  effect  which
the  discovery  of  printing  had  in  extending,  accelerating,  and
facilitating  the  communication  of  thought,  and  the  similar
influence  exercised  by  the  development  of  navigation  and
finally  of  steam  power  upon  commerce — these  things  it  is
that  have  chiefly  given  to  modern  life  its  distinctive  character
as  regards  enjoyment,  industry,  and  interchange  of  goods.

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  381

The  outlines  of  land  and  water  on  the  earth's  surface  have
now  been  ascertained  with  a  completeness  which  causes  us  to
believe  that  we  cannot  look  for  any  surprising  discoveries  in
the  future,  and  for  the  first  time  the  various  races  that  dwell
upon  the  globe  have  come  within  sight  of  one  another. The
interior  of  great  continents  and  their  resources  still  remain  in
deep  obscurity,  and  many  nations  are  stiU  seeking  points  of
departure  from  which  they  may  proceed  to  the  formation  of
permanent  social  relations;  but  everywhere  we  find an  in-
vestigating  zeal  which is no longer content  to amuse the
imagination  with  a  description  of  distant  wonders,  but  desires /
to  bring  all  these  unknown  and  distant  regions  into  useful j
connection  with  our  own  civilisation. The  explanation  which
science  is  now  beginning  to  afford  of  the  extensive  connection
between  natural  effects  all over the surface of the earth
already  gives  useful support to these attempts, hindering
some adventurous undertakings by  showing  their  economic
uselessness, and  encouraging others by pointing out their
probable good results. Commerce,  in equilibrating  supply . jJ^
and  demand  in  the  most  distant  regions,  and  being  able  to
effect  desirable  exchanges  with  increasing  ease,  is  approaching
the  solution  of  its  problem,  which  is  to  unite  all  parts  of  the \
earth  into  a  single  economic  whole,  to  supplement  the  niggard- [
liness  of  one  climate  by  the  fruitfulness  of  another,  to  guard '
against  the  dangerous  fluctuations  of  society  caused  by  famines
in  ancient  times  and  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  to  make  the
most  inhospitable  regions  fit  to  be  at  least  a  temporary  abode
of  human  beings  wherever  I^ature  has  not  set  limits  to  men's
further  advance  by  refusing  the gifts  which  are  absolutely
indispensable to  life. Political projects  which  have  never »,
been  altogether  independent  of  economic  considerations  are M
now  obliged  to  be  made  with  a  more  careful  calculation  of  the
much  more  complicated  actions  and  reactions  upon  which  the
power  and  welfare  of  states  depends. Perhaps  an accurate
judgment  of  what  is  here  advantageous  is  in  most  respects
still  in  its  infancy ;  yet  to  some  extent  we  clearly  see  the
restraining  power  which  is  exercised  upon  the  warlike  instincts .  ' —

382

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  II.

of  mankind  by  the  consciousness  of  this  connection  of  com-
plicated relations  which  men  are  bound  to  respect.  Not
indeed  unfailingly,  nor  in  all  respects  advantageously,  is  this
influence  exercised.  For  however  desirable  may  be  the
restraint  of  coarse  and  merely  destructive  forces,  it  is  by  no
means  desirable  that  the  whole  of  life  should  be  fettered  by
material  possessions  and  by  that  love  of  peace  which  would
sometimes  be  willingly  deaf  to  the  call  of  honour  from  fear
that  such  possessions  should  be  endangered.

The  opening  of  the  boundless  realms  of  the  new  world  has
in  another  respect  had  a  favourable  effect  upon  political  life.
Many  institutions  and  conditions  which  had  been  handed
down  by  long  tradition,  oppressed  mankind  as  with  the  con-
sciousness of  a  tedious  and  hopeless  malady,  and  now  an
opportunity  was  afforded  it  of  making  vast  new  constructions  ;
it  could  now  learn  by  its  own  fresh  experience  what  strength
and  activity  human  life  demands  when  men  are  forced  to
return  to  the  most  primitive  labour,  what  benefits  (perhaps  too
lightly  esteemed)  may  be  combined  even  with  the  evils  of
ancient  civilisation,  and  finally  what  new  and  more  vigorous
institutions  may  be  established  when  men  are  unhampered  by
tradition  and  are  free  to  be  guided  by  existing  circumstances.
It  had  hitherto  been  as  impossible  for  history  as  it  is  for  the
physician  to  make  the  valuable  experiment  of  trying  how  an
existing  condition,  which  has  been  treated  in  a  definite  way,
would  develop  if  subjected  to  quite  different  treatment.  One
of  the  most  special  advantages  of  modern  times  has  been  the
possession  of  this  new  world  alongside  of  the  old  world,  and
the  being  able  without  any  sudden  interruption  of  historical
development  to  realize  the  events  and  life-experiences  passed
through  by  men  in  that  great  arena  of  aspiring  powers.

To  this  extension  of  the  scene  of  economic  activity,  with  its
important  results,  the  growth  of  physical  science  furnished  the
means  necessary  for  the  complete  conquest  of  the  new  territory.
Useful  discoveries  have  been  made  in  all  ages,  but  there  has
not  existed  in  all  ages  that  activity  of  imagination  to  which
any  success  attained  immediately  becomes  a  starting-point  for

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  383

fresh  undertakings ;  in  ancient  times  and  in  the  Middle  Ages,
the  application  of  any  newly  discovered  natural  or  artificial
power  was  usually  restricted  to  the  immediate  sphere  of  work
which  had  given  occasion  for  its  discovery.  It  is  different  in
our  time.  By  experiment  and  calculation  the  principles  and
laws  of  action  of  forces  have  been  arrived  at  in  at  least
some  departments  of  Nature;  nuhierous  observations  have
ascertained  the  various  results  produced  by  the  action  of  these
forces  under  arbitrarily  established  or  altered  conditions  of
their  application ;  now  every  newly  discovered  material  and
every  newly  ascertained  natural  process  is  regarded  from  a
variety  of  general  standpoints  and  compared  with  a  variety  of
recollections  of  what  has  been  previously  observed,  and  these
not  merely  arouse  but  often  forthwith  give  an  answer  to  the
question,  What  further  advantage  is  to  be  gained  by  subject-
ing this  new  discovery  to  definite  conditions  or  by  combining
it  with  known  forces  ?  Hence  arise  men's  vigorous  en-
deavours to  follow  out  forthwith  all^the  possible  aipplications
■  of  a  fresh  discovery,  and  the  frequent  demand  that  definite
instruments  of  progress  (which  are  needed  and  from  which  are
expected  services  which  can  be  exactly  specified)  should  be
provided  by  searching  out  new  chemical  combinations,  or  new
means  for  the  composition  of  forces ;  and  hence  finally  a
knowledge  of  the  hindrances  which  yet  remain  to  be  overcome  ^
in  the  accomplishment  of  a  mechanical  task,  and  of  the
direction  which  must  be  taken  by  any  investigation  which
aims  at  removing  these.  These  advantages  depend  upon  the
nature  of  our  knowledge  and  the  facility  with  which  (thanks
to  the  easy  communication  of  thought)  co-operative  labour  can  y^
be  carried  on ;  and  they  have  not  only  conferred  upon  us  an
incomparably  greater  wealth  of  useful  commodities  than  were
possessed  by  men  in  ancient  times  and  in  the  Middle  Ages,
but  have  also  determined  our  mode  of  thought. Much  which  ^

formerly  seemed  to  us  impossible  we  now  regard  as  a  mere
matter  of  time ;  the  combined  energy  of  men  applies  itself  to
the  most  extensive  undertakings  with  a  calm  prevision  of
success. This energy  seeks not merely to transform the

384  BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  IL

inanimate  world  but  also  regards  the  animal  kingdom  as  a
constituent  part  of  a  universe  of  usable  commodities,  modify-
ing the  physical  formation  of  animals  by  careful  breeding  for
arbitrarily  chosen  ends,  and  thus  feeling  ever  more  and  more
supreme  over  Nature  and  ever  more  and  more  losing  the
remains  of  that  awe  with  which  even  as  late  as  the  Middle
Ages  the  mysterious  characteristics  of  natural  elements  were
regarded ;  men  anticipating  more  results  from  the  wondrous
developments  of  these  (which  they  ventured  only  timidly  to
initiate)  than  from  their  own  well- calculated  interference.

These  considerations  extend  to  the  coherence  of  society
with  reference  both  to  its  internal  consistence  and  to  its
connection  with  physical  conditions.  The  abundant  and
penetrating  reflections  of  antiquity  upon  these  questions
were  destitute  on  the  one  hand  of  a  basis  of  observation
wide  as  to  both  space  and  time,  and  on  the  other  hand
of  the  possibility  of  easily  communicating  the  results  attained.
Statistical  science  with  its  characteristically  developed  methods
of  comparison  is  now  able  to  utilize  the  rich  material  which
the  present  owes  to  its  greatly  enlarged  intellectual  horizon,
and  the  existing  multifarious  means  of  communication  make
its  results  the  common  property  of  much  wider  circles.  Thus
among  the  most  characteristic  features  of  modern  times  may
be  reckoned  growing  clearness  and  increasing  extension
of  reflection  concerning  the  foundations  of  the  economic
articulation  of  society,  concerning  the  laws  of  exchange,  and
the  connection  of  all  human  activity.  If  it  were  ever  possible
for  the  human  mind  to  move  on  exclusively  in  a  single  direc-
tion, the  injurious  effects  of  the  present  preference  for  this
region  of  thought  would  be  developed  still  more  plainly  than
they  are.  For  taken  alone  it  favours  the  disposition  to  regard
all  that  happens  as  a  mere  example  of  general  laws.  It  has
a  tendency  to  make  man  regard  his  own  development,
which  had  before  seemed  at  least  partly  to  be  the  work  of
his  own  free  will,  as  the  product  of  climate,  of  food,  and  of
natural  endowment,  and  the  changes  of  these  that  take  place
according  to  natural  law. In  this  connection  of  all  things,

WOilK  AND  HAPPINESS.  385

mechanically  so  clear,  it  is  difficult  to  hold  fast  the  thought
of  higher  ideals,  ideals  which  are  entitled  to  require  some-
thing other  than  that  which  the  natural  concatenation  of
causes  and  effects  can  of  itself  produce.  In  fact  the  flood  of
materialistic  views  with  which  we  are  inundated  bears  witness
to  this  increasing  disposition  to  leave  to  man  no  other  destiny  [
than  care  for  his  physical  nature,  development  of  the  capacities  i\
of  his  kind,  and  the  multiplication  of  those  good  things  to  the
enjoyment  of  which  this  part  of  his  being  leads  him.  Thought-
ful reflection  also,  which  does  not  take  such  a  narrow  view,  has
succumbed  to  the  temptation  to  regard  social  changes  which
seem  to  be  forced  on  by  natural  conditions,  as  being  justifiable
simply  because  they  are  explicable;  and  to  look  on  at  the
stream  of  circumstances  with  tacit  acceptance  of  events  that
are  accomplished,  or  are  in  course  of  being  accomplished,
approving  every  turn  and  eddy  of  that  stream.

§  5.  The  greatest  part  of  the  peculiar  form  assumed  by  the  ,  Ia/vU^
relations  of  labour  in  our  times  is  due  to  the  development  of  '
machinery.  The  infinitely  numerous  possible  functions  of
the  human  hand  in  labour  are  found  separated  in  machines,
each  individual  function  being  attached  to  a  mechanism
which  exists  purposely  for  it,  and  each  being  on  this  account
endowed  with  greater  strength,  staying  power,  and  exact-
ness. Antiquity  possessed  but  few  of  these  advantages ;  it
had  at  best  only  tools,  that  is  to  say  contrivances  which  do
indeed  by  their  construction  and  manner  of  use  afford  to
human  strength  a  more  convenient  hold  of  the  objects  upon
which  men  work,  but  yet  find  the  spring  of  their  movement
and  action  in  the  strength  and  skill  of  the  human  arm.  It  was
the  utilization  of  steam  which  first  substituted  for  them,  and
hat  with  ever  increasing  generality,  machines  the  disposable
brce  of  which  is  developed  not  indeed  from  nothing,  and  just
as  little  from  a  mere  summation  or  transformation  of  human
activity,  but  from  the  efficiency  of  elemental  forces,  machines
erely  providing  for  this  efficiency  the  conditions  of  useful
action;  and  even  this  work  is  facilitated  by  the  progress  of

^technical  art. As  from  the  beginning  the  earlier  and  coarser

B VOL.  II.  2  B

I

t;

I

386  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  H.

tool  helped  to  make  a  more  delicate  one,  so  it  is  machines
themselves  which  make  those  parts  of  other  machines  that  are
difficult  of  construction ;  and  it  is  machines  themselves  which,
in  part  at  least,  changing  their  action  according  to  the  chang-
ing requirements  of  the  work,  counterbalance  the  injurious
incidental  effects  which  that  action  would  otherwise  entail.

The  costliness  of  machinery  and  of  keeping  it  going,
generally  speaking  makes  its  employment  profitable  only
in  uninterrupted  production  on  a  large  scale.  As  when  the
radius  of  a  circle  is  increased,  successive  equal  additions  to
its  superficial  extent  are  made  with  an  ever  decreasing  pro-
portional addition  to  its  circumference :  so  with  the  same
necessity  in  most  kinds  of  labour,  as  the  scale  on  which  it  is
undertaken  is  increased,  the  increase  of  useful  production
exceeds  in  a  growing  ratio  the  increase  of  outlay ;  when  re-
duplications of  similar  functions  are  performed  by  one
instrument  there  is  hardly  needed  an  increase  of  the  activity
which  it  would  have  to  devote  to  a  single  performance  of  the
same  function ;  most  productions  gain  in  perfection  when
their  various  separate  parts  are  made  by  separate  machinery
which  is  devoted  exclusively  to  them ;  and  finally  this
division  of  labour,  advantageous  in  itself,  is  facilitated  by  the
unvarying  exactitude  of  mechanical  action,  the  uniformity  of
its  productions  making  possible  their  subsequent  combination
into  a  whole.

The  advantages  hence  arising  for  the  products  of  labour
and  for  their  distribution  have  been  as  often  extolled  as  the
disadvantages  connected  with  them  have  been  lamented.  It
is  without  doubt  due  to  the  use  of  machinery  in  manufactures
that  there  has  been  diffused  among  the  people  a  great  supply
of  the  means  of  comfort  and  wellbeing  which  either  were  quite
inaccessible  to  the  civilisation  of  earlier  times,  or  on  account
of  the  difficulty  of  procuring  them  were  attainable  only  by  a
few.  But  this  industry  has  already  absorbed  much  which
used  to  belong  to  art,  and  though  the  artistic  element  may
not  have  been  wholly  banished  from  its  uniform  productions,
yet  they are without the traces  of that  lively  individual

i

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  387

imagination  which  is  revealed  in  so  many  objects  of  ancient
or  mediaeval  workmanship — objects  which  one  hand  had  with
loving  interest  framed  in  every  stage,  from  the  raw  material
to  the  final  form.  It  is  now  more  difficult  than  it  used  to  be
to  provide  dwellings  with  harmonious  furniture  ;  it  is  the  slight
interest  which  we  can  feel  in  furniture  that  has  been  pur-
chased and  brought  together  from  a  variety  of  places,  that
makes  us  disregard  the  lack  of  coherent  mental  character  in
our  customary  surroundings.  On  the  other  hand,  the  cheap-
ness of  manufactures  produced  by  machinery,  as  compared
with  those  produced  by  that  human  skill  which  has  now  lost
its  value,  is  not  so  great  as  to  allow  of  unpropertied  persons
participating  with  any  degree  of  completeness  in  these  new
comforts  and  conveniences  of  life.  In  perfectly  simple  states
of  society,  the  various  dispositions  which  even  there  have  place
appear  side  by  side  as  if  they  all  had  anr  equal  right  to  exist,
just  as  the  different  kinds  of  animals,  for  none  of  which  is  it
any  reproof  to  be  what  it  is ;  it  is  to  a  high  degree  of  refinement,
that  there  is  first  opposed  as  its  antitype  that  coarseness  which
while  it  knows  all  the  newly  discovered  and  newly  developed
moral  relations  despises  or  misuses  all  of  them.  Just  in  the
same  way  poverty  of  external  appearance  is  no  reproach,  is
often  even  picturesque,  at  a  stage  of  civilisation  in  which  men
have  but  few  needs  and  satisfy  these  in  the  most  primitive
and  simple  manner.  On  the  other  hand,  this  same  poverty
assumes  the  peculiar  character  of  squalor  when  it  appears  in
the  midst  of  a  society  the  life  of  which  is  based  upon  a  very
complicated  and  intricately  branching-  system  of  satisfying
human  wants.  Poverty,  taking  isolated  and  disconnected  frag-
ments from  this  system,  becomes  subject  to  wants  which  it  has
no  assured  permanent  and  adequate  means  of  satisfying ;  and
substitutes  for  previous  frugal  needs  and  occasional  inventive
sallies  the  awkward  discomfort  of  surroundings  which  afford
adequate  satisfaction  of  needs  only  by  fits  and  starts,  and  of
an  outward  appearance  of  slovenliness.  It  is  only  in  the  south,
with  its  mild  climate,  that  there  still  remains  any  charm  about
the  life  of  the  majority ;  the  vast  and  needy  masses  of  the

388  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  II.

civilised  nations  of  the  north  pass  their  existence  even  now
in  such  dwellings  and  under  such  conditions  as  to  clothing
and  household  furniture  as  must  be  hardly  less  repulsive  than
the  hovels  in  which  thousands  of  years  ago  oppressed  Asiatics
hid  themselves  away  from  their  tyrants.

Still  more  unfavourable  is  the  effect  of  the  new  forms  of
labour  upon  mental  development.  What  was  so  much  feared
in  ancient  times,  the  narrowing  of  men's  intellectual  horizon
by  unintellectual  occupations,  threatens  the  mass  of  the  people
more  and  more  as  the  division  of  labour  goes  on  getting
greater.  Even  in  the  division  of  manual  labour  in  past  times,
many  an  employment  constituted  a  fixed  vocation  which,  if
the  matter  had  been  settled  by  regard  for  untrammelled  human
development,  must  have  been  reckoned  among  the  temporary
occupations  of  household  labour.  But  independent  handicrafts
generally  embraced  a  plurality  of  cognate  operations ;  it  was
possible  for  the  labourer  to  accompany  the  various  stages  of
elaboration  undergone  by  raw  material  before  attaining  its  final
form,  with  continuous  activity  and  a  satisfactory  sense  of
the  progress  and  results  of  the  work.  The  tool  habitually
used  did  indeed  exercise  an  influence  upon  the  bodily  develop-
ment, the  demeanour,  the  character,  and  the  sphere  of  thought
of  the  workman  ;  but  yet  he  was  not  its  slave  :  in  every  outline
of  the  finished  products  he  could,  as  it  were,  trace  the  strength
and  delicacy  of  his  own  formative  touch.  On  the  other  hand,
man's  share  in  the  work  that  is  done  by  machinery  is  limited
to  very  uniform  manual  operations  which  do  not  directly
shape  anything,  but  merely  communicate  to  some  mechanism
which  is  not  understood  an  uncomprehended  impulse  to
some  invisible  operation.  The  completed  product  reaches  the
hands  of  the  individual  worker  in  a  condition  of  which  he
did  not  witness  the  production,  and  passes  out  of  his  hands
again  to  undergo  further  transformations  which  are  brought
about  in  a  way  equally  obscure  to  him.  Hence  arises  the
worst  possible  division  of  labour  —  the  separation  of  the
sagacious  invention  and  guidance  which,  with  the  increasing
complication  of  machinery,  requires  ever  increasing  circum-

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  389

Bpection,  fiom  the  nnintelligent  inanipulation  which  is  able  to
do  without  thought in  proportion  as  all  its  difficulties are
solved  by  others. For  the  only  perfection  which  it  is  possible
for  such  workers  to  develop — the  formal  one  of  exactitude
without  consciousness  of  the  ends  to  be  attained — is  the  very
same  virtue  which  is  required  from  machinery  itself. It  is
only  unusual  talent  that  can  succeed  in  raising  itself,  under
such unfavourable  conditions  and  in  entering  the  ranks  of
invention ;  for  moderate  capacities  labour  is  no  longer  either \y
enjoyment  or  a  means  of  culture. And  this  injurious  result ' '
cannot  be  counterbalanced  by  the  compensation  which  intelli-
gent benevolence  seeks  to  provide  for  the  labourer  by  giving  y^
him  a  larger  allowance  of  leisure  and  better  means  of  occupy-
ing it. He  may  have  access  given  him  to  means  of  scientific
culture,  to  instructive  lectures,  to  refined  pleasures — he  may
even  be  enabled  to  enjoy  temporarily  a  luxury,  which  certainly
may  possibly  be made accessible to him by a  system ot
industry  that  depends  upon  enormous  consumption ;  but  all
this  does  not  alter  the  feeling  which  regards  unintellectual ^
work  as  a  mere  means  to  enjoyment,  and  having  no  sympathy (
or  devotion  for  the  work  itself  merely  seeks  to  get  it  over  in
order  to  obtain  its  fruits. This  lamentable  division  of  life
into  labour  and  leisure  that  are  opposed  to  one  another  as  day
and  night,  is  at  present  undoubtedly  progressing ;  when  we
boast,  as  one  of  the  advantages  of  our  own  time,  that  all  kinds
of  labour  are  now  respected,  this  often  means  nothing  more
than  that  the  attainment  of  means  of  enjoyment  by  any  kind i  1
of  effort  is  praised ;  it  is  not  labour  but  its  product  that  is
sought ;  men  undertake  to  bear  for  a  fixed  term  of  years  the
repulsive  burden  of  this  effort,  which  is  destitute  of  mental ,
interest,  in  order  that  then  the  remainder  of  their  life,  sharply ,
marked  off  from  this  time  of  labour,  may  be  spent  in  idle |
enjoyment.

The  social  relations,  too,  which  depend  on  the  division
of  labour,  develop  new  and  gloomy  aspects.  As  long  as
production  by  hand-labour  remains  profitable,  or  in  as  far
as  trade  is  concerned  with  simple  products  the  indispensable-

390  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  XL

ness  of  which  insures  their  sale,  honest  endeavour  may
maintain  a  modest  independence,  without  having  any  great
superabundance  of  intellect  and  capital.  Wider  knowledge  of
the  connection  which  there  is  between  the  needs  of  extensive
groups  of  countries,  now  makes  it  possible  to  anticipate
demand  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  formerly,  the  multi-
plied means  of  communication  allow  those  products  which  can
be  cheaply  supplied  in  large  quantities  to  be  easily  got  rid  of,
and  the  greatness  of  the  resources  employed  makes  it  easier
to  weather  the  fluctuations  of  demand  and  exchange ;  in
many  cases  the  greater  excellence  and  uniformity  of  things
produced  by  machinery  contribute  to  drive  out  hand  labour.
There  are  not  a  few  handicrafts  which  from  an  independent
production  of  commodities  have  come  down  to  the  mere
finishing  off  and  fitting  together  of  manufactured  goods ;  others
no  longer  pursuing  any  trade  of  their  own  have  to  take  a
subordinate  place  as  mere  appendages  of  great  businesses.
The  same  conditions  which  in  a  general  way  make  the  com-
bination of  several  different  operations  in  one  business  more
remunerative,  have  a  specially  powerful  effect  in  concentrat-
ing mechanical  industry  in  great  manufactories,  a  system
which,  by  its  combination  of  mind  and  money,  prevents
mere  faithful  work  from  attaining  independence.  It  is  true
that  within  short  periods  the  machine  worker  is  more  sure  of
his  wages ;  but  whilst  independent  handicrafts  depend  upon
the  needs  of  a  greater  number  of  customers — a  number  which
in  a  small  trade  is  seldom  altered  suddenly — the  existence  of
the  machine  worker  depends  partly  upon  the  arbitrary  choice
and  the  insight  of  one  person  or  of  a  few,  and  partly  upon
the  fluctuations  of  universal  demand  and  supply,  which  he
can  neither  survey  nor  control.  This  insecurity  is  by  no
means  counterbalanced  by  the  sense  that  he  participates  in
a  great  whole,  for  he  participates  neither  in  the  insight  nor  in
the  gain,  but  almost  exclusively  in  the  dangers.  Nor  has  he
more  cheering  prospects  as  regards  a  gradual  improvement  of
circumstances.  His  wages  are  mostly  insufficient  for  the
attainment  of  ultimate  independence;  and  a  change  of  occupa-

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  391

tion  is  impracticable  for  him  ;  since,  generally  speaking,  a  maa
becomes  thoroughly  competent  for  any  definite  work  only  by
long  habituation,  which  unfits  him  for  any  other.  It  therefore
seems  to  the  machine-worker  that  the  best  condition  of  life
attainable  for  him  is  soon  reached,  and  that  striving  after
something  more  serves  only  to  lessen  the  enjoyment  of  the
present ;  the  impulse  to  frugality  is  extinguished,  and  early
marriages  (contracted  because  there  is  no  prospect  of  any
advantage  being  derived  from  delay,  and  because  the
children's  capacity  of  labour  can  soon  be  turned  to  account)
rapidly  increase  the  number  of  industrial  proletarians,  all
doomed  to  the  same  prospectless  and  improvident  life.  The
humanity  of  the  masters,  which  is  often  present  and  often
absent,  cannot  remove  these  evils  without  changing  the
principle  of  division  of  labour ;  even  a  patriarchial  relation
between  them  and  their  subordinates  would  not  produce  a
complete  solution  of  the  problem,  since  this  could  only  be
found  in  the  re-establishment  of  an  independence  based  upon
men's  own  activity.

In  another  direction  labour  has  broken  through  earlier
restrictions,  with  much  advantage  and  not  without  some  dis-
advantage. Historical  relations  had  made  it  necessary  that
infant  guilds  in  order  to  prosper  should  have  strong  internal
coherence  and  external  inaccessibility.  But  altogether  rash
was  the  view  (which  in  course  of  time  developed  from  these
beginnings)  that  all  human  labour  falls  into  a  limited  number
of  classes  with  a  regularity  like  that  of  the  animal  or  veget-
able kingdom,  each  of  these  classes  having  an  exclusive  right
to  a  definite  circle  of  employments.  The  growing-up  of  new
kinds  of  work,  which  could  not  be  fitted  into  this  system,  led
to  the  removal  of  such  limitations,  and  this  has  certainly  opened
a  free  field  of  labour  to  struggling  powers  which  were  before
confined  ;  but  the  benefits  of  this  improvement  are  abridged
by  the  general  condition  of  things.  As  there  is  scarcely  any
business  which  may  not  possibly  be  carried  on  in  manufac-
tories, the  powers  which  have  been  thus  set  free  may  also
divide  into  the two classes of employers of labour and

802  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  II.

dependent  labourers.  The  possibility  of  going  from  one
business  to  another  may  delay  this  result,  but  will  also  con-
tribute to  make  men  forget  still  more  the  idea  of  a  calling
and  to  dissolve  the  steadiness  and  security  of  ancient  customs
depending  upon  it ;  life  will  become  a  succession  of  discon-
nected attempts  to  fight  one's  way  through  somehow  or  other.
The  present  age  has  met  these  wants  by  a  resource  which
promises  much  though  not  everything,  namely  by  voluntary
combinations  for  definite  objects.  As  Assurance  Companies
they  distribute  among  a  number  the  unavoidable  damage
produced  by  natural  causes,  effecting  this  distribution  as  a
judicious  economic  measure ;  as  Joint-Stock  Companies  for
carrying  out  undertakings  which  are  beyond  the  power  ot
individuals,  they  alone,  combining  self-interest  with  the
common  good,  are  able  to  succeed  in  works  which  can  com-
pare with  the  colossal  undertakings  of  antiquity ;  they  appear
in  innumerable  other  forms  in  order  to  combine  the  separate
resources  of  individuals  whose  wants  are  similar  by  buying
the  materials  for  work  wholesale,  saving  the  useless  cost  of
retailing,  and  affording  to  small  capitals,  by  co-operation  in
trade,  the  same  rate  of  profit  which  large  capitals  can  obtain.
Cheering  experiences  already  testify  to  the  value  of  the  further
development  which  this  principle  is  capable  of.  Needy  work-
men combining  their  small  savings  into  one  capital  stock,  and
thus  being  able  to  enter  upon  undertakings  for  the  common
benefit,  have  enlarged  their  modest  associations  into  tlourish-
ing  companies  which  afford  to  all  participants  the  commercial
advantages  of  business  on  a  large  scale.  The  united  com-
munity of  workers  takes  the  place  of  the  one  employer,  and
the  satisfaction  of  labour  by  wages  regulated  by  the  supply  of
unemployed  labourers  is  transformed  into  a  participation  of
the  gain  obtained  by  the  industry  of  the  society '  the
oppressive  and  demoralizing  effects  of  the  relations  between
the  sole  lord  and  his  "  hands  "  give  way  to  the  animating  and
moralizing  power  of  the  sympathy  which  the  individuej
feels  for  the  prosperity  of  the  whole  to  which  he  belongs.
Without  recourse being hud lo express prohibitions,  vicea

WOEK  AND  HAPPINESS.  393

of  excess,  which  are  not  congenial  to  the  spirit  of  these
societies  on  the  whole,  seem  to  grow  less  of  their  own  accord ;
they  have  manifested  a  vigorous  impulse  towards  further
cultivation  by  establishing  educational  institutions  and
seeking  means  of  instruction ;  without  State  support  and
struggling  against  many  obstacles,  they  have  brought  to  their
members  an  amount  of  gain  which  secures  and  improves  their
existence  and  their  domestic  life.  It  is  hard  to  anticipate
experience  and  to  determine  what  capacity  of  further  develop-
ment these  associations  may  have  ;  what  they  have  hitherto
not  afforded  is  the  independence  of  individual  callings,  for  all
they  do  for  the  individual  is  to  guarantee  him  a  competency.
The  question  is  whether  this  ideal  of  family  life,  self-dependent,
economically  self-supporting  and  constituting  in  itself  a  com-
plete sphere  of  activity,  is  capable  of  general  attainment  in
our  time,  or  whether  it  must  not  be  sacrificed  to  the  changed
conditions  of  labour.  It  still  exists  on  landed  properties
v^here  the  owner  is  the  cultivator ;  but  if  the  time  of  the
steam-plough  should  come  and  its  superiority  should  make
necessary  that  cultivation  on  a  large  scale  which  alone  is
suited  to  steam  agriculture,  then  many  fields  will  be  thrown
into  one,  all  the  slight  hollows  will  be  filled  up,  all  the  slight
elevations  will  be  levelled,  and  though  individual  rights  of
property  in  the  wide  and  fruitful  plain  thus  created  may  con-
tinue, it  will  be  handed  over  to  the  administration  of  select
committees,  from  whom  after  the  harvesting  the  owners  will
receive  the  produce  or  an  account  of  it.  The  connection
between  man  on  the  one  hand,  and  Nature  and  the  labour
applied  to  natural  objects  on  the  other,  will  in  this  case  as
in  others  become  ever  less  perceptible  ;  the  earth  also  will
then  be  regarded  as  merely  gain-producing,  and  not  as  the
object  of  an  industry  that  is  carried  on  with  self-sacrificing
attachment.

The  ties  of  neighbourhood  already  combine  the  inhabitants
of  a  village  or  town  to  a  community  of  interest  in  most  of
the  affairs  of  life ;  and  in  the  time  when  guilds  flourished  the
association  between their  members  was even stronger,  and

394

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  II.

extended  to  the  whole  of  life  and  not  merely  to  work  alone  ^
all  modern  associations  have  hitherto  had  the  disadvantage
of  being  combinations  for  isolated  objects,  none  of  which
captivates  and  occupies  the  whole  man.  As  the  implement
which  a  man  uses  lays  claim  to  him  altogether  as  it  were,  but
machinery,  on  the  contrary,  works  for  him,  so  formerly  a  man's
calling  encompassed  him  as  it  were  on  every  side,  '.vhile  his
present  relation  to  work  is  like  that  of  machinery  to  it,  no
devotion  being  required  from  him,  but  only  the  punctual
fulfilment  of  a  small  number  of  conditions.  Formal  virtues
are  abundantly  developed  ;  in  the  intercourse  which  is  carried
on  in  trade,  by  postal  communication,  by  rail,  in  money
exchanges,  in  credit,  there  is  a  stupendous  reliance  upon  the
trustworthiness  of  machinery  that  is  withdrawn  from  all
personal  supervision  and  all  individual  influence,  working  for
men  as  it  were  in  the  dark.  What  in  ancient  and  medieval
times  required  a  multiplicity  of  personal  efforts,  of  emotional
springs  of  action,  of  effectively  calculated  persuasion,  of  manifold
manipulation,  is  now  (with  the  least  possible  expenditure  of
excitement,  with  an  economy  that  is  sparing  even  of  words)
entrusted  wholly  to  that  machinery  of  communication  which
provides  for  all.  But  the  more  the  real  nature  of  business
is  understood  and  developed  in  conformity  with  its  concept,
the  more  are  liking  and  personal  devotion  withdrawn  from  it.
It  is  true  that  a  great  part  of  the  good  results  which  in  earlier
times  resulted  from  this  active  participation  is  more  advan-
tageously obtained  by  the  mode  of  business  administration
referred  to;  that  by  assurances,  by  a  general  system  of
poor-relief,  and  by  the  stimulation  of  intelligent  self-interest,
tasks  which  were  formerly  left  to  voluntary  charity  are  to
some  extent  lessened  and  to  some  extent  more  certainly
iulfilled ;  but  after  all  these  departments  of  human  activity
have  been  made  as  far  as  possible  mechanical,  the  question
becomes  more  and  more  prominent.  Where,  then,  as  a  matter
of  fact  does  life  itself  begin  if  all  which  formerly  filled  it  up
is  removed  from  the  sphere  of  living  interest  and  reckoned  as
merely  among  the  preparations  for  life  and  instruments  of  living?

WORK  AND  HAPPINESS.  395

Enjoyment  of  the  leisure  which  remains  after  all  necessary
labour  has  been  accomplished  is  hardly  on  the  whole
estimated  very  highly  in  our  own  age.  It  is  an  age  which
is  well  acquainted  with  the  bitterness  of  toil,  but  knows  little
of  joyous  festivals.  With  the  disappearance  to  so  large  an
extent  of  trade  guilds  and  status,  old  manners  and  traditional
customs  with  all  the  complex  formalities  of  public  festivals  and
entertainments  and  all  significant  ceremonies  of  social  inter-
course have  declined;  and  amid  the  general  formlessness,  men
are  at  a  loss  what  to  do  with  the  leisure  they  have  obtained
unless  they  either  turn  again  to  the  labour  which  was  to
have  been  got  rid  of,  or  seek  that  sensuous  enjoyment  which
is  always  to  be  had.  Exhibitions  are  the  only  peculiarly
modern  entertainments  of  a  public  kind,  and  public  dinners
for  political  or  other  purposes  are  the  means  used  to  strengthen
enthusiasm.  Neither  Church  nor  State  supplies  the  lack  of
popular  inventive  power;  the  latter  neither  favours  the
political  activity  natural  to  good  fellowship,  nor  does  it  readily
allow  the  use  of  social  solemnities  in  even  such  political  action
as  it  approves  ;  and  the  Church  by  forbidding  or  disapproving
natural  impulses,  abandons  the  imagination  of  the  people  to
its  own  vacuity,  without  winning  it  to  participation  in  the
forms  of  worship  and  the  enjoyment  of  genuine  artistic  beauty,
by  positive  development  of  spiritual  life.

Now  if  we  take  a  comprehensive  survey  of  these  historical
transformations,  human  life  seems  to  be  turned  more  and
more  into  a  struggle  for  existence ;  the  multiplication  of  small
wants,  which  is  not  accompanied  by  a  proportionate  increase
in  the  ease  with  which  they  are  satisfied,  consumes  a  large
share  of  the  strength  which  might  have  been  devoted  to  more
ultimate  ends,  while  the  kind  of  labour  required  does  not
contain  in  itself  its  own  reward  or  even  a  part  of  its  reward.
The  place  of  Work,  which  was  once  a  self-animating  exercise  of
activity,  is  taken  more  and  more  by  Business,  that  wonderful
creation  of  society,  that  with  its  complicated  connections  and
its  natural  laws  which  are  independent  of  our  will  in  a  certain
sense  leads  a  life  of  its  own,  and  reduces  individuals  to  the

396  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEIi  II.

condition  of  its  panting  slaves.  Great  advances  in  insight,
in  discoveries,  in  new  social  constructions  of  all  kinds  serve
on  the  one  hand  to  give  new  strength  to  this  monster,  and  on
the  other  hand  to  give  some  security,  against  the  inexorable
course  of  its  development,  to  that  humanity  which  it  has  itself
created  ;  and  we  are  accustomed  to  admire  the  one  as  well  as
the  other.  We  regard  with  amazement  and  not  without
satisfaction  the  growth  of  those  giant  cities  in  which  the
nature  of  business  gradually  concentrates  the  population,  and
often  forget  under  what  joyless  and  revolting  conditions  of
existence  a  large  part  of  humanity  is  thus  placed  ;  we  regard
it  as  an  advance  when  the  tender  strength  of  children  is
employed  in  useful  labour,  or  there  are  opened  to  women
spheres  of  work  which  secure  to  the  increasing  numbers  of
those  who  are  unmarried  the  possibility  of  subsistence ;  and
we  do  not  enough  consider  that  at  the  best  these  arrangements
are  but  forced  and  wholly  unnatural  attempts  to  counterbalance
serious  evils  which  owe  their  existence  to  the  progressive
development  of  all  the  relations  of  life.

That  the  sociological  order  when  left  to  itself  is  necessarily
such  we  do  not  deny,  and  we  think  that  those  are  in  the  right
who  hold  that  it  is  unpractical  sentimentality  to  wish  for  a
condition  which  cannot  be  brought  back.  But  the  remainder
of  the  truth  must  also  be  told,  which  is  that  this  course  of
things  is  not  in  itself  a  movement  towards  perfection.  The
innumerable  individual  steps  of  progress  in  knowledge  and
capability  which  have  unquestionably  been  made  as  regards
this  production  and  management  of  external  goods,  have  as
yet  by  no  means  become  combined  so  as  to  form  a  general
advance  in  the  happiness  of  life.  For  the  growth  of  this
happiness  cannot  be  sought  either  in  the  mere  multiplication
and  improvement  of  productions,  or  in  the  increasing  bustle
of  industry,  nor  yet  in  the  ingenuity  that  tries  to  maintain  the
same  tolerable  equilibrium  between  labour  and  wages  under
conditions  that  become  ever  more  and  more  artificial  and  com-
plicated. For  this  maintenance  is  the  utmost  that  is  accom-
plished. Each  step  of  progress  with  the  increase  of  strength

I

WOKK  AND  HAPPINESS.  397

which  it  brings,  brings  also  a  corresponding  increase  of  pres-
sure; the  more  varied  the  ways  are  in  which  the  individual
elements  that  form  the  social  system  touch  one  another —
tlieir  connections  being  now  more  tense  than  formerly — the
more  do  they  both  gain  by  the  union  of  their  forces,  and  suffer
from  the  disturbances  of  others  and  the  inner  repulsions  of  all.
Hence  we  find  that  never  has  there  existed  in  such  a  striking
degree  the  inconsistency  of  holding  that  the  whole  life  with
which  men  are  anxiously  occupied  and  which  they  eagerly
participate  in,  is  not  at  bottom  the  true  life,  and  of  dreaming
that  there  is  another  and  a  fairer  that  might  be  lived  and  will
be  lived  as  soon  as  the  lower  life  gives  us  time,  and  opens  a
way  of  entrance  to  it.

Let  us  see  now  whether  in  the  midst  of  this  noise  of
external  progress,  this  better  life  has  been  preserved,  and
perchance  by  its  own  advance  towards  perfection  provided  a
compensation  for  the  deficiencies  which  we  have  indicated.

CHAPTER III.

BEAUTY  AND  AET.

Art  as  an  "Organism,"  and  as  the  Expression  of  Human  Feeling — ^Eastern
Vastness  —  Hebrew  Sublimity  —  Greek  Beauty  —  Roman  Elegance  and
Dignity — The  Individuality  and  Fantasticalness  of  the  Middle  Ages —
Romance — Beauty,  Art,  and  ^stheticism  in  Modern  Life.

R  1.  TT  is  no  longer  our  custom  to  personify  (as  myth-
J-  constructing  imagination  once  did)  the  various  forms
of  mental  activity  which  in  the  course  of  history  have  been
devoted  to  the  same  supreme  aims,  aided  by  ever  new  and
perhaps  ever  more  perfect  expedients.  But  after  thinking
we  had  discovered  in  their  historical  changes  an  ordered  and
constant  progress,  we  found,  in  the  name  and  the  notion  ot
spiritual  organisms,  a  means  of  ascribing  to  them  greatel
independence  of  existence  and  development  than  really  belongs
to  them.  Philosophy  and  the  history  of  philosophy  have  long
been  spoken  of  as  if  they  embraced  not  only  the  ever-recurring
efforts  of  human  thought  to  grasp  the  truth  which  is  always
equally  valid,  not  only  the  series  of  philosophic  views  by
I  which  the  human  heart  seeks  to  rise  above  the  doubts  and
'  difficulties  and  distresses  of  life  ;  rather  it  seemed  as  though
in  them  truth  itself  experienced  a  development  of  its  own
existence  and  content  and  validity,  like  the  growth  of  a
/  plant  which  is  indeed  tended  and  cultivated  by  our  care  and
(  attention,  but  yet  unfolds  beneath  our  touch  according  to  its
own  immutable  law  of  development.  Of  the  sphere  of  art,  too,
we  are  now  accustomed  to  speak  as  if  it  were  a  mysterious
region  of  enchantment,  having  indeed  its  place  in  our  life,  and
yet  separated  from  life,  accessible  to  few,  working  in  the
service  of  eternal  beauty  according  to  laws  and  order  of  its
own,  holding  together  its  various  productions  in  a  complete
and  isolated  system,  and  governed,  as  to  its  history  in  time

31)8

BEAUTY  AND  AKT.  399

by  an  innate  law  of  development.  "We  do  not  wholly  dispute
the  justice  of  such  a  conception,  nor  the  good  results  which  it
has  had  in  deepening  men's  appreciation  of  all  beauty;  bnt  the
few  considerations  which  we  are  now  about  to  offer  are  not
directed  to  this  organism  of  art,  for  the  development  of  which
according  to  its  own  laws  the  living  passion  of  nations  can  serve
but  as  nutritive  sap.  On  the  contrary,  our  discussion  is  only
concerned  with  th^jvarying  attempts  of  men  to  make  clear  to
themselves  the  mood  which  governed  them,  and  the  peculiar
feeling  awakened  in  them  by  existing  conditions,  by  impressing
the  image  of  that  beauty  which  had  most  taken  hold  of  their
minds  upon  everything  that  they  did  and  experienced,  both
upon  the  character  of  everyday  intercourse  and  upon  works
which  were  intended  to  remain  as  lasting  monuments.  As  far
as  posterity  is  concerned,  it  is  commonly  the  constructions
of  art  which  afford  the  most  evident  testimony  with  regard  to  "-
this  sesthetic  life  of  the  past ;  to  the  men  of  any  age  the  works
of  art  of  that  age  are  but  one  and  that  not  always  the  most
expressive  of  its  manifestations  ;  for  their  production  and  their
greatness  depend  upon  the  number  of  creative  and  constructive
minds,  and  these,  in  consequence  of  some  dispensation  which
is  to  us  inscrutable,  are  not  distributed  equally  to  all  ages.
But  even  such  minds  cannot  collect  scattered  rays  if  these  are
as  yet  non-existent ;  and  the  appearance  of  such  minds  pre-
supposes that  men  in  general  are  in  tune  for  that  aspect  of  (■
beauty  to  which  they  are  called  upon  to  give  form  and  ('
expression.  Therefore  where  great  artists  are  wanting,  and
consequently  the  dreamy  mood  of  appreciativeness  is  not
suddenly  awakened  to  a  clear  consciousness  of  the  ideal,  there
the  slow  working  of  this  less  creative  impulse  produces
festhetically  expressive  developments  of  life.  ^

S  2.  The  most  ancient  nations  of  the  East  found  beauty  chiefly
in  what  was  vast.  They  may  also,  it  is  true,  have  been  not
without  appreciation  of  tenderness  and  grace,  an  appreciation
of  which  we  have  no  testimony  owing  to  the  destruction  of
their  literature  ;  but  even  Indian  fancy,  which  exhibits  this
feeling  in a striking  degree in  such  of  its  poetry  as  is  still

■>

400  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  HI.

^ extant,  has  an even greater  preference  for  what  is  vast  anc
unmeasured. This  ancient  world  was  pervaded  by  reverence
for  what  is  colossal ;  tradition  pointed to immeasurable dis-
tances of  past  time  ;  its  constructions  towered  to  the  skies,
and  extended  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  or  penetrated  sub-
terranean depths  to  an  extent  vastly  beyond  what  might  have
been  expected  from  human  powers,  or  what  could  be  required  for
human  needs ;  sculptured  figures  of  more  than  life  size,  and  in
large groups,  looked  down  from their  pedestals  in  mart  and
, street  upon  busy  commerce,  which  was  struggling  to  assume
equally  vast  proportions  ;  civilised  countries  were  populated
by  enormous  multitudes ;  armies  countless  in  number  were  at
the  beck  of  conquerers,  whose  desires  never  stopped  short  of
universal  monarchy ;  rulers,  exalted  above the rest of the
world  by  mysterious  magnificence,  became  intoxicated  with  a
' sense  of  their  own  divinity,  and  found  nothing  worthy  of  being
j entrusted  with  the  records  of  their  conquests  except  the  hard
j and  rocky  tablets supplied  by  mountains  that  towered  high
above  the  plains.

The  impression  of  grandeur  which  the  ruins  of  this  bygone
world  still  make  upon  our  mind,  convinces  us  that  its  creations
were  the  result  of  genuinely  aesthetic  thought,  which  not  only
covered  its  incapacity  of  estimating  real  beauty  by  an  exaggera-
tion of  external  proportions,  but  undoubtedly  found  in  mere
magnitude  a  one-sided  but  true  expression  of  beauty.  The
transitoriness  of  all  that  is  human,  and  the  swiftness  with
which  it  passes  out  of  sight,  disappearing  in  the  immeasurable
background  of  Nature,  must  have  struck  early  civilisation  more
sharply  and  hopelessly  than  it  did  a  later  age,  which  can  look
back  to  a  transmitted  world  of  complex  thought  created  by
human  effort ;  it  seems  as  though  men's  minds  had  sought  to
alleviit.e  this  secret  dissatisfaction  by  the  greater  boldness
with  which  they  carried  all  images  and  monuments  of  human
life  to  such  a  magnitude  as  to  entirely  remove  them  from  any
measurement  by  the  standards  hitherto  accepted  in  different
stages  of  civilisation.  The  colossal  constructions  of  the
Egyptians  seemed  to  force  their  way  into  the  ranks  of  natural

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  401

objects  of  vast  dimensions,  as  though  they  had  been  rivals  of
equal  birth.  As  year  after  year  they  looked  down  undisturbed  i
upon  the  inundations  of  the  Nile,  and  the  moving  billows  of  j
desert  sand,  they  inspired  the  beholder  with  a  sense  of  the  j
unending  durableness  with  which  the  human  race  fills  the
ages  ;  religious  worship — honouring  the  dead  and  ever  mindful
of  the  possible  return  of  their  souls  to  earth  with  a  far-sighted-
ness which  was  regardless  of  the  flight  of  time,  kept  up  this
feeling — a  feeling  aroused  by  contemplating  the  native  works  of
art,  and  by  which  these  works  of  art  had  themselves  been  pro-
duced. If  one  element  in  all  beauty  is  an  immediate  certainty  ^
of  the  dominion  of  spiritual  life  over  unconscious  Nature,  the
manifestation  of  that  life  being  inevitably  connected  with  un-
conscious natural  instruments,  those  ancient  nations  have  given
to  this  thought  its  simplest  expression ;  they  have  sought
above  all  things  to  represent  the  fact  of  the  conquest  of  Nature  w
by  the  living  Mind ;  and  whilst  they  revelled  in  what  was
vast,  and  yet  by  no  means  always  in  what  was  without  beauty
of  form,  they  made  for  themselves  as  it  were  space  and  breath-
ing room  in  which,  relieved  from  the  pressure  which  all  finite
reality  encounters,  they  might  breathe  freely  with  a  sense  of
their  own  imperishableness.  How  much  they  attained  in
this  way  we  know  not ;  for  no  tradition  of  their  mental  life
has  come  down  to  us.  It  is  only  the  writers  of  the  Old
Testament  who  tell  us  of  the  unbridled  licence  of  the  kingdoms
of  Western  Asia,  in  which  the  life  of  pleasure  flowed  in  fierce  ^
and  mighty  waves ;  the  monument  of  Sardanapalus,  with  its
inscription — Hat,  drink,  and  love,  for  all  else  is  but  little
worth — seems  to  be  the  melancholy  conclusion  of  this  age,
which  in  its  struggles  towards  what  was  great  was  able
indeed  to  assure  itself  of  the  strength  and  imperishableness  of
the  race,  but  had  failed  to  find  for  the  individual  any  eternal
content  of  life,  and  had,  on  the  contrary,  even  minified  that
content  by  comparison  with  the  colossal  magnitude  of  works
constructed  by  human  hands.

It  is  only  the Hebrew  people  who  have  left  us  speaking
monuments of their early  mental life. They must have
"^VOL.  II. '"  2  c

402  BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  III.

possessed  an  abundant  literature  besides  the  writings  which
are  now  collected  in  the  Old  Testament ;  but  judging  by  the
indications  contained  in  these,  those  which  are  lost  to  us  may
Lave  been  essentially  similar  to  those  which  we  still  possess.
We  know  nothing  about  whether  this  nation  had  an  inclina-
tion for  scientific  investigation  ;  their  language  is  not  formed
so  as  to  subserve  this  end,  nor  is  it  fitted  to  be  the  instrument
of  a  many-sided  intercourse  which  makes  it  possible  to
occupy  a  variety  of  points  of  view.  Not  that  there  can  be  in
the  original  capacity  of  a  language  or  in  the  principles  of  its
construction  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the  development  of
any  one  side  of  mental  life ;  but  the  condition  of  a  language
at  any  time  shows  the  direction  which  that  mental  life  has
hitherto  not  taken,  and  in  which  consequently  it  has  neglected
to  develop  the  means  of  communication.  The  Hebrew
language  of  the  Old  Testament,  with  its  small  number _pf
words  for  abstract  ideas,  and  its  great  simplicity  of  construc-
tion, is  favourable  neither  to  scientific  investigation  nor  to
intellectual  conversation  ;  but  it  is  in  an  equal  degree  more
fitted  for  the  most  faithful  delineation  of  the  ever-recurring
fundamental  characteristics  of  human  life,  and  for  the  majestic
expression  of  divine  sublimity.  A  variety  of  points  of  view
which  have  been  thought  out  and  are  well  under  command
generally  diminish  men's  receptivity  for  both  of  these,  or  at
any  rate  their  capacity  for  representing  them ;  with  regard  to
both  the  Hebrew  histories  and  hymns  are  imperishable  models.
The  treasures  of  classic  culture  are  open  to  but  few,  but  from
that  Eastern  fountain  countless  multitudes  of  men  have  for
centuries  gone  on  drawing  ennobling  consolation  in  misery,
judicious  doctrines  of  practical  wisdom,  and  warm  enthusiasm
for  all  that  is  exalted,  so  that  mankind  has  become  accustomed
to  see  in  the  characters  of  those  most  ancient  stories  and  their
destinies,  embodied  exemplars  of  human  life  and  of  the  different
.  characters  which  the  variety  of  circumstances  develops.
7^  Here  popular  imagination  is  no  longer  directed  to  what  is

vast,  but  strains  after  a  sublimity  that  stands  in  need  neither
©f  vastness nor of ornamentation. Thus the descriptive

n

.^

1

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  403

poetry  of  the  Hebrews  depicts  characters  and  events  with  the
greatest  simplicity  of  expression,  without  the  least  artificial
complication  of  motives,  disclosing  everywhere  without
reserve  those  natural  springs  of  action  which  as  long  as  the
world  lasts  will  be  the  real  ultimate  incentives  of  all  that
men  do,  however  ingenious  may  be  the  mask  thrown  over
their  actions  by  the  civilisation  of  auy  age.  These  represen-
tations do  not  employ  even  the  figurative  expressions  with
which  Greek  epic  poetry  incidentally  adorns  the  objects  of
which  it  treats,  in  order  to  adapt  them  to  the  generally
elevated  tone  of  the  description ;  on  the  contrary,  their
characters  impress  us  with  their  sublimity  by  appearing
before  us  without  any  adornment,  in  transparent  natural-
ness, as  though  there  were  nothing  in  the  world  which
could  call  in  question  man's  right  to  be  what  he  is,  and
to  know  that  he,  as  he  is,  is  the  ultimate  object  of  terrestrial
creation.  Their  lyric  poetry  repeats  the  same  sublimity,  only
after  another  fashion  ;  that  upon  which  this  depended  in  their
historical  writings  appears  here  still  more  obviously.  Here
the  mind  dwells  upon  its  communion  with  God,  and  extols
with  all  the  power  of  the  most  passionate  expression,  as  proof
of  divine  omnipotence,  every_  deeply-felt  individual  feature
o_f_cosmic  beauty.  For  among  the  divine  attributes  it  is
certainly  omnipotence  which  above  all  is  felt,  and  gives  a  (rvwvv^*'|>'«-^
colouring  to  aesthetic  imagination  ;  we  do  indeed  meet  with
innumerable  pictures  of  Nature  which  taken  separately  have
often  that  inimitable  beauty  and  charm  which  civilisation,
entangled  by  a  thousand  unessential  accessories  of  thought,
finds  it  so  difficult  to  attain ;  but  these  pictures  are  not
utilized  for  the  development  of  a  progressive  course  of
tiiought,  but  merely  juxtaposed  as  though  to  magnify  from
different  but  corresponding  sides  the  omnipresent  influence
of  that  divine  activity  which  they  depict.

The  earnestness  of  this  religious  bias  of  mind  towards  sub-
limity did  certainly  pervade  life,  but  could  not  endow  it  with ^  —
liarmonious and many-sided beauty. The thousand  petty '
cares to  which  notwithstanding  their  unimportance  cheerful

404  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

attention  must  be  vouchsafed  were  too  far  below  the  soarinr;
flight  of  this  enthusiasm  to  be  efficiently  pervaded  by  it.  The
regulation  of  life  continued  to  be  left  not  to  unfettered
imagination  but  to  instructive  deductions  from  the  great
principle  of  religious  belief;  they  filled  it  not  with  beauty
but  with  ceremonies  and  deeds  of  the  law  which  by  connect-
ing the  smallest  things  directly  with  the  greatest  enabled  the
Hebrew  people  always  to  maintain,  in  their  highest  moods,
the  loftiness  of  character  distinctive  of  them,  but  secured  no
uniform  grace  to  existence  as  a  whole,  during  the  less  exalted
moments  of  relaxed  tension.

§  3.  To  what  admirable  richness  and  flexibility  the  mental
life  of  the  Greeks  had  developed  at  a  very  early  period  is
most  impressively  shown  by  their  language.  In  saying  this
I  am  referring  neither  to  its  wealth  of  grammatical  forms,  nor
to  its  euphoniousness  ;  both  make  a  language  interesting,  but
do  not  show  the  greatness  of  those  who  use  it.  On  the
contrary,  as  at  the  period  of  greatest  strength  in  animals,
various  parts  of  their  bodies  have  been  pushed  out  of  place
or  have  coalesced  or  wasted  away — the  body,  which  does  not
for  a  long  while  attain  the  fulness  of  living  strength,  having
at  an  earlier  period  possessed  these  parts  clearly  marked  out
in  significant  symmetry  and  filled  with  vital  activity — so  in
order  to  obtain  a  perfectly  flexible  instrument  of  mental  life,
the  symmetrical  body  of  language  must  have  its  bones  to
some  extent  displaced  and  its  joints  somewhat  stretched ;
and  the  influence  of  mental  progress  is  shown  in  it  chiefly
by  phsenomena  which  concern  the  dissolution  of  its  earlier
structure.  How  many  moods  and  cases  may  have  continued
in  existence  matters  very  little ;  moods  and  cases  cannot
suffice  for  the  expression  of  all  possible  relations  ;  but  to
increase  them  so  as  to  cover  most  requirements  is  not  in
itself  a  nobler  principle  for  the  construction  of  language
than  the  principle  to  which  in  the  last  resort  recourse  is
always  had  when  there  is  increasing  demand  for  delicacy  of
expression — I  refer  to  the  independent  indication  of  relations
\ by  separate  words. That  in  this  respect  the  Greek  language

BEAUTY  AND  AKT.  405

reached  a  high  degree  ^of  perfection  is  a  trite  remark  ;  its
particles  have  always  been  admired.  By  their  aid  language
could  reproduce  not  only  the  essential  content  of  thought
but  also  the  shades  of  the  speaker's  mood ;  the  sense
of  artificiality  which  perhaps  in  the  dawn  of  civilisation
accompanies  every  systematic  recital  and  makes  the  more
ceremonious  form  of  verse  seem  most  natural  was,  by  help
of  these  particles,  replaced  by  a  sense  of  easy  communication  ;
just  as  in  the  sculptures  of  the  Parthenon  perfected  art
resolves  the  early  stiffness  of  merely  symbolic  representa-
tion into  the  gracious  ease  of  perfect  beauty.

In  all  these  respects  the  language  of  Homer  holds  a  most
happy  medium  between  primitive  unpliableness  and  later  artifi-
ciality. In  its  copiously  used  conjunctions  and  prepositions
we  are  made  aware  that  the  poet  drew  directly  from  a  wealth
of  those  temporal  and  spatial  intuitions  whence  all  languages
derive  their  expressions  for  inner  relations.  Its  structure
of  sentences  connects  thoughts  paratactically  without  the
hypotactic  complications  which  later  became  customary,  and
continued  to  be  intelligible  to  the  quick  ear  of  the
classical  nations  without  being  in  any  striking  degree  a
type  of  lucid  discourse.  If  in  this  respect  the  language  of
Homer  is  language  in  its  youth,  yet  its  impression  on  the
whole  is  decisively  that  of  a  language  in  which  it  was  no  new
thing  for  human  beings  to  be  spoken  of  with  human  feeling.
It  was  only  after  having  been  used  for  a  considerable  time  in
the  intercourse  of  a  people  vividly  awake  to  all  the  interests  of
life,  that  it  could  have  attained  such  a  degree  of  freedom  in
the  expression  of  thought ;  the  metrical  form  itself  must  have
been  preceded  by  abundant  practice  in  similar  composition
before  its  perfect  harmony  between  the  form  of  expression,
the  train  of  ideas,  and  the  rhythm  could  have  been  produced.

But  disregarding  this  merely  lingual  aspect,  Homeric  dis-
course, considered  simply  as  discourse,  bears  witness  to  the
early  attainment  of  a  high  degree  of  human  cultivation.  The
Homeric  heroes  speak  much  and  willingly,  and  know  nothing
of  the fierceness of dumb  encounter  with which barbaric

6^V_-

■406  BOOK  VIIL CHAPl-ER  IIL

energy  does  but  hide  its  awkward  incapacity  of  setting  its
own  thoughts  in  order,  and  its  still  greater  clumsiness  in
expressing  and  justifying  them.  We  see  everywhere  that
liahit  of  understanding  things  which  makes  men  seek  for
reasons ;  Homeric  men  had  long  ago  learnt  how  to  converse
with  one  another,  and  developed  their  natural  reflections  simply
and  fluently,  not  always  confining  themselves  to  the  matter
immediately  in  hand,  but  using  comparisons  and  maxims  which
one  feels  to  have  proverbial  weight,  referring  to  a  common  social
treasure  of  practical  wisdom  which  had  been  for  a  considerable
time  in  their  possession.  In  this  respect  the  heroic  poetry
of  the  Germans  produces  a  different  impression ;  the  spiritual
depth  which  we  admire  in  it  lacks  facility  of  expression.  The
undeveloped  structure  of  sentences  ;  the  meagre  explanation  of
feelings  and  resolves,  to  the  mere  statement  of  which  the
discourse  often  confines  itself ;  the  occasional  obscurity  of  the
course  of  thought  which  yet  seldom  wanders  from  the  immediate
subject  of  discussion — all  these  indicate  a  stage  of  civilisation
in  which  social  intercourse  is  but  little  developed.  This  un
adorned  conjunction  of  occurrences  and  actions  between  which
we  may  in  imagination  interpolate  unspoken  mental  agitation,
is  sometimes  favourable  to  the  loftiness  of  poetic  representa-
tion ;  but  since  life  does  not  consist  of  a  continuous  chain  of
adventures  and  great  deeds,  the  cheerful  interest  shown  by
Greek  writers  in  all  intermediate  circumstances  testifies  to
greater  progress  in  general  tolerant  regard  for  and  treatment
of  the  small  and  apparently  insignificant  elements  of  life.

And  the  Greeks  knew  what  a  treasure  they  had  in  their
language.  When  their  poets  glance  at  the  history  of  human
development,  they  do  not  onjit  to  extol  the  endowment  of
speech  as  a  great  gift  of  the  gods ;  to  be  able  to  express  him-
self is  the  distinctive  characteristic  of  man ;  to  understand
things  by  their  causes,  and  to  guide  men's  souls  by  eloquence,
is  a  fundamental  thought  of  their  later  development.  Homer
can  say  nothing  more  bitter  of  the  rude  Cyclops  than  that
they  neither  held  markets  nor  had  courts  of  justice,  and  that
mo  man  troubled  himself  about  his  fellows. For  the  Greek

BEAUTY  AND  AET.  407

all  the  real  beauty  of  life  arose  from  the  most  intense
reciprocal  action  of  mental  powers  in  society ;  unburdened  by
transmitted  science,  and  troubling  themselves  little  about  the
knowledge  of  foreign  nations,  this  dialectic  people  could
attribute  an  importance  to  skill  in  the  art  of  speaking  which
no  later  and  dissimilar  periods  could  honestly  do,  although
even  here  unintelligent  imitation  has  not  been  wanting.

The  effect  of  this  mental  disposition,  which  so  early  turned
to  the  observation  and  cultivation  of  human  powers,  expecting
everything  from  their  development,  was  shown  even  in  the
attitude  of  the  Greek  mind  towards  Nature.  The  penetrating
glance  of  the  Greeks  could  not^  fail  to  perceive  either  the
beauty  of  their  country  or  the  significant  characteristics  of
physical  Nature,  which  in  mysterious  symbolism  reflect  spiritual
life  and  its  vicissitudes ;  even  their  mythology  makes  natural
pbaenomena  the  background  and  source  of  religious  thought  in
the  broadest  and  fullest  way ;  their  poetry,  by  its  wealth  of
clearly  drawn  comparisons,  convinces  us  of  the  impression
which  the  peculiarities  of  natural  scenery  made  upon  them,
in  an  incidental  sort  of  way ;  the  very  situation  of  their  cities
and  places  of  assembly,  theatres,  and  circuses,  show  how  they
felt  the  value  of  fine  and  beautiful  natural  surroundings,  and
wide  prospects.  But  Nature  affected  them  chiefly  as  the  setting
of  their  own  lives,  and  they  sought  its  beauty  in  the  enjoyment
of  the  mood  which  it  produces  in  us,  and  regarded  its  produc-
tions as  means  of  our  refreshment  and  amusement  rather  than
sought  to  live  in  sympathy  with  the  mysterious  life  of  Nature
itself.  It  seemed  to  them,  when  all  was  said,  that  flowers  had
greater  value  as  a  wreath  around  some  man's  head  than  on
the  stalk  where  they  bloom  in  solitude ;  and  the  saying  that
Plato  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Socrates — that  men  taught  him,
but  that  trees  taught  him  not  —  certainly  expresses  the
universal  Greek  feeling  that  the  value  of  human  society  is  far
above  any  absorption  in  the  beauty  of  Nature.  Neither
painting  nor  poetry  showed  much  favour  to  the  beauty  of
landscape  ;  where  the  delineation  of  natural  scenery  can  throw
light  upon  men's  feelings,  we  see  all  the  poets,  from  Homer

403

BOOK  Vin. CHAPTER  III.

downwards,  able  to  delineate  it  in  a  masterly  way  with  a  few
impressive  touches  ;  but  it  would  have  been  nothing  to  them
unless  the  enjoyment  of  some  beholder  had  supplied  the  final
life-giving  condition.  The  words  with  which  Homer  con-
cludes his  description  of  a  starry  night  in  his  wonderfully
beautiful  and  striking  way — And  from  his  heart  the  shepherd
doth  rejoice  —  give  the  unchanging  keynote  of  the  Greek
temper,  which  not  only  regarded  all  the  glory  of  the  heavens
as  merely  revolving  round  the  stationary  earth,  but  also  held
that  all  the  good  things  of  earth  were  destined  only  for  the
adornment  of  human  existence.

But  all  the  more  perfectly  on  this  account  did  the  Greeks
make  a  real  home  of  the  earth,  which  was  to  them  merely  the
stage  on  which  was  played  the  drama  of  human  life.  In  this
they  were  favoured  by  the  situation  of  their  country.  If  they
had  been  buried  in  a  primeval  forest,  without  ever  being  able
to  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  situations  of  adjacent
places,  their  sagacity  would  have  developed  in  other  directions ;
it  is  probable  that  if  they  had  never  been  able  to  take  wide
and  comprehensive  views  in  the  visible  world,  they  would
never  have  been  able  to  do  so  in  the  world  of  thought.  But
where,  on  the  contrary,  a  bright,  clear  atmosphere  reveals
immeasurable  distances,  where  the  eye  reaches  from  coast  to
coast,  where  the  view  from  a  mountain-top  embraces  seas  and
the  straits  (flowing  between  promontories)  which  unite  them,
and  numerous  human  settlements  along  the  shores — there  alone
does  it  seem  as  though  the  light  of  heaven  really  fulfilled  its
end,  illuminating  all  parts  of  the  world  with  the  lucidity
which  can  result  only  from  showing  the  connection  existing
between  tliem.  A  susceptible  race  of  men  could  not  dwell
from  their  youth  up  amid  such  a  breadth  and  wealth  of  bright
and  varied  scenes  without  having  the  sense  of  spatial  order
sharpened,  and  with  it  the  feeling  for  clearness  and  intelligi-
bility of  all  kinds.  Even  in  the  Homeric  songs  we  are
surprised  by  the  precision  of  geographic  knowledge  as  long  as
the  scene  of  the  story  is  laid  in  regions  which  at  that  time
we  know  to  have  been  within  the  reach  of  navi-iation. There  is

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  409

hardly  a  town  which  is  not  brought  before  us  as  a  familiar
locality  by  some  permanent  characteristic  of  its  situation — it  is
on  the  sea,  or  in  a  valley  watered  by  some  river,  or  on  a  rocky
promontory ;  the  routes  of  travellers  are  described  with  a
distinctness  which  teaches  us  that  even  then  commerce  had
established  permanent  paths,  and  that  the  sea-roads  were
familiarly  known.  The  world  which  presented  itself  to  the
Greeks  was  different  from  the  inland  forest-covered  regions
known  to  our  forefathers ;  the  Ehine  and  the  Danube  flow
through  the  world  of  the  Nibelungenlied  like  two  isolated
threads  of  silver,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  there  is
light ;  but  if  any  warlike  expedition  takes  the  heroes  of  the
song  to  a  distance  from  these,  indistinctness  of  geographical
knowledge  closes  like  trackless  night  around  them.

And  finally,  the  Greeks  were,  from  an  intellectual  point  of
view,  in  full  possession  of  this  country  with  the  physical
features  of  which  they  were  so  well  acquainted.  With  every
locality  that  was  marked  out  in  any  way,  tradition  had  con-
nected stories  of  the  gods  and  heroes,  and  had  made  them
sacred ;  and  to  these  their  stirring  historical  life  soon  joined
the  remembrance  of  great  deeds  performed  by  mortals.  Thus
they  were  one  with  their  country,  and  found  satisfaction  in
the  soil  itself;  what  lay  beyond  the  limits  of  their  native
land  did  indeed  rouse  a  spirit  of  acquisitive  enterprise,  but
did  not  disturb  their  aesthetic  imagination  ;  the  abode  of  the
gods  was  still  within  their  reach  upon  Olympus,  which  was
not  beyond  the  boundary  of  their  horizon,  and  at  the  extreme
limit  of  which  lay  the  entrance  to  the  nether  world ;  all
beyond  might  continue  a  chaos,  peopled  with  fabulous  beings
by  which  their  native  country  was  surrounded  as  by  an
ornamental  framework  without  order  or  significance.  The
Hebrews  were  the  only  other  nation  that  attained  to  anything
like  a  similar  conception;  the  smallness  of  their  country,  the
never-forgotten  connection  of  their  tribes,  the  oneness  of  their
sacred  traditions,  shed  upon  Palestine  too,  that  charm  of  an
historic  light  in  which  numerous  coexistent  points  stand  out
in  the  distinctness  of  their  reciprocal  relations.

Vs

416  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

A  great  part  of  the  charm  exercised  upon  us  by  pictures  of
ancieut  life  depends  upon  the  favour  of  Nature,  which  still
endows  the  southern  countries  of  our  continent  with  a
joyousness  of  life  to  which  the  north  can  never  attain.  In
their  mild  climate,  which  did  not  require  that  man  should  be
shut  off  from  Nature,  the  Greeks  who,  to  begin  with,  were  a
finely-made  race,  learnt  to  regard  nobility  of  form,  dignity  of
carriage,  and  grace  of  movement  as  among  the  good  things  of
life  and  the  ends  of  education,  in  addition  to  that  bodily
strength  and  vigour  the  cultivation  of  which  is  common  to
all  early  civilisations.  It  is  superfluous  to  praise  what  is
admirable  in  all  this,  and  useless  to  investigate  how  far  the
reality  corresponded  to  the  pictures  drawn  by  partial  fancy
when  it  peoples  every  rood  of  Greek  soil  with  living  forms  of
statuesque  beauty.  The  native  poets  with  their  love  of  satire
have  taken  care  to  leave  behind  them  testimonies  of  the
frequent  occurrence  of  ugliness  and  awkwardness.  But
these  do  not  alter  our  general  impression ;  the  Greeks  present
to  all  succeeding  ages  exemplars  of  humau  beauty;  and
probably  as  long  as  the  world  lasts  the  Spartans  at  Thermo-
pylae, the  Athenians  at  Marathon  and  Sal  amis,  the  death  of
Socrates,  and  the  kingly  figure  of  Alexander  the  Great  will
continue  to  be  celebrated  as  classic  examples  of  self-sacrifice,  of
heroic  courage,  and  of  the  spirit  of  enterprise.  Not  that  other
times  have  not  produced  numerous  examples  of  similar  deeds
performed  to  some  extent  from  nobler  motives ;  but  nowhere,
except  in  Greek  life,  has  the  intrinsic  worth  of  the  action
been  so  perfectly  manifested  with  a  simple  beauty  which  does
not  need  that  imagination  should  separate  from  it  any  perverse
strangeness  of  exterior  circumstance  before  enjoying  the  essence.

Such  an  artistic  form  had  already  been  given  to  life  when
art,  reaching  the  period  of  its  greatest  perfection  almost
simultaneously  with  the  fulness  of  political  maturity,  gathered
up  as  it  were  this  living  beauty,  and  reflected  it  back  again
upon  life.  My  intention  is  not  to  sketch  here,  even  in  out-
line, its  magnificent  development ;  it  is  sufficie::it  to  indicate
what  art  was  in  relation  to  life.

I

II

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  411

Among  the  greatest  and  most  attractive  characteristics  of
the  Greek  mind  was  that  mobility  of  fancy  which  can  become
absorbed  in  the  intrinsic  worth  of  any  phsenomenon,  and
which,  while  it  did  not  bring  with  it  any  permanent  bias  of
disposition,  could  sympathize  with  and  accommodate  itself  to
the  changing  nature  of  objects  and  of  events.  Yet  this
characteristic  has  a  limit — not  only  that  limit  which  is  in
itself  a  glory,  the  indefinable  but  perfectly  distinct  character
which  marks  out  the  most  varied  productions  of  Greek  art
as  having  a  common  national  stamp — but  also  another  and
different  limit,  which  it  would  be  idle  to  blame  and  perverse
to  imitate.  That  is,  it  was  not  really  the  intrinsic  worth  of
things  which  the  Greeks  sought ;  everything  was  of  value  to
them  only  in  as  far  as  it  could  be  made  instrumental  to  human
development.  Everything  which  could  be  utilized  to  produce
a  perfectly  harmonious  constitution  of  man's  whole  mental
and  physical  nature,  everything  which  could  be  permanently
expressed  in  this  constitution,  or  could  through  it  receive  some
fresh  manifestation,  aroused  their  artistic  imitative  sympathy ;
they  were  much  less  inclined  to  that  which  in  its  over-
powering profundity  and  incalculableness  left  no  alternative
but  contemplative  subjection  and  submission.

"We  do  not  know  their  music,  a  fortunate  circumstance
which  has  left  room  for  modern  times  to  become  great  in  this
one  art  at  least ;  but  according  to  all  that  their  authors  have
said  on  the  subject,  it  was  measure  and  harmony  that  they
principally  esteemed  in  music ;  they  considered  that  those
were  the  elements  which  one  might  expect  to  exercise  a
useful  influence  upon  the  temperament,  disposition,  and  whole
conscious  life  of  man,  the  improved  mental  condition  thus
induced  expressing  itself  in  gesture,  carriage,  and  action.
Hence  nothing  was  more  natural  than  the  close  connection  of
ancient  music  with  dancing  ;  the  graceful  and  objectless  move-
ment of  the  limbs  in  the  dance  was  the  simplest  and  most
sensuous  expression  and  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  beauty  felt
in  musical  sound  was  not  overpowering  to  human  nature,  but
tliat  on  the  contrary  man  could  appropriate  music  as  having

412  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEK  III.

special  affinity  with  his  own  nature,  and  could  reproduce  it  W
the  help  of  bodily  organs.  With  regard  to  the  development
of  any  melody,  this  capacity  does  not  count  for  much ;  the
connection  between  successive  phrases  in  a  really  beautiful
musical  composition  carries  us  away  from  the  well-known  and
familiar  forms  of  our  own  existence  into  the  wide  ocean  of  a
universal  life  in  which  all  individual  forms  are  dissolved ;
isolated  turns  and  phrases  may  indeed  charm  by  reminding
is  that  even  this  beauty  of  sound  is  not  wholly  incapable  of
being  reflected  in  human  life ;  but  taking  it  as  a  whole,  we
find  that  we  have  no  choice  but  to  give  ourselves  up  to  it
with  unreserved  self-surrender ;  the  agitation  which  it  arouses
may  pass  off  in  tears,  but  the  content  of  this  agitation  cannot
be  presented  in  tangible  form.  Either  this  open  sea  of
universality  to  which  music  leads  us  was  avoided  by  the
Greeks,  or  the  error  of  venturing  upon  it  was  disapproved  of
by  their  aesthetes.  The  extremely  meagre  thoughts  concern-
ing music  which  are  expressed  with  singular  unanimity  by
their  philosophers  make  it  seem  improbable  that  any  striking
degree  of  beauty  had  been  developed  in  the  actual  practice  of
the  art;  on  the  contrary,  the  fashion  in  which  (in  the  same
matter-of-fact  way  in  which  one  would  draw  up  a  catalogue
of  the  most  familiar  objects)  they  set  down  definite  mental
conditions  as  effects  which  might  always  be  expected  to  be
produced  by  definite  styles  of  melody,  or  hoped  by  State
regulation  of  the  kind  of  music  to  be  cultivated,  to  establish  a
disposition  favourable  to  the  existing  constitution — all  this
indicates  that  poverty  of  artistic  content  which  commonly
tries  to  make  up  for  its  deficiencies  by  doctrinaire  over-estima-
tion, analysis,  and  interpretation  of  that  which  has  been
attained.

Little  has  remained  to  us  of  all  the  wealth  of  song  which
Greece  possessed.  We  have  express  testimony  of  that  which
we  might  have  guessed — namely  that  among  the  ancient
Greeks,  as  among  all  other  nations,  mothers  sang  lullabies  to
their  little  ones,  and  sailors  lightened  their  toilsome  rowing,
and  shepherd  and  peasant  shortened  the  lingering  hours  with

J6EAUTY  AND  AKT.  413

song ;  but  this  popular  poesy  has  not  been  transmitted  to  us.
The  kind  of  Greek  song  which  we  know  and  which  is  framed
according  to  the  rules  of  art,  presents  two  peculiar  features.
One  is  a  predilection  for  the  picturesque  presentation  of
events  which  are  set  before  us  like  a  succession  of  living
pictures,  not  with  epic  detail  but  effectively  condensed  ;  not  so
much  related  as  brought  into  sudden  relief  by  masterly
delineation  of  the  main  outlines ;  not  presented  with  the
measured  symmetry  of  epic  verse,  but  seeking  appropriate
living  expression  in  passionate  rhythm.  The  inclination  to
make  fable  prominent  may  have  a  deeply-rooted  cause  in  the
fact  that  all  human  thought  and  action  and  life  and  suffering
seemed  incapable  of  being  a  worthy  subject  of  poetry  unless
it  had  types  and  likenesses  in  the  Olympian  world  and  in
mythology  from  which  poetic  imagery  was  ordinarily  bor-
rowed; on  the  other  hand,  it  was  no  doubt  a  liking  for
plastic  sensible  phaenomena  which  led  Greek  fancy  not  to
linger  in  immediate  contemplation  of  the  content  of  feeling,
but  to  illustrate  it  indirectly  by  looking  at  living  examples.
The  other  characteristic  is  the  habit  of  storing  up  the  outcome
of  poetic  excitement  in  some  general  proposition  or  some
proverb  of  practical  wisdom — and  thus  in  this  way,  too,  taking
refuge  from  the  agitation  of  emotion  in  the  definiteness  and
calm  of  a  general  conviction.  It  is  difficult  to  estimate
impartially  this  gnomic  element,  which  in  Pindar  and  in  the
choruses  of  the  tragic  poets  continually  alternates  with  graphic
historic  pictures.  There  is  no  doubt  deep  meaning  in  the
trite  expressions  and  commonplaces  with  which  in  practice
we  often  try  to  brace  ourselves  in  joy  and  sorrow ;  they  could
not  have  become  commonplaces  if  they  did  not  include
something  which,  rightly  understood,  would  suffice  to  com-
pletely calm  our  agitation.  Now  if  the  poet  insensibly  guides
us  in  such  a  way  that,  as  through  a  rift  in  a  cloud,  the  content
(still  existent)  of  reflection  which  has  thus  grown  into  habit,
suddenly  appears  to  us  in  all  its  original  heartfelt  meaning,  he
will  produce  the  finest  possible  effect  by  words  and  thoughts
V'hich  in  their  insignificance  seem  to  the  uninitiated  to  be  the

414  BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  IH.

most  commonplace  on  earth.  We  not  unfrequently  meet  this
lofty  and  earnest  beauty  in  the  songs  of  Pindar  and  the  tragic
poets  ;  but  sometimes  only  its  external  form  is  present,  and
poesy  hovers  about  the  line  beyond  which  what  is  really  prose
becomes  almost  exalted  into  poetry  by  the  solemnity  with
which  it  gives  itself  out  as  such.  Greek  lyric  poetry  moving
thus  between  the  two  poles  of  gorgeous  historic  painting  and
impressive  admonition,  does  not  exhibit  much  of  the  true
spirit  of  song.  In  the  numerous  remains  of  this  lyric
poetry  which  we  possess,  we  hear  many  a  tone  sweet  or
beautiful  or  passionate  or  intense,  but  that  which  is  expressed
in  them  is  the  mere  human  beauty  of  man's  nature.  All  the
charm  and  tenderness  and  graceful  dignity  exhibited  by
favourable  specimens  of  the  race — especially  in  as  far  as  all
this  finds  sensuous  expression  in  gesture  and  demeanour — ■
exercised  a  strong  influence  upon  the  Greek  mind,  and  was
apprehended  and  imitated  by  their  artistic  imagination.  But
this  imagination  does  not  reveal  to  us  the  unfathomable  depths
of  the  individual  soul,  and  the  incalculable  fashion  in  which
it  apprehends  the  world.

To  illustrate  some  universal  truth  of  practical  experience
by  reference  to  great  examples  was  the  task  undertaken  by
the  Greek  drama  also,  and  beside  this  task  the  full  delineation
of  human  character  and  of  the  special  justice  which  brings  to
each  his  own  peculiar  and  appropriate  doom  falls  noticeably
into  the  background.  As  mythology  had  once  for  all  set  out
the  meaning  of  the  heroic  characters  in  the  large  firm  out-
lines  which  the  nature  of  the  case  demanded,  the  drama,  with-
out any  great  liking  for  mythology,  borrowed  from  it,  in  order
to  elaborate  into  characteristic  individual  forms  these  general
sketches  of  human  dispositions  and  destinies.  This  can
hardly  be  denied  unless  we  apply  different  standards  to  old
and  to  new ;  trying  in  the  first  case  with  microscopic  acuteness
of  vision  to  jprove  by  instances  the  beauty  of  works  of  art,  and
reserving  for  modern  art  an  inexorable  appeal  to  the  immediate
impression  produced,  which  alone  is  competent  to  decide  how
far  the  beauty  that  has  been  proved  to  exist  is  aesthetically

II
II

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  415

effective.  As  regards  the  influence  of  art  upon  life,  which  ia
what  we  are  here  considering,  this  peculiarity  of  the  Greek
drama  was  an  advantage.  The  subtle  psychological  analysis
and  delineation  which  in  the  masterpieces  of  modern  dramatic
art  seeks  to  dive  into  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  human
heart,  can  never  hope  to  be  universally  understood,  nor  even
to  meet,  in  narrower  circles,  with  uniform  and  harmonious
comprehension;  but  antiquity,  ignoring  those  inexhaustible
depths  and  taking  characters  that  all  could  understand,
depicted  the  destinies  of  mankind  with  broad  firm ,  strokes
wliich  found  appreciative  comprehension  in  the  living  sym-
pathy of  the  people.  And  it  did  this  all  the  more  because
both  subject  and  mode  of  treatment  were  determined  by
ancient  custom  ;  the  poet  was  not  at  liberty  either  to  find  his
heroes  in  any  obscure  corner  of  the  world,  or  to  make  any
strangeness  of  his  own  humour  the  keynote  of  his  representa-
tion. The  fact  that  the  persons  of  tragedy  M'ere  always  taken
from  the  circle  of  native  heroes ;  the  repetition  of  the  same
story  by  various  authors ;  the  maintenance  of  the  national
philosophic  views  which  yet  allowed  the  special  qualities  of
individual  poets  to  make  themselves  felt — all  this  had  a
steady  educative  influence  upon  the  people,  and  led  it  by  a
definite  series  of  aesthetic  presentations,  without  confusing
multiplicity,  to  a  capacity  of  judgment  which  has  never  since
been  so  widely  diffused  as  it  was  then  at  Athens.

Among  the  arts  that  deal  with  form,  painting  seems  to
have  had  least  influence  upon  the  national  life,  great  as  may
have  been  the  height  of  artistic  development  to  which  it  had
attained ;  of  infinitely  more  importance  was  the  constant
sight  of  the  noble  and  ideal  forms  which  Greek  sculpture,
with  a  masterly  perfection  which  has  never  since  been
reached,  set  before  the  eyes  of  the  people.  Having  developed
to  this  degree,  the  art  of  sculpture  busied  itself  about  the
most  insignificant  as  well  as  the  most  important  tasks.  To
us,  who  admire  the  isolated  remains,  the  thought  expressed
by  many  an  ancient  work  of  art  seems  to  be  too  slight  in
comparison  with the labour expended in  presenting it  in

415  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IIL

sculpture;  but  such  works  were  tlien  intended  to  serve
as  fitting  adornments  of  edifices  the  most  insignificant
details  of  which  were  pervaded  by  a  coherent  idea  of  har-
monious beauty  of  form,  and  within  the  walls  of  which  there
'  paced  figures  whose  costume,  ornaments,  and  gesture  seemed
like  the  living  embodiment  of  the  same  idea.  And  from
what  was  finest  and  most  beautiful  in  this  world  of  art  the
people  were  not  excluded ;  traditional  custom  turned  the
attention  of  creative  art  to  the  temples,  the  places  of
public  congregation ;  for  the  private  dwellings  of  citizens
more  modest  adornment  was  thought  sufficient.  In  those
places  which  the  nation  regarded  as  sacred,  in  those  festivals
/  in  the  arrangement  of  which  no  other  nation  has  come  up
/  to  the  Greeks,  life  was  more  thoroughly  pervaded  by  all  the
^  splendour  of  art  than  it  has  been  in  any  other  age  ;  the
statues  of  the  gods  seemed  to  live  among  their  worshippers ;
music  and  dance  appeared  to  be  the  natural  expression  of
the  mood  aroused  by  the  words  of  the  sacred  songs,  and  in
looking  on  at  theatrical  representations  the  excitement  of
feeling  passed  into  a  more  calm  contemplation  of  human
destinies,  a  mental  condition  permanently  raised  above  the
commonplaces  of  daily  life.  And  the  Greeks  thus  lived
I  and  moved,  and  as  it  were  had  their  being  in  beauty,  without
j  that  deification  of  art  which  is  so  common  in  our  time ;  \
they  did  indeed  deify  beauty,  but  not  the  human  activity
by  which  it  was  produced.  They  did  not  even  possess  any
word  by  which  art  might  be  essentially  distinguished  from
any  handicraft  skill;  so  self-evident  did  it  seem  to  them
that  every  free-born  soul  is  capable  of  appreciating  beauty,
and  needs  for  producing  beauty  no  more  mysterious  endow-
ment than  that  which  in  every  kind  of  occupation  distinguishes
productive  from  receptive  talent.

§  4.  When  the  languages  of  the  Greeks  and  Eomans,
respectively,  are  compared,  that  of  the  latter  seems  the  less
flexible.  If  the  Greek  language  forms  its  words  in  such  a
way  that  each  may  be  connected  without  break  with  those
that  precede  and  follow,  Latin  seems  to  be  animated  by  an

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  -  417

almost  directly  contrary  endeavour.  The  vowel  endings  are
less  numerous,  the  frequent  inflexional  terminations  in  t,  m,
and  nt  necessitate  slower  enunciation  owing  to  their  inca-
pacity of  blending  with  most  words  that  begin  with  mutes,
and  give  the  impression  of  a  sort  of  individual  reserve  with
which  each  word  excludes  its  neighbour  in  self-contained
isolation.  And  the  vowel  changes  have  a  more  impressive
effect,  since  the  phonic  system  of  the  Eomans  contains  a
smaller  number  of  differences  and  these  more  sharply  con-
trasted, and  there  are  lacking  many  intermediate  sounds
which  give  gradations  of  light  and  shade  to  Greek  speech.
The  Eomans  gave  up  the  article ;  each  word  appears  as  a  solid
and  independent  whole  without  this  prop ;  the  conjugations
have  fewer  forms,  and  the  declensions  are  only  apparently
fuller  because  of  their  having  retained  the  ablative.  Tor  as
compared  with  the  Greek  determination  by  prepositions,  which
the  Eomans  neither  used  so  much  nor  possessed  in  such
abundance,  the  ablative  hardly  does  more  than  indicate  the
existence  of  some  relation,  leaving  it  to  the  hearer  to  guess,
within  wide  limits,  the  more  definite  nature  of  that  relation.
The  language  is  still  poorer  in  those  particles  so  frequently
used  in  Greek  to  indicate  the  subtle  contrasts,  connections,
limitations,  and  links  between  the  different  ideas  of  the
speaker,  the  expression  of  which  contributes  little  towards
the  communication  of  matter  of  fact,  but  helps  greatly  to
make  clear  the  mood  and  the  subjective  view  of  the  com-
municator. Hence,  as  compared  with  the  soft  drapery  of
Greek  speech  which  revealed  the  most  trifling  modifications  of
thought,  the  Latin  language  has  a  sterner  aspect ;  it  groups
together  more  simply  and  concisely  the  items  of  fact,  ex-
pecting the  hearer  to  add  that  which  is  unexpressed.  And
yet  this  mode  of  speech  is  not  less  expressive  and  impressive,
producing  its  effect  by  the  position  of  the  words,  the  peculiar
construction  of  sentences,  and  even  by  the  omission  of  ex-
pressions which  might  have  been  expected.  The  gestures
which  in  other  cases  are  an  accompaniment  of  speech,  and
can  make  clear  the  meaning  of  the  most  imperfect  language,
VOL.  IL  2d

418  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

are  here  contained,  in  a  certain  fashion,  in  the  very  structure
of  the  sentences ;  these  characteristic  forms  of  construction
supplement  the  meagre  melody  of  speech  as  with  a  clear
harmonious  accompaniment,  and  produce  the  impression
of  that  stern  pomp  and  suppressed  passion,  which  in  the
Latin  language  always  invite  the  reader  to  declaim,  and  give
the  hearer  the  idea  of  a  life  full  of  power,  and  using  its
splendid  resources  with  calm  mastery.

It  is  customary  to  estimate  at  a  low  value  the  artistic
endowment  of  the  Eomans  as  compared  with  that  of  the
Greeks.  Without  disputing  this  judgment,  which  is  well
founded,  we  must  yet  attribute  to  that  which  they  accom-
plished (in  harmony  with  the  genius  of  their  language)  in
this  department  also,  an  historical  significance  which,  though
different  in  kind  from  that  which  appertains  to  the  art  of
the  Greek  nation,  is  hardly  less  important.  The  Greeks
made  up  in  clearness  of  perception  and  in  constructive  power
what  their  imagination  perhaps  lacked  in  warmth  and  in-
tensity of  feeling.  As  no  living  expression,  no  hidden
excellence  of  proportion  in  the  human  form,  and  no  beauty
of  attitude  in  the  living  subject  was  neglected  by  the  sculptor's
art  among  the  Greeks,  so  their  poetry  with  lucid  freshness
reflected  all  the  habits  of  mental  life,  as  well  as  external
occurrences.  It  could  enter  into  any  circumstances  with  a
flexible  sympathy  which  enabled  it  to  represent  how  these
circumstances  would  affect  the  generality  of  men  ;  it  repro-
duced with  the  characteristic  colouring  every  feeling  of  pain
or  happiness  commonly  resulting  from  the  experiences  of
life  in  the  human  mind  ;  it  never  lost  itself  amid  those
obscure  movements  of  distinctively  individual  emotion,  which
as  they  are  to  one  mind  inevitable  are  to  another  unintelli
gible ;  it  is  nowhere  disturbed  by  an  intense  longing  to  reach
beyond  life  as  it  is,  to  a  higher  peace — to  a  sacred  joy  in
life  and  an  unforced  equanimity  in  the  contemplation  of  it,

The  mind  of  the  Eomans  seems  to  have  been  differently
constituted.  More  phlegmatic,  and  with  less  airiness  of
imagination,  they  could  less  easily  be  satisfied  by  the  many-

I

I

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  419

hued  brightness  of  life,  behind  which  their  religious  belief
discerned  a  network  of  obscure  connections  between  things —
enigmatical  relations  which  were  the  more  oppressive  to
human  life  since  no  glory  of  redeeming  beauty  was  shed
upon  them  (as  it  was  in  the  case  of  the  Greeks)  by  a  circle  of
divinities  who  were  to  them  as  living  realities,  and  from
whose  human-like  customs  these  connections  of  things  might
become  intelligible.  Also  in  social  intercourse  the  Eomans
exhibited  a  greater  sense  of  their  own  individual  personality
and  of  the  mysteriousness  of  alien  personality ;  the  Greeks
felt  themselves  and  regarded  each  other  far  more  as  mere
specimens  of  their  kind,  whose  ambition  might  intelligibly  be
directed  to  superior  excellence  in  performances  which  might
be  severally  compared,  but  not  to  the  attainment  of  some-
thing unique  in  the  individual.  Thus  there  arose  among  the
Eomans  that  reflective  turn  which  obtained  for  their  poetry,
in  the  judgment  of  modern  nations,  a  preference  over  the
colder  and  more  objective  repose  of  Greek  poetry  which  it
did  not  quite  deserve.  For  the  greater  warmth  of  their
reflective  and  contemplative  imagination  lacked  that  power  of
artistic  construction  of  which  it  required  a  specially  large
measure.  Now  if  to  a  soul  that  is  passionately  stirred  it  is
as  unsatisfying  to  take  things  simply  as  they  are,  as  it  is
impossible  to  fashiqn  the  restless  content  of  the  mind  to  the
calm  beauty  of  a  nature  not  its  own,  there  remains  no  alterna-
tive but  voluntary  renunciation — such  as  seeks  to  secure
to  the  soul  that  stands  opposed  to  things  a  dignified  com-
posure and  an  unchanging  demeanour,  by  warding  off  all
disturbances  from  without  and  all  outbreaks  from  within
that  might  interfere  with  the  braced  and  steady  calm  of
manly  firmness.  This  path  of  self-suppression  was  taken
by  the  Eomans,  and  it  led  them  to  the  development  of  a  style
of  aesthetic  representation  which  has  permanent  historic
value.

Unceremonious  communication  is  not  generally  carefully
precise  in  expression ;  the  order  in  which  we  give  utterance
to  our  thoughts  concerning  the  connection  of  things  is  not

420  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

always  in  correspondence  with those thoughts themselves,
for  sudden  stirrings  of  emotion  hurry  on  our  words  in  advance
of  the  natural  development  of  the  subject,  or  force  them  back
to  a  point  which  they  ought  to  have  passed. Greek  speech
abounds  in such  incoherences and looseness,  of  which  the
syntactic  justification  is  often  as  difficult  as  the  psychological
justification  is  easy,  and  which  in  facile  superabundance  and
in  alternate  sudden  breaks  and  awkward  additions  reproduce
the  natural  and  often  charming  irregularity  of  living  speech.
The  Latin  style of expression is constructed with much
more conscious design,  and  even  where it imitates  Greek
models  it  does  not  simply  follow  the  course  of  thought,  but
(aiming  at  orderliness  and  a  completeness  which  gives  due
prominence to each essential  relation, and  omits what  is
I unessential)  compresses  the  really  important  content  in  fixed
and  regular  structural  forms. Every  other  and  perhaps  every
^  /, higher  aesthetic  superiority  may  belong  to  the  Greek  style,
U^ but  the  Eoman  style  aims much  more  than  it  at  an  ideal
• y*^  of  Correctness, It  is  pervaded  by  the  sense  of  an  intrinsic

'^  order in all things which  may be made the subject of

communication ;  without  entering  into  the  variety  of  their
nature  with  pliant  imitative  fancy,  it  seems  under  an  obliga-
tion to  observe  with  regard  to  them  general  forms  of  order,
which  guarantee  to  their  content,  as  it  were,  distant  respect
without  slavish  submission,  and  at  the  same  time  secure  this
respect  from  being  violated  by  subjective  caprice.

In  the  practice  of  art  among  the  Eomans,  this  characteristic
is  repeated  under  a  variety  of  aspects.  They  copied  all  tho
artistic  forms  of  the  Greeks,  and  always,  even  when  they
^^  /I  borrowed  matter  as  well  as  form,  the  copy  in  their  hands
became  something  quite  different  from  the  exemplar.  Even
in  the  older  imitations  of  Greek  plays,  of  which  there  still
remain  fragments,  the  sternness  of  the  ancient  Eoman
character  gives  to  the  style  a  striking  stamp  of  strength  and
J  trustworthiness;  as  advancing  civilisation  permitted  greater
refinement  of  form.  Elegance  appeared  as  the  distinguishing
characteristic  of  Eoman  art. The  idea  and  name  of  elegance

3

(jX

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  421

occur  here for  the  first  time,  and  later  culture  has  learnt
afresh  to  value  the  quality  by  contemplating  the  specimens  of
Eoman  elegance  which  remain  to  us. There  is  no  doubt  that
the  Greeks  possessed  a  gift  of  greater  artistic  value  in  their
capacity  of  becoming  absorbed  in  the  full  beauty  of  things ]
without  the  intervention  of  reflection,  and  of  reproducing  that 1
beauty  with  all  the  naturalness  suggestive  of  having  lived  and )
moved in it ;  but  in  art,  as  in  life,  the  higher  does  not  so
include  the  lower  as  to  hinder  the  lower  from  developing  to
characteristic and irreplaceable worth if its evolution is
allowed  to  proceed  undisturbed. As  the  sharp-angled  forms  ^

of  crystals  when  compared with  the  unanalysable  grace  of i
flowers still retain their own inalienable charm, so the \
elegance  of  the  Eomans  holds  its  own  beside  the  beauty  ot
the  Greeks ;  and  taking  our  civilisation  as  a  whole,  the  former \
could  not  without  loss  be  replaced  by  the  latter.

The  great  master  of  elegance,  Horace,  has  shown  by  precept  |j.  ^fc*'^
and  example  what  it  is.  When  he  requires  the  poet  to  say
what  is  ordinary  after  an  unordinary  fashion,  what  he  asks  for
is  neither  an  idle  play  of  enigmatical  designations  nor  useless
pomp  of  words,  but  a  kind  of  justice  towards  things  with
regard  to  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of  being  unjust.  The
dust  under  our  feet  arouses  neither  our  attention  nor  our
admiration ;  yet  the  microscope  finds  in  it  crystalline  and  '  ^
vegetable  matters,  the  characteristic  forms  of  which  would
captivate  us  if  the  confused  intermixture  in  which  it  all  appears
to  our  eyes  did  not  prevent  our  perceiving  and  distinguishing.
In  the  same  way  the  world  and  life  are  full  of  events,  the
frequent  occurrence  of  which  has  diminished  their  value  in
our  estimation,  or  to  the  characteristic  significance  of  which
we  can  only  give  an  indifferent,  distant,  sidelong  glance,
because  of  the  eagerness  with  which — and  rightly — we  press
forward  towards  goals  of  more  importance.  It  would  only  be
a  fresh  injustice  to  bring  forward  and  distinguish  with  special
preference  these  things  which  have  hitherto  been  unjustly
neglected ;  what  is  just  is,  not  to  pass  them  over  with  the  \
trite  and  well-worn  phrases  of  everyday  usage,  but  as  we  observe \

422

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

A

i>>

X^

A^y  them  and  then  pass  on,  to  suggest  the  forgotten  value  which
they  conceal  by  some  uncommon  turn  of  expression  prompted
by  happy  insight.  The  appertaining  of  vi^hat  is  small  and
insicmificant  and  confused  to  the  same  world  that  holds  what
is  grand  and  beautiful  and  distinct,  is  brought  into  notice  by
the  careful  aad  concise  style  to  which  we  have  referred,
without  offending  against  truth  by  artificial  enhancing  of
insignificant  values.  This  is  what  Horace  calls  the  un-
ordinary  expression  of  what  is  ordinary,  and  with  this
artistic  intention  which  aims  at  elegance,  the  means  which  he
uses  are  connected.  So  his  poetic  art — like  that  of  others —
employs  imagery  not  merely  to  give  a  twofold  expression  to
the  same  content,  and  also  not  merely — by  help  of  the
palpable  plainness  of  some  simile — to  give  clearness  to  a
thought  that  is  difficult  to  set  forth;  finally,  it  does  not
merely  reckon  upon  the  probability  that  feelings  which  such
a  simile  may  excite  (and  which  attach  themselves  spontaneously
to  it)  may  apply  also  to  the  object  concerning  which  it  is  used,
without  any  express  incentive — an  incentive  which,  in  fact,  it
would  not  be  possible  for  the  poetiy  to  convey  in  express  terms:
on  the  contrary,  by  exhibiting  the  one  event  that  it  wishes  to
emphasize  by  means  of  other  and  similar  events,  it  abolishes  the
isolation  of  the  one,  and  shows  it  forth  as  entitled  to  constitute
part  of  a  world  in  which  the  most  essential  features  of  its
character  occur  and  are  of  value,  in  other  places  and  under
other  circumstances,  forming  part  of  the  general  plan  of  the
whole.  Eoman  fancy  uses  such  similes  with  great  precision  ;
by  the  perfect  finish  of  its  brief  figurative  expressions,  a  feeling
of  certainty  and  assurance  is  awakened,  and  this  feeling
is  strengthened  by  the  very  strangeness  of  the  con-
struction which  often  essays  to  combine  ideas  from  other
than  the  ordinary  standpoint.  For  the  success  of  these
essays  convinces  us  of  the  steady  coherence  between  the
parts  of  the  thinkable  world ;  since  this,  being  considered  in  a
variety  of  aspects,  yet  always  appears  as  a  self-contained
whole.  The  same  end  is  served  by  many  analogous  means —
the  sparing  use  of  ornamental  predicates,  the  due  proportion

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  423

in  tlieir  distribution,  and  in  the  general  grouping  of  ideas
between  which  a  musical  or  artistic  play  of  connections  and
contrasts  is  plainly  aimed  at ;  and  lastly,  the  predilection  for
working  out  a  thought  to  that  statuesque  simplicity  in  which  -\  '
— all  that  is  unnecessary  having  been  got  rid  of,  and  all  that  is  |
necessary  having  been  brought  into  the  sharpest  relief — the
thought  is  presented  to  us  as  the  classical  expression  for  all
time,  both  of  the  nature  of  the  object  of  thought  and  of  the
right  way  of  regarding  it.

Plenty  of  empty  brilliancy  of  form  has  no  doubt  resulted
from  the  following  of  these  rules  by  poorly  endowed  poets ;
but  this  form  of  procedure  furnishes  a  favourable  testimony
to  the  vitality  and  character  of  the  people ;  it  reveals  even  in
the  productions  of  depraved  ages  and  unruly  spirits  the  back-
ground of  a  grand  discipline  of  thought  which  could  never  be
wholly  broken.  And  in  other  respects  also  Roman  elegance  ^-^xi  "^
is  not  to  be  despised  in  comparison  with  Greek  beauty.
Certainly  its  chief  endeavour  is  to  elevate  and  give  weight  to  /^
what  is  in  itself  small  and  slight  and  insignificant,  in  order  to
give  to  our  temper  and  our  philosophic  views  such  equable-  ,
ness  of  tone  as  characterizes  a  good  picture,  and  it  is  true  that
with  this  aim  it  minifies  what  is  great ;  in  place  of  the  over-  i
powering  tones  of  living  passion,  it  generally  substitutes  the
colder  reflection  in  which  contemplative  thought  considers  the
gain  and  loss  of  a  struggle  which  has  already  come  to  a
conclusion.  But  when  such  procedure  cannot  attain  the
highest  poetry,  it  may  yet  give  an  air  of  grandeur  to  the
prose  of  life.  Society,  as  well  as  intercourse  with  Nature,
produces  innumerable  situations  from  which  all  really  striking
beauty  has  wholly  disappeared;  means  to  an  end  which  are
in  themselves  indifferent,  and  the  attention  which  they  require
place  keenly  felt  obstacles  in  the  way  of  mental  activity ;  a
world  of  worthless  externalities  bars  the  way  to  that  for
which  our  soul  longs.  Where  any  occurrence  of  domestic  or
public  life  may  be  transfigured,  either  by  its  own  content  or
by  immediate  connection  with  a  world  of  aesthetic  or  religious
thought,  the  Greeks  have  not  failed  to  consecrate  it  thus  in

424  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IIL

a  striking  manner;  but  to  give  interest  and  an  air  of
stateliness  to  that  prose  of  life  which  obstinately  refuses  to
be  transformed  into  anything  but  prose,  and  to  do  this  by  the
mere  mode  of  treatment  adopted,  was  a  task  the  merit  of
accomplishing  which  belonged  to  the  Eomans.  Their  mode  of
thought,  which  in  art  created  the  special  notion  of  elegance,
introduced  into  life  a  not  less  special  dignity  in  the  formal
treatment  of  all  kinds  of  subjects.  With  the  declining
vitality  of  the  nation,  reverence  for  the  sacredness  of  legal
institutions  (once  the  fairest  flower  of  Eoman  thought)  became
weakened,  and  only  ceremonial  and  the  external  regulation  of
splendid  ostentation  continued  to  receive  further  develop-
ment ;  and  these  themselves  were  elements  which,  after  the
fall  of  the  empire,  helped  (amid  the  chaos  which  characterized
the  beginning  of  a  new  order  of  international  life)  to  pre-
serve the  thought  that  everything  has  some  particular  mode
which,  and  which  only,  is  right  for  it.  From  this  legacy  left
by  the  Eomans  the  men  of  succeeding  centuries  derived  a
large  part  of  that  which  gave  beauty  to  their  life ;  and  that
portion  of  this  legacy  of  which  we  are  the  historic  heirs,  stUl
works  more  powerfully  within  us  than  the  artistically  more
,,  important  heritage  that  we  have  received  from  the  Greeks,
1^  which  affects  us  by  rousing  us  to  conscious  imitation.
Numerous  forms  of  expression  which  have  been  transplanted
into  modern  languages,  the  character  of  our  public  solemnities
and  the  difficulty  on  all  such  occasions  (and  for  inscriptions
on  monuments,  records  of  solemn  ceremonies,  or  brief  and
pregnant  sayings)  of  replacing  the  statuesque  style  of
Eoman  speech  and  custom  by  substitutes  of  home  growth —
all  this  still  bears  witness  to  the  lasting  influence  of  Eoman
civilisation — an  influence  from  which,  even  now,  we  have
\  scarcely  begun  to  try  and  emancipate  ourselves,  and  for  the
j  advantages  of  which  we  do  not  as  yet  know  any  adequate
substitute.

§  5.  Between  the  fall  of  the  ancient  world  and  our  own
times,  the  temper,  morality,  and  aesthetic  feelings  of  mankind
have  experienced  many  changes,  which  must  be  passed  ovel

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  425

in  silence  by  our  brief  survey,  which  is  concerned  only  with

the  lasting  results  of  these  developments. There  were set

before  imagination  increasingly  difficult  tasks,  which  roused  it

to  passionate agitation;  but  there  was  an  absence  of  those

favouring  conditions  which  in  the  age  of classic  antiquity

made  it  possible  to  impress  upon  life  a  stamp  of  harmonious /j/'

beauty.

To  the  ancients  the  starting-point  and  goal  of  all  human  en-
deavours were,  as  a  whole,  plain.  Nature  lay  before  them  as  the
only  reality ;  in  unceasing  creation,  which  is  its  very  essence,
and  without  pursuing  ends  situated  beyond  the  sphere  of  its
phsenomena,  it  brought  forth  even  the  human  race,  as  the
fairest  among  its  perishable  blossoms ;  that  man  should  live  in
harmony  with  Nature  was  the  common  conclusion  at  which
the  ancients,  setting  out  from  the  most  various  premises,
had  arrived.  Excellence  of  national  disposition  and  the
intellectual  candour  of  an  active  spirit  of  investigation  pre-
vented this  adherence  to  Nature  from  being  carried  out  by
obedience  to  every  rude  and  blind  impulse,  and  every  noble
and  attractive  quality  of  the  race  was  cherished  as  a  distinc-
tive endowment  by  which  Nature  prescribed  to  man  a  path
which  leads  beyond  the  limits  of  the  animal  world ;  to  the
fair  ideal  of  humanity  thus  formed,  a  rich  and  harmonious
development  of  characteristic  morality  and  custom  was  insured
by  an  almost  undisturbed  national  evolution.  But  no  recog-
nised aims  lay  beyond  ;  the  course  of  events  might  pursue  the
same  round  for  ever  and  ever ;  Nature  might  go  on  to  eternity
producing  fresh  relays  of  short-lived  mortals,  each  generation
of  whom,  after  having  exhausted  the  good  things  which  its
organization  enabled  it  to  develop  and  to  enjoy,  would  be
reabsorbed  into  the  same  universal  Nature.  Now  doubtless
there  will  always  be  a  secret  contradiction  between  this
sacrifice  of  self  to  Nature  and  its  transitoriness,  and  a  civilisa-
tion which,  the  more  noble  the  aims  which  it  recognises,
only  presupposes  the  more  an  eternal  preservation  of  all  that
is  good ;  the  impetus  of  eager  and  exuberant  activity  easily
carries  men  past  unsolved  problems  which  press  upon  those

426

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

.,v

U

who  have  leisure.  So  that  antiquity  did  not  in  theory  ovei
come  the  discrepancy  in  its  philosophic  view,  but  neither  did
it  allow  this  discrepancy  to  influence  its  temper.  It  neither
sought  nor  found  that  higher  world,  into  the  eternity  of  which
the  transitoriness  of  this  debouches;  yet  it  did  not,  like
oriental  pantheism,  take  pleasure  in  extolling  the  frailty  of  the
individual.  A  happy  talent  for  making  the  most  of  mundane
existence,  and  pleasure  in  the  increasing  success  of  efforts  in
that  direction,  helped  to  compensate  for  the  great  deprivation
of  not  recognising  any  significance  beyond  that  of  a  mere
passing  natural  occurrence  in  even  the  very  highest  of  its
works,  that  is,  in  the  cultured  development  of  human  life.
As  long  as  the  creative  activity  of  antiquity  traversed  an
ascending  path,  and  as  art  and  political  life  were  fruitful  in
the  production  of  new  forms  expressive  of  the  ideal  of  the  age,
while  historical  circumstances  were  favourable  to  attempts  at
their  realization,  so  long  the  still  impetuous  general  movement
of  civilisation  carried  men  safely  over  the  weak  place  in  their
philosophy,  and  the  fits  of  doubt  and  despair  which  appeared
in  isolated  minds  and  at  isolated  moments,  had  little  influence
upon  the  general  temper.  In  course  of  time  such  favouring
conditions  failed,  and  antiquity,  having  exhausted  its  creative
strength,  developed  uncertain,  dissatisfied,  contradictory  tempers
which  attacked  the  hitherto  received  philosophy  on  all  sides.

Another  foundation  had  from  the  beginning  been  given
by  Christianity  to  the  new  civilisation  which  was  to  grow  up
upon  the  ruins  of  that  which  was  passing  away.  Christianity
had  demolished  the  calm  self-sufficingness  of  the  secular
world ;  the  life  of  humanity  which  to  the  ancients  seemed  like
a  never-ending  uniform  stream,  was  by  it  compressed  into
a  course  of  stern  dramatic  development  between  the  two  events
of  the  Creation  and  the  Last  Judgment,  and  (as  compared
with  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven)  depressed  to  a  mere  brief  stage
of  transition ;  that  to  which  man  was  destined  no  longer
appeared  as  the  goal  at  which  our  being  naturally  aims,  but
was  regarded  as  attainable  only  by  conflict  with  innate  im-
pulses, of  which  the  noblest  seemed  to  be  hardly  more  than

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  427

splendid  vices ;  great  Nature  herself  was  no  longer  considered
as  the  sole  cause  of  things  or  the  mighty  Mother  of  all,  but
merely  as  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of  Providence ;  and
even  to  this  vocation  she  was  thought  to  have  been  untrue —
the  intrusion  of  sin  had  distorted  her  features,  and  there  was
in  her  a  mingling  of  memories  of  what  was  divine  with  inex-
plicable self-will  and  the  seductive  charm  of  evil  powers.
These  richly  coloured  pictures  of  a  vast  cosmic  history
entered  perhaps  more  generally  and  deeply  into  the  imagi-
nation of  the  people  of  the  Middle  Ages  than  the  spiritual
content  of  Christianity  did  into  their  heart ;  and  they  did  not
have  merely  the  same  effect  as  other  similar  oriental  pictures
which  afford  us  glimpses  of  the  beginning  and  end  of  the
world  hovering  in  mythic  obscurity  at  inconceivable  distances
of  time.  In  times  of  historic  light — times  of  which  the  detailed
outlines  were  recognisable — there  had  happened  the  greatest
marvel  in  the  providential  guidance  of  the  world  ;  bringing  with
it  into  its  own  dazzling  reality,  all  connected  circumstances
whether  past  or  future,  making  them  look  as  if  they  had
either  just  happened  or  were  just  about  to  happen.  Men
did  not  see  symbols,  with  regard  to  which  they  were  uncertain
as  to  how  much  was  figurative  and  how  much  real  and  serious,
but  they  actually  stood  in  the  current  of  universal  history  and
felt  themselves  carried  forward  by  it.

Thus,  whilst  antiquity  only  cared  to  see  with  the  eye  of
intuition  what  things  were,  and  whither  their  development
was  tending,  the  imagination  of  the  new  age  developed  a
taste  for  subtle  inquiry ;  it  distinguished  everywhere  between
what  things  appear  and  what  they  signify  or  what  they  are
a  means  to  ;  life  was  to  be  ordered  after  a  pattern,  the  sole
content  of  which  had  first  to  be  discovered  by  intei-preting  an
ideal  that  soared  high  above  all  reality  ;  but  resigned  obedience
to  the  ordering  of  this  life  had  at  the  same  time  to  struggle
with  the  discouragement  constantly  arising  from  a  conscious-
ness of  the  merely  conditional  value  and  temporariness  of  all
earthly  existence ;  finally,  this  diflBcult  task  had  fallen  to  the
lot  of  nations  which  were  not  supported  by  any  heritage  of

428  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEK  III.

long-accustomed  civilisation.  Christianity  did  not  imme
ately  supply  this  want ;  it  had  indeed  ennobled  from  within  r-
the  developed  forms  of  ancient  life  as  long  as  these  lasted ;
but  systematizing  ideas  capable  of  furnishing  a  foundation  for
new  constructions,  could  not  be  easily  obtained  from  its
simple  ideal  content.  Perhaps  it  is  rather  the  case  that  all
the  characteristic  contrasts  of  the  Middle  Ages  were  held
together  by  the  fact,  that  the  vigour  with  which  they
grasped  a  high  ideal  lacked  all  thoroughly  developed  insight
into  the  articulation  of  the  instruments  necessary  to  prepare
a  place  for  it  in  the  world  of  reality.  With  the  aim  of
antiquity — to  develop  what  Nature  prescribes — was  given
also  the  way  by  which  that  aim  might  be  reached ;  but
the  new  ideal  of  sanctification  towards  the  attainment  of
which  all  Nature  affords  no  aid,  left  the  question.  What  shall
we  do  to  be  saved  ?  without  any  such  definite  answer.
Proximate  ends,  the  earthly  vocation  of  men,  admitted  of
various  interpretations  ;  salvation  might  be  sought  in  various
ways.  Yet  neither  in  penitential  aversion  from  all  the
interests  of  earthly  life  nor  in  the  excitement  of  knightly
combat  was  full  satisfaction  found ;  both  these  modes  of
life  were  at  the  best  conflicts  with  threatening  evils  ;  but
they  were  not  productive  of  any  material  gain  which
could  be  cherished  and  guarded;  just  as  little  was  labou
capable  of  setting  all  longing  at  rest ;  occupied  by  the
pressing  needs  of  life  which  were  regarded  as  being  necessary
only  on  account  of  earthly  imperfection,  labour  for  a  long
while  felt  a  sense  of  its  own  meanness  and  could  not
regard  itself  as  direct  service  in  the  work  of  sanctification.
Thus  human  life  attained  to  no  clear  views  concerning  its
earthly  tasks ;  it  was  the  reconstruction  of  society  which
gradually,  at  first,  toned  down  the  excitement  of  the  prejudice,
which  made  men  think  that  they  must  do  once  for  all  in
this  life  work  which  had  an  inalienable  place  in  the  universal
order  ;  instead  of  feeling  themselves  called  upon  to  be  con-
scious participants  in  the  construction  of  the  great  universal
fabric,  men  learnt  afresh  the  lesson  of  valuing  every  unim-

BEAUTY  AXD  ART.  429

portant  situation  resulting  from  human  intercourse  as  afford-
ing scope  for  the  exercise  of  moral  strength,  and  learnt  not
to  seek  in  life  anything  more  lofty  than  it  is  capable  of
affording.

Thus  there  had  not  been  developed  a  generally  received
type  of  human  culture ;  but  every  rank  and  condition  had  its
own  code  of  morals,  and  sought  in  the  exact  observance  of
transmitted  ordinances  an  historical  justification  of  its  mode
of  life,  in  place  of  that  ideal  justification  which  it  lacked.
There  was  never  a  greater  multiplicity  of  forms  and  observ-
ances than  in  the  intercourse  of  the  society  built  up  out  of
all  these  multifarious  distinct  elements ;  but  this  very  state  of
things  corresponded  to  the  theoretic  philosophy  developed  by
the  Middle  Ages  in  contrast  with  antiquity.  The  eye  of
antiquity  was  captivated  by  that  which  is  general  and
homogeneous  in  human  life  and  in  Nature,  and  which  is
ever  recurring  in  inexhaustible  variety  of  manifestation ;  it
made  no  great  effort  to  comprehend  the  world  as  a  whole.
It  was  not  possible  for  Christian  imagination  to  have  so
much  sympathy  with  this  generality ;  what  it  regarded  as
the  really  efficient  agency  in  the  world  was  not  that  nature
of  things  which  works  homogeneously  in  a  variety  of  subjects,
but  that  divine  Providence  which  has  a  special  purpose  with
regard  to  every  individual,  and  assigns  to  each  his  share
in  the  building  up  of  the  whole.  Minds  were  very  earnestly
directed  to  this  unity  of  the  world,  which  consisted  in  the
congruence  in  one  plan  of  innumerable  individuals  ;  specu-
lative philosophy  as  well  as  practical  life  neglected  the
region  intervening  between  the  Whole  and  the  Individual —
those  generalities  of  homogeneous  activities  and  simple  laws
by  means  of  which  alone  the  materials  of  any  edifice  can  be
combined  into  one  whole.  The  knowledge  handed  down  by
tradition  having  become  meagre,  the  educational  curriculum
of  the  Middle  Ages  sought  to  compress  encyclopsedically  the
sum  of  all  that  was  knowable  into  one  great  whole,  in  which
the  sciences  were  arranged  in  an  order  that  corresponded  to
the  place  which  the  subject  of  each  seemed  to  occupy  in  the

(

430  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

divine  plan  of  the  universe.  What  was  accomplished  was
far  from  being  equal  to  what  was  designed ;  but  even  the
external  forced  and  far  -  fetched  concatenation  which  was
brought  about  shows  how  vivid  was  the  belief  that  all
things  are  closely  connected  parts  of  a  divine  cosmic  order
— the  unsubstantial  truths  of  mathematics  as  well  as  human
history  and  the  rich  variety  of  Nature  in  products  and
events.  In  this  cosmic  construction,  which  was  regarded
not  as  the  simultaneous  production  of  a  manifold  from  a
homogeneous  cause  but  as  the  combination  into  one  whole
of  the  most  heterogeneous  members,  a  social  system  com-
prising many  varying  codes  and  callings  naturally  found  a
place.

This  mode  of  thought  which  regarded  nothing  as  self-
contained,  but  considered  everything  as  either  significant  of
or  connected  with  something  else,  could  not  favour  impulses
to  aesthetic  construction.  An  exaggerated  leaning  towards
symbolism  caused  a  disproportionate  value  to  be  set  upon  the
significance  of  phsenomena,  and  weakened  men's  susceptibility
to  beauty  of  form,  which  depends  more  upon  general  laws  of
the  reciprocal  relation  of  several  elements  than  upon  the
intellectual  significance  of  the  whole  which  these  constitute.
Delight  in  the  splendid  profuseness  of  life  itself  was  foreign
to  this  philosophic  view,  and  would  have  remained  foreign  to
the  age  also  but  that  it  is  not  possible  for  any  philosophic
view,  however  deeply  rooted,  to  wholly  alter  the  unvarying
natural  tendencies  of the  human  race. So  that  the  men  of

/  the  Middle  Ages,  notwithstanding  the  oppressive  solemnity  of
their  idea  of  cosmic  connection,  had  also  a  liking  for  fun  and
enjoyment;  and  notwithstanding  their  mania  for  symbolic
distortion,  took  pleasure  in  self-sufficing  beauty  of  form.  But
even  in  the  imitative  arts  they  did  not  attain  to any  origi-

,  nality  in  the  reproduction  of  beauty  ;  for  a  long  time  sculpture
and  painting  were  mere  vehicles  for  the  expression  of  actual
thoughts,  feelings,  or  situations — aiming  at  first  at  mere  con-
ventional indication  of  their  meaning,  but  afterwards  at
natural and powerful expression. At last art bethought

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  431

itself  that  its  productions  ought  not  to  be  of  merely  commer-
cial value,  but  should  be  developed  to  creations  having  a  full,
beautiful,  and  characteristic  reality  of  their  own. In  architec-  ,

ture  alone — the  activity  of  which  does  not,  to  so  great  an
extent,  presuppose  unfettered  and  original  skill — it  was  possible
for  works  of  great  and  special  merit  to  be  produced  by  imita-
tion of  existing  models,  and  a  sense  of  the  complex  beauty  of
proportion  (a  beauty  susceptible  of  realization)  both  in  the
whole  of  an  architectural  production  and  in  its  details.  Such
works  sometimes  combine  into  clearly  expressed  unity  a
multitude  of  members  differing  from  one  another ;  and  some-
times by  adopting  a  principle  of  construction  which  seems
rather  suited  to  a  picture  or  a  landscape  than  to  architecture,
they  recall  that  characteristic  manifoldness  of  human  life
which  it  is  difficult  to  take  in  at  a  glance.  Poetry,  as  an  art  (c<^"^
of  words,  needed  for  its  full  evolution  a  considerable  develop-
ment of  language,  and  this  during  a  large  portion  of  the
Middle  Ages  was  lacking ;  for  not  only  were  the  languages  of
some  of  the  nations  slow  in  becoming  fixed,  Latin  remaining
for  a  long  time  the  instrument  of  communication  among  the
learned,  but  the  undeveloped  state  of  society  had  still  more
influence  in  hindering  the  advance  of  language  as  the  instru-
ment of  social  intercourse.  There  lacked  that  cultured
language  which  thinks  and  poetizes  for  us,  and  the  thorough
development  of  which,  up  to  a  certain  point,  is  undoubtedly
a  necessary  condition  of  complete  perfection  in  poetic  form.
Profound  feelings  did  unquestionably  find  powerful  expression
in  national  songs ;  but  even  narrations  which  conformed  to
the  rules  of  poetic  art  did  not  succeed  in  giving  a  perfect
representation  of  the  rich  poetic  content  of  ancient  legends ;  \\/
form  remained  inferior  to  content.

And  this  was  the  general  fate  of  the  age.  It  lived  a  life
full  of  poetic  impulses  from  the  strength  of  which  it  suffered ;
but  it  was  only  in  the  mind  of  posterity  that  there  was
developed  a  comprehensive  consciousness  of  what  that  age
might  have  been  to  itself,  if  it  had  not  been  hindered  by
so  many  obstacles  from  recognising  and  realizing  its  ideal.

432  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

As  life  began  to  take  in  a  high  degree  an  intelligible  form,
imagination,  which  always  seeks  to  find  its  way  by  a  short  cut
from  the  pursuit  of  common  aims  to  the  secret  of  the  Eternal,
turned  back  with  a  feeling  of  preference  to  the  picture
presented  by  the  Middle  Ages — or  rather  to  the  ideal  antitype
of  this  which  it  had  constructed  for  itself.  For  indeed  as  a
matter  of  historical  fact  this  romantic  temper  in  looking  back
could  nowhere  find  such  an  age  as  that  which  it  thus  pre-
ferred ;  the  actual  Middle  Ages  were  richer  in  good  and  in  ill
than  the  dreamy  temper  of  romance,  which  everywhere  sought
the  infinite  in  the  finite,  and  turned  away  from  intelligible
ends — richer  in  real  interests,  the  obstinate  individuality  of
which  was  not  wholly  exhausted  in  symbolism ;  and  like-
wise richer  in  natural  barbarism  and  eccentric  cruelty
— that  are  the  heritage  of  primitive  savagery  (which  it
took  Christianity  a  long  time  to  tame  thoroughly)  and
of  those  fanatical  wanderings  to  which  a  misunderstanding
of  great  ideals  commonly  leads.  But  stiU  this  age  has
left  to  us  a  very  important  legacy,  namely  that  dissatisfac-
tion with  what  is  merely  phsenomenal  and  that  longing  for
the  infinite  which  give  the  keynote  to  the  sesthetic  temper
of  modern  times  and  to  its  poetry ;  although  the  age  itself,
mistaking  the  noblest  sources  of  its  life,  not  unfrequently
imagines  that  it  may  become  greater  by  imitating  other  ideals
than  by  developing  its  own.
j  §  6.  If  we  glance  at  the  monuments  of  Eomanesque  and

!  Gothic  architecture,  at  the  flourishing  condition  of  painting  in
the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  at  the  progressive  develop-
ment of  music  and  the  treasures  of  poesy  which  the  Eomance
and  Germanic  nations  of  Europe,  vying  with  one  another,
successively  produced  in  rich  abundance,  we  are  convinced
that  the  human  race  was  not  lacking  either  in  susceptibility
/  to  beauty  or  in  power  of  artistic  construction  at  the  period  of
^  transition  from  the  Middle  Ages  to  the  modern  era.  A
decision  concerning  the  comparative  greatness  of  these  two
endowments  at  this  period  and  in  antiquity  finds  equal
hindrances  in  the  difficulty  of  the  subject  itself  and  in  the

i

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  433

many  prejudices  that  have  been  produced  both  naturally
and  artificially  ;  there  will  be  more  unanimity  in  the  com-
plaint that  the  echo  which  even  the  best  of  the  more  modern
art  found  in  real  life  appears  to  have  been  incomparably  less
than  in  antiquity,  and  even  where  considerable  to  have  been
of  a  less  satisfying  kind.  For  the  Greeks  at  any  rate  appre-
ciation and  enjoyment  of  beauty  were  a  substantial  part  of
life ;  and  though  no  doubt  the  culture  which  makes  men
capable  of  both  was  unequally  distributed  among  them,  yet
the  less  intelligent  were  surrounded,  as  by  the  atmosphere
which  they  breathed,  by  a  kind  of  artistic  rhythm  which
had  impressed  its  stamp  even  upon  the  customs  of  ordinary
life.  The  gulf  which  separated  the  life  of  more  modern
nations  from  their  art,  ^vas  wider ;  men  became  accustomed
to  contemplate  an  ideal  kingdom,  far  removed  from  living
reality — a  region  which  it  was  both  possible  and  delightful
to  look  up  to,  yet  the  contemplation  of  which  could  not  be
regarded  as  part  of  the  proper  business  of  life,  but  rather  as
a  relaxation  from  it.  It  seemed  to  them  that  among  the
innumerable  wonders  which  the  universe  contains,  and  in
which  men  (incapable  of  examining  more  than  a  part  of  the
whole)  take  a  spontaneous  interest,  art  is  one — that  it  grows
and  blooms  like  an  exotic  plant,  the  marvellous  productive
impulses  of  which,  deviating  from  all  indigenous  models,  from
time  to  time  captivate  and  interest  the  fancy.

We  here  find  art  not  as  yet  detached  from  aU  connection
with  religious,  public,  and  social  life,  though  the  nature  of  the
reciprocal  contact  shows  its  superficiality.  In  antiquity,
religious  worship  was  the  living  act  of  the  national  mind,  to  a
great  extent  supplying  poetry  with  its  raison  d'Stre,  its  content,
and  its  form  ;  what  art  furnishes  to  us  is  formal  powers  (which
it  attributes  to  its  own  nature)  that  may  be  used  to  embellish
religious  worship ;  even  now,  in  moments  of  peril  which
rouse  passionate  feeling,  it  may  rise  to  adequate  expression  of
the  national  consciousness ;  but  in  times  of  rest  it  finds  no
fixed  popular  ideal  of  morality  and  life  from  which  to  borrow
the  form  and  content  of  its  productions,  and  there  is  put  at

VOL II.  2  E

434  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IIL

the  service  of  its  formal  means  of  expression  only  one-sided
party  tendencies,  or  petty  private  interests,  or  capricious  indi-
vidual views  of  life ;  it  does  not  penetrate  social  life  in  such
a  way  as  to  become  as  it  were  its  very  rhythm,  but  among
the  many  dishes  which  society  serves  up  to  help  while  away
the  time,  art  also  brings  its  contribution,  which  makes  a
change  and  is  an  assistance.  It  would  be  a  misapprehension  j
■ of  these  remarks  to  take  them  for  a  denial  of  the  real  worth'

/ of  modern  art  or  of  the  powerful  effects  which  it  produces  j
even  under  such  unfavourable  circumstances ;  but  we  think  it
desirable  to  bring  these  circumstances  into  prominence. It
would,  however,  be  just  as  great  a  misapprehension  to  take,
what  we  have  said  as  applicable  only  to  the  dull  multitude

/ which has always been without appreciation of beauty;
in  order  to  understand all  the barbarism of our  attitude

/ towards  art,  we  must  call  to  mind arrangements  which,  by

I their  commonness,  have  already  wholly  ceased  to  affect  us
j^  -^{'^'  unpleasantly. We crowd pictures together, one above
another,  in  galleries, so  that  the  impressions  received  from
them  are  mutually  destructive ;  the  resolution  to  erect  any
great  architectural  work  is  followed  regularly  and  as  a  matter
of  course  by  a  discussion  as  to  the  style  to  be  adopted,  that
point  being  regarded  as  an  open  question ;  at  concerts,  whichi
are  given  in  places  and  at  hours  the  choice  of  which  is  deter-
mined by  causes known only  to  the  person  who  provides
them,  the  hearer's  soul  is canied  compendiously  through  a|
whole  series  of  masterpieces ;  occasionally  some  quiet  valleyy
invaded  by  a  troop  of  singers,  without  knowing  why,  suddenly^
hears  chanted  by  a  hundred  voices  the  praises  of  its  modest
violets  which bloomed so long  unseen:; the theatres are
opened  almost  nightly,  and  it  would  be  hard  to  say  whethei
the  sentiments  or  the  taste  of  the  spectators  are  most  culti-
vated by  their  rich  variety  of  material  and  style ;  fortunately^
there  is  a  less  frequent  recurrence  of  the  pleasures  of  the!
Carnival,  which  is  as  incoherent  in  itself  as  it  is  devoid  of
any  living connection with  life, and which has long  age
forgotten  what  originally  gave  rise  to  it. All  these  exhibit

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  435

tions  of  varied  beauty  and  artistic  skill  take  place  for  their |/
owu  sake,  and  do  not  mark  any  important  epochs  of  human ^
life ;  they  connect  the  enjoyment  of  art  with  fixed  times,  in
the  same  way  as,  at  any  rate,  Protestant  worship  does  divine
service ;  as  in  the  one  case  the  world  is  left  to  itself  for  six
days,  but  on  the  seventh  men  "  go  to  church,"  so  in  the  other j^
case  the  prose  of  life  is  sharply  marked  off  from  moments  of
poetic  exaltation.

Of  all  this  we  can  alter  nothing.  The  modern  spirit,  i
which  analyses  and  investigates  critically,  has  begun  in  all
departments  of  life  to  seek  for  rational  foundations ;  with
conscious  calculation  it  aims  at  constructing  society  according
to  principles  which  do  not  leave  to  the  once  characteristically
various  multiplicity  of  social  conditions  either  a  raison  d'itre
or  any  significant  task  to  accomplish ;  the  very  course  of
events,  by  inevitably  procuring  recognition  of  the  human
rights  of  every  kind  of  labour  and  of  every  labourer,  has  con-
tributed to  the  levelling  of  society,  even  to  uniformity  of
costume,  and  has  fixed  a  moderate  temper  as  giving  the  tone
to  social  intercourse — a  temper  which  has  to  be  on  its  guard
against  the  intrusion  of  elements  of  intense  dulness,  and
which  will  scarcely  allow  that  the  external  forms  of  life
should  be  informed  with  beauty.  The  tendency  of  the  general
instinct  seems  rather  to  be  towards  entirely  purging  social
intercourse  from  all  poetic  elements,  which  would  appear  as  mere
fantastic  inequalities  in  its  measured  sobriety,  and  to  reserve
all  excitement  and  enthusiasm  for  the  retirement  and  solitude
of  the  private  life  of  individuals.  Here  the  best  part  of  our
mental  development  is  accustomed  to  take  refuge  more  now
than  formerly,  fearing  all  publicity  as  almost  a  profanation.  -^

I  have  already  remarked  that  this  characteristic  of  our  time
does  not  in  itself  make  it  impossible  for  art  to  exercise  great
influence  upon  men's  minds,  nor  for  its  productions  to  have  a
high  degree  of  perfection;  yet  in  both  these  respects  the
characteristic  referred  to  is  not  without  effect.  The  less  the  )
thought  and  style  of  art  are  the  direct  expression  of  popular  >
philosophy,  and  the  more  its  works  seem  to  be  the  arbitrary

>

436  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

constructions  of  an  imagination  that  is  merely  making  un-
restrained trials  of  its  strength,  the  more  easily  does  art  evoke
critical  estimation  of  the  merit  of  its  representation,  instead  of
sympathy  with  its  content. There  has  been  plenty  of  criti-
cism in  all  ages ;  and  on  the  other  hand  I  do  not  maintain
that  single-minded  devotion  to  and  enthusiasm  for  beauty  are
things unknown  in our day,  but  a  careful comparison ofj
the  productions  of  art  (the  business  of  which  is  to  embody  j
beauty)  is  more  frequently  met  with ;  the  peculiar  pleasure  of]
connoisseurship,  the  satisfaction  arising  from  intelligent  know-|
ledge  of  the  instruments  and  tricks  of art,  their  histories
development  and  their  application  in  particular  cases,  and
half  critical,  half  literary  interest  in  the  procedure  of  creative

/  imagination — all  this  lessens  our  susceptibility  to  the  imme-
diate impression  which  it  is  yet  the  sole  final  aim  of  sucl

^  imagination  to  produce. As  the  collector  shuts  up  in  port-
folios the  works  of  art  which  he  has  brought  together,  contenfel
to  possess  them  and  to  know  what  aesthetic  impressions  they]
are  capable  of  producing,  if  ever  the  hour  of  unrestrainec
enjoyment should  come,  so  all  of  us  are  in  a  general  wayj
■^-  satisfied  to  possess  an  intelligent  consciousness  of  the  latent]

power  which  beauty  has  to  stir  our  souls ;  sestheticism  con-
gratulates itself  on  increasing  sympathy,  in  proportion  as  the]
living  emotion  produced  in  the  soul  by  the  objects  which  it
judges  becomes  rarer.

Art  itself  has  also  suffered  from  the  causes  which  have  pro^
duced  these  conditions.  Mankind  have  not,  indeed,  wantec
for  great  geniuses  since  (from  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages
onwards)  the  increasing  enlightenment  and  many-sidedness  of
social  culture  have  afforded  opportunities  of  evolution  to  such]
minds.  With  the  exception  of  sculpture  and  epic  poetry]
(essential  conditions  for  the  prosperous  growth  of  which  were
lacking),  there  is  no  art  which  has  not  in  this  period  reachec
the  highest  point  of  development.  A  long  series  of  the  most
illustrious  names,  versatile  minds  equal  to  the  greatest  of
antiquity,  adorn  the  annals  of  Italian  art ;  more  solitarj
indeed,  but  in  the  same  degree  more  great,  is  the  lofty  genius

I

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  437

of  Shakespeare,  whom  Northern  Europe  can  boast.  Yet  there
is  a  frequent  complaint  that  the  productions  of  these  powerful
minds,  together  with  those  of  the  illustrious  men  of  later
times,  are  (notwithstanding  their  greatness)  lacking  in  that
classic  perfection  of  form  which  has  made  antiquity  the  one
epoch  that  can  be  regarded  as  affording  models  to  the  art  of
succeeding  times.  I  hold  that  neither  this  praise  of  the
ancients  nor  this  blame  of  the  moderns  is  just,  if  taken  in  the
careless  generality  with  which  both  are  commonly  expressed.
The  ancients  seldom  failed  from  individual  caprice;  their
world  of  artistic  thought  and  their  favourite  methods  of
treatment  grew  so  directly  from  their  popular  philosophy,  and
were  so  generally  established  by  tradition  and  constant
practice,  that  even  the  less  highly  endowed  minds  attained  to
the  harmonious  use  of  artistic  forms  as  easily  as  in  our  time
they  do  to  irreproachable  social  behaviour ;  and  this  very
harmony  of  treatment  occurring  in  an  immense  number  of
works  of  art  causes  us  to  regard  as  among  the  essentially
necessary  conditions  of  beauty,  much  which  even  in  the
antique  works  themselves  is  mere  conventional  manner.
Modern  art  lacks  the  advantage  above  referred  to.  It  grew
out  of  passionate  needs  of  the  soul,  the  satisfaction  of  which
men  had  to  search  for  since  they  did  not  find  it  ready  to  their
hand,  either  in  science  as  it  then  existed,  or  in  social
intercourse,  which  was  in  a  state  of  disruption,  or  in  the
political  constitution  of  public  life.  Modern  art  therefore  had
not  the  simple  task  of  giving  an  artistic  reproduction  of  beauty
of  which  it  had  had  living  experience,  but  it  had  the  double
task  of  finding  first  an  ideal  which  should  satisfy  its  longings,
and  then  the  forms  in  which  to  embody  this  ideal.  The
revival  of  antique  art  could  only  partially  further  these  ends;
much  could  be  learnt  from  its  forms,  but  as  far  as  its  content
was  concerned,  this  did  not  come  up  to  the  demands  made  by
the  spirit  of  the  later  age.  When  for  some  time  men's
dominant  endeavour  was  to  reanimate  literature,  art,  and
politics  with  the  spirit  of  antiquity,  what  took  place  was  not
an  historically  necessary  development,  but  a  conscious  move-

\y^

438  BOOK  vm. chapter  hi.

menfc,  which,  choosing  freely  among  various  directions  that
stood  open  as  possible  paths  of  further  development,  selected
a  particular  one  in  preference  to  the  rest.  The  want  of  a
generally  accepted  ideal,  and  the  necessity  which  there  is  that
every  age,  every  nation,  and  every  individual  genius  should
fix  once  for  all  its  own  highest  aims  and  its  own  forms  of
expression,  introduced  into  modern  art  its  varied  and  rapid
alternations  of  style,  and  gave  to  its  works  as  compared  with
those  of  antiquity  a  predominant  stamp  of  intellectual  wealth.
Tor  we  may  very  well  describe  by  this  phrase  the  impression
which  we  receive  when  imagination,  instead  of  being  borne
along  by  the  general  current  of  the  age,  and  reflecting  without
effort  some  representation  of  the  universe  which  has  become  a
kind  of  second  nature,  undertakes  independent  investigation
and  analysis,  in  order  to  arrive  at  some  interpretation  of
reality,  of  which  reality  itself  cannot  refuse  to  recognise  the
truth,  Incontestably  this  free  action  of  imagination  is  oftener
exposed  to  aesthetic  failure  than  imaginative  activity  which
works  in  subordination  to  a  fixed  ideal ;  modern  art  was  not
satisfied  by  representations  of  universal,  typical,  generic  beauty,
but  became  absorbed  in  profound  depths  of  human  existence
which  had  been  previously  untouched,  and  sought  to  investigate
the  mighty  coherence  of  the  universe  with  many  a  passionate
question  concerning  its  significance — thus  it  was  in  danger,
on  the  one  hand,  of  arriving  at  fanciful  conclusions,  not
recognised  by  reality  as  justifiable,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of
neglecting  formal  beauty  of  representation  on  account  of  the
predominance  of  reflective  activity.  In  many  works  of  wit
and  sarcasm  and  insolent  caricature,  capricious  fancy  has  no
doubt  overstepped  the  limits  of  beauty;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  if  poetry  attempts  to  portray  the  secret  development  of
human  character,  if  painting  is  only  satisfied  when  it  can
succeed  in  presenting  a  reflection  of  the  story  of  such
development  compressed  into  the  action  of  a  moment,  if
music,  stripping  off  from  our  feelings  all  remembrance  of  their
earthly  occasions,  so  enlarges  and  exalts  them  that  their
movement  becomes  the  interaction  (not  describable  in  words

I

I

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  439

of  those  univer-al  forms  of  the  connection  of  elements  upon
which  all  the  joy  and  all  the  pain  of  reality  depends — -if  all
this  is  so,  and  if  we  take  as  our  model  abstractions  derived
from  a  far  simpler  age,  it  is  easy  to  disapprove  a  large  part  of
the  wealth  of  modern  art,  but  difficult  to  be  impartially  just
to  the  lofty  beauty  which  has  assumed  new  and  unique  forms
under  these  more  complex  manifestations ;  finally,  it  is  in  any
case  impossible  to  give  up  what  we  now  possess,  and  to
return  to  that  greater  simplicity  which  can  no  longer  satisfy
our  hearts.

In  spite  of  its  slight  connection  with  the  higher  aims  of
art,  modern  life  is  not  wanting  in  a  special  aesthetic  element,
that  has,  in  course  of  time,  made  itself  felt  in  many  and
various  ways.  The  modern  spirit  of  criticism  and  of  self-
conscious  reflection  first  showed  itself  in  Italy  ;  the  cultiva-
tion of  knowledge  of  aU  kinds  and  formal  excellence  in
all  the  dexterities  and  refinements  of  style,  both  in  language
and  in  the  intercourse  of  life,  were  the  ends  at  which  it  aimed,
and  which  in  many  brilliant  instances  it  attained ;  the  large
and  significant  views  which  constructive  art  inherited  from
the  Middle  Ages,  views  by  which  it  held  fast  and  which  it
was  able  to  embody  with  a  technical  perfection  which  made
rapid  progress,  afforded  a  wholesome  counterpoise  to  the
unrestrainedness  of  this  subjective  spirit.  Political  disasters
interrupted  the  progress  of  this  development,  and  Italy
abdicated  to  France  that  living  dominion  over  the  rising
modern  world  which  it  had  for  a  time  possessed  unquestioned.
In  France  the  gradually  perfected  centralization  of  govern-
mental power  had  caused  the  formation  of  a  coherent  and
exclusive  society  of  aristocrats,  who,  being  compelled  to  keep
comparative  peace  among  themselves,  and  being  furnished
with  abundant  means,  but  destitute  of  any  great  aims  in  life,
were  forced  to  employ  their  intellectual  strength  upon
problems  of  social  intercourse.  The  condition  of  the  people,
which  furnished  the  necessary  basis  of  such  a  society,  was
miserable  to  a  degree ;  indeed,  the  epoch  taken  as  a  whole
was  by  no  means  a  Golden  Age,  that  men  need  wish  back

440

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  III.

i

again ;  but  it  was  undoubtedly  this  isolated  concentration  of
action  and  reaction  between  the  most  favoured  constituents  of
a  great  State,  which  first  gave  to  the  spirit  of  modern  times  a
characteristic  sesthetic  expression.

It  was  language  which  above  all  experienced  the  influence
of  these  favourable  conditions.  It  was  developed  as  it  had
been  in  Greece,  by  means  of  living  conversation,  though  not  as
there  in  the  publicity  of  a  great  political  life.  Such  con-
versation dealt  with  all  imaginable  subjects  of  reflection  from
all  possible  points  of  view ;  and  being  thus  compelled  both  to
use  brief  and  clear  expression,  and  to  clothe  opinion  in  an
agreeable  dress,  the  French  style  became  formed  into  the  most
perfect  prose  that  up  to  that  time  the  human  mind  had
succeeded  in  constructing.  There  is  but  little  of  the  aroma
of  poetry  about  it,  as  might  be  expected  in  the  instrument  of
expression  used  and  formed  by  a  society  not  accustomed  to
manifest  its  deepest  emotions ;  but  it  has  the  well-defined,  lucid,
orderly  movement  and  the  conscious  respect  for  generally
recognised  conventional  rules  which  were  likewise  necessary
in  such  a  society ;  it  does  not  show  the  interesting  but
awkward  originality  with  which,  in  the  prose  of  the  ancients,
we  often  see  the  thought  that  is  to  be  communicated  unfold
from  its  germ,  and  as  it  were  seek  its  fitting  form,  but  as
becomes  the  heir  of  an  old  and  reflective  civilisation  it
skilfully  lays  hold  of  the  most  diverse  among  familiar  points
of  view,  and  accomplishes  its  object  by  means  of  abstractions
and  modes  of  combination  applicable  to  them  all ;  in  these
respects  it  corresponds  to  the  character  of  the  modern  spirit,
the  strength  of  which  consists  not  in  flights  of  artistic
enthusiasm  in  which  it  rushes  upon  its  objects,  attracting
attention  and  betraying  its  own  inward  excitement,  but
in  the  unobtrusive  business-like  way  in  which  it  gets  rid
of  difficulties,  being  conscious  of  knowing  ways  of  solving
them  which  are  of  general  application.  It  is  not  surprising
that  through  this  spirit  of  clearness  and  precision  the  French
language  obtained  dominion  all  over  the  world — a  prerogative
which  it  has  only  gradually  lost. In  Germany  the  rise  of  a

BEAUTY  AND  ART.  441

Iiio-her  kind  of  art  to  which  the  genius  of  the  French  language
was  not  adapted,  caused  its  supremacy  to  be  set  aside,  but  a
substitute  for  its  prose  has  hardly  yet  been  found  in  that
country.  The  living  unity  of  society  was  lacking  there ;  the
too  great  predominance  of  learned  culture  thence  arising,  and
the  inherited  error  of  not  only  learning  from  antiquity,  but
also  of  imitating  it,  caused  German  prose  to  be  for  a  long
time  awkward  and  confused,  and  the  language  itself  and  its
resources  to  be  more  unfamiliar  to  the  people  than  in  other
countries.  For  let  the  Germans  not  deceive  themselves —
though  the  whole  nation  can  read  and  write,  he  is  a  happy
man  who  need  not  hear  the  reading  nor  see  the  writing ;  the
gulf  that  still  exists  between  the  perfection  of  the  language  in
the  masterpieces  of  German  poetry  and  the  style  of  ordinary
life  is  wide  indeed.  It  wall  only  be  gradually  filled  up  as  the
education  of  the  circles  which  do  not  go  to  antiquity  for
guidance  increases  to  such  an  extent  that  they  can  give  to
the  modern  modes  of  expression  which  they  use  for  modern
views  and  interests  the  established  character  and  fixed  form
which  it  is  quite  in  vain  to  expect  from  ancient  models.

The  peculiar  character  of  the  time  found  more  whimsical
but  not  less  animated  expression  in  the  much  abused  Eococo
style  which  became  dominant  in  the  ceremonies  of  social
intercourse  in  costume,  buildings,  furniture,  and  even  in
the  laying  out  of  gardens  and  of  pleasure-grounds.  It  is  easy
for  us,  guided  by  the  teachings  of  historic  periods  which  were
more  favoured  in  an  artistic  point  of  view,  to  reproach  this
style,  because,  being  destitute  of  feeling  for  the  characteristic
truth  of  things,  it  distorted  the  real  nature  of  everything
without  exception  that  it  attempted  to  beautify,  and  with
odd  caprice  imposed  arbitrary  forms  and  laws  upon  every
department  of  life  into  which  it  intruded ;  yet  it  cannot  be
said  that  this  caprice  was  incoherent  and  inconsequent.
Certainly  it  had  no  other  principle  than  that  of  the  sovereign
and  unrestrained  will  with  which  the  subjective  mind  moulds
all  given  material  into  a  creation  that  is  according  to  its  own
fancy ;  but  it  did  not  merely  apply  this  principle  with  rare

f

442  BOOK  Vm. CHAPTER  IIL

consistency  to  things,  but  with  stern  discipline  brought  even
human  life  under  self-imposed  laws  of  etiquette.  Certainly
the  forms  which  it  forced  upon  all  objects  and  all  relations
cannot  be  understood  by  reference  to  any  artistically  justifiable
principle  of  form ;  but  the  very  end  aimed  at  was  to  be
invariably  graceful  even  amid  all  the  complete  arbitrariness
of  this  procedure,  and  where  there  is  a  cessation  of  all  rule
dependent  upon  the  nature  of  the  thing,  to  find  by  the  power
of  the  mind  itself  a  definite  law  of  the  production  of  pleasure.
It  would  be  mere  scholastic  pedantry  to  deny  that  in  many
cases  this  was  accomplished ;  not  only  do  we  trace  with
pleasure  in  countless  individual  utensils,  buildings,  and
fashions  of  the  time  the  bright  and  graceful  flight  of
this  arbitrary  fancy,  but  among  all  the  styles  which  have  ever
pervaded  life  in  all  directions  this  as  a  whole  seems  to  be
quite  the  most  in  harmony  with  natural  receptivity.  Who
would  not  admit  that  Classic  and  Gothic  art  unfold  a
refined  and  lofty  beauty  that  is  more  to  be  reverenced  than
this  ?  But  at  the  same  time  we  may  admit  that  they  are
alien  to  us,  and  that  especially  every  renewal  of  the  antique
in  our  life  looks  like  a  learned  pretension  to  the  possession
of  superior  understanding,  whilst  in  defiance  of  all  aesthetic
systems,  we  always  sympathize  with  the  Eococo  style.

But  this  too  has  passed  away ;  and  the  aesthetic  elements
which  life  in  the  present  day  still  retains  appear  much
more  insignificant.  We  often  hear  quoted  the  saying  that
architecture  is  frozen  music  :  hence  I  have  some  hope  of
gaining  a  modicum  of  undying  fame  by  taking  a  step  further
and  calling  mathematics  desiccated  music.  For  what  element
of  music  does  mathematics  lack  except  the  living  sound  ?  All
its  other  elements  and  resources  are  common  to  it  and  to
music,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,  music  borrows  them  all
from  mathematics.  Now  it  seems  to  me  that  what  haa
remained  to  us  as  the  good  genius  of  our  age,  is  just  a  mathe-
matical element  of  exactness,  neatness,  concise  clearness  and
simplicity,  supple  versatility  and  pruning  away  of  all  super-
fluities. As  compared  with  the roundabout  procedure and

1

BEAUTY  AXD  AET.  443

awkwardness  of  innumerable  regulations  of  earlier  times,  what
a  preference  do  we  now  see  for  that  elegance  which  charac-
terises the  most  concise  solutions  of  difficulties !  What
brief  and  severe  simplicity  do  we  see  in  the  structure  of
machines !  what  vast  effects  produced  by  the  ingenious
combination  of  simple  means  !

Undoubtedly  there  is  beauty  even  in  this,  and  we  may
rejoice  heartily  in  that  genius  of  modern  times,  which  no
longer  wearing  antique  draperies,  or  dreaming  through  life
with  flowing  hair,  goes  with  shorn  locks  and  close-fitting
garments ;  and  we  may  hope  that  it  will  raise  from  this  small
germ  a  mighty  tree  filling  life  with  fresh  beauty.

CHAPTEK IV.

THE RELIGIOUS LIFE.

Comparison  of  Eastern  with  Western  Life  and  Thought — Nature  and  Social
Life  as  Sources  of  Religious  Ideas — Preponderance  of  the  Cosmological
Element  in  Heathendom,  and  of  the  Moral  Element  in  Judaism  and
Christianity — Christianity  and  the  Church — Returning  Preponderance  of
Cosmology  in  the  New  Philosophical  Dogmatism — Life  and  the  Church.

§  1.  rp^HE East has been the birthplace of all those

T

religions  which  have  had  a  decisive  influence  on
the  destinies  of  mankind.  And  not  only  has  it  (as  the  father-
land of  all  nations  historically  important)  forestalled  future
ages  by  giving  birth  to  the  germs  of  all  religion — religion  being
one  of  the  things  earliest  developed  by  the  human  race — but
also  even  in  later  times  the  religious  life  of  the  West  is
distinguished  from  that  of  the  East  by  a  permanent  difference
of  disposition  and  of  the  course  of  development.  In  the  latter
the  imagination  of  men  became  early  susceptible  to  the
numerous  analogies  by  which  visible  reality  points  to  some-
thing beyond  itself,  and  drew  in  grand  outlines  pictures  of
a  supersensuous  world,  which  contained  the  beginning  and
the  end,  the  completion  and  the  explanation  of  the  world  we
know.  And  the  manifold  content  of  this  faith  was  no  mere
impotent  dream  of  enthusiastic  moments;  the  thought  of  it
pervaded  the  insignificant  customs  of  everyday  life,  the  rules
of  commerce,  and  the  ordinances  of  morality ;  the  obligatory
commands,  which  seemed  to  flow  from  it,  received  unquestion-
ing obedience,  whether  they  demanded  the  long  self-denial
of  a  life  of  penance,  or  some  one  supreme  sacrifice ;  even
general  social  and  political  arrangements  were  (without
separating  between  divine  and  human  law)  governed  by  anj
ever-present  thought  of  the  great  universe,  of  which  all'
earthly  things  make  but  a  dependent  part. This  broad  and

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  445

widely-comprehensive  view  remained  in  many  respects  peculiar
to  the  East,  and  still  has  an  imposing  effect  upon  us,  but  the
blood  of  the  Western  nations  cannot  endure  for  a  continuance
that  repose  of  cosmic  contemplation  in  which  this  view
causes  men  to  become  absorbed.

The  more  exclusively  imagination  aims  at  combining  the
manifold  of  reality  into  a  whole  in  the  unity  of  one  plan,  the
more  is  every  particular  arranged  and  fixed  in  its  own  proper
place,  and  cared  for  and  subordinated  within  the  clearly-
marked  outlines  of  this  whole — supposing,  of  course,  that  the
attempt  at  unification  appears  successful.  We  are  stimulated
to  advance  by  the  unknown  reaches  of  the  path  that  lies
before  us ;  to  have  an  early  view  of  all  attainable  goals  only
makes  men  wish  to  continue  undisturbed  in  the  position  in
which  they  happen  to  be,  and  beyond  the  horizon  of  which
there  lies  nothing  essentially  new.  To  such  an  early  survey
and  to  such  quiescence  did  the  nations  of  the  East  attain ;  the
universe  as  a  whole  seemed  to  lie  finished  and  complete  before
them ;  it  had  been  such  from  eternity,  and  the  future  could
add  nothing  to  it.  Many  things  in  it  seemed  uncertain,  but
nothing  really  was  so ;  there  was  no  such  thing  as  a  merely
probable  development  of  cosmic  history  capable  of  being
determined  by  some  exercise  of  human  freedom ;  there  was
no  field  for  the  exercise  of  inventive  activity  which  might
enrich  life  by  new  productions,  or  accomplish  by  purposive
struggles  anything  more  than  that  which,  being  preordained,
would  come  to  pass  without  human  effort ;  according  to  the
immutable  ordering  of  the  whole,  man  can  choose  nothing
except  what  he  cannot  avoid,  namely  to  live  that  part  of  the
life  of  the  universe  which  falls  to  his  share,  and  to  suffer  and
rejoice  therewith.  It  is  true  that  even  within  these  limits
human  nature  (which  is  never  wholly  brought  into  subjection
to  its  own  philosophic  views)  finds  room  for  untamed  passions  ;
but  the  only  goals  which  these  can  have  are  visions  of  pride
and  sensual  delights — visions  which  fall  to  pieces  when  the
passions  that  gave  rise  to  them  are  burnt  out,  and  which  do
not  affect  the  old  order  of  things,  which  goes  on  unchanging

446

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

and  undeveloping.  Therefore,  however  agitated  the  course  of
oriental  life  may  be  in  detail,  looked  at  as  a  whole  all  its
activities  appear  to  be  enclosed  by  a  broad  framework  of
resigned  quietism.

The  West  developed  a  contrary  bias,  and  this  the  more
vigorously  in  proportion  as  it  freed  itself  the  more  thoroughly
from  oriental  traditions.  Its  imagination  was  never  directed
so  eagerly  to  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  world  as  a  whole,
but  all  the  more  eagerly  to  those  universal  laws  upon  which
the  reality  and  movement  of  the  world  itself  in  every  particular
depends.  The  oriental  representation  of  the  complete  and
finished  condition  of  the  world  and  of  the  circle  of  its  phseno-
mena  exhibited  a  universe  that  had  been  perfected  once  for
all,  which  no  one  could  add  to  or  take  away  from ;  but  to  gain
a  knowledge  of  these  universal  laws  the  world  had  to  be
regarded  as  something  imperfect,  to  the  perfecting  of  which  it
was  possible  to  contribute  ;  for  these  laws  taught  men  to
comprehend  not  only  the  condition  of  what  actually  existed,
but  also  the  possibility  of  much  that  as  yet  did  not  actually
exist ;  and  opened  to  the  mind  that  was  struggling  onwards  a
prospect  of  reconstructing — for  its  own  ends  and  by  the  help
of  these  laws — both  external  Nature  within  narrow  limits  and
human  life  within  much  wider  limits.  For  such  a  mind
there  was  possible  a  history  in  which  human  action  should
determine  the  as  yet  formless  future  to  new  and  hitherto
indefinite  developments  of  reality.

It  is  said  of  philosophy  that  if  the  cup  is  merely  tasted  it
leads  man  away  from  God,  but  that  if  it  is  deeply  drained
it  brings  him  back  again.  Perhaps  this  saying  is  equally
applicable  to  the  whole  mode  of  thought  which  in  occidental
civilisation  gave  rise  to  its  characteristic  restlessness — to  that
spirit  of  progress  which  must  be  for  ever  bringing  change  into
every  department  of  life,  and  to  the  investigating  and  analysing
spirit  of  philosophy  itself.  For  certainly  that  which  first
makes  a  distinct  impression  upon  the  mind  is  the  alienation
from  God  and  from  what  is  divine  to  which  on  the  whole  the
course  of  this  period  of  civilisation  has  unremittingly  tended.

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  447

In  as  far  as  imagination  influences  life^  the  horizon  of  human
imagination  has  undergone  progressive  contraction  in  pro-
portion as  there  has  been  an  ever-progressive  increase  of  clear-
ness in  the  diminishing  field  of  vision  to  which  it  restricted
itself.  With  growing  knowledge  of  natural  products,  and
increased  skill  in  making  use  of  them,  men's  insight  into  the
connection  between  them  and  the  supersensuous  world  has  not
become  clearer,  but  attention  has  been  weaned  from  dwelling
upon  the  connection  as  one  of  the  problems  which  have  to  be
considered ;  and  life  and  morality  have  become  more  and  more
separated  from  the  content  of  religious  belief,  regarded  as  the
source  of  obligation,  and  have  become  more  and  more  estab-
lished upon  secular  principles  of  their  own.  Esthetic  sensibility,
averse  to  ideals  of  vast  and  eternal  significance,  has  turned
from  what  was  great  and  exalted  to  what  was  elegant  and
correct  and  to  the  activity  of  intellectual  resource  exhibited
in  it.  Art  is  hardly  able  to  cope  even  with  what  is  merely
historically  great,  but  in  genre-painting  it  gives  characteristic
reproductions  of  fragments  of  life.  In  science,  dependence  on
experience  has  taken  the  place  of  speculation,  and  elements
and  general  laws  of  action  have  supplanted  the  predetermin-
ing oneness  of  creative  and  formative  Ideas  as  means  of
explanation.  In  a  similar  way  in  the  department  of  practice
individual  rights  are  being  brought  into  ever  greater  promi-
nence as  compared  with  the  duties  demanded  by  consideration
for  the  whole ;  and  finally,  we  see  that  increasingly  general
acceptance  is  accorded  to  the  principle  of  letting  every
individual  power  act  unhindered,  and  of  expecting  the  most
satisfactory  condition  of  human  affairs  from  the  equilibrium
which  the  various  forces  will  reach  of  their  own  accord
through  the  reciprocal  action  of  all.

All  these  features  cause  Western  civilisation  as  compared
witih  Eastern  to  have  the  aspect  of  a  whoUy  profane  or  secular
life  which  does  indeed  willingly  submit  to  the  general  condi-
tions and  laws  which  govern  the  course  of  things,  and  skil-
fully contrives  that  these  forces  should  work  for  it ;  but  is  little
conscious  of  any  necessary  connection  between  its  thought  and

448  BOOK  vni. chapter  iv.

action  as  a  whole  and  a  supersensuous  world,  and  is  of  opinion
that  it  only  needs,  and  need  only  regard,  as  much  of  what  is
divine  as  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  general  laws  for  the
regulation  of  moral  conduct.  Undoubtedly  the  entrance  of
Christianity  into  the  Western  world  was  like  a  mighty  inflow-
ing wave  which  interrupted  this  ebb,  but  it  has  not  prevented
it  from  resuming  its  course.  Dogma  and  worship  are  equally
poverty-stricken,  and  efforts  which  aim  at  their  rehabilitation
have  to  encounter  increasing  aversion ;  religiousness  dis-
appears from  morality  even  while  morality  ir.creases  in
humanity  and  refinement ;  not  only  does  the  articulation  of
secular  society  avoid  all  ecclesiastical  control,  but  even  the
coherence  of  church  communities  becomes  loosened  by  the
growing  demands  for  independence  made  by  individual
opinion.  Are  these  conditions  signs  of  a  general  retrogression
of  humanity,  or  do  they  conceal  an  advance  which  appears  to
us  to  be  primarily  occupied  in  breaking  up  the  old  forms  of
religious  life,  but  which  does  not  leave  us  without  hope  that
in  the  future  those  old  forms  will  be  replaced  by  new  ones  ?

§  2.  Nature  is  commonly  our  earliest  guide  to  religious
contemplation.  Observation  of  Nature  leads  in  various  ways
to  attempts  to  supplement  the  perceptible  content  of  reality
by  continuations  which  are  visible  only  to  the  eye  of  faith.
Imagination  looks  to  the  past,  seeking  in  histories  of  the
origin  of  the  world  an  explanation  of  the  wonders  of  the
existing  universe — wonders  which  could  not,  it  seems,  have
owed  their  birth  to  such  an  order  of  Nature  as  now  obtains —
and  it  looks  also  to  the  future,  seeking  to  find  some  con-
tinuation of  Nature  into  which  the  swift-flowing  stream  of
earthly  life  may  empty  itself  and  find  continued  existence;
the  two  lines  of  fancy  are  connected  together  by  a  more  or
less  comprehensive  knowledge  of  reality  so  as  to  constitute  a
whole  of  greater  or  less  completeness.  If  no  other  interest
than  the  merely  theoretic  one  of  explanation  were  involved
in  this  cosmological  construction,  it  would  attract  no  greater
sympathy  and  attention  than  the  geological  opinions  of  the
Neptunists  and  the  Vulcanists,  or  than  the  equally  divergent

1

I

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFK  449

conjectures  which  imperfect  astronomical  science  once  put
forth  concerning  the  structure  of  the  starry  heavens.  But
in  those  cosmological  views  there  is  always  contained  some
expression  of  men's  conclusions  concerning  the  worth  of  the
world,  and  the  amount  of  satisfaction  which  the  order  of
Nature  affords  or  refuses  to  the  irrepressible  needs  of  the
human  soul ;  and  with  the  pictures  which  are  drawn  of  the
powers  which  create,  preserve,  and  guide  the  universe  there
is  always  connected  a  more  or  less  developed  view  of  the
position  which  man  occupies  with  regard  to  them,  or  the
attitude  which  in  action  he  should  hold  towards  them.  It  is
only  for  these  reasons  that  we  can  with  any  justice  seek  the
germs  of  religion  in  such  complementing  of  natural  phsenomena
and  such  combinations  and  explanations  of  them ;  we  can
attribute  all  the  significance  implied  in  the  name  Cosmology,  to
those  systems  only  in  which  that  is  made  the  standard  of
worth  and  the  point  of  departure  which  in  existing  theories
has  but  a  secret  influence — I  mean  a  conscious  recognition
of  the  unconditioned  validity  and  truth  of  Morality  and
Holiness  as  compared  with  all  that  is,  or  seems  to  be,  matter
of  fact.

Now  if  the  whole  of  Nature  lay  before  us  we  should  see  its
manifoldness  combined  in  a  unity  which — being  the  perfect
reflection  of  what  ought  to  be — would  teach  us  what  the
significance  of  Nature  itself  is,  what  our  place  in  it  is,  and
what  the  aims  of  our  existence  are.  But  such  insight  as  this
is  reserved  for  the  end  of  time.  To  every  natian  that  has
entered  on  the  path  of  civilisation.  Nature  has  displayed  but
a  small  section  of  its  whole  content ;  different  in  different
zones  and  climates  and  unintelligible  in  its  connection  without
the  enlightenment  to  be  supplied  by  investigations  which
have  not  yet  been  carried  out ;  unfit  to  form  the  basis  of  a
comprehensive  view  of  the  world,  because  the  condition  of
that  which  has  been  observed  seems  to  leave  diverse  modes
of  completion  equally  admissible.  Imagination  always  finds
in  the  course  of  Nature  traces  of  harmonious  and  beneficent
wisdom;  besides  these  it  always  finds  also  traces  of  discord,

VOL.  II.  2  F

450  BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  lY.

harshness,  and  cruelty;  it  finds  much  which  leads  it  to
believe  in  a  righteous  Providence  and  much  of  which  the
Nature  is  such  that  this  belief  can  only  be  held  in  defiance
of  it.  Different  nations  have  become  absorbed  in  the  con-
fusing complication  of  these  facts — men  with  different  degrees
of  mental  activity,  with  different  temperaments,  and  under
the  influence  of  very  divergent  modes  of  life;  and  according
to  the  measure  of  their  endowments  in  these  respects  they
have  attained  to  philosophic  views  of  greater  or  less  fulness
and  lucidity.  But  even  the  greatest  fulness,  \vith  the  keen
eye  for  Nature  which  belongs  to  developed  cosmologic  insight
(such  as  characterize  the  mythologies  of  the  classic  nations),
can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  having  ever  been  a  blessing  in
themselves.  To  the  distant  observer  the  richly  coloured  and
realistic  circumstantiality  of  those  mythologies  appears  as  an
enviable  filling  of  man's  whole  life  with  thoughts  which
unceasingly  connect  all  its  trivialities  with  the  grandeur  of
the  supersensuous  world,  and  it  exalts,  in  our  view,  the
festhetic  importance  of  those  nations  with  whom  it  is  found ;
but  these  nations  themselves  were  hardly  ever  led  by  the
natural-philosophic  element  of  their  religion  to  any  useful
progress  in  life  and  humanity,  but  often  enough  to  great
errors  and  to  a  useless  squandering  of  human  powers.

Observation  of  Nature  easily  leads  to  a  conviction  that
there  is  some  supersensuous  power  which  rules  events,  but
no  observation  of  Nature  teaches  moral  truths.  It  can
teach  that  the  destruction  of  every  individual  may  have  its  1
significance  in  the  plan  of  the  whole ;  that  from  every  life  that
is  trampled  out  another  life  may  spring ;  that  all  the  powers
of  Nature  in  an  unceasing  cycle  may  combine  in  the  continual
production,  destruction,  and.  reproduction  of  phsenomena  in
never-failing  regularity;  but  with  all  this  it  leaves  wholly
undecided  whether  indulgence  towards  others  and  sacrifice
of  oneself,  or  conversely  trampling  upon  others  and  asserting
oneself,  is  that  to  which  we  are  morally  called ;  as  a  conscious
prolongation  of  the  course  that  Nature  unconsciously  takes,
the  one  mode  of  action  has  as  good  a  claim  to  consideration

THE  EELIGIOUS  LIFE,  451

as  the  other.  That  which  is,  does  not  enlighten  us  concerning
that  which  we  ought  to  do,  unless  we  know  beforehand  what
meaning  we  ought  to  attach  to  that  which  is.  But  how  this
ambiguous  world  of  phsenomena  is  to  be  taken  and  understood
by  men,  whether  the  way  in  which  it  is  interpreted  and  used
will  be  a  blessing  or  a  curse,  is  determined  by  the  mind
which  man  brings  to  it — by  the  degree  of  civilisation  which
the  moral  influences  of  society  have  enabled  him  to  attain,
and  upon  the  development  of  which  Nature  herself  (not  as
instructress  but  as  the  sum  of  conditions  promotive  or
obstructive)  undoubtedly  has  an  important  effect.

If  social  conditions  have  provided  but  meagrely  for  the
cultivation  of  the  moral  consciousness,  men  must  be  destitute
of  standpoints  and  conditions  necessary  for  taking  a  coherent
and  comprehensive  view  of  Nature  and  of  the  order  of  events
— a  view  in  which  there  is  room  for  the  accommodation  of
individual  contradictions.  And  being  thus  destitute  they
must  lack  also  that  wholesome  ballast  which  is  capable  of
preserving  imagination  from  yielding  unresistingly  to  the
impressions  produced  by  individual  striking  phsenomena.  In
such  a  case  the  unstable  mind  is  driven  by  the  incalculable
influence  of  fortuitous  combinations  of  ideas,  first  of  all  to
this  or  that  interpretation  of  phaenomena,  and  then  to  such  or
such  maxims  of  conduct — perhaps  to  maxims  of  foolish  soft-
heartedness  or  perhaps  to  others  of  barbarous  cruelty.  And
this  danger  is  a  permanent  one ;  it  reappears  under  some
fresh  form  at  every  stage  of  civilisation.  It  is  a  danger  that
threatens  even  when  a  vigorous  and  developed  intelligence
that  has  long  been  in  possession  of  many-sided  experience  and
of  various  standpoints  from  which  to  estimate  things,  can  no
longer  be  imposed  upon  and  led  into  narrow-minded  mistakes
by  isolated  phsenomena,  being  able  to  rise  above  many  indivi-
dual contradictions  to  a  consciousness  of  the  all-pervading  and
eternal  harmony  of  the  universal  order.  For  even  supposing
that  it  does  thus  rise,  yet  a  just  perception  of  facts  does  not
of  necessity  involve  a  just  estimation  of  their  worth.  On
the  contrary,  the  higher  our  trains  of  thought soar  in  their

452  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

progress  to  ever  wider  generalizations,  the  more  unstable  does
their  equilibrium  become  ;  it  needs  but  a  slight  alteration  of
mood  and  at  once  our  mobile  imagination  beholds  the  same
facts  in  a  light  which  altogether  transforms  them,  without
their  having  themselves  undergone  any  change.  When  this
happens,  nothing  but  a  thorough  and  established  moralization
of  life  can  furnish  a  counterpoise  of  sufficient  weight  to  with-
stand the  effect  on  conduct  of  the  wild  theories  into  which
speculation  is  only  too  easily  drawn,  in  its  attempts  to  take  a
comprehensive  view  of  the  universe.  And  finally,  even  when
reverence  for  the  content  of  moral  Ideas,  undisturbed  by  any
doubt,  rules  the  general  mind  and  is  the  point  from  which  by
common  consent  all  attempts  set  out  which  aim  at  following
by  faith  the  course  of  the  world  into  regions  which  no
experience  can  reach  :  even  in  these  times  of  religious  culture
in  the  strict  sense,  the  old  danger  will  always  lurk  in  men's
preference  for  a  cosmological  construction  of  philosophy.
With  the  voice  of  conscience  and  with  that  which  we  venerate
as  revelation,  we  build  up  but  very  tottering  bridges,  which
are  none  the  more  secure  because  we  use  them  with  pre-
sumptuous confidence  as  a  means  of  obtaining  untrustworthy
glimpses  of  the  construction  and  articulation  of  the  universe
as  a  whole.  Still  more  untrustworthy  will  be  the  conclusions
as  to  practical  life  which  men  deduce  from  cosmologic  philo-
sophy, as  though  it  afforded  a  representation  of  reality  which
might  be  relied  on.  The  aim  of  such  an  application  of  these
conclusions  would  be  to  deduce  from  a  supramundane  meta-
physic  of  the  universe  holier  precepts  and  aims  for  human
guidance ;  while  perhaps  on  their  account  silence  would  be
imposed  upon  the  simple  absolute  commands  of  conscience
which  have  no  pretensions  to  universal  knowledge.

If  therefore  the  name  of  religion  is  to  be  exclusively
reserved  for  that  form  of  spiritual  activity  which  regards  a
recognition  of  the  divine  order  of  the  world  and  the  subordina-
tion of  our  life  to  it,  as  conditions  of  salvation  (and  it  is  in
this  sense  that  religion  is  commonly  opposed  to  unbelieving
mcrality),  we  should  be  expressing  but  a  part  of  the  truth  in

fl

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  453

lauding  the  improvement  of  the  human  race  as  attributable  to
the  influence  of  religion ;  we  should  have  equally  to  admit
that  the  progress  of  humanity  due  to  the  action  and  reaction
of  society  and  to  the  development  proper  to  secular  life,  on
the  one  hand  has  supplied  religious  belief  with  new  questions
and  subjects  of  consideration,  and  on  the  other  hand  by  its
quiet,  obstinate,  and  ever  present  resistance  has  blunted  the
edge  of  those  injurious  extravagances  into  which  the  world-
interpreting,  world  -  creating  flights  of  devoutly  inspired
speculation  were  apt  to  run.

§  3.  By  what  thread  of  connected  tradition  or  by  what
recognisable  law  of  progressive  development  those  successive
forms  of  religion  may  have  been  determined  which  have
gradually  arisen  among  the  civilised  nations  of  our  hemi-
sphere, are  matters  which  I  leave  undecided,  considering  that
they  cannot  be  exhaustively  discussed  in  this  place.  And
even  the  hasty  survey  which  I  propose  taking  for  the  confirma-
tion of  the  foregoing  remarks,  must  be  curtailed.

Where  social  life  is  very  little  developed  and  reflection
lacks  the  breadth  of  view  which  can  be  given  to  it  only
by  a  stirring  life  and  constant  intercourse  between  one's
own  thoughts  and  those  of  others,  the  foreshadowings
of  a  supersensuous  world  which  may  be  called  into  exist-
ence by  even  the  most  everyday  occurrences,  remain
chaotic  and  incoherent.  Fetich-worship,  with  very  natural
confusion,  while  it  reverences  the  mysterious  power  resid-
ing in  every  object  which  happens  to  strike  the  senses,
neither  identifies  this  power  with  that  in  which  it  inheres
nor  clearly  distinguishes  it  therefrom.  It  is  not  this  lack  of
conceptual  clearness  which  causes  Tetichism  to  take  such  a
low  place  among  the  different  forms  of  religion,  but  the
absolute  indefiniteness  of  its  ideas  concerning  the  nature  of
the  supersensuous  power  which  it  venerates.  It  regarda
this  as  nothing  but  a  certain  degree  of  mysterious  in-
determinate capacity,  not  any  fixed  kind  of  volition  or
activity,  susceptible  of  specification.  Such  power  is  to  be
found  in  every  object,  but  any  one object  may possess it

454  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

iu  a  higher  degree  than  any  other  ;  for  men  to  try,  by  prayer
and  sacrifice,  to  make  it  favourable  to them is  but a trans-
ference of  natural  human  action  in  reference  to  human  wills ;
in the nature  of  the incalculable  demon  itself  there  is  no
iu.telligible  ground  for  even  this  most  simple  worship. The
'same  poverty  of  thought  makes  it  difficult  to  estimate  the'
gain  to  life  of  presentiments  of  immortality. The  idea  of
the  absolute  annihilation  of  anything  which  has  once  been
observed  in  the  vigorous  exercise  of  perceptible  activity  is
as  incomprehensible  to  undeveloped  thought  as  the  idea  of|
anything's  arising  from  absolute  nothingness  ;  belief  in the
continuance  of  the  soul  after  death  is  more  natural  and  more
ancient  than  the belief  in its annihilation,  which  is  among
the  earliest  mental  products  of  a  somewhat  advanced  civilisa-
tion. But  the  poor  philosophy  of  the  early  stage  is  equally
unable  to  assign  a  content  to  the  continued  existence  in  which
it  believes  and  to its notion  of  a supersensuous  power  in
things ;  where  future  existence  is  not  conceived  of  as  a  copy
of  earthly  life,  the  soul  is  supposed  to  join  the  ranks  of  the
obscure  powers  of  Nature ;  it  continues  to  exist  as  a  ghost,
that  is,  with  the  general  attributes  of  the  spiritual  life  of  man,]
but  without  humanly intelligible ends. Such  unsatisfying]
ideas  neither  can  become  sources  of  moral  convictions  nor  do;
they  readily  admit  of  being  connected  with  such  convictions  ;l
but  the  ideas  themselves  would  have  taken  a  very  different]
turn  if  a  greater  degree  of  moral  cultivation  had  led  men  tol
seek  beneath  the  siirface  of  phenomena  something  other  than]
vague forms of life and powers  different  from our own.i
"What  is  taught  by  fear and sympathy  can at  any  rate,  asj
contrasted  with  such  a  faith,  be  developed  to  practical  preceptiij
and  the  rudiments  of  worship  ;  but  what  such  precepts  and]
such  rudiments  shall  be  is  decided by  the  purely  accidental
course  of  unbridled  imagination  and  the  bias  of  temperament;]
tliey  are apt  to run  into superstitions  deformed  by  witlesSl
sorceries  and  bloody  abominations  of  sacrifices  to  the  dead.
One  of  the  errors  that seem to us  most  strange is  theil

J

piiying  of  divine honours  to animals,  and  yet  there  is antj

THE  EELIGIOUS  LIFE.

455

intelligible  cause  for  it  in  dawning  religious  feeling.  Social
intercourse  teaches  men  to  know  one  another  in  a  wholly-
secular  aspect ;  they  find  each  other  busied  with  small  and
changing  and  contradictory  interests  which  are  perfectly
intelligible  and  have  nothing  of  the  obscure  grandeur  which
imagination  admires  in  those  natural  forces  which  work
unconsciously.  When  man  has  once  begun  to  contrast  him-
self and  his  fellows  and  all  his  human  interests  with  the  world
and  that  strange  power  residing  in  it  which  constitute  the
first  object  of  his  confused  reverence,  he  can  find  nothing  in
which  this  power  appears  more  expressively  than  in  the
activity  of  the  animal  kingdom,  which  in  all  its  manifesta-
tions impresses  us  the  more  on  account  of  its  voicelessness
and  our  inability  to  understand  the  extraordinary  instincts
which  it  displays.  It  is  true  that  without  some  flights  of
imagination  this  contemplation  cannot  give  any  definite  content
to  our  notion  of  the  supersensuous,  but  at  any  rate  it  views
this  under  the  exalted  notion  of  a  spirit-life  that  broods  over
strange  ends,  unintelligible  to  us.  We  can  see  that  while
men  lived  a  life  in  which  attention  had  not  as  yet  been
attracted  from  physical  existence  by  a  multiplicity  of
peculiarly  human  interests,  such  considerations  might  easily
give  rise  to  the  idea  of  transmigration  of  souls,  an  idea  which
afforded  an  abundant  field  for  the  exercise  of  ingenious  com-
parison and  constructive  imagination.  There  is  no  doubt  that
at  one  time  men's  minds  were  seriously  possessed  by  this  idea,
and  that  in  consequence  a  vast  amount  of  human  activity  and
attention  were  squandered  on  wholly  unmeaning  and  fictitious
objects.  The  belief  was  not  refuted  by  science,  but  died  out
from  its  own  lack  of  interest,  as  there  grew  up  around  it  a
civilisation  which  has  its  centre  of  attraction  in  the  worth  of
social  and  moral  relations.  At  present  we  hardly  think  of
animals  except  as  objects  of  domestic  economy,  or  of  natural
history,  or  as  ornaments  in  a  landscape ;  that  they  have  a
multiform  mental  life  allied  to  our  own,  is  a  proposition
which  we  sometimes  timidly  advance  as  a  probable  conjecture.
And  just  as  indifierently  do  we  turn  away  from  all  the  un-

456

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  IV.

remembered  past  which  preceded  our  earthly  existence  ;  as  to
what  lies  beyond  this  we  refuse  material  analogies  in  as  far  as
our  abiding  need  for  some  sensuous  representation  of  the
supersensuous  will  permit.

In  every  case  in  which  fully  developed  civilisations  have
culminated  in  comprehensive  religious  systems,  in  Egypt,  in
India  and  in  Western  Asia,  investigation  takes  us  back  to  the
grand  all-encompassing  phsenomena  of  the  heavens  as  the
point  of  departure  from  which  religious  ideas  have  set  out.
Far  removed  beyond  the  reach  of  earthly  contact,  the  heavenly
bodies  for  that  reason  stirred  imaginative  forebodings  with  their
far-away  brilliancy,  but  they  attracted  attention  still  more  by
the  regularity  of  their  movements ;  the  reverence  paid  to  them
applied  not  only  to  their  gladdening  light,  but  it  was  also  the
first  homage  that  was  offered  to  the  notion  of  truth,  and  law,
and  order,  as  the  genuine  content  of  the  supersensuous.  But
this  germ  which  promised  so  much,  seems  to  have  come  to
nothing  as  far  as  the  development  of  religion  was  concerned.

Egypt  owed  to  it  noteworthy  beginnings  of  astronomic
science,  and  an  attempt  to  construct  cosmic  order  by  con-
necting it  systematically  with  natural  forces  that  were  per-
sonified as  divine  beings.  From  the  cultivation  of  this
wisdom  (on  which  the  ingenuity  of  the  priesthood  was
exercised)  no  gain  accrued  to  life — nothing  but  the  burden  of
a  ceremonial  worship,  which  at  best  could  only  serve  to  keep
up  a  general  feeling  that  it  was  being  offered  to  super-
sensuous beings,  but  the  symbolic  significance  of  which  was
unknown  to  the  people.  On  the  other  hand,  the  wonderful
phsenomena  of  the  Nile  valley,  connected  as  they  seemed  with
the  course  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  must  have  directed  general
attention  to  the  regular  activity  of  the  natural  forces  which
in  steady  rotation  alternately  call  forth  and  destroy  life.  The
contrast  between  generative  and  destructive  power  not  only
aroused  mystic  speculative  reflection,  but  was  also  the  subject
of  popular  mythology  and  of  many  solemn  rites.  Still  the  whole
sphere  of  religious  thought  does  not  seem  to  have  been
dominated  by  it  to  such  an  extent  as  in  Babylonia,  where

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  '457

imagination  was  carried  away  by  similar  incentives  to  the  most
extravagant  worship  of  the  universal  generative  power  of
Nature.  In  Egypt  alongside  these  cosmological  myths,  and
connected  with  them  in  a  way  that  to  us  appears  merely  ex-
ternal, there  was  developed  a  religious  view  of  human  life.
This  view  was  characterized  by  a  conviction  of  the  immor-
tality of  the  personal  soul ;  combined  with  the  idea  of  a
judgment  which  should  summon  the  spirits  of  the  good  to
a  life  of  blessedness,  and  condemn  the  wicked  to  infernal
punishments  and  the  purifying  penance  of  passing  through
earthly  life  again  under  the  forms  of  men  or  beasts,  this
system  of  doctrine  most  happily  succeeded  in  keeping  itself  from
being  overgrown  by  the  speculations  of  natural  philosophy,  and
brought  together  those  elements  of  moral  conviction  which
the  full  and  various  life  of  the  oldest  civilised  nation  had
developed.

This  was  a  comparatively  healthy  realism,  which,  though  it
attached  human  existence  to  an  all-embracing  cosmic  order,
left  the  determination  of  the  ends  of  human  life  to  the
development  of  life  itself,  and  not  to  cosmological  speculation.
The  excess  of  such  speculation  in  India  led,  on  the  other  hand,
to  an  idealism  which,  while  it  took  away  all  meaning  from  the
world,  took  away  also  all  meaning  from  human  life.  Here
imagination  turned  from  the  primitive  worship  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  not  to  bring  into  prominence  their  order  and  regularity,
but  to  lay  one-sided  stress  upon  their  changeableness  and
transitoriness,  and  emphasized  with  fatal  ingenuity  the
necessity  of  one  eternal  primal  being,  which  we  should
conceive  of  wrongly  if  we  imagined  it  to  have  any  definite
content,  and  most  wrongly  if  we  imagined  such  content  to
be  continuous  eternal  rest,  Indian  speculation  found  it  as
difficult  as  later  philosophy  has  done  to  get  back  from  this
indefinite  being  to  the  world  of  reality.  It  avoided  those
mythical  genealogies  of  divine  beings  which  in  other  cases
fix  the  successive  steps  of  the  creation  of  the  world,
while  at  the  same  time  the  failure  to  explain  how  and
by whom this progression was accomplished is hidden

458

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

Ly  the  imagery.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  our  want  of
insight  into  the  cause  of  the  origin  of  the  world  was  taken
to  indicate  an  origin  which  had  no  cause ;  the  primal  being,
misunderstanding  its  own  yearnings,  is  represented  by  this  line
of  speculation  as  developing  into  a  world  which  is  illusive,
and  which  only  seems  real  to  its  own  individual  members.
An  appearance  which  arises  without  cause,  and  which  appears
in  orderly  fashion  to  its  own  constituent  parts,  is  but  another
name  for  a  reality  which  is  as  yet  unexplained;  hence  this
mode  of  representation  is  metaphysically  inadequate.  On
the  other  hand,  it  contains  a  decided  expression  of  opinion  as
to  the  worth  of  the  world ;  the  world  is  a  mere  appearance,
not  because  it  is  not  real,  but  because  it  is  not  what  ought  to
be.  As  regards  that  which  ought  not  to  be,  man's  only  duty
is  the  effort  to  remove  it ;  in  the  universal  nothingness  of  the
world,  the  condemnation  of  which  is  unceasingly  expressed  by
the  primal  being  itself  in  the  constant  destruction  of  all
created  things,  human  life  has  no  worth  and  no  special  ends ;
salvation  lies  only  in  turning  away  from  it,  in  withdrawing
oneself  from  the  influence  of  that  world  of  appearances,  which
is  what  it  ought  not  to  be,  by  annihilating  all  passion,  and
finally  all  ideas  and  all  thought,  and  returning  to  the  painless
condition  of  the  unconscious  primal  being.  This  despair  of
life  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  resulting  from  speculative
error  in  interpreting  the  universe ;  it  must  have  proceeded
from  psychological  causes,  from  the  general  tone  of  mood  and
feeling  which  we  can  no  longer  analyse,  for  it  pervaded  all
Indian  thought  and  even  practical  life  with  a  power  which
belongs  to  no  doctrine  that  is  not  in  harmony  with  the
popular  mind.  Even  Buddhism,  after  it  had  sought  to  free
men's  minds  from  the  fetters  of  Brahmanism,  of  ceremonial
service,  of  distinctions  of  caste,  of  the  horrors  of  transmi-
gration of  souls  which  threatened  ever  renewed  tortures  of
existence,  ended  with  the  same  thought  and  aimed  only  at
facilitating  the  return  to  nothingness.  The  power  which
this  belief  exercised  over  men's  souls  is  shown  by  that
inclination  for  an  ascetic  life  which  inspired  such  countless]

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  459

numbers  with  an  enthusiasm  for  penance  and  unheard-of
self-torture.  The  great  mental  endowments  of  the  people
were  expended  uselessly  under  the  guidance  of  such  views.
The  development  of  knowledge  was  insignificant ;  notwith-
standing great  refinement  of  feeling,  morality  did  not  recognise
the  unconditional  sacredness  of  goodness ;  strictly  speaking,  it
knew  nothing  of  sin,  but  only  of  ill,  which  is  the  cause  of
mental  disquiet;  hence  all  virtue  consisted  in  cultivating
skilfulness  in  escaping  from  this  ill.  Finally,  in  course  of
time,  like  all  other  similar  extravagances  which,  becoming
unable  to  maintain  their  original  elevation,  produce  some
mechanism  of  custom  as  a  residuum  of  enthusiasm,  Brah-
manism  and  Buddhism  (and  the  latter  in  the  end  to  a  greater
extent  than  the  former)  became  secularized  into  the  utter
aimlessness  of  monastic  life  and  cerem.onial  pomp.

Thanks  to  a  more  robust  mental  constitution,  the  cognate
Iranian  races  obtained  better  fruits  from  the  germs  of  religion
which  were  common  to  them  and  to  the  Indians.  Zoroaster's
teaching  added  a  dark  shadow  to  the  light  which  men
worshipped;  here,  the  delusion  by  which  the  primal  being
was  supposed  to  have  been  confused,  and  misled  to  create  the
world,  was  replaced  by  the  darkness  of  an  evil  principle
which  limits,  but  only  apparently,  the  just  and  true  develop-
ment of  the  good  principle  of  light;  at  the  end  of  that
conflict  between  the  two  which  fills  the  world,  the  evil  will
succumb  to  the  kingdom  of  light,  and  then  nothing  will  be
except  what  ought  to  be.  In  this  conflict  man  has  to  take
part.  The  natural  symbolism,  which  in  all  times  has  made
Light  the  image  of  the  Good,  and  Darkness  the  symbol  of
Evil,  allowed  of  this  hurtful,  equivocal,  ill-favoured,  natural
phsenomenon  being  assigned  to  the  realm  of  Ahriman,  and
(while  the  final  victory  of  Ormuzd  in  the  future  was
held  to  be  certain)  also  allowed  a  multitude  of  practical
precepts,  which  prescribed  intelligible  ends  of  daily  action
and  reasonable  moral  obligations,  to  be  connected  with  the
Clear  dualism  of  principles  which  was  adopted.  But  neither
did  this  form  of  religion  escape  the  fate  of  having  its  great

460

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

thoughts  buried  under  a  superfluity  of  external  forms  by  the
ceremonial  pedantry  of  a  growing  priesthood.

S  4.  We  encounter  other  phaenomeua  on  European  soil
The  Greeks  as  well  as  the  nations  above  refeiTed  to  felt  some-
thing divine  in  natural  phsenomena  before  they  recognised  it
in  the  law  of  conscience.  But  their  thoughts  were  absorbed
neither  in  the  abyss  of  universal  being  in  which  all  form  dis-
appears, nor  in  considering  the  intelligible  secrets  which  each
particular  in  its  own  place  was  called  upon  to  indicate ;  what
they  took  hold  of  and  clung  to  was  the  beauty  of  the  whole
and  of  each  of  its  parts ;  the  more  their  civilisation  advanced,
the  more  did  that  didactic  part  of  the  content  of  their  myths,
which  at  one  time  was  common  to  them  and  the  Eastern  races
with  which  they  were  allied,  fall  into  the  background  beside
the  characteristic  beauty  with  which  they  endowed  their
divinities  and  the  world  they  inhabited.  Calm,  steady
development,  the  domination  of  motley  multiplicity  by  the
unity  of  one  ever-repeated  rhythm  and  all  the  fair  proportion,
clearness,  and  purity  which  the  world  of  the  senses  presents
to  us — these  are  not  in  themselves  moral  concepts,  but  they
are  modes  in  which  things  exist  and  comport  themselves,  which
we  strive  first  to  realize  in  ourselves  as  conditions  or  resulta
of  morality  and  afterwards  to  find  again  in  the  external
world.  Hence  favourable  natural  surroundings  from  which
such  impressions  may  be  obtained,  may  contribute  their  part
to  the  taming  of  wild  impulses  and  to  mildness  and  beauty  ot
disposition,  but  the  larger  share  is  undoubtedly  contributed  by
a  successful  development  of  moral  life  in  society ;  it  is  this
which  first  gives  susceptibility  to  and  interest  in  the  beauty
of  the  external  world.  And  this  it  was  which  early  with-
drew the  attention  of  the  Greeks  from  the  significance  of  their
deities  in  Nature,  a  subject  the  consideration  of  which  has
always  proved  unfruitful  as  regards  religious  development;
their  imagination  substituted  for  the  vanishing  mysteries  of
this  secret  meaning  the  obvious  and  expressive  beauty  of  ideal
forms,  the  characteristic  variety  of  which  reflected  the
infinitely  higher  secret of  the manifolduess  of  mental  life.

I

I

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  °46l

This  representation  of  the  world  of  gods  (which  was  not  accom-
plished without  frequent  misuse  of  poetic  imagination)  in
making  them  human  made  them  at  the  same  time  moral.
As  often  as  the  popular  conscience  recognised  the  beauty  and
urgency  of  some  new  moral  obligation  or  some  new  ethical
Idea,  men  tried  on  the  one  hand  (from  the  natural  desire  to
Tinderstand  that  which  is  greatest  in  the  world  as  being  also
the  most  perfect)  to  assure  to  the  divine  world  the  possession
of  tliis  beauty  as  a  side  of  its  wealth  that  had  hitherto
remained  unknown,  and  on  the  other  hand  they  tried  to  raise
recognised  duty  above  the  fluctuations  of  individual  judgment
and  of  variable  moods  by  deducing  it  from  the  will  of  the
gods.  Thus  the  Greeks  improved  their  faith  by  the  results  of
living  culture  ;  their  most  profound  poets  struggled  to  infuse
into  the  transmitted  content  of  this  faith  their  consciousness
of  sacred  truths  and  precepts,  thereby  deepening  that  content.
And  it  was  just  on  this  account  that  at  last  the  feeling
became  overpowering  that  the  original  basis  which  men
sought  thus  to  ennoble  was  inadequate ;  they  found  that  all
which  gives  worth  to  human  life  may  indeed  be  externally
connected  with  the  names  of  the  mythic  gods,  but  has  not  any
essential  dependence  upon  them.  Then  there  came  into
honour  the  simple  name  of  God  or  of  the  Divine,  used  to
indicate  the  true  source  of  what  is  worthy,  to  which  source
the  living  longing  of  the  nobler  minds  turned  back  in  anxious
search.

It  was  the  religion  of  individuals  and  not  of  the  people
that  came  to  this  conclusion ;  the  popular  religion  which  at
last  fell  wholly  into  ruins,  never  attained  the  coherent  unity
of  the  religious  systems  of  the  East.  Mythology  arose  neither
from  a  single  impulse,  nor  from  impulses  that  worked  on
uninterruptedly.  Notions  that  had  diverged  somewhat  even
in  the  Asiatic  home  where  they  had  their  birth,  had  become
still  more  different  in  the  European  settlements  in  which  the
various  tribes  lived  on  for  a  long  time  in  isolation  from  one
another ;  migration  and  intercourse  with  other  peoples  had
introduced  foreign  ideas  concerning  God ;  local  circumstances

462

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  17.

had  reduced  many  an  image  of  some  divinity  which  had
formerly  been  the  same  for  all,  to  various  different  embodi-
ments; and  jfinally,  all  such  notions  had  early  fallen  into  the
transforming  hands  of  poetry.  All  this  collection  of  cha-
racteristic ideal  figures,  consisting  of  symbolic  personages  from
ancient  national  legends  and  from  the  poetry  of  untrammelled
imagination,  had  grown  to  such  vast  dimensions  that  perfect
agreement  about  them  had  become  unthinkable,  and  dogmatic
instruction  as  the  foundation  of  a  settled  confession  of  faith
impossible.  The  world  of  the  gods  in  its  boundlessness  stood
over  against  consciousness  as  physical  Nature  had  stood  over
against  it  from  the  beginning ;  the  latter,  too,  is  not  known  in
all  its  parts  by  any  man,  but  its  main  outlines  are  known  to
all ;  each  has  a  limited  region  within  which  he  lives,  and  the
peculiar  worth  of  which  he  understands  from  actual  experi-
ence. So  in  the  wide  world  of  mythological  divinities  each
had  a  special  circle  of  tribal  gods  ;  and  to  honour  these  with
traditional  forms  of  worship  was  enjoined  by  the  state,  the
family,  or  some  ancient  religious  guild,  on  all  who  wished  to
be  reckoned  as  belonging  to  it.  But  there  was  no  church  to
guard  pure  doctrine  or  to  see  that  it  was  followed,  no  estab-
lished priesthood  with  any  power  over  consciences.  The
priest  was  the  expert  who  knew  the  secrets  of  the  particular
sanctuary  in  which  he  served  and  lent  his  aid  as  mediator  to
the  pious  worshipper  who  came  with  offerings.  Wherever
there  was  any  censorship  of  religious  opinions,  it  was  exer-
cised by  the  political  community ;  the  national  worship  of  the
gods,  upon  which,  as  upon  a  primitive  sacred  treaty,  the
welfare  of  the  state  was  supposed  to  rest,  was  defended  by  the
state  itself,  on  the  one  hand  against  the  intrusion  of  immoral
foreign  worship,  and  on  the  other  hand  against  the  disin-
tegrating enlightenment  of  home-born  philosophy.

Before  the  moral  deepening  of  the  idea  of  divinity  had
made  it  possible  for  men  to  pay  unceasing  reverence  to  this
idea  by  their  mode  of  life,  prayers  and  sacrifice  and  songs  of
praise  continued  here,  as  in  all  cases,  to  be  the  only  expres-
sions of  gratitude,  of  spontaneous  admiration,  and  of awful

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFK

463

fear  called  forth  by  the  gods,  whom  men  regarded  as  bene-
ficent, or  exaltedly  beautiful,  or  finally  as  threatening  powers
of  Nature.  A  mixture  of  these  feelings  was  the  frame  of
mind  which  the  Greek  conscience  continued  to  require  as
piety  towards  the  gods.  It  is  a  long  step  from  this  frame
of  mind  to  the  definite  actions  by  which  it  manifests
itself  in  men's  lives.  The  will  of  the  gods  men  did  not
know ;  to  reverence  it  while  yet  unknown,  and  also  to  regard
the  scattered  revelations  in  which  it  now  and  then  made  itself
known ;  not  to  be  in  any  way  haughty  or  presumptuous,  but
to  maintain  a  moderate  frame  of  mind,  being  conscious  that
the  guidance  of  all  things  is  in  higher  and  mysterious  hands
— such  was  the  sole  further  development  that  the  Greek  con-
science was  able  to  give  to  this  evae^eia.  Mythology  could
not  teach  any  more  pregnant  connection  between  human  life
and  divine  decrees ;  it  had  too  entirely  lost  all  remembrance  of
the  comprehensive  world-history  with  which  human  history
had  been  interwoven  by  oriental  imagination ;  for  it  every-
thing was  but  a  radiant  present,  the  echoes  of  whose  past
lived  only  in  a  few  obscure  legends,  and  which  saw  before  it
no  unfathomable  future,  nothing  but  its  own  steady  uniform
continuance.  Under  however  glorified  an  aspect  men  might
regard  the  gods,  they  yet  never  regarded  them  as  the  creators
of  the  world ;  they  continued  to  look  upon  them  as  con-
ditioned beings,  the  fortunate  firstlings  of  a  hidden  creative
power;  as  ideal  men  and  powerful  helpers  of  their  weaker
brethren  in  difficulties  which  yet  even  for  themselves  were
still  difficulties.  And  for  this  very  reason  the  moral  deficien-
cies which  were  blots  in  their  representations  of  their  gods,
when  the  natural  symbolism  of  the  early  legends  had  been
transformed  into  histories  of  personal  beings,  did  not  disturb
the  sincerity  of  their  reverence  to  the  extent  which  might
otherwise  have  been  expected.  These  pictures  of  the  gods
lived  in  men's  consciousness  as  expressive  and  characteristic
representations  of  natures,  some  of  which  were  noble  and  some
ignoble,  but  all  having  the  freshness  and  reality  of  life  about
them ;  and  the  gods  themselves  were  regarded  as  superhuman

464  BOOK  vni. chapter  iv.

combatants  who  had  been  our  forerunners  in  the  battle  of
life,  forerunners  for  whom  men  felt  the  same  kind  of
devoted  and  confident  attachment  that  soldiers  do  for  their
leader.

In  the  external  forms  of  worship  the  Greek  mind  preferred
the  solemn  beauty  of  mystic  elevation,  and  avoided,  except  in
a  few  points,  the  sensuous  enthusiastic  passion  of  the  worship
of  God  as  practised  by  the  Asiatics.  Many  of  the  customs
handed  down  from  antiquity  had  become  unintelligible
to  the  people.  Although  every  divinity  might  be  called
upon  in  any  locality,  yet  the  more  solemn  worship  of  each
was  connected  with  special  places  where  help  had  been
vouchsafed  to  men  on  particularly  memorable  occasions,  the
recollection  of  which  was  intended  to  be  preserved  by
significant  ceremonies,  yet  which  notwithstanding  did  not
escape  oblivion.  Thus  sacred  ceremonies  remained  attached
to  particular  places  of  worship,  as  being  of  traditional
obligation ;  almost  like  the  peculiar  feudal  obligations  which
vassals  of  the  Middle  Ages  owed  to  their  feudal  lords  ever
after  the  occurrence  of  some  forgotten  adventure.  Yet  the
Greeks  were  impelled  to  maintain  conscientiously  the  integrity
of  these  ceremonies  by  that  piety  with  which  they  believed
that  they  ought  in  all  cases  to  honour  the  uncomprehended
will  of  the  gods.

And  uncomprehended  as  to  its  final  secrets  did  this  will
ever  remain  to  the  Greeks.  There  is  a  mild,  pleasing,  unaffected
naturalness  in  their  religious  views ;  they  do  not,  however,
set  up  a  kingdom  of  heaven  in  opposition  to  the  world,  but
exhibit  the  beauty  of  a  moderate,  serene,  peaceful  enjoyment
of  life  springing  from  a  judicious  and  intelligent  appropria-
tion and  improvement  of  earthly  conditions,  in  contrast  to
the  splendour  of  oriental  despotism  and  unmeaning  luxury.
It  was  only  this  which  Solon  set  before  Croesus  when  he
declared  the  peaceful  life  of  Tellos,  or  the  happy  end  of
Kleobis  and  Biton  cut  off  in  their  youth  by  a  blessed  death,
to  be  preferable  to  the  renowned  good  fortune  of  the
Lydian  king. There  is  no  reference  in  his  words  to  a  happi-

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFK  465

ness  which  is  not  of  this  world,  or  to  a  peace  of  conscience
which  can  outweigh  external  misfortune.  Solon  urgently
admonishes  the  king  to  think  of  the  end,  not  as  though  he
were  then  to  be  judged  according  to  the  worth  or  worthless-
ness  of  his  life,  but  because  no  man  is  truly  happy  who  is
not  happy  to  the  end.  According  to  Greek  ideas,  a  disaster
quite  late  in  life  mars  all  a  man's  previous  happiness,  just  as
in  art  the  beauty  of  a  whole  work  is  spoiled  by  failure  in  the
smallest  detail.  These  remarkable  people  even  tried  to
make  the  end  ^—  which  they  regarded  as  the  final  end  —
artistically  satisfactory ;  any  connection  of  the  whole  life  with
a  future  beyond  it  was  never  a  dominant  thought  with  them.
It  may  be  that  in  the  religious  mysteries  of  the  Greeks  there
were  handed  down  some  ancient  Eastern  teachings  as  to
immortality,  and  certainly  cultivated  Greeks  were  not  un-
acquainted with  the  idea  of  a  continued  existence,  such  as
lightens  the  hard  life  of  so  many  rude  tribes.  But  if  this
belief  had  had  any  deep-reaching  influence,  we  should  know
of  it,  without  any  special  proof,  through  the  immediate
impression  produced  by  Greek  national  life  as  a  whole.  This
impression,  however,  testifies  decidedly  to  complete  satisfaction
with  the  present  world.  The  wide  gulf  between  the  Greek
view  of  life  and  that  of  Christianity  cannot  be  filled  up  by
bringing  together  isolated  expressions  of  which  we  can  never
be  sure  whether  they  gave  voice  to  a  fixed  and  hearty  belief
or  whether  they  were  mere  poetic  images  without  serious
meaning,  which  served  the  aesthetically  cultured  people  who
used  them  as  mere  ornamentations  of  life.

§  5.  The  noblest  representatives  of  Greek  speculation  had
learnt  to  know  God  as  the  first  and  unmoved  mover  of  all
things,  as  the  operative  essence  of  the  Ideas  of  the  True,  the
Beautiful,  and  the  Good ;  but  to  the  Hellenic  mind  (of  which
the  one-sided  reverence  for  knowledge  was  kept  up  by  its
consciousness  of  scientific  achievements,  and  to  which  sin  was
only  intelligible  as  error)  the  Supreme  Good  was  without  any
content  of  its  own,  and  melted  away  again  into  Beauty  and
Truth. However  great the interest with which we may

VOL.  n.  2  G

466

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

continue  to  regard  this  final  religious  outcome  of  the  classical
world,  which  is  great  regarded  as  the  fruit  of  human  investi-
gation, yet  it  is  but  as  a  modest  rivulet  compared  to  that
rushing  river  of  consciousness  of God  which,  from  a  long
previous  period,  had  swept  through  the  life  of  the  Hebrew
people  and  overflowed  in  their  sacred  poetry  with  a  power
compared  to  the  assured  reality  of  which  the  highest  flights
of  Greek  enthusiasm  seem  but  as  mere  problematic  conjecture.
Learned  investigation  may  discover  traces  of  foreign  influ-
ence in  individual  features  of  legend  and  custom,  and  in  the
artistic  and  ceremonial  development  of  Hebrew  worship,  but
the  essence  of  their  religious  philosophy  was  wholly  withdrawn
by  the  Israelites  from  the  influence  of  heathen  culture,  with
some  aspects  of  which  they  were  in  long-continued  contact.
Those  principles  of  natural  philosophy  which  smothered  the
religions  of  the  East  with  their  rank  and  injurious  growth  are
almost  entirely  absent  from  the  religion  of  the  Hebrews ;  here
the  motive-power  of  development  is  to  be  found  in  ethical
Ideas,  which,  though  not  indeed  alien  to  the  life  of  other
nations,  were  not  the  source  from  which  their  religious  notions
were  derived. With  what  ingenuity  must  the  Egyptians  have
determined  the  succession  of  the  cosmic  powers  to  which  the
order  of  the  universe  is  due — if,  that  is,  we  can  trust  the
equal  ingenuity  of  their  interpreters. But  for  religious  life  it
haa  all  about  as  much  worth  as  the  infinitely  more  trustworthy]
teachings  of  modern  geology  concerning  the  stratification  of]
the  earth's  crust. The Mosaic history  of  the creation (tO;
which  only  a  strange  misunderstanding  can  seek  to  attribute]
natural-historical  significance)  is  distinguished  by  its  contempt
for  such  cosmological  speculation. It  does  not  make  any  one
phsenomenon  a  basis  for  the  development  of  any  other;  with
the  greatest  uniformity  it  repeats  in  the  case  of  every  creature  i
that  God  made  it,  and  in  describing  the  series  of  creative  acts]
it hardly thinks enough even about observing an order
corresponding to the interdependence existing between!
different  parts  of  the  material  world. It  was  sufficient  thatj
God  made  everything,  and  that  everything  as  He  made  it  was

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  467

good;  sufficient  that  man  was  regarded  as  the  crown  of  this
creation,  and  the  creation  itself  as  the  garden  in  which  he
was  destined  to  live  after  the  likeness  of  God.  Nor  was  any
higher  place  assigned  to  Nature  later ;  as  regarded  the  one
living  God,  natural  phsenomena  had  no  meaning  but  as  signs
of  His  goodness,  His  almighty  power,  or  His  wrath,  and  as
such,  poetry  depicted  them  in  the  most  striking  colours ;  but
except  in  hasty  sketches,  imagination  never  busied  itself  in
attempts  to  see  God's  being  symbolized  in  the  order  of  Nature,
as  though  such  a  manifestation  were  necessary  to  Him,  or
could  suffice  Him.  But  this  God  who  had  no  serious  ends  in
Nature  itself,  but  used  it  as  the  scenery  of  a  magnificent
drama,  had  special  designs  for  the  human  race;  while  the
cosmographic  horizon  of  the  Hebrews  was  narrowed  to  almost
idyllic  dimensions,  and  all  interest  in  Nature  as  a  whole  was
relinquished  with  indifference,  the  promised  land  was  raised
to  the  sacredness  of  a  special  sphere  of  divine  influence,  and
became  the  stage  on  which  a  course  of  action  and  reaction
between  God  and  man  was  played  out.

Attention  being  turned  away  from  the  structure  of  Nature
itself,  the  danger  was  avoided  which  had  misled  those  religions
that  had  a  cosmological  foundation — the  danger,  that  is,  of
regarding  first  natural  ill  and  then  moral  evil  as  necessary
constituents  of  the  cosmic  order,  and  as  metaphysical  conse-
quences of  the  Divine  Nature.  According  to  the  Hebrew
faith  God  was  wholly  good,  and  neither  in  Him  nor  in  the
creation  as  it  came  from  His  hand  was  there  any  seed  of  ill ;
it  was  human  freedom  which,  perfectly  unfettered  and  uncon-
strained by  any  metaphysical  fatality,  brought  sin  into  the
world,  and,  as  its  punishment,  death  and  the  ills  of  life.
This  kingdom  of  evil  which  had  now  arisen  was  not  some-
thing which  must  be  necessarily  thought  as  a  part  of  the
world ;  it  was  something  which  need  not  have  been  and
which  ought  not  to  have  been ;  the  command  to  be  holy  as
God  is  holy  applied  to  man,  and  applied  to  him  as  one  which
it  was  possible  to  fulfil  in  the  fear  of  God  and  of  His  law.
The  doubts  to  which  the  human  mind  must  always  be  led  by

468

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

the  consideration  of  these  most  important  matters,  were  not
theoretically  solved  by  the  Hebrew  faith ;  but  their  suppres-
sion gave  to  life  for  the  first  time  a  thoroughly  religious
foundation.  Moral  obligations,  conscience  of  which  is  every-
where developed  by  social  action  and  reaction,  appear  here
consolidated  into  a  Will  of  God,  which  has  to  be  fulfilled  and
glorified,  not  only  by  the  individual  in  inward  disposition  and
outward  works,  but  also  by  the  whole  nation  in  a  theocrati-
cally  regulated  life  of  the  community ;  the  national  history  is
the  account  of  a  continuous  intercourse  with  the  God  of
righteousness,  who  has  attached  promises  of  favour  to  the  sancti-
fication  of  His  will,  and  who  punishes  obduracy  towards  it.

Neither  did  the  external  destiny  of  the  nation  bring  the
fulfilment  of  what  had  been  promised,  nor  did  the  people  find
in  conscience  the  evidence  of  its  own  uprightness ;  the  end  of
the  struggle  carried on  in  the  attempt at self-justification
towards  God  lay  yet  in  the  future,  and  was  anticipated  as  the
temporal glory of the whole race,  which, with somewhat
obscure  hopes  as  to  the  eternal  significance  of  the  individual
soul,  felt  itself  called  to  constitute  a  kingdom  of  God  upon
earth. Christianity  regarded  itself  as  the  realization  of  the
predictions  which  seemed  to  point  to  this,  but  it  was  not!
recognised  as  such  by  the  Jews ;  in  the  view  of  Christianity
all  which  men  had  hoped  with  regard  to  the  Messiah  was ;
found  realised  in  deepened  significance  in  the  person  of  Christ!
— the crowning  prophecy of  a  final revelation, the high;
priest's  office  as  mediator  by  means  of  sacrifice  (sacrifice  and]
mediator  being  one),  and  the  sovereign  power  of  Him  who  is]
to  be  King  over  the  Church  in  aU  ages.

§  6.  If  we  separate  for  a  moment  that  which  the  doctrine]
of  the  Christian  Church  does  not  allow  to  be  separated,  namely]
that  which  is  revealed  through  Christ  from  faith  in  thdj
historical  fact  of  His  revelation,  we  shall  see  that  the  former!
contains  exclusively  religious  truth  conveyed  in  a  form  of
expression  which  is  also  exclusively  religious.  The  order  of  j
visible  Nature  is  not  a  subject  of  its  interpretation  and]
explanation ;  pervaded  as  a  whole  and  in  all  its  details  by  the]

I

THE  EELIGIOUS  LIFE-  469

foreseeing  and  preserving  will  of  God,  it  does  indeed  in  its
totality  form  the  background  of  our  life,  and  to  it  the  mind
may  appeal  when  seeking  some  witness  to  the  truth  of  its
belief;  but  to  know  its  construction  and  its  articulation  does
not  belong  to  the  one  thing  needful.  In  the  ordinances
of  the  Law  even  Judaism  had  given  to  natural  reality  a
significance  not  its  own ;  although  it  insisted  on  holiness  of
mind,  it  still  saw  in  the  performance  of  actions  a  service
which  was  in  itself  of  some  significance,  and  without  the
doing  of  which  the  world  would  lack  that  which  human
action  was  intended  to  contribute  to  it.  From  this  sometimes
outspoken  and  sometimes  hesitating  reverence  for  works
Christianity  turned  away,  caring  exclusively  for  man's
spiritual  temper  and  the  sanctification  of  this ;  what  is
primarily  to  be  aimed  at  is  not  any  particular  state  of
things,  nor  even  any  particular  state  of  mankind,  reveal-
ing the  kingdom  of  God  in  external  ordinances  by  the
harmony  between  men  in  different  orders  of  society — but
it  is  the  new  birth  and  the  transformation  of  the  individual
human  being,  whose  immortal  spirit  is  to  become  the  temple
of  God.  It  was  only  the  chosen  people  as  a  theocratically
regulated  whole  which  Judaism  had  regarded  as  worthy  to  be
such  a  temple.  Hence  Christianity  developed  directly  social
theories  as  little  as  it  did  cosmological  wisdom ;  but  in  the
new  inner  life  that  it  demanded  and  made  possible  was  the
essential  germ  from  which  might  be  developed  not  indeed
knowledge,  but  the  renovation  of  man's  nature,  not  a  definite
form  of  social  relations,  but  a  capacity  of  using  and  modifying
any  existing  state  of  things  in  the  right  way.

If  the  thought  of  the  merely  conditioned  worth  of  all
earthly  life  lay  at  the  foundation  of  this  peculiarity  of  the
Christian  revelation,  whilst  the  earlier  religions  of  the  East
regarded  this  life  not  as  a  preparation  and  a  school,  but  as
occupying  the  place  of  real  existence  in  the  plan  of  the
world,  it  might  have  been  expected  that  at  any  rate  the
connection  of  earthly  reality  with  the  secret  of  the  divinely
ordered  universe,  of  that  which  is  with  that  which  ought  to

470

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  IV,

be,  would  be  all  the  more  clearly  developed  by  Christianity.
This  expectation  would  be  deceived  supposing  its  object  to  be
an  enlightening  knowledge  of  the  construction  of  the  super-
sensuous  world ;  but,  as  the  history  of  centuries  shows,  com-
pletely fulfilled  if  it  ask  nothing  more  than  certainty  as  regards
the  blessed  significance  of  the  connection  which  that  world
(whatever  its  definite  form  may  be)  has  both  in  itself  and  with
earthly  life.  Eevelation  speaks  of  a  Personal  Spirit  who  ia
Almighty  Love,  but  it  is  not  absorbed  in  answering  those
questions  concerning  the  metaphysical  form  of  His  existence
which  human  knowledge  raises  in  order  that  it  may  under-
stand this  after  its  own  fashion  ;  it  describes  that  aspect  of
God  which  He  shows  to  men,  but  it  merely  indicates  without
attempting  to  analyse  that  glory  which  only  the  angels  in
heaven  see.  It  regards  the  world  as  the  creation  of  this  God,
but  with  regard  to  its  beginning  and  its  end,  it  makes
no  essential  addition  to  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the
ancient  faith ;  it  is  pervaded  by  belief  in  the  immortality  of
the  individual  spirit,  but  intrusive  questions  concerning  the
nature  of  future  existence  it  declines  to  answer;  there  is
much  to  be  told  which  we  cannot  bear  yet.  For  just  in
proportion  as  this  future  existence  is  more  certain,  the  less
necessary  is  it  to  try  and  mature  beforehand  upon  earth  the
fruits  of  the  higher  knowledge  which  it  will  afford  us,  and  the
more  exclusively  necessary  is  it  to  prepare  ourselves  for  this
great  future.  Thus  it  may  appear  as  though  revelation  really
revealed  but  very  little,  and  in  truth  in  a  doctrinal  point  of]
view  it  is  neither  extensive  nor  circumstantial ;  it  does  not]
enrich  science  by  an  abundance  of  individual  truths,  but
establishes  a  new  life  upon  a  foundation  of  truth,  which  is
not  considered  to  be  possessed  if  it  is  merely  known,  but  only]
when  it  pervades  the  whole  man  as  the  prevailing  tone  and]
temper  of  his  life.

To  characterize  this  essential  germ  of  Christianity  more]
in  detail  than  we  have  attempted  to  do  in  our  short  survey  of  I
the  course  of  history,  is  not  our  present  business,  but  we  may]
recall  some  aspects  of  its  relation  to  other  philosophic  views.

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  47 1

Human  nature  is  so  similar  everywhere,  that  wherever  there
is  a  sufficient  amount  of  the  social  intercourse  necessary
to  develop  its  capacities,  the  moral  convictions  that  are
evolved  are  similar  in  all  essential  points.  But  at  the  same
time,  the  faculty  of  drawing  from  our  own  premises  all  the
conclusions  which  they  involve,  and  the  effort  to  attain  com-
plete harmony  of  character,  are  so  deficient  in  us,  and  (being
the  result  of  growing  reflection)  appear  so  late,  that  nearly
everywhere  in  human  civilisation,  that  has  grown  up  spon-
taneously as  national  culture  in  practical  life,  we  find  between
coexistent  moral  principles  obstinate  discrepancies,  to  which
men  are  blinded  by  habit.  Therefore,  on  the  one  hand,  it
may  easily  seem  as  though  Christianity  had  brought  no  other
moral  ideals  into  the  world  than  those  which  mankind  had
already  discovered  for  themselves  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it
will  be  found  that  its  efficacy  was  not  expended  in  introducing
coherence  and  completeness  into  the  contradictory  convictions
of  heathen  ethics.

The  ground  of  all  moral  obligation  is  understood  differently
by  it  and  by  the  heathen  world,  which  in  its  rough  beginnings
was  led  to  moral  habits,  partly  by  natural  good  dispositions,
and  partly  by  experience  of  their  usefulness ;  and  when  it  had
reached  a  higher  stage  of  civilisation  felt  bound  by  the
obligation  of  moral  commands  for  their  own  sake,  just  as
unconditionally  as  it  found  itself  subjected  unconditionally  to
natural  laws.  For  Christianity  the  command  to  do  God's
will  was  not  merely  a  comprehensive  expression  for  the
content  of  all  individual  moral  ideals,  but  it  also  supplied  at
the  same  time  a  reason  which  justified,  or  at  any  rate
explained,  their  binding  power.  The  ordinary  opinion  of
more  or  less  scientific  reflection  is  that  there  is  here  a
retrogression  as  compared  with  the  philosophic  view  of
heathendom,  to  which  the  Beautiful  and  the  Good  seemed  to
be  obligatory,  in  virtue  of  its  own  power  and  dignity  and  not
as  a  law,  even  though  it  might  be  a  law  laid  down  by  the
Supreme  Will,  The  faithful  Christian  will  judge  differently.
He  will  admit  that  he  learns  the  interpretation  of  the  divine

472

BOOK  Vni. CHAPTER  IV.

will  only  from  the  deliverances  of  conscience,  and  will  sliun
the  frightful  consequences  which  have  always  arisen  from  the
admission  of  any  other  source  of  enlightenment ;  he  m]l  not
conceal  from  himself  that  his  conviction  lays  upon  thought
new  difficulties  which  are  hard  to  overcome ;  but  yet  he  will
maintain  that  through  it  alone  is  he  able  to  understand  the
phsenomenon  of  conscience.  For  it  will  seem  to  him  simply
incomprehensible  that  through  some  original  and  primary
necessity  there  should  be  laws  which  have  binding  power  over
our  actions  but  yet  serve  no  purpose — serve  no  purpose
because  their  whole  business  is  to  insist  upon  their  own
fulfilment  and  realization,  the  fulfilment  when  it  has  come
about  being  the  end  of  the  matter,  as  though  it  were  some
new  fact,  without  any  good  having  been  produced  that  did
not  previously  exist.  The  Christian  seeks  to  escape  this
labour  in  the  service  of  impersonal  laws,  this  mere  bringing
about  of  facts ;  it  is  only  in  the  pleasure  which  God  has  in
what  he  has  done,  that  he  finds  that  ultimate  good  for  the
sake  of  which  all  moral  action  has  worth  in  his  eyes.  If  love
is  the  great  commandment,  then  that  that  great  command-
ment must  be  carried  out  for  love's  sake  is  a  necessary
corollary;  neither  the  realization  of  any  Idea  for  its  own
sake,  merely  in  order  that  it,  devoid  of  sensibility  as  it  is,
should  be  put  into  act,  nor  the  residence  of  all  excellences
within  ourselves,  the  egoistic  glorification  of  self,  but
only  love  to  the  living  God,  only  the  longing  to  be  approved
not  by  our  own  hearts  but  by  Him — this,  and  this  only,  is
the  basis  of  Christian  morality,  and  science  will  never  find
one  that  is  plainer,  nor  life  one  that  is  surer.

There  is  a  close  connection  between  this  foundation  and
the  fact  that  with  the  Christian  precepts  promises  are  always
conjoined ;  this,  too,  is  a  rock  of  offence  for  that  quixotism  of
pure  reason  which  regards  its  efforts  as  almost  disgraced  if;
the  kingdom  of  heaven  and  eternal  blessedness  are  offered  as
their  reward.  It  would  be  wicked  to  deny  that  the  human
heart  is  capable  of  the  greatest  self-sacrifice,  even  without
admitting  to  itself  that  it  cherishes  a  hope  of  such  reward;

L

THE  EELIGIOUS  LIFE.  473

for  we  have  no  right  to  doubt  the  instances  which  we  find  in
history  and  in  life,  or  to  attribute  motives  by  which  these
instances  would  be  made  more  intelligible  to  us.  But  while
we  recognise  the  merit  of  that  virtue  which,  in  sincere
devotion  to  the  moral  ideal,  prefers  destruction  to  defilement,
we  regard  as  incomplete  any  philosophy  which  holds  that
good  may  vanish  out  of  the  universe  unrequited,  and  which
lets  the  joyousness  of  action  be  damped  by  this  conviction
which  can  never  be  in  itself  a  motive  to  action.  Yet  indeed
it  is  not  merely  in  order  that  the  universe  should  be  in  itself
harmonious  and  perfect  that  Christianity  connects  blessedness
with  moral  fidelity  as  its  result ;  it  does  undoubtedly  also  hold
forth  the  crown  of  life  which  it  promises  as  the  motive  which
is  to  confirm  and  uphold  that  fidelity  even  unto  death.  Cau
we  then  contest  with  those  who  denounce  all  Eudsemonism
the  right  to  apply  this  name  of  reproach  to  Christian  doctrine
also,  and  to  prefer  to  it  as  more  exalted  their  own  teaching
which  commands  virtue  and  self-sacrifice  without  any  reward  ?
This  latter  requirement  may  indeed  seem  more  exalted ;  but
from  the  sublime  there  is  but  a  step  not  only  to  the  ridiculous
but  also  to  the  inane  and  the  preposterous.  And  this  pedantry
of  reason  runs  the  risk  of  taking  not  indeed  the  first  but  the
second  of  those  steps,  if  it  is  really  in  earnest.  For  without
a  supreme  good  to  which  the  lesser  good  would  be  sacrificed,
and  as  mere  continuous  labour  for  the  establishment  of  a
definite  external  condition  of  things,  or  of  some  definite
condition  of  the  inner  man,  in  what  would  our  moral  struggles
differ  from  any  blind  activity  of  natural  forces,  except  in  the
accompanying  but  inexplicable  feeling  that  one  ought  to  do
something  which,  when  it  is  done,  is  of  no  use  to  any  one  ?
But  in  fact  this  step  is  not  taken  by  that  quixotic  virtue  to
which  we  have  referred ;  it  is  conscious  that  at  bottom  it,  too,
aspires  after  a  Supreme  Good — namely.  Self-esteem ;  and  it
would  certainly  give  up  all  moral  effort  if  it  were  not
rewarded  by  this  result.  Perhaps  it  would  even  be  much  less
inclined  than  the  more  open  Eudaemonism  of  Christianity  to
labour  in  the  service  of  moral  commands  if  obedience  to  them

474

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

did  not  enable  it  to  reach  by  the  shortest  road,  and  with  the
greatest  possible  directness,  that  which  it  regards  as  the
Supreme  Good.  The  distinction,  then,  is  between  the  proud
inflexible  Euda3monism  of  self-esteem,  which  is  self-sufficing,
and  the  Eudsemonism  of  humility,  which  is  not  self-sufficing,
and  seeks  its  Highest  Good  in  standing  well  not  with  self  but
with  God,  and  in  being  beloved  by  Him.  The  sacrifices
which  Christianity  imposes  on  men  in  order  to  the  attainment
of  salvation  are  not  less  than  those  required  from  them  by
the  more  self-sufficing  doctrine ;  but  while  the  latter  sets  out
with  efforts  to  reach  that  which  is  sublime,  and  finds  little
opportunity  of  returning  thence  to  what  is  meek  and  lowly,
the  former  begins  with  what  is  joyous  and  attractive,  and  yet
mighty  enough  to  produce  also  what  is  most  sublime.  And  that
this  way  alone  is  the  true  one  is  an  opinion  confirmed  by  a  con-
sideration even  of  those  aesthetic  ideas  upon  which  our  moral
judgment  is  only  too  dependent.  Such  a  consideration  would
show  us  how  hollow  is  all  sublimity  that  aims  only  at  being
sublime,  and  how  imperfectly  it  is  conceived  when,  being
carried  beyond  its  necessary  relation  to  an  Absolute  Good  to
the  power  of  which  it  testifies,  it  is  set  up  as  independent.
Christianity  does  not  see  this  good  in  the  mere  existence  of  a
world  of  being  and  action,  regulated  according  to  moral  Ideas,]
but  only  in  the  blessedness  produced  by  the  enjoyment  of  j
this  world;  and  the  gospel  is  glad  tidings  just  because  it
carries  out  to  this  its  final  logical  result  the  abolition  of  all]
reverence  for  mere  blind  factual  existence,  and  reveals  the]
hidden  priceless  jewel  of  salvation  as  the  final  secret  for  the
sake  of  which  all  the  vast  expenditure  of  creation  and  human
life  has  been  made.  It  never  aimed  at  being  sublime  or]
magnificent;  and  yet  because  it  is  "glad  tidings"  it  is  also]
sublime  and  grand.

By  Judaism  too  and  by  all  heathen  religions,  the  moral]
commands  which  life  has  taught  have  been  interpreted  as  the]
requirements  of  God or  of  the gods,  and they have pro-
mised happiness  as  the  result  of fulfilling  these  commands.j
But  the  gods  of  heathendom  were  too  much  occupied  witl

THE  RELIGIOrS  LIFE.  475

Kature  ;  their  care  for  the  spiritual  world  and  for  mankind
seemed  to  disappear  beside  the  splendour  of  their  manifesta-
tions in  Nature,  for  the  significance  of  which,  alien  as  it
was  from  human  life,  they  demanded  reverence  ;  in  this  world
which  had  no  special  definite  aim,  man  must  strive  to  win,
by  careful  piety  towards  the  easily  offended  unknown  powers,
mere  toleration  for  mere  transitory  happiness.  By  the  Jews
too  God  was  regarded  as  the  Almighty  whose  acts,  whatever
they  might  be,  were  always  righteous,  because  they  were  not
measured  by  any  higher  standard  of  right ;  by  this  Almighty
Being  blessings  were  promised  as  a  reward  for  the  submission
of  mortals,  which  He  eagerly  desired  although  they  were  as
nothing  before  Him.  Not  only  did  Christianity  bring  into
prominence  the  spiritual  world  as  the  only  true  world  and
that  in  which  God  specially  works,  but  moreover  man  is  no
longer  as  nothing  before  Him.  It  is  true  that  the  hope  of
attaining  happiness  in  his  own  strength  is  taken  from  him ;
but  as  a  child  of  God  even  the  meanest  knows  himself  to  be
an  object  of  unceasing  care  to  the  Almighty,  to  whom  the
manifestation  of  the  glory  of  external  Nature  is  now  regarded
as  being  but  a  secondary  consideration.  Traces  of  all  this
are  visible  throughout  history.  Men  had  heretofore  felt  them-
selves to  be  individuals  of  a  species,  members  of  the  nation
to  which  they  belonged,  and  they  had  sought  in  the  external
order  of  political  society  to  realize  those  higher  goods  of  life
which  the  individual  could  share  in  only  as  the  joint  pro-
duction of  the  race.  Christianity  gave  to  this  characteristic
on  the  one  hand  cosmopolitan  breadth,  and  on  the  other  hand
individual  depth.  All  distinctions  of  earthly  rank  and  calling
disappeared  as  unimportant  in  the  sight  of  the  one  God  ;  the
immediate  relation  to  God,  which  is  possible  for  every  faith-
ful soul,  gave  to  each  individual  a  worth  of  which  he  could
not  be  deprived,  a  worth  that  did  not  arise  primarily  from
his  position  in  human  society,  and  that  was  the  work  not  of
Nature  but  of  himself.  Each  man  was  to  his  fellow  now  no
longer  a  mere  specimen  of  the  race,  whose  whole  nature  was
transparent and familiar,  but  in  each  individual  there  was

476

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

something  hidden  and  sacred  that  forbade  intrusion.  It  is
of  course  the  fact  that  under  favourable  social  conditions  men
had  always  developed  varieties  of  disposition  and  indeed
wholly  distinct  types  of  character ;  it  was  Christianity  that
first  supplied  a  deeper  reason  than  this  for  demanding  respect
for  the  individual  by  rousing  a  sensitive  regard  for  personal
honour,  through  the  ascription  of  eternal  significance  to  the
eoul  of  the  individual  man,

§  7.  The full  joyous assurance of the truth of these
doctrines,  the  subjection  in  lowly  humility  of  all  one's  own
strength to  the  grace  of  God,  the  consciousness  not  only  of ,
that  imperfection  which  has  a  meaning  in  the  cosmic order  j
but  also  of  the  sinfulness  which  always  is  but  never  ought  to  ■
be,  the  confession  of  the  inadequacy  of  all  one's  own  deserts,
and  the  hope  of  redemption  from  all  evil  through  the  love
of  God  which  no  one  can deserve  but  every  one  can  win —
all  this  is  characteristic  of  a  temper  of  mind  which  has  been
regarded  by  many  in  all  times  as  that  which  entitles  men  to
call  themselves  by  the  name  of  Christ. The  Christian  Church
has  judged  otherwise. It  has  attached  the  right  to  this  name
to a  faith  which  believes  not  only  in  Christian  doctrine  but
also in  the  whole  historical  account  of  how  this  came  to  be
revealed to the  world. The Church  holds that Christian
doctrine alone does not contain the  seed of  a  redemption
which  through faith  can  take  root  and  spring  up  afresh  in
every  soul  in  every  age  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  holds  that  once
and  by  one  act,  which  belongs  not  to  earthly  but  to divine
history,  the  work  of  redemption  was  accomplished ;  and  thati
its  benefits  are  to  be  obtained,  not  indeed  without  the  living!
appropriation  of the doctrine, yet also not  by  this  aloneJ
but  only  by  this  in  conjunction  with  faith  in Christ  as the]
mediator  of  future  generations. The  moral  doctrines  of  Chris-
tianity have  encountered  no  other  hostility  than  that  which!
wickedness  and  folly  have  always  opposed  to  all  religion,  and|
the  best  civilisation  of  the  modern  world  is  built  upon  these
doctrines,  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously  or  against  itii|
will. But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  demand  that  the  strength-^

THE  KELIGIOUS  LIFE.  477

ening  and  blessing  which  they  give  should  be  earned  by  faith
in  the  Bible  history,  has  met  with  a  growing  opposition
which  has  called  down  upon  the  present  age  the  reproach
of  increasing  irreligiousness.

The  most  essential  point,  the  recognition  of  providential
foresight  as  an  historical  fact,  is  regarded  by  this  civilisation
not  with  aversion  but  rather  as  answering  a  secret  need.
Only  one-sided  habituation  to  observation  of  Nature  could
prefer  the  thought  of  a  cosmic  order  established  once  for  all,
and  according  to  the  unchanging  conditions  of  which  nothing
is  possible  except  a  brief  and  continually  repeated  cycle  of
phaenomena,  to  the  idea  of  a  cosmic  history,  at  the  different
stages  of  which  God  does  not  work  uniformly  but  is  con-
stantly adding  to  the  world  in  genuine  action,  something  new,
something  which  was  not  there  before.  A  simple  natural
religious  temper  will  be  inclined  to  conceal  from  itself  the
difficulties  which  this  idea  of  a  history  of  the  world  involves,
or  to  hope  for  a  subsequent  solution  of  them.  If  it  is  once
admitted  that  in  the  changing  destinies  of  mankind  there  is
a  temporal  succession  of  things  which  cannot  be  regarded  as
the  mere  repetition  of  previous  cycles,  it  is  hardly  likely  that
serious  opposition  will  be  offered  to  the  demand  that  the
relation  of  God  to  the  world  should  be  conceived  as  one
which  changes  as  history  goes  on — that  men  should  believe
God  to  be  nearer  to  the  world  at  some  periods  of  history
than  at  others,  and  His  influence  to  have  been  imparted  in  a
manner  wholly  unique  in  some  periods  of  which  the  temporal
limits  are  clearly  defined.  But  readiness  to  admit  this  much
is  not  held  to  be  enough;  and  when  orthodoxy  demands
either  the  acceptance  of  the  whole  content  of  the  Biblical
history,  or  the  recognition  of  those  doctrines  which  the
dogmatic  theology  of  the  Church  has  connected  with  them,  a

I  difference  begins  which  it  is  impossible  to  adjust.
The  sacred  writings  will  always  captivate  men's  minds  by
their  majesty  of  content  and  their  grand  beauty  of  expression,
the  simplicity  of  which  is  more  effective  than  any  conscious
art. But  that  which  primarily  hinders  us  from  taking  them

478

BOOK  Vm. CHAPTEK  IV.

quite  literally  is  not  the  incredibility  of  that  which  they
report,  but  the  figurative  form  of  their  teaching  which  must
be  interpreted  in  order  to  be  understood.  And  then  (since
we  were  bound  to  the  Scriptures  only  by  our  reverence  for
the  doctrine  which  they  teach),  in  the  second  place,  doubts
arise  concerning  the  history  of  those  wonderful  events  the
credibility  of  which  cannot  be  the  same  to  us  as  it  was  to  the
age  from  which  we  have  received  the  account  of  them.  It
was  natural  that  that  age  should  demand  to  see  the  presence
of  God  confirmed  by  signs  and  wonders  which  yet  could  not
have  as  much  significance  for  them  as  they  would  for  us.
For  the  thought  of  an  order  in  Nature  connecting  natural
phsenomena  according  to  universal  laws,  was  alien  to  antiquity,
which  regarded  every  force  that  works  in  Nature  as  being
directly  guided  by  the  end  at  which  it  aims,  and  as  having
the  power  to  realize  that  end.  Hence  miracles  did  not  lie  as
contradictions  outside  the  order  of  Nature,  but  were  actually
the  natural  exercise  of  a  superior  power,  which,  under
unwonted  conditions  of  time  and  space,  made  its  appearance
within  the  sphere  where  lesser  powers  were  used  to  work.
In  this  sense  the  order  of  Nature  was  not  independent  even
as  regarded  the  heathen  gods ;  each  petty  deity  could  violate
that  order;  even  men  had  at  their  command  enchantments
by  which  they  could  alter  its  course ;  and  for  this  very
reason  miracles  could  not  be  received  in  those  times  as  con-
vincing proofs  of  the  presence  and  working  of  the  supreme
and  the  one  true  God.  It  is  only  to  the  modern  conception
of  Nature  that  a  miracle  could  seem  really  miraculous,  for
this  conception  recognises  no  impulse  of  which  the  result  does .
not  follow  necessarily  and  according  to  general  laws,  from  a:
pre-existing  collocation  of  conditions.  At  the  same  time,'
those  who  hold  this  view  of  Nature  are  in  a  position  to  admit
the  general  possibility  of  miracles  in  as  far  as  the  idea!
corresponds  to  a  mental  need,  although  they  may  lack  faith
to  believe  in  them  as  recorded  in  Scripture.  For  to  them  too
the  whole  course  of  Nature  becomes  intelligible  only  by
supposing  the  continual  concourse  of  God,  who  alone  mediates!

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  479

the  action  and  reaction  going  on  between  different  parts  of
the  world.  It  is  only  as  long  as  this  concourse  takes  place
in  similar  ways  that  it  (being  then  a  constant  condition  in
the  course  of  events)  does  not  appear  as  a  condition  of  change ;
and  as  long  as  this  is  so  the  course  of  Nature  seems  to  be  a
self-contained  whole,  that  does  not  need,  nor  experience,  nor
admit,  interference  from  without.  But  any  view  which
admits  a  divine  life  that  is  not  fixed  in  rigid  immutability,
will  also  be  able  to  understand  the  eternal  divine  concourse
as  a  variable  quantity,  the  transforming  influence  of  which
becomes  prominent  at  particular  times,  showing  that  the
course  of  Nature  is  not  independent.  And  this  being  the
case,  the  completely  conditioning  causes  of  miracles  will  be
found  in  God  and  Nature  together,  and  in  that  eternal  action
and  reaction  between  them,  which  is  not  without  governing
rules,  although  perhaps  it  is  not  simply  ordered  according  to
general  laws ;  it  is  this  idea  only,  and  not  the  idea  of  com-
plete fortuitousness  and  arbitrariness,  which  the  mind  frames
of  a  miracle  when  it  would  see  in  it  an  object  of  reverence.
But  the  recognition  of  this  general  thought  does  not  suffice  to
lead  Natural  Science  to  a  recognition  of  the  reality  of  miracles
in  the  form  in  which  religion  generally  demands  it.  So
immeasurably  preponderant  is  the  weight  of  all  experience  in
favour  of  a  steady  development  of  all  natural  occurrences,
each  step  preparing  the  way  for  that  which  succeeds  it,  that
even  this  general  admission  prepares  the  mind  to  believe  only
in  a  noiseless,  ceaseless  working  of  God  in  Nature,  not  in
sudden  interruptions  of  the  established  order  by  occasional
interferences  of  divine  power.  Such  a  belief  could  only  arise
if  the  ideal  significance  of  miracles  in  the  system  of  the
universe  were  sufficiently  clear  and  important  to  cause  us  to
regard  them  as  a  turning-point  in  history,  for  which  the
efficient  forces  of  the  universe  had  always  been  preparing
uuperceived.

And  the  wonderful  events  which  glorify  the  life  of  Christ
in  the  sacred  writings  would  certainly  in  themselves  give  rise
to  this  thought  if  their  physical  reality  were  not  made  dubious

480

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

to  US  partly  by  the  change  in  men's  conception  of  Nature
which  has  Dccurred  since  Christ's  time,  and  partly  by  the  way
in  which  we  take  the  spiritual  meaning  which  the  record  of
these  events  is  intended  to  convey. While  the earth  was
regarded  as  a  flat  disk,  and  the  visible  heaven  above  it  as  the
abode  of  God,  it  was  possible  for  the  ascension  into  heaven  to
appear  to  men's  minds  as  a  real  return  of  the  Divine  to  God ;
but  since  astronomy  has  taught  us  that  the  earth  is  a  sphere
surrounded  by  immeasurable  realms  of  homogeneous  space,  we
fail  to  see  what  intelligible  goal  the  upward  ascent  of  Christ;
could  have. In  an  age  that  could  hardly  distinguish  between
the  sensuous  and  the  supersensuous,  men  might  regard  the
bodily resurrection of the Saviour with  reverence as a
guarantee  of  their  own  immortality ;  but  to  us  this  reanimation
of  the  body  is  not  an  object  of  hope ;  if  it  were  really  to
happen,  it  would  only  secure  to  us  the  continuance  of  this
life  during  the  existence  of  the  body  which  it  animates  ;  what
would  really  give  us  comfort  would  be  some  proof  of  a  con-
tinued life  of  the  spirit  after  its  return  to  that  invisible  world
by  which  the  visible  world  which  we  inhabit  is  mysteriously
surrounded. Eationalism  in  interpreting  these  circumstances,
which  are  described  to  us  as  external  facts,  as  visions  of  those  j
who  describe  them,  has  overlooked  the  point  which  can  herei
give more worth to visions  than  to  actual external  factsJ
Rationalism  supposed  that  out  of  mere  psychological  trains  of]
ideas,  there  arose  in  excited  minds  fancies  due  to  memory  andj
subjective conditions, which had nothing objective corre-1
spending  to  them ;  the  very  thing  that  it  had  to  take  accounlTi
of  was  this  spiritual  world  which  though  unseen  is  every-j
where,  and in which  that which has  no actual  corporeal]
existence  is  present  and  none  the  less  real. Between  thiaj
world  and  the  world  of  sense,  actions  and reactions  might!
take  place  which  are  foreign  to  the  ordinary  course  of  Nature  ;1
and  from  these,  which  are  true,  real,  living  impressions  upon]
the soul  of something divine and actually  present, those
visions  might  arise,  being  apparitions  not  of  the  non-existentj
but  of  something  really  existent,  and  (as  the  direct  inward

Il#

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  481

action  of  the  deity)  not  mediated  by  help  of  the  course  of
physical  Nature,  which  has  no  independent  worth,  or  by  dis-
turbances of  that  course  which  are  incomprehensible  to  us.
The  significance  of  the  resurrection  lies  not  in  this,  that
the  soul  of  the  risen  person  now  as  heretofore  inhabits  a
body  which  is  visible  to  the  eyes  of  men,  but  in  this,  that
without  any  such  mediation,  his  real  living  presence,  and  not
the  mere  remembrance  of  him,  takes  hold  of  men's  souls,  and
appears  to  them  in  a  form  which  has  greater  strength  and
efficacy  of  influence  than  the  restoratioa  of  the  actual  bodily
presence  would  have.

But  to  the  religious  frame  of  mind  from  which  such
attempts  at  explanation  arise,  the  prosecution  of  them  to  any
great  length  is  naturally  repugnant ;  it  seems  impious  to
make  that  the  subject  of  theorizing  ingenuity  which,  when
received  uncritically,  never  fails  to  produce  a  deep  impression,
but  which  critical  analysis  can  never  bring  to  certainty  in
detail.  Such  awe  is  not  aroused  by  the  dogmas  in  which  in
the  course  of  history  the  content  of  Christian  faith  has  come
to  be  expressed.  The  human  mind  will  continually  be  forced
to  renew  its  attempts  to  grasp  and  retain  in  scientific  form
the  truth  which  it  has  believingly  appropriated,  in  order  that
it  may  maintain  this  truth  against  unbelieving  civilisation,  and
that  it  may  satisfy  its  own  cravings  after  unity  and  clearness
of  philosophic  view ;  we  see  this  work  of  human  speculation
in  Dogmatic  Theology,  which  is  respectable  on  account  of  the
earnestness  of  its  efforts  and  the  connection  it  establishes
between  all  earthly  life  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  kingdom  of
heaven  and  the  divine  order  of  the  universe  on  the  other.
Yet  this  dogmatic  theology,  as  being  the  antiquated  ecclesi-
astical philosophy,  is  subject  to  criticism,  as  is  also  every  fresh
attempt  at  a  philosophical  explanation  of  the  universe.  The
content  of  this  dogmatic  system  has  become  alienated  from
modern  civilisation  (which,  owing  to  its  great  advances  in
secular  matters,  has  grown  careless  of  religious  interests),  and
is  frequently  regarded  by  it  as  a  fabric  built  up  out  of
traditions,  having  no  root  in  reality  and  no  significance  for

VOL.  II.  2  H

482  BOOK  vin. chapter  iv.

human  life ;  a  less  hostile  consideration  of  the  matter  would
speedily  show  that,  on  the  contrary,  dogmatic  theology  is
concerned  with  but  few  merely  subtle  inquiries ;  it  deals
principally  with  serious  and  weighty  questions,  which  our
civilisation  may  indeed  seem  to  get  rid  of,  but  to  which  we
are  led  back  by  every  searching  reflection  on  the  destiny  of
man  and  his  relation  to  God.  But  with  equal  plainness  we
may  say  that  dogmatic  theology  has  neither  succeeded  in
giving,  nor  indeed  attempted  to  give,  to  these  questions  any
answer  which  cognition  can  accept  as  satisfactory ;  it  formu-
lates in  its  tenets  the  burning  and  inextinguishable  interest
which  we  take  in  these  great  problems,  and  expresses  without
satisfying  our  craving  for  enlightenment.

It  would  be  a  misinterpretation  of  this  avowal  of  dissatis-
faction to  consider  that  its  cause  is  to  be  found  in  the  demand
for  an  explanation  of  the  possibility  and  process  of  realization
of  something  which  in  itself  surpasses  the  powers  of  human
reason  to  elucidate,  and  to  require  in  place  of  this  pre-
sumptuous demand  the  faith  which  is  lacking ;  for  faith
where  it  exists  does  not  find  that  its  own  content  can  be
embraced  by  dogma.  Faith  does  not  require  explanations,
impossible  to  be  given,  of  how  things  come  about,  but  it
must  require  the  clearest  determination  of  what  it  is  which
dogmatism  presents  as  the  fixed  and  central  truths  towards
which  the  vague  yearnings  of  faith  itself  gravitate.  And  this
is  just  what  is  not  given ;  that  of  which,  as  the  right  and
true,  we  are  fully  conscious  in  the  dim  impulse  of  faith,
almost  always  receives  from  dogmatism  a  mere  figurative
expression,  which,  instead  of  immediately  determining  what
we  believe,  itself  requires  a  fresh  exercise  of  interpretation,
the  admissible  limits  of  which,  again,  can  only  be  fixed  by
that  same  dim  impulse.  When  Christian  theology  calls
Christ  the  Son  of  God,  it  gives  expression  no  doubt  to  the
most  distinctive  article  of  its  belief ;  but  it  does  this  in  a
figure  the  exact  signification  of  which  it  can  by  no  means
precisely  determine ;  what  that  phrase  expresses  and  is  meant
to  express  is  clearer  to  the  believing  soul  without  than  with

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  483

the  dogmatic  determinations  which  have  been  attached  to  it,
for  the  figure  taken  simply  merely  indicates  the  intimate
nature  of  that  relation  between  God  and  Christ  which  is
clear  to  feeling ;  it  contains  no  explanation  as  to  the  mode  of
that  relation,  all  adequate  knowledge  of  which  is  impossible
for  us.  Direct  religious  feeling  meets  the  Church's  teaching
concerning  the  redeeming  power  of  Christ's  mediatorial  death
with  ready  faith,  but  this  faith  is  not  rewarded  by  any  increase
of  knowledge.  For  that  idea  of  a  sacrifice  to  which  dim
emotion  first  betakes  itself,  no  other  idea  is  substituted  which
makes  the  redeeming  power  more  comprehensible  without  at
the  same  time  diminishing  the  value  of  the  mediatorial  death.
We  all  feel  that  evil  has  taken  hold  of  us,  and  that  sin,  like
some  inheritance  inexplicably  entailed,  runs  through  the  whole
race  ;  but  the  thoughts  which  arise  from  this  consciousness,
and  have  not  been  worked  out  to  any  clear  conclusion,
cannot  be  led  to  such  a  conclusion  by  way  of  dogmatism ;
ideas  which  go  so  far  astray  as  belief  in  the  complete
soUdarity  of  mankind,  and  in  the  actual  inheritance  by
the  whole  race  (as  by  legal  representatives)  of  the  sin  of
our  first  ancestor,  cannot  by  reason  of  their  own  obscurity
afford  any  illumination  to  our  minds ;  they  merely  give  an
incisive  statement  of  the  problem  at  which  we  unsuccessfully
labour.

Besides  those  harmonious  and  early-developed  teachings
which  the  Church  adopted  as  part  of  its  confession  of  faith,
men's  speculative  impulse  has  driven  them  to  make  innu-
merable attempts  to  find  an  explanation  of  the  world  which
should  be  in  agreement  with  Christian  doctrine,  but  the  greater

■■divergence  of  these  explanations  from  accepted  teaching  has
prevented their being similarly  accepted. The  Protestant

■ theology  of  our  own  time  is  more  active  in  this  direction  than

it  has  been  for  a  long  period  previously,  believing  on  the  one

hand  that  it  possesses  in  the  results  of  modern  philosophy

new  and  previously  unknown  levers  of  religious  truth,  and  on

^the  other  hand  being  animated  by  a  courage  of  conviction  for

Khe  a<jsurance  of  which  I  do  not  know  the  grounds. The  self-

L

484

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

imposed  limitation  which  led  philosophy  at  the  end  of  the
last  century  to  give  up  all  claim  to  a  knowledge  of  the  super-
sensuous,  caused  the  prominence  of  a  rationalistic  system  of
ethics  which,  since  it  lacked  any  views  concerning  the  place  of
the  moral  world  in  the  plan  of  the  whole,  came  at  last  to  be
without  any  religious  colouring  whatever.  But  our  highest
wisdom  cannot  consist  in  following  general  rules  of  duty
without  caring  in  the  least  what  benefit  may  or  may  not
ultimately  result  from  their  fulfilment ;  we  need  to  be  con-
vinced of  some  intelligible  cosmic  connection  in  which  we  can
trace  the  destiny  of  human  life  and  the  eternal  significance  of
all  moral  effort.  The  suppression  of  this  impulse  to  a  cosmo-
logical  development  of  philosophic  views  has  by  a  natural
process  of  reaction  been  followed  by  its  reappearance  in  a
prominent  form,  and  it  has  now,  as  it  seems  to  me,  far
exceeded  the  limits  within  which  it  could  hope  for  success
and  for  salutary  influence  on  Christian  life.

For  not  only  do  we  doubt  whether  the  methods  of  modem
philosophy  can  make  possible  that  which  has  always  hitherto
been  impossible,  but  we  also  lament  that  dogmatic  investiga-
tions seldom  make  a  conscientious  use  of  even  the  modest
results  which  this  philosophy  has  perhaps  obtained.  Christi-
anity does  not  furnish  any  immediate  revelation  concerning
the  structure  of  the  world ;  the  essence  of  its  ethical  teaching
and  scriptural  sayings  which  only  incidentally  involve  cosmo-
logical  notions,  are  the  sole  materials  which  Christians  can
use  for  making  a  construction  of  the  universe.  But  from
moral  Ideas  the  most  careful  investigation  can  never  develop
anything  more  than  the  universal  conditions  to  which  the
cosmic  construction  must  conform  in  order  to  avoid  coming
into  collision  with  the  Supreme  Principle  of  Good ;  and  only
a  very  undisciplined  fancy  will  imagine  that  it  can  learn
from  this  source  those  definite  concrete  forms  of  the  cosmic
order  by  which  the  conditions  indicated  are  satisfied ;  we
cannot  even  use  these  Ideas  to  carry  on  the  world  of  experi-
ence, which  lies  before  us,  beyond  what  is  actually  given,  or
to  find with any certainty  that  contmuation and comple

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  485

tion  of  it  which  is  hidden  from  our  observation.  Therefore
such  attempts  run  great  risk  of  ceasing  to  ask  what  must  be,
or  even  what  may  be,  and  of  asking  instead  what  it  is  that
would  be  most  delightful  supposing  that  it  were  the  actual
condition  of  things  ;  and  this  matter  is  decided  by  the  pre-
judices of  individual  character,  which  are  insusceptible  of
discipline.  Yet  the  inclination  which  we  here  blame  is  sup-
ported by  a  philosophy  which  expressly  regards  the  meaning
of  things,  their  Ideas,  as  being  (and  that  without  any  limita-
tion) their  active  essence ;  and  which,  in  seeking  out  and
determining  these  Ideas,  requires  no  strict  and  formal  proof,
but  regards  poetic  justice  in  the  coherent  development  of
thought  as  a  sufficient  warranty  of  truth.  This  being  the
case,  the  dogmatic  investigation  of  our  own  time  has,  with
great  expenditure  of  philosophic  profundity,  and  with  little
method  and  much  self-satisfaction,  plunged  into  inquiries
which  the  modern  spirit  of  general  culture  refuses  to  enter
upon  at  all,  not  only  from  a  consciousness  of  its  probable  ill-
success,  but  also  from  fear  lest,  by  presumptuously  insisting
upon  trying  to  know  all  things,  it  should  intrude  upon  those
divine  secrets  which  it  respects.  And  the  divergent  results
of  these  attempts  do  not  promise  unanimity  of  knowledge  on
questions  concerning  which  believing  minds  have  been  always
at  one ;  they  only  give  to  modern  dogmatic  theology  as  a
whole  a  character  of  anarchy  tempered  by  sterility.

For  no  gain  accrues  to  life  from  all  these  attempts  either  to
set  forth  in  detail  by  uncertain  interpretation  of  uncertain  texts
the  whole  story  of  Creation — and  that  after  a  fashion  which  is
mm  in  conflict  with  the  results  of  scientific  investigation  of  Nature
— or  to  make  out  what  will  be  the  end  of  the  world  and  the
exact  nature  of  man's  future  life,  without  taking  into  con-
sideration our  progressive  knowledge  of  the  physical  world,
|iB|which  (though  it  can  indeed  never  solve  such  problems)  may
furnish  our  thoughts  concerning  them  with  a  background
that  sets  limits  to  too  great  extravagances.  And  finally,  we
blame,  as  being  both  unfruitful  and  little  in  conformity  with
the spirit of Christianity, a predilection for speculations

48 S  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  IV.

concerning  the  divine  Trinity  in  Unity,  in  which  many
declare,  to  the  profound  astonishment  of  their  hearers,  that
they  have  found  the  key  to  all  knowledge,  sacred  and  pro-
fane— though  they  have  not  hitherto  done  anything  to  make
men  hope  for  the  fulfilment  of  their  promises.  In  the  living
Christ,  faithful  souls  beheld,  not  indeed  God,  for  Christ  Him-
self said.  The  Father  is  greater  than  I,  but  the  Son  of  God
who  is  one  with  God  in  a  way  that  we  do  not  understand,
and  who  came  into  the  world,  not  because  His  coming  had
from  the  beginning  been  the  necessary  consequence  of  some
natural  law  of  cosmic  order,  but  because  the  love  of  God,
which  is  greater  than  all  the  mechanism  of  necessary  develop-
ment, though  it  need  not  have  sent  Him,  yet  did  send  Him
to  the  world.  To  this  dualism  of  the  Divine  Personality
faith  might  also  add,  as  an  object  of  veneration,  that  Holy
Ghost,  the  Comforter,  whom  Christ  promised  to  send ;  but
neither  had  this  Spirit  appeared  in  the  course  of  history  in
personal  form,  nor  was  there  any  need  to  understand  it  as
other  than  some  divine  activity.  Dogmatic  theology,  with
but  a  weak  foundation  in  passages  of  Holy  Scripture  which
indicate  the  dawn  of  speculation  in  Christian  thought,  has
endeavoured  to  develop  from  such  material  a  Metaphysics  of
the  divine  nature  which  the  further  it  advances  gets  further
away  from  that  to  which  simple  faith  would  cling  as  the
blessing  of  Christianity.

And  yet  it  is  a  natural  need  which  leads  men  to  make
these  attempts.  It  seemed  that  the  divine  revelation  was  not
estimated  at  its  full  value  if  it  were  regarded  as  an  historically
incalculable  addition  to  an  intrinsically  independent  cosmic
order  (the  content  of  the  revelation  being  indeed  at  first  taken
hold  of  by  men's  minds  for  its  own  worth,  without  any  inquiry
as  to  the  process  by  which  this  content  was  made  known) — ■
it  seemed  as  though  this  revelation  must  be  inwoven  both
in  the  past  and  in  the  future  with  the  whole  economy  of  the
universe,  so  that  there  might  be  nothing  in  that  economy
which  was  (as  to  either  the  nature  or  reality  of  its  existence)
independent  of  the  revelation. Thus  it  was  that  the  image

THE  EELIGIOUS  LIFE.  487

of  the  historical  Christ  f;;rew  into  the  thought  of  a  power  that
worked  in  God  before  the  world  began ;  the  same  purpose  of
the  love  of  God  which  was  made  manifest  in  the  historical
act  of  redemption,  came  to  be  regarded  as  having  been  from
the  beginning  that  regulative  will  through  which  things  are
what  they  are.  Now  this  spiritual  need  of  finding  unity  in
the  nature  and  acts  of  God  could  be  satisfied  by  the  belief
that  that  which  moved  God  to  redeem  the  world  should  be
conceived  as  a  thought  which  had  been  from  everlasting,  and
had  not  been  called  into  existence  by  any  temporal  occasion ;
it  was  not  necessary  that  the  unity  thus  reached  should  be
endangered  by  the  impracticable  demand  to  make  two  persons
into  one ;  still  less  was  there  in  the  content  of  faith  itself
any  cogent  reason  for  a  similar  personification  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  On  the  other  hand,  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  secular
speculations  of  philosophy  lead  to  a  trinity  in  the  beginnings,
of  the  cosmos — that  is,  to  laws  according  to  which  things  are,
to  powers  hy  which  they  are,  and  to  ends  for  the  sake  of
which  they  are  what  they  are.  The  recognition  of  this
trinity  is  no  triumph  of  philosophy,  for  it  is  in  reality  a
confession  of  human  incapacity  to  identify  as  one  in  cognition
that  which  according  to  the  demand  of  cognition  itself  must
necessarily  be  one ;  and  for  the  rest,  however  those  three  may
be  conceived,  they  can  never  be  anything  other  than  forms
of  divine  activity  which  are  incapable  of  being  derived  one
from  another.  This  trinity — a  fateful  gift — has  been  offered
by  philosophy  to  theology,  and  has  been  accepted,  although
its  several  members  correspond  neither  with  the  historical
Christ  and  the  promised  Holy  Ghost,  nor  with  the  three
persons  of  the  divine  Trinity  in  Unity  as  confessed  by  the
Church.  Now  it  may  be  that  theology  in  the  narrowest
sense — the  dogmatic  determination  of  our  notions  concerning
^Bthe  nature  of  God — cannot  be  made  complete  without  refer-
ence to  that  philosophic  trinity  of  essentially  different  prin-
ciples ;  but  all  the  assistance  that  philosophy  can  give  will
never  apply  to  more  than  the  first  article  of  our  confession  of
faith ;  Chiistology gains nothing  by  it  in  a  scientific  point

488  BOOK  vin. chapter  iv.

of  view,  and  loses  as  regards  its  significance  for  living  faith.
For  what  faithful  souls  cling  to  is  the  living  Christ,  the
complete  personality  of  the  Saviour,  not  taken  figuratively
or  in  any  symbolic  sense ;  if  this  personality  is  interpreted  as
some  necessary  phase  of  the  Divine  Nature,  as  some  secondary
potentiality  of  the  concept  of  Divinity,  as  an  antithesis
within  the  Deity,  as  a  world-creating  X0709,  our  faith  is  only
disturbed.  For  we  do  not  see  why  we  should  separate  from
God  energies  which  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  as  among
His  attributes,  and  we  cannot  discover  that  any  metaphysical
glory  of  Christ  as  a  superlatively  supernatural  God  of  Nature,
is  greater  than  the  moral  majesty  of  the  Eedeemer.  It  seems
to  us  that  such  speculations  transfer  us  from  the  place  in
which  Christianity  has  set  us,  from  faith  in  the  sole  and
final  reality  of  what  is  good  and  holy,  back  to  the  old  heathen
cosmology  which  regarded  God  as  manifesting  Himself,  not  in
unfathomable  deeds  of  love,  but  in  those  emanations  of  His
being  which  take  place  according  to  natural  laws.  It  seem»
to  us  so ;  for  we  do  not  in  the  least  wish  to  conceal  from  our-
selves, nor  to  withhold  here  our  acknowledgment,  that  the
attempts  which  have  been  made  in  this  direction  have  been
determined  by  the  need  which  men  feel  of  making  the
world  and  all  things  in  it  subordinate  to  the  ethical  plan
of  salvation;  neither  the  Christian  temper  in  which  these
attempts  have  been  undertaken  nor  the  earnestness  with
which  they  have  been  carried  out  seem  to  us  to  admit  of
doubt;  all  we  affirm  is  that  the  impression  produced  on  many
minds  by  the  results  at  which  they  have  arrived  is  the  very
opposite  of  that  at  which  they  aim.  But  we  pass  over  with
silent  contempt  those  essays  which  simply  trifle  with  the
notion  of  trinity  in  unity,  after  the  fashion  of  that  numerical
mysticism  indulged  in  by  the  Pythagoreans  ;  and  which  almost
seem  as  though  they  set  great  value  on  the  Trinity  merely
because  of  its  involving  the  number  three.  It  would  be  just
as  reasonable  to  include  in  our  confession  of  faith  veneration
of  the  prime  numbers,  or  of  square  roots.

§  8.  We  have said  that  these  speculations  were  for  the

1

I

THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFI!.  489

most  part  unfruitful ;  that  we  are  able  to  confine  ourselves  to
this  reproach  is  due  to  the  opposition  which  secular  civilisa-
tion has  for  so  long  offered  to  the  power  of  the  Church.
The  vagaries  of  millenarian  dreamers  have  now  come  to  an
end ;  if  they  were  still  in  fashion,  other  and  more  important
consequences  would  be  entailed  by  the  rococo  of  belief  in  a
devil  and  other  similar  doctrines  to  which  the  dogmatic
renascence  of  our  time  is  inclined  to  return  ;  the  Humanism
which  has  had  a  salutary  and  pervading  influence  on  theology
as  science  has  revived,  and  a  sense  of  practical  justice  received
increased  development,  will,  we  hope,  in  the  future  prevent
speculative  errors  from  being  carried  out  in  practice.  But  this
greater  security  of  personal  faith  is  connected  with  increasing
insecurity  of  the  ecclesiastical  edifice,  the  pulling  down  or
re-establishing  of  which  is  at  present  a  subject  of  dispute.

The  fact  that  their  gods  were  chiefly  important  because  of
their  significance  in  Nature,  prevented  the  heathen  world
from  regarding  the  whole  life  of  man  as  a  continual  service  of
worship  towards  the  divine  splendour  of  these  deities  ;  the
plurality  of  divinities,  to  particular  individuals  among  whom
particular  tribes  attached  themselves,  made  difiicult  the
combination  of  all  mankind  or  even  of  one  nation  in  that
close  communion  which  unites  the  members  of  a  community
drawn  together  by  common  spiritual  interests  ;  where,  in
consequence  of  the  greater  unity  of  mythological  teaching,
this  hindrance  did  not  exist,  still  religious  communion  did
not  exist  independently  beside  political  communion,  but
men's  confession  of  faith  was  itself  national ;  nothing
was  required  beyond  civic  virtue  and  ceremonial  acts,
and  the  national  religion  had  no  power  to  bring  individuals
into  communion  as  the  subjects  of  a  higher  and  spiritual
kingdom ;  in  India,  where  more  than  in  any  other  part  of  the
heathen  world,  religious  feeling  had  entered  most  deeply  into
aU  mental  needs  and  distresses,  the  despair  of  life  at  which
men  arrived  was  no  bond  of  any  community  of  life.  The
Church  is  an  institution  peculiar  to  Christianity.  Disregarding
distinctions  of  nationality,  sex,  rank,  and  education,  it  aims

■ Church

IT'

490  BOOK  Vm. CHAPTER  IV.

at uniting all mankind in  a  service towards God  which
consists  in  the  subjection  of  one's  whole  life  to  Him.

The  Church  began  as  a  free  community,  without  any  other
bond  of  union  than  love  and  a  common  faith ;  like  every
growing  society,  it  developed  forms  of  administration  and  of
internal  intercourse  that  were  binding  on  its  members,  but  it
did  not  claim  any  authority  over  the  rest  of  mankind,
although  even  then  it  felt  itself  raised  above  all  temporal
combinations  of  men  by  the  consciousness  of  being  a  union
entered  into  for  purposes  of  eternal  import.  When  the
Eoman  persecution  of  Christianity  had  given  place  to  recogni*
tion,  there  grew  up  in  the  Church  the  consciousness  of  being
au  institution  to  the  ordinances  of  which  secular  national
life  was  bound  to  conform,  and  departure  from  which  waf»  no
longer  regarded  as  a  step  which  men  might  take  of  their
own  free  choice  but  as  an  act  of  desertion  to  be  judicially
punished.  With  a  still  bolder  flight  it  finally  rose  from
the  position  of  an  earthly  institution  to  the  importance  of
a  cosmic  power  which  not  only  has  given  to  it  on  earth
all  supremacy  over  the  consciences  of  men,  over  the  autho-
rity of  magistrates,  and  over  the  lands  of  the  heathen,  but
which  is  able  also,  through  those  means  of  grace  which  it
alone  administers  and  distributes,  to  reach  beyond  this  life,
and  not  only  teaches  men  how  to  find  or  avoid  the  paths  to
salvation  and  to  damnation,  but  actually  opens  or  shuts  the
entrance  to  these.  Thus  the  Church  became  the  grandest  and
most  noteworthy  constituent  of  that  great  department  of
cosmic  order  which  the  human  mind  has  added  to  the  existing
order  of  physical  Nature.  Even  the  constitution  of  States
depends  upon  objects  of  the  physical  world,  upon  the  land
and  its  boundaries,  the  produce  of  the  soil  and  men's  right  to
it,  and  the  distribution  of  the  wealth  which  is  produced,  and
nowhere  do  its  pretensions  to  power  extend  beyond  the  earth
itself ;  the  Church  alone  binds  the  spirits  of  men  and  fills  the
whole  of  life  with  a  pervading  consciousness  of  its  connection
with  the  other  world.  Hence  it  is  easy  to  comprehend  the
admiration  which  the  dazzling  impression  produced  by  this

is Jl

THE  EELIGIOUS  LIFE.

491

mighty  phcenomenon  ever  calls  forth  afresh  in  receptive
minds,  and  the  longing  which  men  feel  to  be  received  into
the  steady  shelter  of  its  mighty  order,  and  thus  escape  the
fragmentariness  of  a  life  which  pursues  its  ends  with  vacillat-
ing purpose.

But  the  more  completely  the  plan  of  any  organization
corresponds  to  an  ideal,  the  more  injurious  is  the  effect
which  this  organization  has  if  it  is  forced  upon  any  life  as  a
form  that  must  be  complied  with,  when  that  life  is  not
adapted  to  realize  it  voluntarily.  The  most  fatal  error  of
human  efforts  consists  in  prematurely  attempting  to  realize
ectyjpes  of  perfection  in  cases  where  what  ought  to  be  con-
sidered is  the  organization  of  means  for  approaching  in  practice
as  near  to  perfection  as  circumstances  will  allow.  Such  an
error  was  involved  in  the  constitution  of  the  Church  ;  it
sought  to  reach  in  this  life  a  condition  which  is  only  possible
in  another  life,  and  suppressed  the  free  activity  of  powers
which  cannot  reach  this  goal  here  below  though  they  may
prepare  the  way  for  it.  It  believed  that  it  possessed  complete
truth,  and  endeavoured  to  hinder  any  search  for  truth;  and
believing  itself  to  be  in  enjoyment  of  this  possession,  it  under-
took cares  which  belong  only  to  providence  itself  ;  it  interfered,
commanding  and  forbidding,  with  the  general  secular  concerns
of  mankind  and  the  consciences  of  individuals,  as  though  it
had  been  the  immediate  plenipotentiary  of  God  and  the
guardian  of  those  laws  according  to  which  eternal  wisdom
chose  to  regulate  mundane  affairs ;  it  assumed  a  right  of
punishing  and  persecuting  all  who  resisted  any  part  of  the
extensive  ramifications  of  its  doctrine  and  its  regulations,  and
all  this  universal  dominion  which  it  arrogated  in  the  name  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  it  could  only  carry  on  by  means  of  human
personages  whose  incurable  frailties  were  in  innumerable
particulars  in  contradiction  with  the  sacredness  of  their  ofl&ce.
It  is  the  spirit  of  orientalism  which  culminates  in  this
colossal  attempt  not  only  to  teach  but  also  to  found  and
establish  a  cosmic  order,  and  to  assign  to  human  life,  with
all  its  multifarious  interests,  a  place  in that order. But

492  BOOK  VTIL CHAPTER  IV.

as  it  was  the  West  and  not  tlie  East  which  reached  this
highest  summit  of  religious  cosmology,  so  from  the  time  when
it  was  attained  all  the  powers  of  Western  civilisation  have
been  actively  engaged  in  an  unceasing  struggle  against  this
vision  of  an  earthly  anticipation  of  divine  order,  which  at  a
distance  promises  happiness  but  disappoints  those  who  have
drawn  near.

The  Protestant  mode  of  thought  has  given  up  the  cosmical
significance  of  the  Church  ;  according  to  it,  the  visible  Church
at  least  is  once  again  regarded  as  a  mundane  institution  of
which  the  business  is  to  minister  to  the  religious  life  of  man.
But  this  being  so,  the  course  of  events  has  brought  the
Church  into  a  connection  with  the  State  which  abounds  in
anomalies  that  are  difficult  to  remove,  and  that  have  caused
her  members  to  withdraw  their  sympathy  from  her  in  increas-
ing measure.  The  Eoman  Catholic  Church,  having  one
supreme  head,  an  established  doctrine,  and  extremely  homo-
geneous forms  of  worship,  is  spread  abroad  among  the  nations,
and  may  be  regarded  by  those  who  belong  to  it  as  a  great
objective  and  independent  organization.  If  Protestant  Chris-
tianity had  been  able  to  maintain  a  similar  unity  of  doctrine,
of  worship,  and  of  Church  government,  the  various  national
Churches  into  which  it  has  split  up  would  be  less  prejudicial
to  the  vigour  of  religious  feeling ;  they  would  appear  as  the
locally  diverse  secular  organizations  which  guard  sanctities
that  are  everywhere  equally  hallowed.  And  in  fact  this  is
the  part  which  the  secular  power  professes  to  assume  in
religious  matters ;  but  the  unity  to  which  we  have  referred
never  existed  in  any  completeness.  Hence  although  the  times
will  not  return  in  which  governments  could  forbid  their
subjects  to  make  profession  of  any  religion  or  to  change  their
religion,  yet  there  is  still  much  room  in  the  interpretation  of
the  established  faith  for  the  exercise  of  political  power,  and  of
the  favour  capriciously  shown  to  divergent  points  of  view
between  which  Protestant  freedom  permits  a  choice.  The
absence  of  uniform  doctrine ;  men's  feeling  that  its  place  and
name  are  taken  by  the  subjective  convictions  of  individual ji

THE  EELIGIOUS  LIFE.  493

ecclesiastics ;  a  perception  that  the  character  of  these  convic-
tions changes  considerably  within  brief  periods;  the  not  always
just  yet  still  not  always  unjust  suspicion  that  these  changes
are  to  some  extent  influenced  by  the  pressure  of  political
motives — all  these  circumstances  cause  the  Church  to  be
regarded  as  a  political  institution,  the  pressure  of  which
arouses  aversion,  because  it  intrudes  into  a  region  in  which
obedience  to  it  ought  not  to  come  into  conflict  with  men's
spiritual  convictions.

We  cannot  prophesy  what  the  future  will  be,  we  can  only
prepare  for  it.  It  is  not  to  be  hoped  nor  is  it  to  be  wished
that  the  Protestant  freedom  of  religious  conviction  and  investi-
gation should  be  suppressed  or  voluntarily  surrendered  ;  it  is
to  be  hoped  and  wished  that  dogmatic  theology,  becoming  less
confident  in  its  assurance  of  knowledge,  should  diminish  the
number  of  arbitrary  interpretations  of  things  which  do  not
admit  of  interpretation ;  and  should  by  greater  unanimity  in
matters  that  are  essential,  and  by  abandoning  useless  disputes,
strengthen  in  the  members  of  its  communion  a  sense  of  trust
in  Christian  faith  ;  it  is  to  be  hoped  and  wished  that  thought-
ful sensitiveness  of  conscience  in  treating  all  the  concerns  of
life  (that  most  wholesome  fruit  which  living  Christianity  has
produced  in  many  souls)  should  be  recognised  as  greater  than
the  temper  of  mind  which,  turning  away  from  all  that  is  best
and  fairest  in  modern  secular  civilisation,  affects  matters  that
are  inscrutable  and  useless,  and  archaisms  which  offend  taste
without  strengthening  faith  ;  finally,  it  is  to  be  hoped  and
wished  that  a  greater  share  in  the  management  of  Church
matters  should  be  given  to  the  laity,  and  that  thus  they  should
regain  that  interest  in  these  matters  which  they  have  lost
tlirough  being  so  much  excluded  from  them.  But  though  it
is  certain  that  among  the  things  most  to  be  desired  in  the
future  we  must  reckon  the  continued  existence  of  the  Church
as  an  objective  reality  in  which  the  religious  life  of  the
individual  issues,  finding  therein  both  a  guarantee  that  its
efforts  are  well  directed,  and  spiritual  comfort  and  edification ;
3"et  still  if  those  changes  which  we  have  indicated  as  desirable

494

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  17.

are  not  carried  out,  we  sliould  hold  that  the  renewed  attempt
to  maintain  the  external  integrity  of  the  Church,  while  it
lacked  the  internal  conditions  of  truth,  would  be  less  salutary
than  its  ruin — a  ruin  which  our  opponents  point  out  to  us  as
an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  Protestant  principle.  It  is
certain  that  the  time  immediately  succeeding  such  a  catas-
trophe would  be  neither  desirable  nor  agreeable ;  but  we  may
confidently  hope  that  not  only  would  living  religion  grow  when
relieved  from  conflict  with  unsuitable  external  ordinances,  but
that  also  the  ineradicable  need  which  men  feel  of  not  standing
alone  in  religion  and  of  having  their  faith  recognised,  would
lead  to  the  voluntary  establishment  of  great  ecclesiastical
communities  that  would  be  free  from  impracticable  claims  to
authority  over  men  not  belonging  to  theuu

CHAPTEE V.

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.

The  Family,  and  Tribal  States — The  Kingdoms  of  tlie  East — Paternal  Despotism
— The  Political  Constructions  of  the  Greeks — Civic  Life  and  Law  in  Rome
— Political  Life  and  Society  in  the  Middle  Ages — The  Autonomy  of  Society
— National  and  Historical  Law — Practicable  and  Impracticable  Postulates  •.
Duty  of  Society  as  regards  its  Members  ;  State  and  Society  ;  Constitutional
Government ;  Socialism  ;  luternatioual  Relations.

I.  rilHE  Family,  as  being  most  directly  founded  upon
-L  natural  relations,  has  always  been  regarded  as  the
indispensable  basis  of  Society,  and  often  as  tlie  root  from
which  this  has  grown ;  and  its  constitution  has  always  furnished
the  model  to  be  imitated  by  all  social  order.  Unless  ennobled
by  the  civilising  influences  of  a  life  rich  in  manifold  interests,
natural  family  relations  in  themselves  and  exclusive  regard
for  them,  have  not  produced  either  "  tlie  white  flower  of  a
[blameless  life,"  or  social  arrangements  conducive  to  progress,
or  just  towards  the  just  claims  of  individual  human  beings.
And  this  is  not  surprising ;  for  Nature  does  indeed  lead  us  to
form  connections  which,  understood  in  a  right  sense  and  used
in  a  right  spirit,  afford  abundant  occasion  for  the  development
of  moral  beauty,  but  we  cannot  have  the  right  understanding
or  the  right  spirit  except  as  the  result  of  many-sided  reflec-
tion to  which  we  are  forced  by  the  multiplicity  of  the  tasks
and  conflicts  of  life.

The  world,  with  all  those  complicated  relations  of  existence
produced  by  the  historical  course  of  human  civilisation,  is  now
spread  before  us  as  an  immeasurable  field  in  which  there  lie
concealed  a  thousand  sources  of  happiness  and  of  evil ;  to  go
Wk  out  together  into  this  dim  distance  (into  which  our  anticipa-
tory dreams  haye  long  ago  ventured)  purposing  to  share  each
other's  joy  and  sorrow,  and  with  the  hope  that  agreement  in
estimating  that  which  the  future  may  bring  will  strengthen

11

49S

496  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

mutual  fidelity — such  a  resolution  (when  such  it  is  that  leads
to  the  establishment  of  family  relationships)  does  undoubtedly
ennoble  the  natural  impulse  from  which  it  springs.  On
the  other  hand,  the  poorer  life  is,  and  the  more  monotonous
men's  anticipation  of  the  future,  the  less  worthy  will  family
happiness  be,  and  the  less  removed  from  that  which  Nature
affords  even  to  the  beasts ;  and  the  more  plainly  will  there
appear  those  immoral  results,  of  which  (in  barbarous  minds)
natural  relations  are  actually  the  occasion.  For  the  superiority
of  the  man's  strength  over  the  woman's  need  of  help,  and  of
the  fully  developed  vigour  of  adults  over  the  tenderness  of
childhood,  are  indications  of  Nature  which  have  been  always
understood  and  followed  by  the  barbarous  men  of  uncivilised
times.  And  the  less  the  security  of  life  and  the  activity  of
trade,  the  more  does  the  woman,  who  is  dependent  and  obliged
to  seek  the  protection  of  the  man,  have  to  do  for  the  support
of  the  family,  and  so  there  arises  polygamy,  not  as  the  result
of  a  direct  indication  of  Nature,  but  as  a  proximate  con-
sequence  of  natural  relations ;  and  polygamy  entails  a  general
degradation  of  women,  degrees  of  importance  among  the  wives
of  one  man,  and  differences  in  the  hereditary  rights  which
descend  to  their  children.  The  relation  between  parents  and
children  is  in  the  same  way  deformed  by  this  incapacity  of
ennobling  natural  bonds.  That  profound  secret  of  cosmic
order  by  which  each  generation  of  men  springs  from  that
which  preceded  it,  and  by  which  parents  are  endowed  with
the  wonderful  power  of  bringing  into  the  world  immortal
souls  like  themselves,  appears  to  the  untutored  mind  to  be
nothing  but  a  most  commonplace  example  of  causation,  and  it
seems  to  it  that  all  the  power  which  a  maker  has  over  the
work  of  his  own  hands  belongs  as  a  matter  of  course  to  parents
— or  rather  to  the  father,  since  maternal  rights  were  very
early  ignored.  This  paternal  power  had  as  regarded  the  child
a  right  of  life  and  death  just  as  unconditional  as  is  the  right
of  a  possessor  to  dispose  of  his  lifeless  chattels ;  it  knew  no
distinction  between  immature  youth  and  the  dawning  of
manly  independence ;  it  was  without  respect  for  the  ripening

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  497

individuality  of  human  souls,  and  made  no  attempt  to  renew
the  bonds  of  relationship  in  a  spiritual  sense,  by  learning  to
enter  into  fresh  views  of  life,  but  was  ever  harking  back  upon
one  past  fact — the  fact  of  physical  generation.  This  paternal
power  was  the  direct  result  of  straining  to  the  utmost  limit
those  natural  relations  upon  which  the  family  is  founded  ;  we
trace  it  clearly  in  the  beginnings  of  every  civilisation,  and  see
that  it  disappears  from  practice  in  proportion  as  the  growing
complexity  of  human  relations  leads  to  a  more  refined  estima-
tion of  the  rights  of  individual  men.

Even  apart  from  such  crude  misinterpretations  family  life
does  not  teach  social  morality.  Special  and  unique  relations
bind  the  members  of  a  family  together  by  feelings  which  do
not  flow  from  general  duties  of  men  towards  their  fellows ;
these  feelings  do  indeed  incidentally  enrich  life  with  a
passionate  intensity  of  affection,  which  is  no  doubt  an
element  of  the  best  human  happiness,  but  so  far  from
illuminating  men's  consciousness  of  general  moral  duties,  they
only  obscure  it.  Through  forgiving  lenity  and  precautionary
discipline  they  hinder  justice  ;  in  the  education  of  children
they  often  abridge  freedom  which  should  be  permitted,  and
permit  them  much  to  which  they  have  no  claim ;  even  where
their  demands  and  permissions  agree  with  the  general  com-
mands of  morality,  there  is  in  the  mixture  of  piety  and  love
which  prompts  them  a  combination alien  to  the  obligatory

i power  of  moral  laws.  For  what  we  do  from  piety,  that  is  from
a  devout,  feeling,  which  is  not  clearly  conscious  of  the  grounds
and  limits  of  reciprocal  duties,  seems  to  us  (being  indeed,  as
it  is,  only  the  result  of  our  temper  of  mind)  as  the  mere
efflux  of  our  own  devout  individual  character;  and  even
where  all  vanity  of  self-exaltation  is  absent,  it  appears  to  be
something  which  is  by  no  means  necessarily  present  in  the
I  ■  world,  and  in  fact  would  not  be  so  if  it  were  not  for  our
good  disposition ;  we  by  no  means  think  of  it  as something

I  which  others  have a  right to receive  from  us,  which  right
would  be  eternally  valid  even  though  no  one  should  regard
it. Every  one  acknowledges  the  advantage  of  this  founda-
VOL.  II.  2  I

498  BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  V.

tion  of  piety  in  the  domestic  life  of  families,  but  public
morality  is  not  based  upon  it.  A  man  only  comprehends
what  he  owes  to  his  fellows  when  he  comes  into  contact
with  those  who  are  nothing  to  him ;  it  is  only  when  all
the  claims  to  consideration,  friendship,  love,  and  reverence
founded  upon  those  special  natural  conditions  have  fallen
awaj',  that  general  duties  and  their  necessary  general  motives
become  clear.  Hence  as  long  as  the  social  conditions  of  a
growing  nation  are  regulated  after  the  pattern  of  family
relations,  we  do  indeed  find  many  beautiful  and  poetic  traits
of  character,  but  scarcely  any  advance  towards  justice — rather,
on  the  contrary,  many  traces  of  its  opposite.  For  instance,
it  is  quite  common  to  find  in  early  civilisation,  even  among
people  of  otherwise  mUd  temperament,  extreme  harshness  in
the  punishment  of  crime ;  without  weighing  the  degrees  of
heinousness  in  different  offences,  and  still  more  without  taking
into  consideration  those  extenuating  circumstances  which
lessen  guilt  in  particular  cases,  the  piety  of  national  morality,
when  once  wounded,  proceeds  with  indiscriminating  piti-
lessness.  This  is  quite  natural  to  a  temper  which  ia
accustomed  to  be  guided  in  its  demands  not  by  recognised
rights  of  others,  but  only  by  its  own  general  feeling,  and
which  therefore  when  it  is  offended  is  conscious  of  nothing
but  the  offence  to  itself,  and  in  unconditionally  repulsing  the
insult  is  not  moderated  by  any  consideration  of  different
circumstances.

When  a  numerous  people  arises  from  the  multiplication
of  families,  the  feeling  of  being  bound  together  by  ties  of
kindred  disappears,  and  is  replaced  by  the  feeling  of  a  com-
munity founded  on  similarity  of  language,  custom,  and
thought.  The  more  self  -  centred  and  exclusive  any  such
people,  starting  from  a  basis  of  very  special  conditions,  can
make  its  life,  the  further  will  its  condition  be  from  cor-
responding to  the  ideal  of  human  society.  To  aesthetic
feeling  it  may  seem  that  in  comparison  with  the  vacillating
half-heartedness  so  abundantly  produced  by  every  complex
civilisation,  that  unwavering  stability  of  national  character  is

POLinCAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  499

mucli  to  be  preferred  which  is  easily  and  homogeneously
developed  in  all  individuals  when  the  whole  circumstances  of
their  life  are  fixed  and  never  subjected  to  doubt;  but  this
advantage  is  not  in  itself  to  be  reckoned  higher  than  the
beauty  which  belongs  to  some  species  of  animals,  and  like-
wise always  reappears  under  certain  conditions.  There  is
in  it  no  germ  of  progress ;  its  morality,  which  has  only  grown
up  through  custom,  has  not  the  flexibility  which  can  only  be
given  by  general  principles ;  it  presses  upon  individuals  with
the  force  of  rigid  prejudice,  and  condemns  all  those  indi-
vidual impulses  running  counter  to  the  narrow-mindedness  of
tradition,  which  now  and  then  arise  from  the  inextinguishable
diversities  of  human  nature.  Hence  all  such  thoroughly
national  civilisations  of  past  times  are  characterized  by  un-
intelligent intolerance,  and  this  only  disappears  when,  having
been  forced  into  contact  with  the  morality  of  other  nations,
men's  illusion  as  to  the  universal  validity  of  their  own
maxims  is  destroyed,  and  they  are  constrained  to  learn  in
their  most  comprehensive  form  those  universal  moral  obliga-
tions without  the  recognition  of  which  no  human  society  can
subsist.

It  was  by  nomad  tribes,  whose  unity  depends  predomi-
nantly upon  the  remembrance  of  their  past  history,  that
the  bond  of  consanguinity  was  held  in  highest  esteem ;  and
in  the  early  ages  it  often  happened  that  when  they  changed
their  nomad  habits  for  a  stationary  life,  this  fact  had  a  great
influence  upon  the  political  arrangements  which  sprang  from
their  connection  with  the  soil  which  was  to  be  henceforth
■khe  permanent  object  of  their  activity.  The  different  tribes
distributed  conquered  and  unowned  land  among  fathers  of
families  and  heads  of  houses,  and  sought  by  many  ingenuities
of  legislation  to  make  this  distribution  permanent;  in  so
doing  they  gave  to  the  constitution  of  the  State  a  distinct
genealogical  stamp,  assimilating  it  even  in  reference  to  its
physical  basis  to  the  internal  order  of  a  family  sprung  from
ne  ancestor.  When  they  made  such  attempts  they  had  little
nowledge  of  the  real tasks  of  life,  and  did  not  foresee  that

500

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

the  new  connections  with  territorial  possessions,  into  which
they  were  entering,  were  at  variance  with  the  sentiments  and
plans  by  which  they  were  still  swayed.  While  the  Hebrews
were  yet  wandering  shepherds,  they  regarded  the  preservation
of  their  race  as  the  most  sacred  duty,  and  believed  that  their
God  had  promised  to  them,  the  chosen  people,  the  multiplica-
tion of  their  seed  as  His  primary  blessing.  In  fact,  if  the
historic  life  of  wandering  tribes  were  not  carried  on  in  the
ever  -  renewed  traditions  of  never  -  failing  generations,  such
tribes  would  leave  behind  no  signs  of  their  existence  and
activity,  for  they  produce  nothing  that  is  physically  durable ;
they  would  vanish  from  the  earth  and  from  reality  altogether,
leaving  no  trace  behind,  and  would  be  as  though  they  had
never  been.  The  Greeks  as  well  as  the  Hebrews  were  not
without  a  longing  to  live  for  ever  in  their  descendants ;  but
history  did  not  afford  them  any  such  uninterrupted  retrospec-
tive view  of  their  ancestors.  And  yet  when  the  Dorians
founded  the  kingdom  of  Sparta,  they  seemed  just  as  eagerly
anxious  to  establish  by  artificial  regulation  of  property  an
Immutable  complement  of  families  of  equal  fortune,  by  which
the  Spartan  nation  should  be  represented  through  infinite
future  ages.  Both  the  Greek  and  the  Semitic  races  sought
to  strengthen  their  national  fabric  by  hindering  free  self-
determination  in  various  ways,  and  to  secure  the  continued
existence  of  every  family  even  by  the  help  of  legal  fictions  ;
and  thus  both  greatly  retarded  their  own  social  development,
and  their  political  constructions  were  eventually  swept  away
by  the  natural  current  of  events.  For  stationary  life  brings
men  into  such  manifold  contact  with  the  nature  of  things,
and  awakens  in  them  such  strong  ideas  of  the  rights  which
accrue  to  them  from  the  activity  which  they  expend  upon
objects,  that  any  family  morality  which  does  not  recognise
the  independence  founded  upon  such  personal  rights  is  sure
to  be  at  last  broken  through ;  and  Nature  itself  forbids  that
the  number  of  families  should  always  continue  the  same ;
some  families  multiplying  greatly  while  others  become  extinct,
laws  which  aim  at the  maintenance of  family  interests  are

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  501

likely  to  promote  the  advent  of  intolerable  extremes  of  wealth
and  poverty.

A  strong  feeling  of  unity  animated  the  tribes  whose  mem-
bers were  bound  together  by  ties  of  blood ;  this  feeling  ceased
to  be  possible  when  need  and  the  spirit  of  adventure  had
caused  nations  to  attack  one  another,  and  through  the  sub-
jection of  many  by  one,  had  formed  communities  which  indeed
hardly  deserve  to  be  called  communities,  and  stiU  less  states,
but  were  simply  kingdoms.  For  it  was  only  the  authority  of
government  and  not  a  desire  on  the  part  of  individuals  for
such  association  that  held  together  these  political  conglomerates
which  were  produced  in  greatest  number,  though  not  exclu-
sively, by  the  East.  That  a  victorious  tribe  should  regard
the  vanquished  as  destitute  of  rights  and  should  arbitrarily
dispose  of  their  lives,  is  a  thing  that  the  general  characteristics
of  human  nature  make  easily  intelligible  ;  and  from  a  con-
sideration of  actual  circumstances  and  of  the  better  aspects  of
that  nature,  we  can  also  understand  how  it  was  that  what
befell  the  conquered  was  not  unmitigated  slavery,  but  that
the  details  of  their  life  were  left  to  be  determined  by  their
own  codes  of  morality,  absolute  submission  being  required  in
only  a  few  particulars.  But  that  within  the  dominant  tribe
there  could  be  developed  the  authority  of  one  individual  ruler
is  a  fact  which  can  be  explained  only  by  the  co-operation  of
many  conditions.  In  time  of  peace  patriarchal  authority
light  be  established  in  a  tribe,  and  the  leader  of  successful
expeditions  might  win  ardent  attachment ;  the  exaltation  of
jihe  authority  thus  obtained  to  sovereign  majesty  seems  to  be
lade  permanently  possible  only  by  the  transition  to  stationary
ife,  and  to  be  facilitated  by  the  subjection  of  alien  communi-
'ties.  For  however  slight  political  insight  may  be  in  other
respects,  the  claim  of  sovereignty  over  wide  territories,  the
inhabitants  of  which  differ  in  their  mode  of  life,  must  teach
that  some  system  of  order  and  administration  is  necessary ;
care  for  the  general  security  recommends  that  in  the  govern-
ment of  conquered  races  there  should  be  no  divided  mind ;
and  finally,  the  greater  complexity of  conditions makes it

502  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

possible  for  the  ruler  to  withdraw  from  daily  intercourse  into
exalted  unapproachableness.  This  last  circumstance  seems
always  to  have  been  serviceable  to  oriental  governments  in
establishing  and  exalting  men's  reverence  for  their  rulers,  and
impressing  upon  the  minds  both  of  the  dominant  race  and  also
(and  with  less  difficulty)  of  the  conquered  that  this  sovereignty
of  one  over  all  was  an  irrevocable  decree  of  Nature.  Obedi-
ence of  the  multitude  towards  a  power  to  which  it  feels
bound  by  ties  neither  of  morality  nor  of  affection,  and  which
at  the  same  time  would  be  incapable  of  opposing  any  adequate
physical  resistance  to  the  united  will  of  all  its  individual
subjects,  rests  chiefly  upon  the  uncertainty  which  each  indivi-
dual feels  as  to  the  sentiments  and  interests  of  the  rest.
There  have  been  but  few  governments  which  could  have
outlasted  the  moment  (if  it  had  ever  come)  of  a  general
revelation  of  the  secrets  of  all  hearts ;  men  would  have  seen
how  little  the  law  corresponded  with  the  real  will  of  all ;  and
with  such  a  discovery  there  would  have  been  a  general  revolt
of  will  against  it.  But  such  knowledge  of  a  possibly  existent
unanimity  could  only  be  in  very  simple  conditions  of  society,
where  the  circumstances  of  all  are  thoroughly  homogeneous,
or  where  there  are  great  facilities  for  the  exchange  of  thought,
and  a  highly  developed  public  opinion.  Yet  in  comparatively
recent  times  the  leaders  of  nomad  nations  have  been  able  to
put  the  world  in  dread,  thanks  to  the  enthusiastic  and  un-
conditional obedience  of  their  followers ;  the  will  of  the
leaders  being  nothing  more  than  the  concentrated  and  unified
expression  of  desires  which  they  both  found  pre-existing  and
also  helped  to  intensify  in  their  uncivilised  and  hardy  tribes ;
but  nations  at  this  stage  of  civilisation  universally  reject
despotism  in  times  of  peace.  Where  such  unanimity  has
become  a  thing  of  the  past,  and  community  of  public  opinion  |
has  not  yet  arisen,  the  ambition  of  rulers  derives  its  strength
from  the  paralysing  uncertainty  of  each  man  concerning  the
views  of  others.  For  submission  to  an  express  law  addressed
to  all,  must  ever  promise  most  security  to  him  who  does  not
know  (because  they  do  not  manifest  themselves)  those  counter-

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  503

forces  in  the  society  vvhicli  are  able  and  willing  to  offer
resistance — who  can  never  know  what  interests  beyond  his
own  intellectual  horizon  may  alter  the  sentiments  of  men
whom  otherwise  he  would  naturally  conclude  to  be  like-
minded  with  himself — and  who  finally,  if  he  knew  all  this,
would  still  not  be  able  to  call  into  combined  action  at  the
right  moment  those  forces  which  he  knows  to  exist.  In  this
lies  the  great  superiority  which  any  established  order,  what-
ever it  may  be,  generally  has  over  all  attempts  at  innovation
— the  certain  evil,  to  which  men  have  learnt  to  accommodate
themselves,  is  preferred  to  the  uncertain,  of  which  they
cannot  see  all  the  bearings.

The  sentiments  cherished  towards  Asiatic  despots  by  their
subjects  could  hardly  have  been  other  than  these.  They
were  reinforced  only  by  the  strength  of  habit,  which  confirmed
patience  in  the  one  case  and  confidence  in  the  other,  causing
him  who  was  ruled  to  regard  being  ruled  as  a  fate  which
could  not  be  even  thought  away,  and  him  who  ruled  to
consider  that  he  had  a  natural  right  to  rule.  The  material
with  which  this  framework  of  society  was  filled  in,  differed
according  to  the  temperament  of  nations  and  of  their  gover-
nors. In  the  East  the  giddy  height  to  which  the  position  of
ruler  had  been  raised  brought  to  powerful  minds  little  more
than  dreams  of  universal  sovereignty  which  did  not  lead  to
the  purposive  accomplishment  of  any  social  organization,  but
yet,  with  unconscious  historic  efficacy,  enlarged  the  intellectual
horizon  of  the  nations  and  the  bonds  between  them,  and
aroused  in  men  a  general  idea  of  vast  and  comprehensive
order.  And  since  these  dreams  could  only  be  carried  out  by
means  of  the  strength  of  subjects,  the  resources  of  subjects
had  to  be  spared,  and  protected  by  a  regular  administration ;
such  administration  could  be  carried  out  in  detail  only  by
the  conquered  nations  themselves,  since  they  alone  were
acquainted  with  their  own  circumstances,  and  for  this  reason
despots  left  national  institutions  uninterfered  with  for  the
most  part,  only  reserving  to  themselves  the  power  of  disposing
absolutely  of the resources produced by  means of these.

504  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

Hence  the  fall  of  kingdoms  and  the  transference  of  dominion
to  other  tribes  altered  bat  little  the  general  features  of
society ;  it  was  only  organized  within  limited  circles,  not
being  to  any  extent  systematized  as  a  whole.

The  ancient  political  communities  of  China  and  of  the
American  Indians  deserve  the  name  of  states  much  more
than  these  Asiatic  kingdoms ;  in  them,  in  place  of  empty
arbitrariness,  we  find  the  thought  of  an  ordered  administration
of  human  affairs  which  the  ruler  is  empowered  to  carry  out.3
Asiatic  despotism  left  the  life  of  the  people  to  its  own  luck ;
it  ruled  indeed,  but  did  not  govern ;  but  China,  Mexico,  and
Peru  lacked  neither  an  administration  regulated  in  detail,  nor
generally  received  laws  and  traditions  which  sought  to  bring
the  tenor  of  individual  life  into  harmony  with  the  well-
being  of  the  whole ;  the  rights  and  duties  of  subjects  and
morality  and  education  were  determined  with  provident
wisdom  and  sometimes  with  much  refinement  of  feeling,  and
connected  with  rules  founded  at  the  same  time  upon  natural
equity  and  judicious  policy.  Peru  especially  had  in  many
respects  realized  the  Platonic  ideal  of  a  state,  though  pre-
senting that  interesting  superabundance  of  characteristic
practical  arrangements  which  always  distinguishes  social
institutions  that  have  resulted  from  actual  circumstances  as
compared  with  logical  deductions  from  general  principles.
Yet  none  of  these  states  were  promotive  of  progress  for  long
China  has  retained  its  isolation  up  to  the  present  time,  Mexico
was  on  the  verge  of  dissolution  when  destruction  fell  upon  it
from  without ;  Peru,  notwithstanding  the  devotion  of  its  people
to  their  native  government,  could  not  long  withstand  the  pres-
sure of  the  Europeans.  For  all  these  states  were  founded,  not
upon  any  basis  of  justice,  but  on  well-meaning  administration
and  consecrated  tradition.  They  had  laws,  and  these  were  not
merely  arbitrary  ordinances;  but  a  sense  of  equity,  attainment  of
definite  ends,  and  traditional  usage,  were  the  sole  grounds
from  which  they  proceeded,  for  they  were  based  on  no  recog-
nition of  universal  principles  of  right.  They  had  an  ideal
of  social  life,  which  they  regarded  as  the  concern  of  the  state.

r

i

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  505

and  souglit  to  realize  by  complex  organization  and  strict
centralization ;  but  for  them  society  did  not  rest  on  individual
personal  rights,  which  always  demand  recognition  even  where
their  exercise  has  to  be  renounced  for  the  sake  of  the  general
welfare ;  they  rather  set  their  political  ideal  before  them-
selves as  an  immutable  goal,  and  deduced  from  it  all  individual
rights  and  the  comparative  cogency  of  every  claim.  Hence
when  there  came  a  dissolution  of  this  form  of  political  con-
stitution, in  which  (as  is  commonly  said  of  organisms)  the
whole  was  actually  prior  to  the  parts,  the  parts  had  no  vital
strength  of  their  own,  which  could  enable  them  to  attempt
new  political  constructions.  Any  structure  that  arises  from
the  inherent  powers  of  its  constituent  parts  is,  by  the  ever-
active  reciprocity  of  these,  renewed  under  some  fresh  form,
whenever  the  old  form  disappears ;  that  more  organic  con-
struction of  society,  in  which  every  detail  has  reference  to  the
one  informing  Idea  of  the  whole,  may  have  a  more  imposing
appearance  as  long  as  it  lasts,  but  if  its  integrity  is  once
broken  up,  it  falls  into  a  condition  of  corruption  incapable  of
producing  fresh  life.  The  European  nations,  who  had  a  strong
consciousness  of  personal  rights,  due  partly  to  their  own
■  natural  character,  and  partly  to  Eoman  influence,  have  been
^able  to  escape  without  political  dissolution  from  conditions  of
[great  social  confusion;  for  the  Peruvian,  the  possibility  of
i  social  life  depended  upon  the  existence  of  his  Incas,  and  upon
the  continuance  of  a  thousand  historically  transmitted  institu-
tions ;  accustomed  to  a  definite  form  of  the  wliole,  he  knew
nothing  of  that  power  of  the  universal  which  makes  the
•  formation  of  new  wholes  always  possible.  Under  the  dominion
of  their  well-meaning  princes,  who  were  prudent  in  policy  and
not  unskilled  in  economics,  these  Indians  may  have  felt  very
much  happier  than  they  would  probably  have  been  under  the
dominion  of  the  philosophic  expert  whom  Plato  would  have
called  to  the  throne  ;  but  their  edifice  of  protective  despotism,
when  called  upon  to  resist  unforeseen  disturbances,  did  not
stand  the  test.

LS  2.  A  settlement  had  been  formed  on  the  banks  of  the

506  BOOK  Vin. CHAPTER  V.

Eurotas  by  a  warlike  nomad  tribe  called  Dorians.  It  was
natural  that  this  community  of  foreigners,  surrounded  on  all
sides  by  enemies,  should  retain  those  habits  of  constant  readi-
ness for  combat,  strict  fidelity  to  one  another,  and  stern
discipline,  which  the  obligation  of  self-preservation  had  taught
to  them  during  their  wanderings,  and  which  besides  were
ancient  habits  of  their  race.  Hence  is  explicable  a  great  part
of  the  political  constitution  of  Sparta — both  of  what  it  com-
manded and  of  what  it  forbade ;  it  established  as  the  permanent
order  of  the  commonwealth  institutions  which  had  been
adapted  to  the  temporary  needs  of  the  infant  state,  and  the
position  in  which  it  at  first  found  itsel£

In  modern  times  the  State  is  not  expected  to  teach  society
what  are  the  important  aims  of  life,  and  to  make  regulations
by  which  individuals  may  be  guided  to  the  attainment  of  such
ends ;  it  is  sufficient  and  seems  most  desirable  that  public
institutions  should  do  no  more  than  protect  all  free  and  lawful
personal  activity,  affording  merely  the  possibility  of  general
human  culture,  which  every  individual  may  use  in  the
particular  way  that  suits  his  own  talents.  By  the  Greek
mind  generally,  the  unceasing  discipline  and  guidance  of
individual  life  was  regarded  as  both  the  right  and  the  duty  of
the  state ;  it  was  carried  out  in  Sparta  in  such  a  way  that  all
individual  powers  were  forced  to  exhaust  themselves  in  the
work  of  keeping  up  the  whole,  efforts  for  private  ends  being
neither  justified  nor  encouraged.  What  was  demanded  was
not  the  blind  obedience  of  slaves  but  the  conscious  self-
devotion  of  citizens  to  the  common  weal,  the  laws  and
traditions  of  which  were  impressed  upon  all  by  a  careful
course  of  education ;  but  the  individual  had  no  freedom  either
with  reference  to  this  genius  of  the  state,  or  even  in  other
respects ;  every  exercise  of  human  powers  which  was  left  to
unfettered  self-determination  was  held  to  threaten  the  security
of  the  whole.  There  was  no  choice  of  callings,  the  possible
differences  of  which  all  disappeared  before  the  one  task  which
the  state  set  itself,  that  of  ensuring  constant  readiness  fo:
war;  the  behaviour  of  individuals,  family  relations,  and

i

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  607

addition  to  these  the  social  enjoyments  of  life,  were  even  in
unimportant  details  subjected  to  state  regulation.

Yet  it  would  be  an  entire  mistake  to  suppose  that  on  this
account  Spartan  life  was  destitute  of  all  the  mental  wealth  and
all  the  happiness  which  can  rejoice  the  human  soul.  That  stern
discipline  itself  produced  so  many  and  such  admirable  virtues  of
manliness,  constancy,  moderation,  discretion,  and  fidelity,  that
the  very  consciousness  of  this  strong  and  splendid  develop-
ment was  in  itself  a  source  of  exalted  pleasure,  as  it  became
for  contemporaries  and  posterity  an  object  of  genuine  admira-
tion. Yet  a  question  arises  as  to  the  independent  and
intrinsically  worthy  good,  which  this  state  (since  it  took  away
from  individuals  the  liberty  of  choosing  their  aim  in  life)  seemed
the  more  bound  to  set  before  all  as  that  which  every  one
should  strive  after.  For  all  those  virtues  whicli  we  have
enumerated  are  yet  but  formal  excellences,  preparatory  dis-
cipline of  efficient  powers,  which  strain  towards  some  ideal
in  the  service  of  which  they  may  receive  the  consecration  of
humanity ;  they  do  not  in  themselves  set  man  much  higher
than  many  favoured  races  of  animals  which  walk  the  earth  in
native  beauty  and  with  all  the  grace  of  consummate  strength.
The  Spartan  state  lacked  the  content  of  mental  life  to  which
we  refer.  It  was  not  animated  by  any  unbounded  impulse
towards  the  enlargement  of  knowledge;  on  the  contrary,  it
regarded  such  impulse  with  suspicion;  for  the  innumerable
small  interests  with  which  cultivated  minds  often  amuse
and  occupy  themselves,  generally  winning  by  the  way  some
fragment  of  eternal  good  fraught  with  delight,  the  Dorian
mind  felt  no  sympathy  or  indulgence — felt  nothing  but  the
contemptuous  superiority  of  which  a  hardy  nature  is  conscious
towards  those  which  are  more  finely  organized ;  it  even  seemed
as  though  the  moral  perfections  which  it  inculcated  were
required  less  as  a  result  of  devotion  to  that  which  was  in
itself  fair  and  noble  than  as  formal  conditions  the  fulfilment
— ^  of  which  were  a  guarantee  to  gods  and  men  of  the  safety  of
H  the  commonwealth ;  at  any  rate  Sparta  seemed  to  regard
B intellectual  and  artistic  culture  with  suspicion,  and  to  refuse

L

503

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

tliem  room  for  further  development  as  soon  as  tlie  stage  was
reached  which  from  this  point  of  view  was  desirable.

This  strange  round  of  political  life — of  universality  that
tolerates  no  divergencies,  of  a  whole  the  parts  of  which  have
no  task  but  to  constitute  that  whole — is  very  clearly  ex-
pressed by  Plato  when  in  describing  that  ideal  State  of  his
which  reminds  one  of  the  Dorian  reality,  he  makes  the  candid
remark,  "  We  are  concerned  here  not  with  any  wellbeing  of
the  parts,  but  with  securing  to  the  whole,  to  the  State  as  such,
the  greatest  possible  power  of  self-preservation,"  Both
Sparta  and  Plato  leave  us  asking  the  question,  "  What  good  is
it  for  any  such  State  to  exist  in  the  world  at  all,  and  what
interest  can  one  take  in  a  machine  which  expends  all  its
strength  in  self-conservation  and  turns  out  no  useful  product  ? "

We  owe  it  to  history  that  we  need  not  leave  the  tirst
question  so  entirely  without  an  answer  as  the  second.  We
can  easily  conceive  that  a  tribe  of  Indians  might  have  a  Spartan
form  of  government,  many  of  the  Spartan  institutions,  and
much  of  the  Spartan  virtue,  and  yet  that  with  all  this  if  it
lived  surrounded  by  allied  tribes,  it  might  not  far  surpass  the
average  civilisation  of  the  race.  But  the  Spartans  were
Greeks  and  lived  in  Greece.  Their  constitution  did  not
favour  mental  progress,  but  the  more  it  came  into  contact
with  the  advanced  development  of  the  rest  of  Greece,  the  less
did  it  suppress  in  its  own  subjects  the  natural  capacities  of
the  Hellenic  race.  The  necessity  of  combating  harmful  ex-
cesses of  opposed  political  tendencies  had  caused  the  nation
to  have  an  inspiring  remembrance  of  great  deeds  in  the
accomplishment  of  which  all  had  taken  part,  to  have  its
pride  in  the  national  formal  virtues  confirmed,  and  its
intellectual  horizon  enlarged  by  acquaintance  with  that  civili-
sation against  the  political  consequences  of  which  it  fought.
Continuous  peace  or  permanent  isolation  would  have  under-
mined the  political  life  of  Sparta  by  increasing  unintellectuality
and  a  growing  consciousness  of  its  aimlessness;  but  the
external  relations  we  have  referred  to — the  necessity  ofj
undertaking  the  role  of  political  opposition — provided  it  foi

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  609

some  time  with  a  vocation  for  the  accomplishment  of  which
subjection  to  its  stern  discipline  might  with  some  reason  be
required  and  was  willingly  rendered.  Gradually  the  causes  of
which  we  have  spoken  had  a  disintegrating  effect,  at  first
slowly  and  afterwards  more  rapidly ;  the  irrepressible  desires
of  human  nature  were  roused  by  an  acquaintance,  which  crept
in  and  grew,  with  luxury  which  the  old  constitution  had
taught  men  to  lack  with  dignity,  but  had  not  taught  them  to
enjoy  with  dignity.

In  the  parts  inhabited  by  tribes  of  Ionic  tongue,  the  com-
mon evils  of  unequal  distribution  of  goods,  and  misuse  of
inherited  authority,  were  the  primary  cause  of  attempts  at
innovation  which,  however,  did  not  stop  short  at  the  attain-
ment of  their  proximate  ends.  The  mobile  nature  of  these
more  social  people  whom  trade  and  industry  had  early  made
familiar  with  various  civilisations,  impelled  them  generally  to
wish  to  take  a  personal  part  in  the  administration  and  guid-
ance of  public  affairs.  The  nature  of  the  country  seemed  to
harmonize  with  this  inclination ;  it  favoured  the  independent
development  of  small  communities,  the  mental  powers  of
which,  exercised  in  constant  and  concentrated  action  and
reaction,  connected  with  a  circumscribed  district  the  remem-
brance of  many  famous  deeds  in  which  the  community  as  a
whole  had  participated ;  their  native  city,  adorned  with
monuments  of  artistic  labour,  appeared  to  all  as  the  visible
embodiment  of  mental  wealth,  to  preserve,  protect,  and  increase
which  was  a  debt  of  honour  transmitted  from  generation  to
generation.  They  consciously  held  fast  to  this  principle  of
political  development;  they  required  that  the  state  should
embrace  a  territory  large  enough  to  render  it  independent  of
foreign  supplies  as  far  as  essential  necessaries  were  concerned,
but  small  enough  to  allow  of  the  personal  intercourse  of  all
the  citizens.  An  enlargement  of  the  state  which  while  all
the  population  enjoyed  equal  rights  would  have  withdrawn  the
conduct  of  affairs  from  the  general  view  and  handed  it  over
to  a  government  which  could  not  be  inspected,  they  would
have  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  a  suppression  of  freedom.

510

BOOK  Vm. CHAPTER  V.

For  them  the  co-operation  of  more  extensive  powers  could  only
be  attained  by  means  of  confederations  which,  however,  often
sacrificed  the  freedom  of  the  less  powerful  allies  to  the  interest
of  the  principal  one.

The  smallness  of  the  stage  upon  which  the  actions  and
reactions  of  these  exceedingly  active  societies  were  carried  on,
accelerated  their  maturity  and  decay.  The  participation  of
the  people  in  the  course  of  public  affairs  is  free  from  danger
only  at  times  when  political  development  is  just  beginning,
or  when  it  is  fully  accomplished ;  in  the  first  case  when
established  national  custom  is  still  an  effective  check  upon
individual  caprice,  and  at  the  same  time  the  political  course
of  all  is  guided  into  predetermined  paths  by  simple  and
unvarying  tasks  ;  in  the  second  case  when  long  experience
(producing  respect  for  necessary  restrictions  of  which  men
have  at  last  become  conscious)  prevents  even  those  who
disapprove  from  inconsiderate  interference  with  the  course  of
events.  In  the  first  period  men  will  submit  without  envy  to
the  guidance  and  authority  of  a  few;  in  the  second  it  will
seem  to  them  necessary  that  the  State  as  a  living  historical
whole  in  which  past  and  future  as  well  as  present  genera-
tions have  a  part,  should  in  some  form  or  other  be  contrasted
with  Society,  with  the  aggregate  of  living  men,  as  an
organism  which  does  not  altogether  coincide  with  that
aggregate.  Athens  lived  over  the  first  period ;  it  was  not
destined  to  reach  the  second  ;  the  complete  removal  of  all
popular  restraints  led  to  a  political  dissolution,  and  any
reconstruction  from  the  ruins  was  hindered  by  the  inroads  of
mijifortune  from  without.  We  find  that  even  in  time  of
calamity  Athens  produced  some  splendid  examples  of  self-
sacrifice  and  enthusiasm,  but  these — alternating  as  they  do
with  instances  of  fatal  rashness — seem  but  as  an  echo  from
better  times  that  have  passed  away ;  certainly  a  large  number
of  the  most  gifted  minds  appeared  in  this  age  of  decay,  but
all  withdrew  their  interest  from  the  present,  and  looked  back
with  longing  eyes  to  the  superior  simplicity  of  the  past;
unbridled  freedom  had  brought  no  advance,  but  it  was  only

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY,  511

gradually  that  it  could  destroy  all  the  good  that  had  been
developed  in  that  highly  endowed  people,  by  wise  legislation,
the  rule  of  gifted  tyrants,  and  the  thoughtful  enthusiasm  of  a
less  self-seeking  generation.

By  this  double  example  of  developments  in  opposite
directions,  the  merits  and  errors  of  which  it  exhibits  with
inspiring  and  warning  effect  to  later  times,  Greece  became
a  decisive  turning-point  for  the  political  development  of
the  West.  To  it  belongs  the  glory  of  having  led  the
human  mind  from  stupid  acquiescence  in  traditional  order  to
conscious  participation  in  the  good  and  ill  of  a  common-
wealth ;  of  having  transformed  the  child  of  a  tribe  into  the
member  of  a  nation,  and  the  mere  subject  of  a  ruler  into  the
citizen  of  a  state.  That  which  gave  stability  and  order  to
other  nations  was  not  without  influence  among  the  Greeks
also ;  they,  like  others,  had  begun  with  obedience  towards
historical  tradition,  but  at  a  later  stage  they  held  fast  (not
with  the  blindness  of  mere  habit,  but  with  conscious  piety)  all
that  changed  circumstances  made  it  possible  for  them  to
retain;  they,  too,  knew  well  what  a  magic  bond  of  union
between  the  members  of  a  family  or  of  a  race  is  the  retro-
spective contemplation  of  a  long  line  of  forefathers  ;  but  long-
continued  participation  in  one  common  weal  was  regarded  by
them  as  a  more  powerful  bond  than  the  natural  tie  of  race  or
blood ;  and  when  they  contrasted  their  much-divided  nation
under  the  common  name  of  Hellenes  with  the  world  of
Barbarians,  they  felt  themselves  connected  not  as  descendants
of  any  one  ancestor,  but  as  being  the  only  branch  of  mankind
capable  of  true  political  life ;  finally,  they  were  very  ready  to
trace  back  their  constitutions  to  the  authority  of  lawgivers
and  political  founders,  and  to  consecrate  them  by  the  idea  of
divine  co-operation ;  they  did  not,  however,  receive  the
ordinances  which  they  ascribed  to  this  source  as  alien  statutes,
but  recognised  in  them  (as  though  they  had  been  the
expression  of  a  covenant  between  gods  and  men)  that  which
had  caused  their  recognition  and  adoption  in  the  first  place.
Thus the State seemed to them neither an ordinance of

512  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEK  V.

Nature,  nor  of  directly  divine  institution,  but  a  construction
of  human  reason,  which,  with  conscious  reflection  upon
existing  circumstances,  endeavours  to  order  things  according
to  that  which  is  good  in  the  eyes  of  both  gods  and  men — the
national  conscience  affording  the  revelation  of  this  good.

To  return  once  more  to  a  consideration  of  the  splendid
results  of these  new  political  views  would  be  superfluous;
scarcely  less  obvious  than  those  results  is  the  danger  which
they  involve,  and  involved  in  an  extreme  degree  when  for  the
first  time  in  history  it  was  attempted  to  establish  political r
life  on  its  own  principles,  detached  from  theocratic  grounds ♦
and  from  the  constraining  influence  of  instinctive  obedience
towards  traditional  authority. Whether  what  is  just  exists  by
Nature  or  depends  upon  human  institution  was  a  disputed
point  much  handled  by  Greek  sophists. With  this  question .
were  connected  the  inferences  that  if  right  exists  of  itself,  it  is '.f
binding  upon  all,  but  that  if  it  is the product of  human i
institution,  it  is  not  binding  for  any  power  which  is  able  to
break  it. The  question  when  put  in  the  form  above  given
did  not  admit  of  any  plain  and  simple  answer. Eternal  Ideas,
valid  in  themselves,  might or  might  not determine  those
simplest  principles  of  sentiment  and  action  which  must  bt'
exemplified  in  individual  actions,  in  a  world  of  objects  that  is
conditioned  by  circumstances ;  but  as  regarded  the  obligation  of]
these  moral  Ideas  in  as  far  as  the  Greek  national  conscience  j
was  acquainted  with  them,  no  doubt  was  felt,  or  at  least  no^
doubt  but  such  as  was  raised  by  the  most  idle sophistry — i
scholastic  not  practical  doubt. The  dispute  as  to  what  is  just]
related  to  those  definite  rights  and  duties,  laws  and  institutions]
of  social  life,  which  were  based  upon  existing  circumstances
But  with  regard  to  these,  Dialectic,  in  its  attempts  to  prove!
their  bindingness  by  showing  that  they  proceed  directly  from
the  majesty  of  the  supreme  ethical  Ideas,  always  fell  short.]
Speaking generally, there are several arrangements byJ
which  these  Ideas  may  be  introduced  into  life  with  almost]
equal  perfection ;  whatever  such  arrangements  there  were  oi
are,  have  always  resulted  from  human  institution,  for  m  thiflj

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  513

dispute  concerning  what  is  just,  gradual  growth  from  the
unconscious  action  and  reaction  of  felt  needs  is  included
under  the  notion  of  a  condition  of  things  produced  by  the
free  action  of  human  wills.  But  this  origin  of  justice  in  the
concrete  seemed  to  diminish  its  binding  force,  and  the  more
the  Greeks  felt  that  they  were  in  advance  of  other  nations,
because  of  their  social  order  being  established  on  maxims  the
worth  of  which  they  consciously  recognised,  the  greater  was
their  danger  of  falling  into  the  error  of  regarding  that  which
they  thus  recognised  as  resulting  from  their  own  will  and
^choice  and  always  revocable,  and  themselves  as  not  bound  by
\L  This  error,  which  henceforward  has  never  disappeared
from  the  history  of  political  life,  confounds  the  departments
)f  science  and  practice.  Truths  can  never  be  decreed ;  they
'can  only  have  their  validity  recognised;  and  their  validity,  as
regards  reality,  is  always  complete  and  full,  never  partial  and
merely  approximate.  But  on  the  other  hand  that  which
ought  to  be  is  determined  only  by  universal  Ideas  which,  as
Ideas,  form  no  part  of  the  real  world,  and  always  have  to
wait  until  human  wills  give  them  some  special  definite  form
under  which  they  become  part  of  the  world  of  reality.  In
this  sense  all  justice  is  the  work  of  men,  and  can  only  exist
as  such,  and  undoubtedly  the  sacredness  which  belongs  to  the
supreme  Ideas  themselves  does  not  befit  it;  it  has  a  claim
to  respect  only  in  as  far  as  it  reflects  them ;  but  it  does  not
lose  its binding force and become of no account  merely

3cause it  is  mediated by human action by which alone

jality  can  be  given  to  it.  He  who  reverences  only  the
iupreme Ideas and despises all positive law and justice

Bcause  of  its  human  ingredient,  entirely  mistakes  the  work
and  destiny  of  man  in  history.  Our  institutions  do  not  exist
in  order  to  arouse  the  admiration  of  the  angels  in  heaven  by
their  ideal  perfection ;  but  their  business  is,  while  partaking
of  that  mundane  defectiveness  which  attaches  to  all  human
existence,  society,  and  history,  to  serve  as  testimonies  and
results  of  human reason,  which,  working by  the  best  light

lat  science  and  conscience  give,  tries  to  make  the  ideal  (as
VOL.  IL  2  K

614  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

far  as  understood)  the  rule  of  its  action  within  the  sphere  of
(existing  circumstances.  For  this  work  it  is  entitled  to
demand  respect,  for  its  worth  is  not  reduced  to  nullity
l)ecause  it  is  not  the  highest  conceivable.  The  attempt  to
give  greater  stability  to  human  institutions  by  tracing  them
directly  to  divine  revelation,  or  regarding  them  as  the
mysterious  consequences  of  some  metaphysical  cosmic  order,
shows  imperfection  or  retrogression  of  political  development ;
it  is  an  attempt  to  perpetuate  that  which,  when  all  is  said,  is
but  the  work  of  human  creatures;  here  again  what  is
demanded  of  men  is  to  be  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  and
to  feel  bound  by  the  relative  validity  of  that  for  which
absolute  validity  is  impossible — bound,  that  is,  as  far  as  is
required  by  the  destiny  to  which  they  are  called — that  of
going  through  a  course  of  rational  development  with  the
steady  continuity  of  historical  progression.

This  true  political  instinct  was  by  no  means  lacking  in  the
fair  infancy  of  Greek  state-construction  ;  in  fact,  there  was  a
period  in  which  the  people  regarded  with  religious  awe  and
scrupulousness  the  laws  which  they  had  imposed  upon  them-
selves. It  was  the  sophistry  of  a  corrupt  time  which  first
raised  the  question  that  we  have  been  considering.  But  yet
before  this  time  there  existed  motives  for  raising  it.  As  long
as  the  traditions  of  unchanging  custom  were  powerful  enough,
reverence  for  law  was  upheld  by  habit ;  and  to  this  reverence
there  was  not  opposed  in  men's  minds  any  strong  conscious-
ness of  having  themselves  created  law.  According  to  the
legend,  special  personal  obligations  of  the  people  to  their  law-
givers, ensured  to  the  first  great  legislations  of  Lycurgus  and
Solon  a  continuance  sufficiently  long  to  reproduce  the  same
habit  of  respect ;  when  subsequently  social  evils  and  ever-
recurring  passions  had  repeatedly  changed  the  aspect  of
public  order,  great  statesmen  did  indeed  insist  more  emphati-
cally than  ever  upon  the  sacredness  of  law — they  insisted  upon
this  notwithstanding  (rather  indeed  because  of)  the  fact  that
they  based  law  upon  the  free  and  unanimous  consent  of  the
community,  but  they  no  longer  succeeded  in  convincing  the

Ji

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  615

popular  mind.  As  in  every  period  which  has  experienced
the  misfortune  of  numerous  constitutional  changes,  so  in  the
later  ages  of  Greek  power,  political  life  seemed  to  be  a  mere
stage  upon  which  arbitrary  ordinances  and  experimente,
unsupported  by  any  authoritative  force,  might  clash  and
struggle.

With  regard  to  the  actual  order  which  they  established,
the  views  of  the  Greeks  were  different  from  our  own.  Among
the  civilised  nations  of  modern  times  many  circumstances
(among  which  the  influence  of  Christianity  is  most  prominent)
have  contributed  to  develop  a  sensitive  consciousness  of  the
significance  of  human  personality.  Not  only  does  the  nobler
spirit  find  true  life  in  those  relations  to  the  supersensuous
world  which  are  the  result  of  its  own  mental  labour,  and
ward  off  from  this  inner  sanctuary  all  intrusive  curiosity
or  inspection ;  a  similar  sense  of  individual  personality  has
become  natural  even  to  simpler  minds,  which  without
being  conscious  of  the  foundation  of  their  claim,  feel  that
there  is  something  in  them  which  no  power  in  the  world
is  entitled  to  pry  into  ;  every  one  requires  that  at  least  in
his  family  life,  his  work,  his  favourite  tastes  and  hobbies
he  should  be  left  unmolested,  and  the  restrictions  for  the
general  good  which  interfere  with  him  within  this  sphere
he  feels  to  be  restrictions  indeed.  Hence  we  regard  the
State  as  the  sum  total  of  ordinances  and  institutions
necessary  for  securing  permanently  the  free  development
of  individuality,  having  due  regard  to  the  needs  of  human
life  and  the  means  which  material  Nature  presents  for  their

»atisfaction ;  and  we  all  along  make  the  tacit  assumption
hat  this  security  must  be  effected  with  no  more  constraint
ban  is  involved  in  limiting  the  freedom  of  each  individual
member  of  the  society  so  far  as  to  secure  the  equal  freedom
of  all.  The  Greeks  did  not  share  this  high  estimation  (whicli
is  in  some  respects  an  over-estimation)  of  human  personality.
They  regarded  men  chiefly  as  products  of  Nature,  and  character
as  dependent  upon  degrees  of  intelligence  ;  it  was  not  in  their

616  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

good  and  in  evil  can  fight  against  insight  or  natural  inclina-
tion ;  as  in  thought  they  were  little  addicted  to  pondering  the
problem  of  Free  Will  (to  which  our  time  loves  to  refer  the
very  inner  sanctuary  of  personality),  so  in  life  they  were  not
averse  to  being  regarded  as  homogeneous  examples  of  the
Imman  race.  Absorption  in  work,  in  the  supersensuous
world  of  belief,  and  in  the  heterogeneous  circles  of
thought  familiar  to  those  who  laboriously  investigate  the
extant  fragments  of  past  civilisations,  contributes  to  favour
capricious  peculiarity  of  personal  development  among  us.
These  sources  of  interest  did  not  count  for  much  among
the  Greeks,  and  so  there  was  but  little  which  they  could
have  felt  impelled  to  withdraw  from  the  observation  of
public  life  as  a  sacred  private  interest.  They  did  not  there-
fore oppose  to  political  order  that  sensitive  consciousness  of
the  respect  due  to  every  man's  individuality,  wliich  demands
that  each  several  person  should  be  judged  by  an  unique
standard ;  the  State  appeared  to  them  as  a  system  of  social
ordinances  by  which  alone  man  is  originally  raised  above  ^
mere  animal  existence,  is  made  acquainted  with  the  work  of
his  life,  is  educated  to  fitness  for  this  work,  and  has  deter-
mined for  him  the  aggregate  of  his  rights  and  duties  towards
other  men.  Not  that  Greek  consciousness  lacked  either
universal  moral  Ideas  or  notions  of  equity  and  justice  in
matters  of  private  right ;  both  of  these  were  inevitably  evolved
by  life  itself ;  but  neither  reached  a  development  correspond-
ing to  the  perfection  of  political  theory,  and  neither  was
independent  of  this.  The  Greeks  always  held  fast  to  the
distinction  between  Greeks  and  barbarians,  bond  and  free,
strangers  and  guests,  friends  whom  one  should  benefit  and
enemies  whom  one  should  hate  ;  and  this  shows  that  they
did  not  look  for  justice  (the  specially  moral  perfection
among  the  four  which  they  extolled)  in  the  general  disposition
of  man  towards  man,  but  in  the  performance  of  the  mutual
obligations  imposed  by  social  position.  But  State  regulations
interfered  in  such  a  way  with  private  right  as  to  diminish
many  natural  privileges,  and  elevate  many  others  into  dutiei

1

F

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  617

Beeming  in  all  cases  to  be  rather  the  source  whence  rights
proceeded,  than  to  find  its  business  in  the  recognition  of  those
which  already  existed.  Even  when  the  actual  condition  of
things  no  longer  allowed  the  rein  of  law  to  be  so  tightly
drawn,  we  still  see  a  disposition  even  in  the  most  en-
lightened minds  to  make  the  disposal  of  property,  the
choice  of  a  calling,  marriage  and  the  production  and  educa-
tion of  children  the  object  of  State  regulation — both  these
and  a  multitude  of  other  matters,  all  of  which  modern
feeling  would  not  even  permit  to  be  brought  under  public
consideration.  Variety  of  mental  development  was  not
hindered  everywhere  as  it  was  in  Sparta ;  but  even  in  Athens
it  was  not  unfettered  until  the  time  of  political  retrogression ;
at  an  earlier  period  this  development  itself  was  in  harmony
with  public  opinion ;  when  it  was  not  so,  it  was,  like
many  religious  opinions,  suppressed  —  not  as  being  a  sin
against  a  Divine  Spirit,  but  as  being  an  offence  against  one
of  the  securities  for  political  order ;  and  as  a  last  resource
the  individual  whose  existence,  even  without  his  own  fault
seemed  to  threaten  this  order,  might  be  removed  by
banishment.

This  complete  subjection  of  individual  life  to  a  general  rule
is not peculiar  to antiquity. It  lives  again not only  in

(religious  societies  and  orders,  in  which  it  has  its  special  and
jfeasily  recognisable  motives  in  feelings  of  contrition  ;  even
[Where  ordinary  political  society  cannot  content  itself  with
pemedying  evil  in  detail,  but  thinks  that  its  whole  order  must
be  reconstructed,  we  see  both  in  the  carrying  out  of  this  pur-
pose (which  is  rare)  and  in  the  plans  for  doing  so  (which  are
frequent)  an  inclination  towards  this  excessive  regulation  of
life  by  law.  In  this  case  the  source  of  the  impulse  is  not  so
obvious.  Man  jealously  guards  his  personal  independence  in
most  respects,  and  yet  there  is  in  his  mind  some  mysteiious
attraction  towards  renouncing  it  again,  and  trying  to  live  as  u
mere  exemplar  of  his  species;  the  constant  exertion  of  strength
which  is  necessary  in  order  to  carry  on  his  individual  plan  of
life  is  relaxed,  and  is  exchanged  for  refreshing  ease,  when  he

•

\K.

618  BOOK  Vni. CHAPTER  V.

swims  with  the  stream  which  flows  in  an  accustomed  channel.
The  want  of  courage  which  lurks  in  this  impulse  is  veiled  by
the  aesthetically  elevating  impression  made  by  the  thought  of
a  strict  universal  order  in  human  affairs ;  and  that  which  was
partly  customary  submission,  partly  exhaustion,  takes  on  the
more  pleasing  aspect  of  self-sacrifice.  If  even  the  more
favoured  are  dragged  down  by  these  two  motives  to  the  liking
for  an  uniform  mechanism  of  life,  the  oppressed  find  in  it
their  only  hope  of  relief;  it  will  at  least  let  them  have  some
weight  as  individuals  in  the  crowd,  as  examples  of  their  kind,
and  assure  to  them  a  position  in  life  which  they  could  not
have  won  by  their  own  strength.  All  these  impulses  were
influential  in  Greece ;  there  was  powerful  pressure  from  below
caused  by  envious  desire  for  equality ;  it  was  met  from  above
by  a  self-sacrificing  appreciation  of  the  value  of  law  and
order  on  the  part  of  the  more  noble  spirits ;  thus  it  happened
that  freedom  came  to  the  people  as  a  whole  only  in  the  form
of  autonomy,  that  is,  the  power  to  make  their  own  laws ;  the
only  freedom  left  for  individuals  consisted  in  the  conscious-  j
ness  that  all  which  they  did  and  all  which  they  left  undone
was  determined  by  rational  ordinances  of  the  commonwealth.
Thus  Society  and  the  State  were  almost  wholly  coincident,
and  both  suffered  from  the  admixture.  If  there  had  been
realized  in  society  any  permanent  order,  always  corresponding
to  social  needs,  or  if  it  had  been  possible  to  enlighten  it  to
such  a  degree  that  it  would  have  made  every  necessary
transition  in  the  quickest  and  most  direct  way,  then  the  State
would  have  been  of  but  little  importance  compared  to  it.
But  when  the  development  of  society  proceeds  naturally,  it  is
a  struggle  of  selfish  interests,  which  in  seeking  their  own
satisfaction  violate  the  rights  of  others,  and  thereby  disturb
the  conditions  of  general  prosperity,  and  finally  damage  their
own  welfare.  To  society  in  this  stage,  the  State  is  as  it  were
a  conscience.  As  the  guardian  of  universal  justice  which  is
superior  to  all  individual  interests,  it  protects  the  existing
condition  of  things  from  all  encroachments  which  would  over-
turn and  disregard  it  as  being  of  no  account,  at  the  same  time

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  519

allowing  any  new  development  to  set  it  aside  in  a  lawful
way;  being  keeper  of  the  maxims  by  which  the  common-
wealth is  guided  in  its  external  behaviour,  it  is  deaf  to  those
promptings  of  eccentric  fancy  which  would  impose  upon  the
nation  tasks  that  are  unsuitable  and  do  not  historically
devolve  upon  it.  Now  it  is  difficult  for  this  conscience  to
become  articulate  and  to  give  judgment  if  it  really  resides
only  in  the  various  individual  consciences  of  conflicting
parties,  and  is  not  opposed  to  them  as  a  third  and  higher
power,  having  a  definite  embodiment.  The  present  age
enjoys  a  superabundance  of  this  privilege ;  antiquity  had  not
enough  of  it.  Not  only  do  monarchies  embody  the  impartial
justice  of  the  State  in  the  one  person  of  the  ruler,  to  whom
the  base  envy  of  private  interests  is  unknown,  not  only  do
those  officers  whose  connected  activity  constitutes  the  govern-
ment oppose  to  individual  wills  a  plain  systematization  of  the
general  will,  but  also  very  frequently  the  authority  of  the
State  encounters  the  mobility  of  society  with  superfluous  and
vexatious  constraint,  in  the  form  of  an  excessive  number  of
subordinate  officials ;  finally  the  large  size  of  states,  the
enormous  extent  and  complication  of  State  business,  and  the
great  development  of  the  science  of  jurisprudence  are  all
conditions  which  make  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  the
assumption  of  governmental  office  should  be  preceded  by
special  technical  preparation  by  which  government  as  an
embodiment  of  the  State  is  marked  off  from  the  rest  of
society.

Whatever  disadvantages  this  sharp  limitation  may  have,
the  Greek  states  which  were  without  it  suffered  from  the
deficiency.  A  small  group  of  reverend  officials  consisting  of
men  of  whom  some  belonged  to  the  natural  aristocracy  of  age,
some  to  the  still  more  respected  aristocracy  of  noble  birth,  and
some  again  to  that  of  the  rich  landed  proprietors,  were
originally  contrasted  with  the  nation  as  its  guides  and  rulers,
representing  the  ancient  traditions  of  justice  and  civilisation.
The  progress  of  democratic  sentiment  and  the  increasing  power
of  uncertain  riches  deprived them  of  all  these  advantages.

620  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

Want  of  respect  for  work  as  work  prevented  the  formation  of
any  regular  circle  of  occupations  which  would  have  divided
society  into  ranks  and  classes,  and  have  made  men  desire  that
the  various  great  interests  of  human  life  should  be  represented ;
lience  it  came  to  pass  more  and  more  that  every  individual
felt  himself  a  Citizen  of  the  State  pure  and  simple,  and  that
the  National  Assembly  felt  itself  identical  with  the  State ;
growing  envy  and  the  struggle  of  all  for  equal  rights  caused
an  increase  in  the  number  of  governmental  officers,  and  these
degenerated  into  mere  business  managers  in  a  society  the  de-
cisions of  which  were  guided  by  no  respect  for  any  developed
system  of  universal  law,  but  merely  by  traditions  of  the  past
in  as  far  as  temporary  interests  allowed  them  to  prevail,  and
which  was  turned  to  good  or  ill  by  the  eloquence  of  individual
leaders.  The  battles  which  society  under  the  supervision  of
the  State  had  to  fight  out,  were  thus  transferred  to  the  domain
of  politics,  and  since  each  party  tried  to  get  possession  of  the
helm  of  State,  these  battles  continually  endangered  the  stability
both  of  the  constitution  and  of  those  individual  rights  which
were  too  dependent  upon  it.  Indeed  the  strife  of  parties
assumed  a  more  monotonous  aspect  than  might  have  been
expected  after  so  much  splendour  of  mental  development ;  it
became  at  last  nothing  but  a  struggle  between  poverty  and
wealth,  and  ended  in  Sparta  in  an  intolerable  ascendency  of
some  few  rich  families,  in  whose  hands  was  accumulated  the
possession  of  all  the  land,  and  in  Athens  in  the  supremacy  of
the  unpropertied  majority,  who  thrust  upon  the  diminishing
class  of  the  well-to-do  all  those  State  burdens  which  resulted
chiefly  from  their  own  measures,  and  were  intended  to  satisfy
their  greed  and  their  political  vanity.

§  3.  Between  Greece  and  the  present  there  lies  Eorae ;  and
to  it  cultivated  minds  have  often  looked,  hoping  to  be  taught
and  elevated ;  it  is  with  Kome  only  that  the  political  develop-
ment of  the  modern  world  stands  in  real  causal  connection,
partly  by  means  of  many  special  historical  bonds,  which  there
is  no  need  to  mention  in  this  place,  and  partly  by  a  great
intellectual  heritage  which  has  been  transmitted  by  her  to  U8«

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  521

The  development  of  Law,  of  Jurisprudence,  and  of  a  general
sense  of  Eight  has  given  to  modern  society  a  foundation  by
which,  even  in  its  aberrations,  it  is  essentially  distinguished
from  the  states  of  the  early  ages  of  antiquity;  and  this
foundation  is  a  legacy  from  Eome.

The  Greeks  had  been  animated  by  a  strong  impulse  to
sociality,  and  an  inclination  to  devote  themselves  to  specula-
tive knowledge.  The  first  led  them  to  seek  above  all  in  both
theory  and  practice  a  perfect  plan  of  social  order  which
should  secure  the  most  complete  and  permanent  satisfaction
possible  of  the  need  they  felt  for  communication,  for  human
intercourse,  for  consideration  among  their  equals;  the  other
characteristic  led  them  to  recognise  and  disentangle  moral  and
aesthetic  Ideas  which  as  supreme  exemplars  determined  the
content  of  a  beautiful  and  worthy  life,  which  they  regarded
as  the  goal  of  human  development.  Neither  of  these  two
[spheres  of  thought  favoured  the  development  of  a  strong
r'sense  of  right.

Special emotions accompany the approving or disap-
proving  verdict of  conscience,  being different  for different
classes of  the objects which we  judge  of, and  similar  for
[individuals of the same class. Our  approval of what is
-beautiful  is  not  merely  an  affirmative  judgment  that  differs
Ifrom  a  judgment  expressing  approval  of  what  is  good  only  in
ijbhis,  that  it  concerns  a  different  object ;  on  the  contrary,  in
both  cases  there  is  an  affection  of  the  whole  mind  differing
'.in  kind  in  each  case ;  and  in  the  same  way  there  is  a  differ-
[.ence  between  the  recognition  of  what  is  just,  and  of  what  is
ijbenevolent  and  kind. This  subjective  impression  which  the
thing  judged  of — or  if  we  look  at  it  objectively,  the  nature  and
degree  of  that  worth  which  we  ascribe  to  it — makes  upon  us,
is  expressed  by  the  general  names  of  good,  beautiful,  or  just,
rbut  these  names  contain  no  answer  to  the  question.  What
must  anything  be  in  itself  in  order  to  produce  this  impression,
and  hence  to  merit  this ascription  of  value  ? Hence  from
:the  Idea  of  the  Beautiful,  no  theory  of  aesthetics  can  show
KWjhat  kind  of  individual  thing  it  is  that  beauty  appertains  to ;

622  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

and  yet  it  is  only  individual  things  that  are  beautiful,  and
not  the  general  concept  of  Beauty.  The  Idea  of  Justice  does
not  lead  us  to  know  the  kind  of  action  that  corresponds  to  it,
any  more  than  the  concept  of  Usefulness  (to  which  in  a
logical  point  of  view  it  is  wholly  similar)  enlightens  us  as  to
what  things  are  useful,  and  for  what.  Hence  a  predilection
for  these  universal  concepts  which  are  without  content,  and
for  systematic  deduction  from  them,  leads  men  on  the  one
hand  (in  order  that  they  may  have  something  to  deduce  from)
to  put  into  them  some  content  more  or  less  suitable,  and
supplied  perhaps  by  cultivated  taste,  perhaps  by  a  happy
inspiration,  but  not  warranted  as  certain  and  exhaustive  by
any  full  and  careful  preliminary  investigation  of  particulars.
On  the  other  hand,  it  forces  men  to  take  those  individual  cases
in  which  unsophisticated  feeling  must  recognise  the  validity
of  the  determinations  of  value  referred  to,  and  with  logical  art
to  fit  them  into  a  previously  constructed  scheme.  Both  these
procedures  are  likely  to  interfere  with  the  just  estimation  of
particulars,  in  which  alone,  all  the  while,  the  universal  can  be
realized.

The  Eomans  were  protected  from  this  danger  by  their  lack
of  speculative  impulse.  They  were  just  as  firmly  persuaded
as  the  Greeks  that  there  is  one  single  eternal  universal  Cause
which,  directly  or  indirectly,  makes  everything  right  that  is
right ;  but  it  did  not  occur  to  them  to  take  this  Cause  and
under  the  form  of  an  Idea  of  Eight  to  make  it  in  itself  the
objective  source  from  which  the  particulars  of  what  is  just
and  right  are  to  be  derived ;  it  was  known  to  them  only  as
the  agreement  of  the  Practical  Eeason  with  itself,  this  reason
never  being  able  to  express  its  whole  thought  fully  at  once,
but  giving,  when  consulted  on  special  cases,  approving  or
disapproving  judgments,  aU  of  which  are  consistent  with  one
another.  They  made  use  of  this  organon  for  the  discovery  of
right,  and  thus,  by  the  same  path  by  which  hitherto  every
science  has  collected  its  material,  attained  possession  of  a
multitude  of  truths  relating  to  right  conduct,  which  referred
primarily  to very special circumstances,  but were in this

1

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  523

isolation  much  more  evident  to  men's  natural  sense  of  right
•without  any  mediation,  than  they  could  have  been  as  known
mediately  by  deduction  from  an  universal.  When  the
accumulation  of  the  material  thus  obtained  began  to  make
it  worth  while,  and  when  changed  habits  of  life  seemed  to
require  it,  there  was  developed  great  ingenuity  in  the  discovery
of  the  next  higher  general  principles  which  lay  at  the  founda-
tion of  individual  groups  of  maxims — of  analogies  by  which
fresh  objects  of  ethical  consideration  might  be  brought  under
the  rules  of  cases  already  treated — and  finally,  in  the  adjust-
ment of  the  reciprocal  limitations  required  in  cases  where
different  principles  came  into  conflict  But  when — stirred
partly  by  the  systematizing  spirit  of  Greek  philosophy — they
finally  attempted  to  express  those  ultimate  principles  upon
which  the  abundant  store  of  their  ethical  wealth  rested,  they
succeeded  as  little  as  all  later  philosophy  has  done,  in  finding
anything  that  was  at  the  same  time  fruitful  and  conclusive.

This  inductive  temper  which,  if  need  be,  can  content  itself
with  secure  possession  of  the  particular  if  it  cannot  find  the
universal  for  which  it  seeks,  but  cares  nothing  for  any
universal  from  which  the  particular  cannot  be  obtained,
confirmed  the  peculiarity  which  marked  the  political  bent  of
the  Eomans.  Intercourse  with  one's  fellow-men  was  not  a
prime  necessity  of  life  to  the  Eomans  as  it  was  to  the  Greeks,
who  could  not  conceive  of  human  life  except  in  society ;  least
of  all  did  the  Eomans  look  to  society  to  bestow  or  to  estab-
lish personal  rights.  A  lively  consciousness  of  these — of  all
to  which  the  individual  man  lays  claim  as  naturally  coming
under  his  power,  both  as  regards  the  family  of  which  he  is
the  head  and  the  goods  which  belong  to  him — vi^as  before  all
other  considerations  with  them;  in  their  view  these  rights
could  be  bestowed  by  none,  but  must  be  recognised  by  all.
Now  life  taught  the  impossibility  of  carrying  out  these  claims
without  any  modifications,  and  obliged  men  to  form  social
ties ;  but  social  order  did  not  bestow  rights  on  subjects
previously  destitute  of  them,  but  resulted  from  the  renuncia-
tion by  individuals  of  a  part  of  the  rights  which  they  already

524  BOOK  Vlll. CHAPTER  V.

possessed.  Hence  it  depended  on  practical  limitation  of  rights
recognised  in  theory,  and  not  upon  the  establishment  of  fresh
rights.  I  need  only  note  briefly  that  these  remarks  are  not
intended  to  describe  the  actual  origin  of  the  Eoman  state,  in
which  (as  in  all  great  historic  events)  many  causes  co-operated ;
they  merely  serve  to  indicate  a  predominant  sentiment,  by
which,  as  we  think,  the  Eoman  world  was  animated ;  it  is  the
sentiment  which  led  them  to  a  splendid  development  of  the
Law  of  Private  Eight,  and  to  a  development  of  Public  Law
that  was  by  no  means  narrow  and  merely  national.

The  changing  relations  to  one  another  into  which  the
course  of  life  brings  individual  persons,  form  the  most  natural
school  for  the  development  of  a  sense  of  right.  The  claims
of  different  men  daily  come  into  conflict,  whether  as  regards
the  use  of  material  objects,  or  with  regard  to  those  return
services  and  compensations  which  the  actions  of  some  impose
upon  others.  The  frequent  occurrence  of  cases  that  are
similar,  though  seldom  exactly  alike,  does  of  itself  to  some
extent  secure  just  judgment;  the  speedily-felt  ill  effect  of  a
false  judgment  helps  to  bring  about  its  correction ;  any  selfish
inclination  which  a  man  may  feel  to  maintain  such  a  deci-
sion for  his  own  advantage  will  be  in  every  case  sup-
pressed by  the  apprehension  that  he  may  be  the  next  person  j
to  sufier  from  it ;  from  the  great  multitude  of  particulars  men^
naturally  arrive  at  general  points  of  view,  analogies  drawn
from  which  may  serve  for  their  guidance  in  fresh  cases ;  and
at  the  same  time  the  frequent  recurrence  of  individual  cases
makes  clear  the  errors  that  may  have  been  committed  in
incorrectly  setting  down  as  similar  that  which  is  dissimilar,
thus  sharpening  the  distinction  between  things  that  are  only
superficially  the  same.  And  further,  the  course  of  life  brings
into  circumstances  that  are  the  same,  or  at  any  rate  similar,
the  most  different  classes  of  people — some  bound  together  by
strict  ties  of  love  and  reverence,  others  unconnected  even  byj
the  merest  acquaintanceship,  and  having  no  cause  to  reckon
upon  any  definite  reciprocity  either  of  benevolence  or  of  ill-
will. Thus  it  becomes  so  much  the  easier  to  separate  from ;

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  525

all  considerations  of  sentiment  the  regulation  of  any  special
relation,  and  the  just  determination  of  that  which,  under  the
circumstances,  is  due  on  both  sides ;  and  to  look  at  the  matter
with  reference  to  that  which  the  nature  of  the  relation  itself
(in  as  far  as  it  actually  occurs  among  men)  imposes  upon
those  between  whom  it  obtains,  whatever  other  ties  may
connect  them  together.  Thus  custom  and  right  become
gradually  disjoined,  and  by  degrees  it  grows  clearer  how  much
of  that  which  custom  enjoins  is  required  by  the  essential
nature  of  the  case,  and  what  modifications  of  these  require-
ments are  a  spontaneous  contribution  of  personal  feeling.  And
not  only  is  the  multiplicity  of  persons  important,  between
whom  there  may  arise  relations  involving  private  rights,
but  also  the  infinite  variety  of  objects  with  which  they  may
])e  connected,  is  of  consequence.  Superstition  may  easily
attach  to  particular  objects  and  arrangements  in  Nature
which  are  permanent,  or  grand  in  their  way,  a  mystic  signifi-
cance, which  interferes  with  a  just  practical  treatment  of
them ;  but  the  vast  multitude  of  things  which,  in  the  highest
degree  various,  prosaic,  and  in  themselves  unimportant,  may
yet  at  any  moment  become  the  objects  of  conflicting  claims,
do  not  admit  of  this  false  illumination ;  in  dealing  with
them,  men  become  accustomed  to  regard  things  as  what  they
are,  not  as  symbols  of  something  else,  and  look  to  find  the
right  treatment  of  them  in  such  a  procedure  as  their  nature
requires,  in  order  that  they  may  satisfy  as  completely  and
permanently  as  possible  all  existing  claims.

Now  the  organization  of  political  society,  which  is  to  accom-
plish such  a  limitation  of  the  rights  of  individuals  as  will
make  them  con)patible  with  one  another,  and  is  to  afford
them  efficient  external  protection,  is  (if  we  look  at  its  nature)
the  furthest  goal  to  which  our  search  after  right  can  approxi-
mate, and  at  the  same  time  (if  we  look  at  the  need  of  it)  one
of  the  first  which  our  search  is  bound  to  attain.  The  diffi-
culties which  oppose  its  establishment  are  quite  different  from
[those  which  are  met  with  in  the  establishment  of  the  indi-
[yidual  relations  which  belong  to  the  sphere  of  Private  Eight

526  BOOK  vm. chapter  v.

Men  cannot,  as  in  the  latter  case,  learn  from  observation  of
innumerable  examples ;  the  injurious  effects  of  any  estab-
lished error  only  become  apparent  after  a  long  time,  and
cannot  be  easily  traced  to  their  source ;  the  organization  has
to  deal  with  permanent  differences  of  status  by  taking
account  of  permanent  relations,  and  hence  finds  it  difficult  to
avoid  laying  down  fixed  rules  that  favour  permanent  but
unjust  interests  of  individual  classes  of  society ;  it  finds  it
very  difficult  to  escape  the  influence  of  those  general  preju-
dices with  regard  to  men's  different  positions  in  life  and
reciprocal  obligations,  which  have  been  produced  by  custom
as  time  went  on ;  finally,  it  has  to  guarantee  not  only  all
private  rights,  but  also  the  welfare  of  the  whole,  both  of
which  partly  depend  upon  external  circumstances,  and  also  to
afford  by  its  institutions,  positive  satisfaction  to  the  desire  for
reputation  and  the  impulses  to  action  which  stir  individual  men.
These  tasks  have  to  be  accomplished  under  conditions  which
are  continually,  though  slowly,  changing ;  just  judgment
concerning  them  is  being  continually  disturbed  by  party
interests,  which  are  not  (as  is  the  case  in  questions  between
man  and  man)  held  back  from  persistence  in  injustice  by  the
fear  that  they  themselves  may  be  the  next  to  suffer  the  evil
consequences  of  an  unjust  decision.  Hence  it  early  came
to  seem  as  though  Private  Right  were  a  kind  of  immutable
justice,  founded  in  the  very  nature  of  things  and  of  relations,
and  inherent  in  them ;  and  just  as  naturally  Public  Law
seemed  to  be  the  result  of  human  convention  and  incapable  of
being  made  definitive.  Indeed  the  former  was  not  established  in
Eome  by  governmental  action,  but  discovered  by  the  sagacity
of  experts,  as  instruments  of  the  natural  sense  of  right,
whilst  many  of  the  ordinances  of  Public  Law  have  the
character  of  a  treaty  between  conflicting  parties,  the  content
of  which  is  binding  not  in  Nature  but  through  the  combined
wills  of  contracting  parties,  until  they  agree  to  revoke  the
treaty.

Notwithstanding  this  difference  of  origin,  devotion  to  the
commonwealth  was  not  less  in  Eome  than  in  Greece. When

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  627

social  order  had  once  been  constructed  by  the  submission  of
all  to  limitation  of  their  rights,  the  individual  did  not  cling
to  it  merely  because  it  represented  his  interests  among  others ;
a  sense  of  the  grandeur  and  power  which  could  only  be
attained  by  the  community  as  a  whole,  pride  in  the  great
deeds  achieved,  and  a  consciousness  of  the  manly  virtues
which  through  that  order  had  become  elements  of  everyday
life — these  won  for  the  State  the  self-sacrificing  attachment
of  the  citizens,  and  that  habit  of  uncompromising  obedience,
which  caused  them  to  put  up  with  many  governmental  defi-
ciencies, and  more  than  once  to  drop  complaints  about  pressing
grievances  without  having  obtained  the  redress  they  demanded,
when  government  used  legal  forms  as  an  instrument  against
them,  calling  upon  them  for  services  the  rendering  of  which
prevented  their  following  up  their  grievances.  In  later  times
political  storms  did  indeed  by  violent  and  illegal  measures
disregard  all  law,  yet  still  even  the  Empire  was  far  from  being
a  return  to  Asiatic  despotism.  In  truth  the  fact  is  that  from
this  time  forward  the  life  of  man  was  based  upon  a  conscious-
ness of  inalienable  rights  which  might  indeed  in  many  indi-
vidual cases  be  disregarded  by  the  temporary  representatives
of  political  power,  but  the  theoretical  validity  of  which  was
■  no  longer  a  matter  of  dispute.

We  have  supposed  that  personal  rights  should  be  recog-
nised and  limited  by  society,  but  are  not  bestowed  by  it.  In
itself  this  view  of  the  origin  of  personal  rights  is  by  no  means
absolutely  just ;  it  is  with  capacities  only  that  Nature  endows
us ;  a  man's  right  is  something  which  he  first  feels  as  a  duty
towards  others,  and  hence  regards  as  being  also  a  duty  owed
by  others  to  himself.  This  second  aspect  of  the  case  leads
more  easily  than  the  first  to  the  conception  of  right  as  some-
thing universal  in  which  all  mankind  have  part.  We
only  agree  to  a  limitation  of  original  rights  with  regard  to
those  who  profess  a  willingness  to  make  similar  renunciations,
that  is  with  regard  to  members  of  the  same  political  com-
munity ;  and  then  an  outsider  is  admitted  to  participation  in
political  rights  only  by  being  received  into  the  community,

528  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

and  to  procure  or  to  permit  this  reception  is  left  to  the  dis
cretion  of  custom  and  prejudice.  The  political  development
of  Eome  was  in  harmony  with  all  this  without  being  altogether
determined  by  it.  Its  original  town-community  was  indeed
obliged,  by  the  course  of  events,  to  construct  legal  forms  for
the  regulation  of  intercourse  with  those  who  were  not  citizens,
in  addition  to  the  native  law  according  to  which  they  them-
selves lived ;  but  for  a  long  time  this  original  community  con-
tinued sole  sovereign  over  the  growing  multitudes  of  conquered
subjects,  in  as  far  as  Public  Law  was  concerned,  and  it  was
but  slowly  that  the  rights  of  Eoman  citizenship  spread
to  the  provinces.  Previously  these  had  been  simply  rifled
for  the  benefit  of  the  metropolis,  and  given  over  as  a  prey  to
the  covetousness  and  tyranny  of  her  officials ;  and  even  when
the  imperial  government  abolished  this  metropolitan  privilege,
it  still  did  not  loose  the  bonds  of  slavery  in  which  a  great  part
of  the  population  languished.

After  slow  historic  changes,  Eoman  Law  at  a  later  period
again  began  to  restrict  the  national  legal  customs  of  more
modem  nations.  Not  only  did  it  at  the  time  encounter
suspicious  aversion,  but  even  at  the  present  day  it  is  re-
proached with  having  caused  the  loss  of  much  legal  insight
which  was  of  the  very  essence  of  the  national  spirit  of
different  peoples.  It  does  not  lie  within  the  scope  of  our
brief  survey  to  determine,  in  reference  to  this  reproach,  the
limits  of  its  validity  ;  we  are  more  concerned  to  remember  the
beneficial  effects  which  resulted  not  so  much  from  the  intro-
duction of  Eoman  Law,  as  from  the  way  in  which  all  relations  of
life  became  pervaded  by  the  spirit  of  Eoman  Jurisprudence.  It
is  owing  to  it  that  there  have  disappeared  the  poetic,  significant,
and  spirit-stirring  forms  of  legal  administration  and  carrying
out  of  sentences,  but  also  simultaneously  with  them  the  bar-
barous justice  that  was  exercised  with  so  much  fantastic
pageantry ;  to  its  cool  clear  logic  it  is  due  that  completed
actions,  incipient  attempts,  remote  intentions,  and  obvious  or
merely  supposed  inclinations,  not  yet  put  into  act,  came  to  be
no  longer  indiscriminately  regarded  as  deserving  of  one  and  the

1

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  529

same  sentence ;  that  different  offences  were  no  longer  visited
with  the  same  frightful  and  unvarying  measure  of  punishment,
which  customary  morality  (in  such  cases  always  too  severe)  or
examples  of  Biblical  history  seemed — to  an  offended  sense  of
justice  not  much  used  to  draw  distinctions — to  demand.

§  4.  All  through  the  storms  which  disturbed  the  beginning
of  the  Middle  Ages,  the  thought  of  the  solidarity  of  mankind
had  been  kept  alive  only  in  the  Church ;  and  it  had  regard
rather  to  the  heavenly  goal  which  men  had  in  common  than
to  any  ordered  action  and  reaction  on  earth. Afterwards  the
Empire  sought,  but  with  very  imperfect  success,  to  bind  together
at  least  civilised Christendom  in  political  union ;  any  con-
sciousness on  the  part  of  society  of  being  an  universal  human
community  had  been  lost  amid  the  multitudinous  fragments
of  nations  which  struggled  on  with  difficulty,  in  conflict  with
one  another,  and  without  being  able  to  take  any  comprehen-
sive view  of  their  mutual  relations ;  there  were  indeed  families
and  tribes,  corporations  and communities,  nationalities and
kingdoms,  but  no  political  construction  deserving  of  the  name
of  a  State. This  kind  of  dispersed  and  fragmentary  social  life,
notwithstanding  that  it  produced  here  and  there  some  splendid
fruit,  was  not  favourable  to  the  growth  of  civilisation ;  society
was  first  delivered from it by the growing  absolutism of
kingly power,  which (at  first  with  the  help  of  the  towns)
broke  the  independence  of  the  feudal  lords,  just  as  these  had
Iready  destroyed  the  freedom  of  the  common  people. Where
this  subjugation  of  the  vassals  took  place  after  a  long  struggle
and over a wide  domain,  the prince might not  unjustly
identify  himself  with  the  State, for  he  in  his  own  person
Ifcrepresented  the  political  unity  of  the  whole. And  tliis  not
merely  formally,  in  as  far  as  his  sole  will  was  supreme ;  in
addition  to  this,  a  considerable  part  of  the  intellectual  store
I  Byhich  was  common  to  all,  and  by  which  the  national  con-
I  fcciousness  was nourished,  was to be  traced  to  him  ;  wars,
although  carried  on  without  reference  to  the  real  needs  of
i the whole and  merely for  the sake of  dynastic  interests,
I  Ket  accustomed  nations to internal solidarity, and to that
I  ■ VOL  n.  '  2  L

»

530  BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  V.

Jealous  national  hatred  without  which  no  young  state  becomes
great ;  and  many  undertakin;^s  in  art  and  science,  althougli
due  to  a  liking  for  useless  ostentation  and  other  misguided
impulses,  yet  furthered  civilisation  by  the  abundant  means
that  were  placed  at  their  disposal.

The  condition  of  society  certainly  changed  according  to  the
disposition  and  insight  of  the  rulers,  but  this  Absolutism  was
very  far  from  being  a  return  to  oriental  Despotism ;  and  how-
ever strange  the  forms  which  sovereign  power  took  here  and
there,  the  idea  which  both  rulers  and  subjects  had  of  it  was
founded  upon  entirely  different  principles.  The  sovereign  was
neither  the  possessor  of  the  whole  country  nor  the  sole  source
of  all  private  rights,  which  if  due  to  such  a  source  are  not
rights  but  only  favours  bestowed ;  and  powerful  and  fierce  as
were  some  of  the  attacks  made  upon  these  rights,  they  were
either  regarded  as  violent  and  illegal  measures,  or  were  based
upon  previously  established  ordinances,  and  though  the  content
of  these  might  be  arbitrary,  yet  the  reference  to  them  showed
that  it  was  not  a  retrospective  and  baseless  decision,  given
after  the  fact,  and  applying  only  to  the  individual  case,  that  ■
was  taken  as  the  rule  of  procedure,  but  a  general  precept
affecting  the  future.  But  not  only  did  the  power  of  rulers
find  a  limit  in  this  recognition  of  general  rights  which  it
could  not  evade,  but  also  their  claims  to  majesty  could  not
quite  do  without  some  substratum  of  respect  for  the  people
over  which  they  were  supreme.  It  was  not  merely  distinction
of  descent  which  ennobled  the  kingly  office — or  perhaps  tliis
very  distinction  itself  consisted  in  the  transmitted  heritage  of
kingly  rule,  the  worth  and  dignity  of  which  depended  on  the
worth  of  the  people  ruled.  Hence  it  happened  that  though
the  resources  of  a  people  might  not  be  always  used  for  their
own  best  advantage,  they  were  not  employed  exclusively  for  f
the  personal  benefit  of  the  ruler ;  it  was  felt  necessary  to
glorify  the  name  of  the  country  from  which  a  prince  took  his
title  ;  under  this  name  was  veiled  the  thought  of  the  State,
which  now  again  began  to  come  into  prominence;  in  all
external relations  the  prince  felt  himself  to  be  the  repro^

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  ';531

sentative  of  tlie  State,  but  in  relation  to  his  subjects  he  was
more  apt  to  lose  this  consciousness.  Hence  we  find  that  this
absolutism  has  a  paternal  character,  and  there  are  very
numerous  examples  of  princes  who  sought  to  employ  the
whole  strength  of  their  people  for  objects  in  which  they
thought  they  discerned,  not  their  own  personal  advantage,
but  the  good  of  the  whole  ;  and  we  can  easily  understand  the
subsequent  transition  to  a  much-governing  bureaucracy,  the
activity  of  which  was  not  particularly  useful  to  the  welfare
either  of  the  prince  or  of  the  people,  but  seemed  to  be  advan-
tageous to  the  orderly  maintenance  of  the  State,  the  notion  ol
which  had  not  yet  found  its  right  place  with  regard  either  to
the  notion  of  Society  or  to  that  of  Government.

Eespect  for  the  kingly  power  in  the  minds  of  subjects  was
only  to  a  very  small  extent  based  upon  general  convictions
respecting  the  necessary  order  of  human  affairs,  and  not
exclusively  upon  that  personal  feeling  which  results  from
long-continued  intercourse.  Like  almost  all  the  institutions
of  the  Middle  Ages,  this  sovereign  power  was  based  upon
historical  tradition,  and  its  justification,  limitation,  and  exten-
sion upon  treaties  and  concessions,  which,  though  they  may
have  been  brought  about  by  force,  became  in  their  turn  a
source  of  law,  and  grew  to  be  consecrated  by  prescription.
In  this  way  conflicting  legal  rights  of  individuals  had  long
been  maintained;  when  finally  the  power  which  became
supreme  was  victorious,  it — in  as  far  as  it  was  victorious —
became  another  case  of  acquired  right,  which  now  had  a  place
in  history,  and  continued  to  influence  its  course.  Even  the
,  Church,  when  it  alternately  confirmed  and  attacked  secular
|lB|k>wer,  did  not  act  in  the  name  of  universal  principles  of
right,  but  proceeded  upon  isolated  historic  facts  of  confirmation
and  remission.  This  general  bias  of  the  time  towards  derivin!»
the  binding  force  of  an  existing  condition  not  from  one  general
source  of  all  law,  but  from  its  establishment  upon  the  factual
validity  of  earlier  conditions,  favoured  the  development  of  the
_  -notion  of  legitimacy,  that  is,  of  a  kind  of  legality  that  rests
I  pot upon natural universal right, but upon the historic

532

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

accumulation  of  acquired  rights.  Hence,  in  point  of  fact,  the
beginning  of  all  legitimacy  is  illegitimate,  although  it  need
not  be  at  the  same  time  illegal ;  even  where  the  rise  of  any
power  is  due  to  moral  impulses  of  personal  feeling  or  common
consent,  the  character  of  legitimacy  properly  belongs  to  it
only  at  a  later  stage  of  its  existence.

In  proportion  as  absolutism  consolidated  the  connection
between  different  parts  of  the  State  and  removed  the  restric-
tions which  hindered  their  reciprocal  action,  it  taught  society
to  feel  itself  a  community,  and  roused  it  to  further  efforts
which  became  dangerous  to  the  stability  of  absolutism  itself.
This  supreme  power  did  not  fully  accomplish  its  natural  task ;
although  exerting  every  effort  to  make  all  the  forces  of  the
nation  directly  serviceable  to  the  State,  and  on  this  account
hostile  to  all  subordinate  legal  power  which  in  any  degree  with-j
drew  power  from  itself,  it  yet  did  not  succeed  in  breaking:
down  all  those  barriers  to  its  own  authority  which  were  at  the
same  time  hindrances  to  the  free  movement  of  society,  and;
which,  like  it,  were  based  upon  traditional  custom,  but  wei
not,  like  it,  capable  of  justifying  their  existence  by  rendering
great  services  to  general  progress.  When  the  struggle
between  these  powers  began,  men  became  more  conscious
than  ever  before  of  the  contrast  between  absolute  natural
right  and  historic  and  legitimate  right,  as  a  ground  of  dispute ;
even  in  our  own  day  attachment  to  the  one  or  the  other
distinguishes  men's  convictions  as  regards  the  political  consti-
tution of  the  State,  as  regards  international  relations,  and
finally  as  regards  the  educative,  controlling,  and  punitive  power
over  its  members  which  society  ascribes  to  itself.  "We  will
now  for  a  brief  space  devote  our  attention  to  these  still  influ-
ential questions,  leaving  undiscussed  the  immense  abundance
of  various  social  and  political  constructions  which  have  filled  up
the  period  intervening  between  antiquity  and  the  present  time.

§  5.  When  the  Roman  looked  beyond  the  boundaries  of  his
own  kingdom  and  noted  the  similarity  of  capacities  with
which  Nature  has  endowed  all  nations,  and  seemingly  pre-
destined them  to  unity,  he  recognised  that  all  men  belong

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  533"

to  one  Human  Eace.  For  Christian  thought  the  place
of  this  notion  was  taken  by  that  of  Humanity,  men
being  regarded  not  specially  as  called  by  likeness  of
natural  gifts  to  likeness  of  joy  and  sorrow,  but  by  likeness
of  supernatural  appointment  to  help  make  up  the  composite
whole  of  a  complex  system  of  life.  Finally,  in  the  present
day  the  expression  Society  of  Human  Beings  is  preferred,  and
it  indicates  a  new  change  in  the  way  in  which  the  matter  is
regarded.  In  the  notion  of  the  Human  Eace,  the  prominent
thought  was  that  of  an  Universal,  existing  in  Nature,  and
exemplified  in  every  individual ;  in  the  notion  of  Humanity,
the  prominent  thought  was  the  idea  of  a  Whole,  that  makes
the  Individual  the  means  of  its  realization ;  in  the  notion  of
Society,  the  Individual  plainly  stands  out  as  both  goal  and
point  of  departure.  Society  does  not  exist  for  its  own  sake,
and  its  ordinances  are  not  ends  in  themselves ;  society  is
formed  and  its  internal  relations  developed,  partly  in  order  to
compensate  the  needs  and  deficiencies  of  individuals,  partly  in
order  to  make  use  of  the  capacities  of  different  individuals  for
the  mutual  benefit  of  all ;  but  the  general  order  which  results
from  this  systematization  is  only  valued  in  proportion  as  it
produces  some  good  result  which,  coming  back  to  the  indi-
vidual, is  consciously  enjoyed  by  him.

In  the  unconcealed  expression  of  this  conviction  even  well-
meaning  persons  often  see  a  tacit  threat  of  opposition  to
nearly  all  the  forms  under  which  human  life  has  always
hitherto  gone  on,  and  still  continues  to  go  on — to  the  institu-
tions of  morality  which,  in  family  relations  and  social  inter-

llfcsourse,  restrain  the  caprice  of  self-will;  to  traditional  respect
for  the  rights  of  property,  and  at  the  same  time  to  everything
that  hinders  the  free  exercise  of  this  right ;  to  the  grouping
and  dividing  of  nations  by  political  boundaries  which  have
arisen  without  reference  to  social  needs ;  to  that  self-sacrificing
obedience  which  the  State  imposes  as  an  inherited  obligation
upon  its  citizens,  generation  after  generation ;  to  the  general
duty  of  respecting  obligations  of  historic  growth  which  happen

I  HO  conflict  with  temporary  needs ;  finally,  to  all  that  could  call

L

534

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

in  question  the  sovereign  power  of  society  to  rearrange  its
construction  at  any  moment.  It  is  believed  that  if  this
mode  of  thought  were  practically  accepted,  it  could  only
become  the  source  of  an  instability  and  lack  of  rule  which
would  cause  the  speedy  disappearance  of  all  the  most
treasured  possessions  of  humanity,  and  that  there  ought  to  be
upheld  in  opposition  to  it,  the  absolute  authority  of  those
intrinsically  binding  rules  of  life  to  which  all  human  striving
after  happiness  has  to  submit  as  to  a  divine  order.

And  certainly  all  that  we  have  here  referred  to  is  called  in
question  by  this  mode  of  thought ;  but  not  in  order  to  be
denied — on  the  contrary,  in  order  that  it  may  be  reaffirmed,
and  for  better  reasons  than  before.  The  modern  idea  of
Society  and  its  imprescriptible  right  of  autonomous  legislation
is  not  new  in  itself — it  is  new  only  as  the  final  and  con-
sciously formulated  expression  of  a  presupposition  wliich  has
at  all  periods  of  history  driven  men  to  attack  existing  rela-
tions, and  which  too  is  almost  inevitably  supreme  for  some
time  in  the  life  of  the  individual.  For  all  of  us  are  earlier
conscious  of  the  restraints  which  the  condition  of  society
imposes  on  our  activity  in  many  directions,  than  we  are  of
the  grounds  of  their  justification,  and  of  those  return  services
for  our  benefit  which  that  society  renders  and  which  are  as
omnipresent,  and  hence  as  unnoticed,  as  the  atmosphere,  the
pressure  of  which  holds  our  bodies  together  ;  with  that  well-
known  inclination  to  neglect  all  middle  terms  which  cha-
racterizes Idealism  of  all  kinds,  youth  is  accustomed  to  demand
empty  space  in  which  to  exercise  the  free  wings  of  its  soul.
It  learns  by  degrees  to  understand  the  value  of  resistance  and
friction,  and  then  recognises  in  the  restraints  of  human
relations  the  unavoidable  modification  which  every  ideal
must  put  up  with  when  it  is  realized  in  a  community  of
finite  beings.  The  same  revolt  against  the  existing  order,
which  is  to  some  extent  a  reasonable  result  of  unjustifiable
evils,  and  is  to  some  extent  carried  beyond  its  due  limits
by  the  confusion  due  to  passion,  has  repeatedly  in
iOPurse  of  history  shaken  the  whole  fabric  of  society ;  but  hoj

i

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  635

ever  often  this  storm  of  revolt  may  have  threatened  to  destroy
all  those  established  forms  of  human  relation  which  we  regard
as  sacred,  and  may  for  a  brief  period  have  actually  destroyed
them,  the  waves  have  always  at  last  sunk  down  again  leaving
these  same  forms,  as  a  plain  indication  that  it  is  only  the
misunderstanding  of  passion  which  fails  to  recognise  them  as
what  they  are — that  is,  as  parts  of  an  organization  which
society  itself  (just  in  order  to  partake  of  the  good  which
it  seeks)  would  have  to  assume  consciously,  if  it  had  not  done
so  unconsciously,  from  some  obscure  impulse,  far  back  in  the
course  of  history.  Now  what  distinguishes  our  own  time
from  earlier  times  is  chiefly  the  extraordinary  facilitation
which  has  taken  place  in  the  exchange  of  opinions,  views,  and
experiences,  and  the  proportionally  high  degree  of  clearness
with  which  we  are  able  to  survey,  in  long  periods  of  past
time,  like  movements  of  human  society  with  their  motives,
their  degree  of  justice,  their  mistakes,  and  their  issues.
Therefore  if  the  present  age  again  takes  up  the  supposition
that  society  ought  to  be  self-ruling,  it  will  not  want  for
warnings  against  errors  which  experience  has  long  since  shown
the  destructiveness  of ;  if  it  is  able  to  develop  the  principle
in  peace  and  without  being  roused  to  passionate  convulsions,
we  may  hope  that  the  new  interpretation  which  it  will  give
of  the  foundation  of  human  duties  will  not  endanger  the
continuance  of  any  of  those  forms  of  order  upon  which,  from
the  beginning  of  time,  the  value  of  life  has  depended.

But  in  fact  it  is  not  the  mere  actual  continuance  of  these
oral  forms  that  will  content  the  opposers  of  the  modern
view ;  they  ask  to  be  given  another  reason  for  respecting
these  forms.  It  is  demanded  that  the  validity  of  great  social
institutions  should  be  based  not  upon  proof  of  their  usefulness
Bor  even  of  their  indispensableness  for  the  preservation  of
society,  but  on  some  inherent  and  absolute  right  in  them  to
fashion  human  existence,  however  much  its  needs  may  change
with  changing  time ;  it  is  required  that  they  should  not  have

tierely  the  significance  of  axiomata  media  of  order  proved  by

Hth

536  ■ BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  V.

whole,  but  that  by  their  own  intrinsic  majesty  they  should  he
ideals  which  men  are  bound  to  accept,  and  to  follow  which
gives  worth  to  life.  Those  who  hold  these  views  meanwhile
impute  to  the  effort  of  society  to  develop  itself,  a  one-sided
desire  for  material  welfare  as  its  source.  It  is  certainly  true
that  the  majority  of  mankind  are  always  inclined  to  this,  and
certainly  particular  periods,  tlie  industry  of  which  has  to  make
up  for  the  deficiencies  caused  by  previous  ignorance  or  idle-
ness, are  especially  exposed  to  this  danger.  But  neither  does
the  general  principle  of  social  self-development  in  itself
exclude  the  satisfaction  of  the  noblest  mental  needs  from  the
list  of  our  aims,  nor  have  they  been  always  excluded  by
practical  efforts  in  this  direction.  Men  have  taken  upon
themselves  many  sacrifices  in  the  name  of  freedom,  and  ou
the  other  hand  many  and  great  mental  advantages  have  been
sacrificed  for  the  sake  of  rules  of  human  life  supposed  to  be
of  absolute  validity.  Whatever  errors  may  be  committed  in
practice  by  ill-regulated  passions,  the  theory  of  the  autonomy
of  society  is  free  from  the  reproach  of  base  egoism  ;  it
can  reckon  the  unconditionally  binding  dictate  of  conscience,
as  readily  as  it  can  any  existing  natural  need,  among  the
actual  conditions  which  must  be  considered  in  any  attempts
of  society  to  determine  what  its  order  ought  to  be.  This
theory,  too,  has  at  heart  not  merely  material  prosperity,  and
the  unconstrainedness  of  individual  wills  ;  it  too,  since  it
wishes  to  satisfy  at  once  all  moral  aesthetic  and  sensuous
needs,  seeks  the  kingdom  of  heaven  here  upon  earth,  or  at
least  such  an  approximation  to  it  as  is  possible  upon  earth  ;
but  it  does  indeed  seek  all  this  in  a  way  different  from  that
which  is  sometimes  assigned  to  it.

We  here  again  renew  the  old  war  which  we  have  so  often
waged  against  the  worship  of  empty  forms.  It  is  lamentable
when  Science  degrades  the  rich  warmth  of  reality  to  mere
representations,  wholly  devoid  of  interest,  of  reciprocal  action
between  Unity  and  Plurality,  Finity  and  Infinity,  Centre  and
Periphery ;  it  is  still  more  deplorable  when  Art  and  Eeligion,
instead  of  gathering  enthusiasm  from  that  which  warms  all

.

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  537

hearts,  seeks  what,  is  highest  in  dogmas  and  symbols,  the
signification  of  which,  if  it  is  ever  grasped,  can  produce  nothing
but  empty  astonishment ;  but  it  is  wholly  unbearable  when
social  and  political  life  are  attempted  to  be  forced  into  forms
which  signify  something  or  other,  but  help  men  not  at  all.
And  yet  how  much  has  been  required  of  us  in  this  way  by
the  profundity  of  our  own  time ;  how  often  has  the  attempt
been  made  to  deduce  from  comparisons  analogies  and  symbols,
of  which  we  can  understand  neither  the  justification  nor  the
evidential  force,  that  which  can  only  be  derived  from  practical
needs  which  are  actually  felt !  Following  the  comparison
which  had  already  proved  a  failure  in  the  hands  of  Plato,  the
different  ranks  of  human  society  have  been  obliged  to  submit
to  be  regarded  as  an  imitation  of  bodily  functions ;  at  times
when  astronomy  has  impressed  men's  minds,  the  different
gradations  of  relationship  between  the  central  body  of  a
system  and  its  planet  and  between  the  planet  and  its  satellite,
and  the  complicated  regularity  of  their  orbits,  have  seemed  to
exhibit  a  mysterious  type  of  political  order ;  less  arbitrary  is
the  procedure  of  those  who  seek  the  exemplar  according  to
which  the  articulation  of  the  social  and  political  organism  is
to  be  carried  out,  not  in  any  one  isolated  case  in  Nature  to
which  another  and  contradictory  case  may  always  be  opposed,
but  in  the  very  ground  and  base  of  all  things,  in  the  nature
of  God,  in  the  Trinity  in  Unity,  in  the  reciprocal  action  of
the  divine  attributes.  All  these  attempts  forget  that  what  is
right  for  one  thing  is  by  no  means  also  appropriate  for  another
thing,  which  is  really  dissimilar,  or  which  perhaps  does  not  even
appear  similar;  what  is  just  in  these  comparisons  is  not  valid
for  us  in  virtue  of  the  analogy — ^but  it  is  because  that  which
is  just  is  quite  independently  and  originally  valid  for  the
relations  with  which  we  are  concerned,  that  the  analogy  may
be  conveniently  used  as  an  ornament  of  our  discourse  upon  such
subjects,  without  however  having  any  further  evidential  force.
More  deceptive  than  these  arbitrary  fancies  and  equally  base-
less are  views  which  would  regulate  human  relations  according
to  notions  which  have  a  wider  application,  which through

538

BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  V.

their  own  power  constitute themselves  supreme  principles,
and  the  expression  of  which  in  phaenomena  would  seem  to
be the  necessary  business  of  all  reality. As logically  the
particular  is  subordinated  to  the  universal;  as  rest  is  phy-
sically the  result  of  equilibrium,  and  movement  the  result  of
the  reciprocal  action  of  unequal  forces ;  as  we  derive  aesthetic
satisfaction  only  from  a  plurality  which  may  be  apprehendec
as  a  clearly  discerned  unity :  so  also,  it  is  imagined,  is  societ)
bound — in  the  separation  and  subordination  of  classes,  in  the
division  of  labour  and  distribution  of  rights,  and  in  the  con«|
nection of  the  whole  under the unity of government — tc
exhibit  those  fundamental  ideas  of  reality  in  actual  life,
say  to  exhibit — for  certainly  what  these  views  regard  as  oi
primary importance  is not that such social arrangements!
should be useful or necessary or unavoidable ; they ai
required,  not  to  meet  a  want,  but  to  exist  in  order  that  thosejj
formal  notions  of  order  should  be  reflected  in  them. But  the
end  of  human  society  is  not  to  act  proverbs  or  to  present
tableaux  vivants,  the  symbolic  meaning  of  wliieh  may  delight
spectators  dwelling  in  other  planets ;  human  Ufe,  with  the
infinity  of  struggles,  passions,  pains,  and  cares  which  it  include
is  far  too  earnest  to  be  used  for  such  a  purpose. The  onlj
order  that  can be obligatory  for  us  is  that  which  in  some
actual  and  legitimate causal  connection  is  indispensable  oi
helpful  for  the  accomplishment  of  our  human  destiny. I  d(
not  mean  by  this  that  the  organization  of  society  should  be
limited  to  some  slight  and  rough  systematization  corresponding
to  the  most  pressing  needs,  and  should  despise  every  arrange-
ment the  ideal  significance  of  which  might  adorn  life ;  in
far  as  this  significance  is  vividly  felt  it  is  rather  itself  to  bel
reckoned  among  the  conditions  which  effectively  promote  ourj
improvement;  but  it  must  be  felt  in  order  to  be  justitied.|
Every  form  of  which  the  symbolic  or  speculative  meaning  ia
plain  only  to  the  erudite  or  in  isolated  moments  of  reflection,!
without  rousing  or  restraining  any  activity  in  real  life,  is  ai
artificial  thing  that  has  no  binding  force.

A  general  over-estimation  of  human  affairs,  of  which  oi

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY,  539

philosophy  is  not.  altogether  innocent,  produces  or  favours
these  errors.  For  a  long  time  historical  existence  was  regarded
as  a  confused  stream  in  contrast  to  the  immutable  order  of
Nature ;  subsequently  reflection,  finding  in  it  no  less  than  in
Nature,  traces  of  intelligible  development  and  system,  grew
accustomed  to  regard  the  forms  in  which  this  intelligibility
was  expressed  as  being  ends  in  themselves,  in  much  the  same
way  as  those  which  are  pointed  out  by  concepts  of  kind  in
Nature.  As  Nature  brings  forth  animals  and  plants,  in  order
that  there  may  be  animals  and  plants,  and  not  for  any  other
reason,  so  the  political  construction  of  the  State  came  to  be
looked  upon  as  the  evolutional  end  predetermined  and  pre-
figured by  its  eternal  Idea.  The  State  itself,  it  was  thought,
should  exist  for  its  own  sake  alone — to  produce  a  State
in  order  that  there  should  be  a  State  being  part  of  the  busi-
ness of  mankind,  who  are  called  upon  to  realize  this  among
other  forms  of  their  organization  —  the  concepts  of  such
forms  (as  ends  in  themselves  and  eternal)  being  regarded
as  the  goal  of  human  development.  This  view  naturally
has  a  dangerous  bias  towards  doctrinaire  deduction  of  political
principles  ;  it  believes  that  there  is  an  eternal  Idea  of  the
State  not  only  in  the  sense  of  a  permanent  task  which  it  has
to  accomplish,  but  also  in  the  sense  of  a  type  which  in  all  the
detail  of  its  permanently  binding  systematization  is  a  form
that  ought  to  be  realized  for  its  own  sake,  independent  of  any
other  purpose.  We  cannot  agree  with  this  view  either  in
regard  to  the  State  or  in  regard  to  all  the  other  forms  of  human
life  which  with  the  State  have  been  concatenated  into  a  series
of  stages  in  the  development  of  the  World-soul — stages  which
that  soul  (in  the  part  of  its  path  in  which  it  wears  human
form)  has  to  go  through,  in  order  that  in  each  successive  stage
H  it  may  realize  its  own  being  with  increased  perfection.  All  these
developments  seem  to  us  to  be  not individual  phases and

I  forms  of  heavenly  light,  whose  outline  and  configuration  are
actually  filled  by  the  Supreme  Good,  but  forms  of  human  effort  in
which  men  struggle  to  reach  that  Good.  There  is  no  real  subject,
no  substance,  no  place  in  which  anything  worthy  or  sacred  can

540

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEU  V.

be  realized  except  the  individual  Ego,  the  personal  soul ;
beyond  the  inner  life  of  the  subjective  spirit  with  its  con-
sciousness of  Ideas,  its  enthusiasm  for  them,  its  efforts  to
realize  them,  there  is  no  superior  region  of  a  so-called  objective
spirit  the  forms  and  articulation  of  which  are  in  their  mere
existence  more  worthy  than  the  subjective  souL  It  ia
imagined  that  the  objective  spirit  reveals  itself  in  the  mere
forms  of  social  life — but  all  relations  between  individuals  are
of  worth  only  in  as  far  as  they  are,  and  because  they  are,  not
only  between  those  individuals  but  also  in  them,  being  felt  and
enjoyed  in  living  souls  according  to  their  worth.  There  is
nothing  gained  in  the  existence  of  family  relations,  if  by  family
we  understand  merely  the  formal  connection  between  parents
and  children ;  in  this  sense  animals  and  many  of  the  plants
in  a  garden  are  parents  and  brothers  and  sisters,  but  it  is
nothing  to  them ;  that  which  ought  to  be  realized  is  the  sum
of  the  feelings  which  such  formal  relations  produce  in  the
minds  of  those  who  belong  to  one  family,  their  minds  beingi
like  foci  in  which  alone  the  rays  that  elsewhere  are  without]
meaning  concentre  to  form  a  bright  and  living  picture
And  of  just  as  little  consequence  is  it  that  Political  Society  or  I
State  or  Church  should  simply  exist,  or  be  developed  In  this
way  or  that ;  if  all  these  have  necessary  forms  which  men  arei
bound  to  keep  to,  the  binding  force  of  such  forms  always
depends  upon  the  degree  in  which  they  correspond  to  per-
manent or  temporary  human  needs,  and  are  capable  of  beiugl
brought  nearer  to  perfection  both  in  themselves  and  in  those]
external  states  in  which  they  can  be  realized.

§  6.  Radicalism  is  accustomed  in  atomistic  fashion  to]
oppose  the  individual  to  society,  and  absolute  and  inalienable
personal  rights  to  social  privileges  and  restrictions.  But  it]
does  not  succeed  in  showing  how  an  isolated  human  being!
can  be  a  subject  of  rights.  Against  the  powers  of  Nature,  thel
ravages  of  disease,  the  fierceness  of  wild  beasts,  we  can  establish]
no  right  to  the  security  of  our  existence ;  we  feel  that  what
Nature  has  endowed  us  with  is  only  more  or  less  extended!
capacities  and  the  wish  to  exercise  them  ;  but our  natural!

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  541

claims  only  become  rights  when  there  is  some  one  else  who
can  recognise  them.  It  is  certainly  true  that  they  then
become  rights  not  merely  to  the  extent  to  which  recognition
is  actually  accorded  to  them,  for  the  recognition  may  fail
where  it  ought  to  be  forthcoming ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that
this  recognition,  when  it  is  accorded,  does  not  consist  in  a
bare  perception  of  rights  attaching  in  finished  completeness  to
individuals  as  such  without  any  reference  to  reciprocal  inter-
course. Not  only  to  fear  the  claims  of  others  as  a  power  that
may  possibly  be  turned  against  ourselves,  but  also  to  respect
them  as  rights,  is  a  thing  to  which  we  can  be  compelled  by
nothing  but  the  feeling  that  we  are  morally  bound  to  help
forward  the  accomplishment  of  the  task  to  which  mankind
are  destined  (and  which  society  alone  makes  possible)  by
renouncing  absolute  freedom  of  arbitrary  individual  will.
Our  right  is  something  which  another  feels  to  be  obligatory,
expecting  in  return  that  we  shall  be  similarly  bound  towards
him.  Therefore  if  we  speak  of  the  original  rights  of  human
persons,  we  here  regard  each  man^not  as  a  solitary  individual,
but  think  of  him,  under  the  concept  of  a  person,  as  one  who
is  in  intercourse  with  others,  as  member  of  a  society  of  which
all  the  constituents  are  not  indeed  always  acting  and  reacting
upon  one  another,  but  still  only  have  rights,  as  regards  one
another,  in  as  far  and  for  as  long  as  this  reciprocal  action
goes  on.

It  may  here  be  regarded  as  sufficient  (though  the  thought
is  not  in  such  a  case  apprehended  in  quite  the  same  way)  to
admit  that  the  opportunity  of  making  rights  effective  first
occurs  in  society,  but  that  their  actual  content  remains  fixed,
as  a  series  of  requirements  to  the  fulfilment  of  which  man's
destiny  carries  him,  in  anticipation  of  all  special  relations.
When  the  transition  is  made  from  theory  to  practice,  it  is  soon
seen  that  these  anticipatory  demands  consist  only  in  extremely
general  claims  ;  and  that  when  we  come  to  the  question  of  how
a  number  of  men  are  to  live  together  in  the  same  world,  how
they  are  to  make  a  common  use  of  their  resources,  and  how
to  manage  their  sources  of  enjoyment,  these  claims  need  much

542

BOOK  VIII. CHA.PTER  V.

more  dose  and  definite  limitation  before  they  can  be  carried
into  efl'ect.  Here  we  may  make  a  distinction  between  two
things  that  can  never  be  separated  in  reality.  When  a  number
of  men  live  together  in  one  community,  there  daily  arise  a
multitude  of  ever-recurring  similar  cases  of  collision  between
conflicting  claims ;  and  hence  to  make  any  kind  of  rational
existence  possible,  it  becomes  necessary  to  force  individual
wills  to  give  up  their  freedom  in  some  definite  degree.  The
rules  of  such  renunciation  (concerning  chiefly  relations  dealt
with  by  the  Law  of  Private  Right)  are  thought  to  have
binding  force  because  they  are,  in  general  at  least,  the  dictates
of  an  ever-present  reason,  founded  in  the  nature  of  men  and
the  nature  of  things,  and  hence  receive  fresh  confirmation  at
every  moment.  The  case  is  supposed  to  be  quite  different  as
regards  those  legal  determinations  which  have  grown  up  as
time  went  on,  and  which,  embracing  and  enclosing  the  whole
life  of  man,  set  to  his  arbitrary  will  bounds  for  which  no
justification  can  be  found  either  in  the  notion  of  human  destiny
or  in  the  nature  of  things.  _  It  is  thought  that  to  allow  these
customary  arrangements  to  continue  in  force  is  to  resist  that
eternal  law  of  reason  which  requires  that  all  human  affairs
should  be  continually  guided  directly  by  its  own  immutable
laws.

It  is  a  matter  of  course  that  among  the  conditions,  which
are  only  historically  explicable,  there  are  primarily  reckoned;
political  relations  and  the division of society  into  different:
ranks,  but  the  line  of  demarcation  has  not  always  been  steadily!
fixed ;  communism  shows  that  even  essential  parts  of  the  Law
of  Private  Kight  may  be  reckoned  among  those  laws  and  legal .
institutions  which  seem  to  drag  on  their  existence  like  a  sloW|
disease. This  very  fact  shows  the  untenableness  of  the  whole
distinction. If  man  could  live  his  destined  life  in  solitude,;
and  if  he  entered  only  incidentally  into  social  relations,  then
indeed  no  form  of  society  which  had  grown  up  historically  I
would be binding  on  him without his individual consent.
But  man  has  no  power  over  the  place  and  time  of  his  birth,
both  of  which  involve  his  life  from  the  first  in  a  network  of

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  543

conditions  tliat  have  grown  up  historically ;  he  does  not  rise
to  the  independence  of  which  his  nature  allows  without  the
assistance  of  others,  who  in  this  very  work  are  protected  only
by  an  historically  established  reign  of  law  in  his  society ;  his
mental  development  would  be  a  nullity  if  the  same  condition
of  society  did  not  bring  to  him  in  countless  ways  the  material
of  mental  growth,  and  aid  him  in  making  use  of  it.  Thus
then  before  he  becomes  a.  person  having  rights  concerning
which  he  can  dispute,  he  is  profoundly  indebted  to  the  institu-
tions of  society  for  the  very  development  of  his  personality.
And  the  same  thing  holds  of  society  as  a  whole.  If  a  number
of  beings  endowed  with  mind,  without  ancestors  or  previous
history,  were  suddenly  to  arise  in  space,  having  similar  natures
and  being  at  a  similar  stage  of  development,  they  would  be
at  liberty  to  reconstruct  their  social  order  at  any  moment
by  arbitrary  convention.  But  any  human  society  embraces
countless  gradations  of  age,  with  just  as  numerous  gradations
of  rights  and  obligations,  of  rational  insight,  and  of  helpless
nonage  ;  hence  it  can  never,  as  a  whole,  constitute  one  subject,
able  in  real  truth  to  exhibit  and  realize  a  homogeneous  general
will ;  it  must  always  regard  the  resolutions  which  it  takes  as
binding  even  upon  those  of  its  members  who  were  incapable
of  taking  part  in  them,  who  will  therefore  on  the  other  hand  be

I  unable  to  refuse  to  recognise,  as  having  a  right  to  exist,  those
transmitted  conditions  which  it  had  no  hand  in  establishing.
We  find  nowhere  realized  the  assumption  of  Radicalism,  that
in  the  construction  of  human  society  an  altogether  new
departure  might  be  taken,  or  the  past  be  treated  as  of  no
account.
This,  however,  is  in  fact  only  one  aspect  of  the  matter.
History  continues  its  course,  and  the  conditions  by  which
one  age  seeks  to  order  human  life  can  neither  furnish  irre-
■  vocable  rules  for  the  future,  nor  have,  as  means  for  the
B  attainment  of  human  ends,  the  unconditioned  majesty  of  the
moral  commands  themselves.  Only  it  would  be  an  error,
destructive  of  the  security  of  human  existence,  to  treat  obso-

644  BOOK  VIIL CHAPTER  V.

are  growing  unfair  as  becoming  naturally  extinct,  and  inno-
vations of  which  the  intrinsic  justice  is  indubitable  as  though
they  were  legally  established  claims.  It  is  just  the  historical
connection  of  all  things  which  makes  that  which  is  growing
old  remain  a  power  still  to  be  recognised  and  to  be  got  rid  of
in  a  legal  manner ;  and  new  impulses  to  development  cannot
grow  up  unrestrained  as  in  empty  space,  but  must  come  to
terms  with  that  which  already  exists.  Not  even  a  condition
that  owed  its  origin  wholly  to  unlawful  force  can,  when  it
lias  subsisted  for  some  time,  be  summarily  set  aside  as  invalid
with  all  its  consequences ;  the  life  of  society  could  not  pause
from  the  time  of  its  establishment,  nor  hold  back  from  all
connection  with  it — engagements  laudable  in  themselves  will
have  been  entered  into,  legal  agreements  of  unquestionable
validity  concluded,  and  the  prosperity  of  society  advanced,  all
in  formal  recognition  or  acceptance  of  the  illegal  condition ;
and  if  this  unjust  foundation  were  done  away,  it  would  be
impossible  to  give  up  along  with  it  the  covenants  and  gains
in  negotiating  which  men  had  had  to  make  use  of  it.  Still
less  can  that  which  was  once  law  disappear  of  itself  simply
because  the  spirit  of  the  time  has  changed ;  the  consequences
of  such  law  will  have  pervaded  society  in  all  directions  with
personal  rights  and  duties  which  can  only  be  sacrificed  to  the
new  condition  that  it  is  desired  to  establish,  by  means  of
compensation  and  voluntary  renunciation  on  the  part  of  those
concerned.  To  accept  this  view  is  the  moral  duty  of  all
parties;  the  generation  that  is  going  out  cannot  bind  all
future  ages  by  its  own  conceptions  of  life,  and  that  which  is
growing  up  cannot  lay  exclusive  claim  to  all  the  world,  seeing
that  it  has  been  brought  into  possession  of  it  by  those  who
went  before.

§  7.  We  see  that  men  of  the  present  day  led  by  such
convictions  are  in  a  variety  of  ways  occupied  in  seeking  for
legal  forms  which  may  admit  of  the  necessary  progress  being
made  without  breach  of  legal  continuity.  These  efforts  can
only  be  successful  in  particular  directions ;  the  historical
work  of  humanity  cannot  once  for  all  be  brought  up  to  a

i

L

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  545

point  from  which  onwards  all  further  development  may  pro-
ceed without  struggle  as  naturally  resulting  from  the  final
adjustment  of  the  social  mechanism.  It  must  suffice  if  men
will  accept  the  guidance  of  general  principles  which  are
favourable  to  this  view;  difficulties  there  will  always  be,
either  old  or  new,  which  at  the  moment  when  they  are  most
strongly  felt  can  be  obviated  only  by  temporary  expedients,
and  not  fundamentally  solved  for  all  future  time.

The  individual  will  submits  more  easily  to  any  limitation,
if  this  appears  to  be  in  fact  an  unavoidable  prerequisite  of
social  life ;  but  it  is  irritated  and  offended  if  the  same  demand
is  enforced  upon  it  as  an  original  right  of  society,  without
regard  to  this  practical  signification.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
society  will  always  exercise  an  educating,  guiding,  and  pro-
tecting power  over  its  individual  members ;  but  among  the
first  of  those  general  principles  referred  to  above  must  be
reckoned  the  maxim  that  society  should  not  formally  use
this  influence  as  a  right  belonging  to  it,  nor  (as  is  always
very  likely  to  happen)  systematize  this  in  permanent  in-
stitutions to  a  much  greater  extent  than  the  nature  of  the
matter  requires.  Of  all  that  is  demanded  by  moral  custom
and  the  spirit  of  the  age,  by  habit  and  fashion,  no  more  should
be  made  law  than  is  indispensably  necessary  in  order  to  pre-
serve social  life  from  the  encroachments  of  rude  and  arbitrary
caprice;  and  these  laws  will  have  to  take  the  form  of
prohibitions,  not  of  commands.  Without  doubt  also  it  is
the  interest  of  society  that  the  culture  of  its  members  should
reach  a  certain  stage,  and  should  take  some  definite  direction
in  preference  to  others ;  and  we  do  not  in  the  least  oppose  those
who  look  upon  guardianship  of  this  interest  as  an  exalted  part  of
the  historical  work  of  society ;  but  desirable  as  it  is  that  this
conviction  should  be  powerful  in  the  minds  of  all  individuals,
and  should  strengthen  their  readiness  to  acquire  such  a  degree
of  culture,  yet  it  should  by  no  means  be  regarded  as  the
"source  of  an  authority  entitling  society  to  claim  obedience  for
any  educational  system  which  it  may  see  fit  to  prescribe.
The  moral  spirit  which  should  animate  humanity  will  every

VOL.  II.  2  M

546  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEE  V.

where  be  more  perfect  in  proportion  as  it  is  more  immediately
guided  by  the  loftiest  views ;  but  the  mechanism  of  social
arrangements  has  to  be  based  upon  proximate  and  unques-
tionable grounds.  The  historical  work  of  any  age  and  the
proximate  goal  of  its  culture  is  not  written  visibly  in  the
heavens,  that  all  who  run  may  read,  but  is  inteipreted  by
individuals  according  to  their  intelligence ;  if  the  uncertain
content  of  this  interpretation  is  made  a  legal  basis  of  social
institutions  the  result  is  apt  to  be  a  guardianship  of  the  many
by  the  few  which,  though  acquiesced  in  quite  contentedly  in
as  far  as  it  grows  up  spontaneously,  always  offends  when  it
appears  as  legal  ordinance.  Hence  society  has  not  only  to
refrain  from  fixing  its  requirements  in  too  great  detail,  but
even  that  which  it  demands  it  must  (in  as  far  as  it  demands
it)  regard  as  being  the  condition  of  a  return  service  which  it
is  itself  able  to  offer.  Upon  this  sober  ground  of  reciprocal
and  general  interest,  public  institutions  wiU  rest  more  securely
than  upon  pretensions  to  insight  into  the  eternal  cosmic  order,
of  which  no  one  has  been  appointed  the  exclusive  interpreter.

And  these  return  services  of  society  consist  far  more  in
the  natural  reactions  of  the  interests  which  it  embraces,  and
which  it  has  to  make  men  respect,  than  in  advantages  afforded
by  it  expressly  and  of  set  purpose.  For  society  does  not
establish  and  confer  individual  rights,  but  recognises  them
and  guarantees  the  possibility  of  their  exercise,  on  condition
that  individuals  in  some  respects  renounce  their  unrestricted
use.  It  only  confers  privileges  which  arise  from  its  own
constitution  —  governmental  posts  which  cannot  naturally
belong  to  any  individual,  because  they  are  themselves  a
result  of  the  voluntary  renunciation  of  other  men ;  for  the
rest  its  power  is  limitative,  and  its  activity  (in  as  far  as
legally  determined)  is  exercised  chiefly  in  affording  security
and  protection.

The amount of limitation which it can impose upon |
individual  wills  must  itself  be  but  limited. No  system  of
human  regulations  can  claim  authority  to  dispose  irrevocably
of  a  man's  whole  life ;  every  one  must  be  allowed  liberty  to^ ,

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  547

leave  the  State  to  which  he  belongs,  his  social  rank  and
calling,  and  his  Church,  and  to  break  national  ties ;  every  one
must  be  free  to  throw  off  those  conditions  of  dependence  into
which  he  has  been  born — not  indeed  unconditionally,  and  not
without  having  paid  the  obligations  which  he  owed,  yet  still
as  a  right  and  not  a  favour  it  is  due  to  him,  being  a  free
person,  that  he  should  at  his  own  choice  give  or  withhold  at
least  a  supplementary  agreement  to  a  condition  of  things
into  which  he  came  at  first  without  any  agreement  on  his
part.  And  indeed  freedom  cannot  always  be  restricted  to  this
possibility  of  separation  when  existing  relations  are  felt  to  be
irksome  ;  nor  can  society  everywhere  require  that  if  any  man
disapprove  the  laws  that  rale  in  a  given  region,  he  should
quit  that  region ;  but  while  entitled  to  treat  in  this  fashion
the  wilfulness  and  insubordination  of  individuals,  it  cannot
take  such  an  attitude  towards  any  wider  current  of  change  in
the  general  mind.  It  is  not  the  duty  of  society  to  accom-
modate itself  unresistingly  to  new  claims ;  but  where  it  loses
its  own  unity  and  is  divided  on  essential  points,  a  con-
servative minority  cannot  permanently  exclude  a  dissenting
majority  from  participation  in  the  benefits  of  social  order  to
which  it  has  a  multitude  of  traditional  claims — claims  that
cannot  be  extinguished  by  its  divergence  from  rules  which
are  not  immutable.  It  is  easy  to  scoff,  and  to  say  that  in
this  way  the  majority  of  votes  (so  often  irrational)  would
iecide  human  destiny ;  and  to  demand  that  votes  should  be
^weighed  and  not  merely  counted;  those  who  make  such  a
lemand  do  not  perceive  the  tremendous  assumption  involved
taking  for  granted  that  there  anywhere  exists  an  infallible
jrgan  able  to  weigh  votes  in  the  manner  required.  Even  to
jount  the  majority  of  votes  is  hard  enough ;  and  we  must
[jontent  ourselves  for  the  most  part  with  this  imperfect
means  of  decision  ;  taking  care,  however — with  due  recogni-
tion of  its  imperfection — that  it  should,  whenever  possible,
supply  its  own  corrective.  And  practically  this  can  only
be  done  through  the  delays  which  the  existing  laws  and
constitution oppose to the realization of the  new  claims.

Ik_

548  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEE  V.

We  cau  only  hope  from  the  influence  of  time  that  (as  a
result  of  that  free  exchange  of  opinions  which  must  be
allowed  and  fostered)  beliefs  may  be  amended,  rash  haste
moderated,  misunderstandings  cleared  up,  vague  dreams
developed  to  practicable  projects,  and  the  abiding  heart
and  seed  of  fluctuating  efforts  held  fast  and  cherished —
the  greater  weight  of  just  opinion  being  thus  in  truth
assured  of  victory  over  the  mere  majority  of  votes.  It  is
indeed  not  impossible,  and  to  some  it  may  seem  very  pro-
bable, that  notwithstanding  everything,  mankind  will  still
go  on  permanently  wandering  in  error ;  but  this  would  be
an  evil  fate  that  could  not  be  remedied  by  any  legal
measures.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  every  one  should
patiently  acquiesce  in  this  ill  fate ;  we  can  praise  the  heroes
of  history  who  in  doing  battle  against  it  either  conquered  or
were  destroyed  —  though  in  delivering  this  judgment  we
altogether  transgress  the  boundaries  of  the  consideration
with  which  we  are  here  occupied.  For  historical  develop-
ment, which  remains  ever  superior  to  our  poor  political
and  social  art,  will  not  in  the  future  any  more  than  in
the  past  proceed  without  much  disturbance  from  breaches
of  law,  coups  d'6tat,  and  violent  subversions  of  existing  rela-
tions. Such  historical  events,  which  simply  show  that  the
guidance  of  affairs  has  temporarily  escaped  from  governmental
control,  may  be  regarded  as  blessings  or  curses  according  to
their  results ;  but  as  loujg  as  it  still  remains  a  question
whether  human  reason  can  guide  the  course  of  history,
they  can  never  be  taken  into  account  beforehand  as  admis-
sible factors  in  its  development.  All  coherent  interest  in
the  public  affairs  of  mankind  is  injured  at  the  root  as  soon
as  notions  which  are  opposed  to  law  are  regarded  as  entitled
to  the  practical  guidance  of  these  affairs  ;  to  build  hopes  upon
arbitrary  caprice  which  puts  itself  in  the  place  of  Providence,
is  like  expecting  the  cure  of  some  bodily  ailment  from  the
doubtful  issue  of  a  frightful  disease  artificially  induced.  Let
us  appropriate  the  golden  saying  of  Kant — If  Law  ceases,
worth  of  human  life  on  earth  ceases  too.

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  549

I  8.  We  have  spoken  of  human  society  as  existent  and  as
being  actually  occupied  in  giving  itself  the  organization  cor-
responding to  its  destiny  and  its  needs.  But  when  the
notion  of  Society  first  arose,  men  had  lived  for  thousands  of
years  divided  into  various  states,  between  which  there  had
constantly  been  hostile  contact ;  and  for  a  long  time  before,
each  of  these  states  had  by  an  organization  of  its  corporate
life  proceeding  from  quite  other  causes,  anticipated  the  work
which  social  theories  are  supposed  to  begin.  Hence  it  may
seem  useless  to  distinguish  the  notion  of  Society  from
that  of  the  State — the  State  being  the  only  form  in  which
hitherto  communities  embracing  all  the  interests  of  human
life  have  been  able  to  subsist.  Yet  it  is  not  quite  useless
to  consider  which  of  the  two  notions  presupposes  the
other  —  whether  the  State  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  basis
of  all  possibility  of  human  solidarity  and  the  source  of  all
rights  and  duties  ;  or  whether  the  destiny  of  Society  should
be  considered  as  the  goal  for  the  attainment  of  which  Society
itself  requires  state  -  organization  as  a  necessary  condition.
In  the  latter  case  Society  may  be  entirely  hidden  beneath
the  State,  as  the  root  which  is  the  source  of  growth  and
nourishment  below  the  spreading  ramage  of  the  developed
tree  ;  but  amid  all  the  storms  that  might  hurt  the  latter,
hope  and  help  would  be  derivable  only  from  a  knowledge  of
the  vital  impulse  that  flows  forth  from  the  former.  The
foregoing  remarks  will  have  made  it  plain  in  what  way  we
ourselves  should  answer  this  question ;  but  the  characteristic
development  of  modern  times  gives  it  another  more  practical
signification.  It  makes  it  seem  at  least  possible  to  hopeful
minds  that  the  numerous  states  which  still  divide  the  world
may  finally  be  replaced  by  one  Universal  Society,  which  just
on  account  of  its  universality  would  no  longer  have  altogether
the  form  of  those  states  the  work  of  which  it  would  under-
\  take — or  that  at  any  rate,  without  the  demolition  of  existing
!  political  structures.  Society  may  be  called  to  exercise  over
them  a  power  which  hitherto  it  has  only  possessed  by  their
means.

550  BOOK  Vm. CHAPTER  V.

The  increasing  relations  between  the  dififerent  divisions
of  mankind  have  indeed  in  a  great  measure  changed  the  signi-
fication of  political  boundaries,  and  have  given  new  stimulus
to  the  thought  of  cosmopolitanism.  Similar  forms  of  social
intercourse  and  way  of  life,  and  like  notions  of  honour,  duty,  and
good  manners,  are  diffused  over  countries  and  among  the  various
ranks  of  their  populations  in  proportion  as  the  intercourse
between  these  becomes  general ;  not  only  are  arts  and  sciences
to  a  very  large  extent  cultivated  in  similar  ways,  but  their  most
splendid  productions  are  being  more  and  more  brought  into
connection,  so  as  to  form  one  store  of  universal  literature  acces-
sible to  all ;  the  Church,  not  indeed  embracing  all  the  interests
of  life  but  cherishing  those  which  are  noblest  and  highest,  has
for  ages  spread  its  arms  abroad,  regardless  of  the  boundaries
of  states,  and  distinguished  chiefly  by  a  complex  organization,
bound  neither  to  territories  nor  to  nationalities ;  innumerable
associations  for  the  pursuit  of  economic  ends  have  long
reckoned  among  their  members  men  belonging  to  different
states,  such  associations  being  made  possible  by  respect  for
commercial  obligations,  kept  up  by  mutual  interest;  thus,
over  a  great  part  of  the  earth  the  individual  finds  himself
supported  and  restrained  by  a  spirit  of  social  order  which  is
not  directly  due  to  any  political  connection  between  those
whom  it  affects.  It  will  be  objected  that  in  the  fortunate
case  of  voluntary  performance  on  both  sides  of  what  is
equitable,  this  international  intercourse  could  only  dis-
pense with  state -help  in  the  same  way  as  under  similar
conditions  it  could  be  dispensed  with  in  the  intercourse
between  individuals  within  a  country ;  while  its  general  possi-
bility depends  upon  the  further  possibility  of  calling  upon  the
governments  of  distant  countries  to  aid,  in  virtue  of  treaties,
in  compelling  the  rendering  of  reciprocal  services  which  have
been  refused.  And  this  is  certainly  the  case  at  present ;  but
the  cosmopolitan  theory  will  reply  that  it  is  so  only  because
hitherto  individual  states  which  have  grown  up  historically
have  regarded  themselves  as  constituting  divisions  within
society ;  and  because,  each recognising  as  binding  on  itse

li

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  551

its  own  special  legal  customs  (likewise  of  historical  growth),
none  has  been  ready  and  willing  to  undertake  all  the  obliga-
tions of  such  international  intercourse,  each  requiring  special
treaties  as  a  basis  of  its  procedure.  An  Universal  Society
would  also  not  be  able  to  dispense  with  administrative,  legis-
lative, judicial,  and  executive  organs ;  but  it  would  establish
organs  that  would  not  have  their  action  interfered  with  by  the
intricacy  and  diffuseness  which  the  present  plurality  of  states
causes.

We  will  not  discuss  such  projects  in  detail ;  to  sketch  out
plans  for  the  organization  of  a  community  is  always  hazardous.
To  deduce  from  the  notion  of  a  State  its  necessary  functions,
and  to  set  up  a  special  organ  for  each  of  these,  and  definite
rules  for  the  co-operation  of  these  organs,  is  all  quite  worth-
less if  it  cannot  be  shown  that  men  will  give  themselves  up
to  carrying  out  and  enduring  whatever  this  logically  developed
organization  of  life  may  require  of  them.  And  it  is  a  fact
that  careful  consideration  of  men's  nature  and  habits,  such  as
can  only  result  from  many-sided  knowledge  of  life  and  history,
furnishes  no  ideal  pictures  of  assured  practicability;  for  how-
ever well -authorized  and  however  respectable  may  be  men's
efforts  to  attain  some  yet  unenjoyed  good,  their  being  so  is
never  any  guarantee  that  the  use  made  of  it  when  attained
will  be  either  respectable  or  admissible.  The  general  con-
science of  mankind  may  slowly  grow  in  insight  into  our
duties  and  destiny ;  but  the  successive  generations  of  living
men  who  are  to  fulfil  this  destiny  grow  up  each  afresh
with  all  the  imperfections  and  faults  of  the  breed ;  and  it  is
seldom  that  those  who  come  into  power  show  themselves
capable  of  establishing  that  better  condition  for  which,  when
in  opposition,  they  fought  with  good  right  against  existing
defects.  Hence  detailed  plans  for  the  future  organization  of
(Society  seem  to  us  worthless,  but  very  important  the  general
thoughts  and  sentiments  which  are  expressed  in  them ;  for
these  will  be  capable  of  giving  a  definite  character  to  our
treatment  of  actual  historic  conditions,  even  when  the  attain-
ment of  those  general  ideals  has  to  be  given  up. From  the

552  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

remotest  times  struggles  between  different  states  have  filled
the  world  with  their  noise,  and  the  general  temper  of  the
present  age — intent  upon  the  development  of  all  mental
powers  and  material  prosperity — very  naturally  doubts  the
authority  of  political  constructions,  which  on  the  one  hand
claim  that  their  organization  shall  embrace  the  whole  of
human  life,  and  on  the  other  hand  are  continually  exposing
the  treasures  which  men  have  won  to  the  most  destructive
shocks.  And  hence  it  is  worth  our  while  to  ask,  what  the
State  is  and  must  remain  for  Modern  Society,  and  in  what
sense  that  form  of  it  which  has  grown  up  historically  can  be
transformed  so  as  to  harmonize  better  with  the  growing  need
which  men  feel  for  freedom  of  development.

Similarity  of  language  is  an  indispensable  condition  of  the
civilisation  of  even  the  smallest  communities ;  for  without
direct  mutual  understanding,  extending  even  to  the  small
things  of  daily  life  and  equally  possible  for  every  member,
we  cannot  conceive  a  society  of  which  the  members  have  all
the  interests  of  life  in  common.  But  within  such  a  small
circle  the  requirements  of  civilisation  do  not  find  full  satisfac-
tion ;  even  for  the  supply  of  material  resources  foreign  inter-
course is  necessary ;  and  not  less  is  there  an  effort  of  mind
supplement  the  one-sided  stimuli  received  in  daily  intercourse
by  manifold  contact  with  foreign  but  intelligible  spheres  of
life.  Hence  where  geographical  conditions  do  not  hinder,  it
is  communities  whose  languages  are  similar  that  first  dra^
near  to  each  other  ;  and  the  higher  the  development  attained'
by  art  and  science  the  more  closely  are  such  communities
united  in  reciprocal  sympathy  and  praiseworthy  emulation,  not
only  by  similarity  in  their  views  of  right  and  in  institutions  pro-
motive of  mutual  intercourse,  but  also  by  the  consciousness  of
common  intellectual  possessions.  But  as  the  individual  does
not  know  until  he  is  in  a  foreign  land  all  the  worth  of  home,
so  also  national  culture  and  the  feeling  of  kinship  between
those  who  belong  to  the  same  country  only  receive  the  finish-
ing touch  from  contrast  with  that  which  is  extra-native.
Tliis  takes  place  in  a  less  degree  as  long  as  foreign  surround-

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  553

ings  oppose  to  native  culture  nothing  but  barbarism,  and  in  a
greater  degree  when  amid  general  civilisation  the  contrast  is  no
longer  between  humanity  and  brutishness,  but  between  the
most  refined  and  subtle  peculiarities  of  national  character  and
custom.  Hence  in  the  modern  world  the  wide  diffusion  of
many  similar  elements  of  culture  has  not  caused  the  disap-
pearance of  contrasts  between  different  nations,  but  has  pro-
duced generally  and  in  an  intensified  form  those  struggles
towards  unity  which  aim  at  combining  as  intimately  as
possible  all  the  material  and  mental  forces  of  races  having  one
language — the  object  of  such  combination  being  partly  that
the  intensified  action  and  reaction  thence  resulting  may  ensure
to  the  nation  an  honourable  share  in  the  human  work  of
civilisation,  partly  in  order  to  protect  it  from  the  arrogance
which  disposes  every  developed  nationality  to  be  oppressive
towards  others.

But  mere  community  of  origin,  language,  and  custom  does
not  suffice  to  build  up  the  form  of  a  State  ;  it  is  not  nomadic
but  only  stationary  peoples  that  have  been  able  to  develop
their  national  life  in  this  form.  And,  indeed,  the  territory
inhabited  by  any  people  is  not  the  mere  locality  in  which  the
nation  dwells  and  may  be  found,  as  plants  and  animals  in
their  habitats  and  haunts — it  has  much  rather  to  be  con-
sidered as  a  permanent  object  of  joint  labour  which  first
weaves  into  a  strong  and  lasting  fabric  those  elements,  akin  in
language  and  origin,  which  before  had  had  as  it  were  a  merely
parallel  existence.  For  the  division  of  this  labour  causes  the
separation  from  one  another  of  various  branches  of  employ-
ment, and  the  indispensable  action  and  reaction  between  these
makes  men  feel  the  necessity  of  a  fixed,  comprehensive  and
complex  administration ;  the  transmission  of  the  same  work
from  generation  to  generation  makes  the  history  of  the  nation,
and  gives  it  the  consciousness  of  an  historical  task,  in  the
accomplishment  of  which  are  done  the  most  splendid  of  those
deeds  which  give  exalted  worth  to  human  life  ;  even  those
delicate  shades  of  national  thought  and  temper  which  consti-
tute the  spiritual  possession  of a people are more or  less

5  0-4  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

connected  with  its  modes  of  labour.  A  territory  large  enough
to  provide  within  its  own  limits  a  great  variety  of  occupations,
and  rich  enough  to  be  able  to  do  without  foreign  help  except
for  adornments  of  existence  which  are  not  indispensable —
belonging  as  an  inherited  possession  to  a  people  speaking  one
language,  and  bound  to  its  native  land  by  a  wealth  of  historical
associations,  and  exerting  all  its  economic  and  mental  forces
under  a  strong  and  united  government  in  order  to  fill  its  own
particular  place  in  the  movement  of  civilisation — such  a
territory  presents  a  complete  picture  of  Human  Society,  and  it
can  neither  become  enormously  enlarged  without  losing  its
distinctive  character,  nor  very  much  contracted  without  losing
its  importance.

In  as  far  as  the  historical  condition  of  things  provides  the
material  for  such  social  constructions,  and  the  possibility  of  intro-
ducing them  without  breach  of  law,  attempts  to  realize  them
are  justified ;  and  it  is  neither  to  be  expected  nor  to  be  wished
that  in  the  future  these  many-coloured  contrasts  should  dis-
appear. It  is  not  to  be  wished;  for  even  the  desire  that
moral  commands  should  rule  all  mankind  with  equal  power,
if  it  give  rise  to  a  demand  for  the  extirpation  of  that  variety,
only  betrays  afresh  the  oft  combated  prejudice  which  would
make  reality  a  mere  example  of  those  universal  laws,  in
obedience  to  which,  alone,  it  is  able  to  develop  its  living
content.  The  whole  of  morality  for  the  individual  does  not
consist  in  this — that  each  has  simply  in  a  general  way  to
fulfil  the  moral  commands,  and  therefore  each  to  be  just  the
same  as  others ;  but  within  the  limits  of  this  obedience  to  the
universal,  it  is  the  duty  of  each  to  develop  his  own  individuality,
and,  by  the  good  which  he  and  none  other  can  thus  accomplish,
help  to  exhibit  and  to  realize  the  glorious  results  which  the
moral  Ideas  are  capable  of  producing.  The  task  of  the  nations
is  no  other.  They  too  are  not  meant  to  be  mere  general
colourless  examples  of  human  communities  which  might,
without  sufiering  loss,  melt  into  the  uniformity  of  an  Universal
Society,  but  each  has  its  own  special  forms  of  life  to  develop,
without  prejudice  to  the  general  validity  of  the  moral  prin-

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  655

ciples  by  which  all  its  reciprocal  relations  must  be  regulated.
Such  a  blending,  however,  is  as  little  to  be  expected  as  it  is
to  be  wished.  All  the  facilitations  of  intercourse  to  which  we
may  yet  look  forward  may  suffice  to  compensate  economic
deficiencies,  and  to  cause  a  salutary  enlargement  of  the  intel-
lectual horizon  of  the  nations  beyond  the  narrowness  of  native
prejudice  ;  but  they  will  never  bring  the  great  masses  of
mankind  into  such  thoroughgoing  contact  with  one  another,
that  a  growing  consciousness  of  the  duties  of  cosmopolitan
intercourse  will  abolish  all  national  peculiarities  of  character.
As  far  as  the  last  result  has  actually  taken  place — as,  for
instance,  in  the  disappearance  of  many  national  characteristics
of  manners,  costume,  and  speech — we  must  regard  it  as  being
for  the  most  part  pure  loss,  and  only  to  a  small  extent  as  a
sacrifice  indispensable  for  the  attainment  of  the  advantages
referred  to.  Hence  we  hope  that  through  an  ever-deepening
conviction  of  the  moral  and  economic  unity  of  mankind,  the
progress  of  civilisation  will  thus  more  and  more  realize  an  Uni-
versal Society  in  such  a  way  that  its  existence  and  the  stability
of  its  organization  may  be  beneficially  felt  by  every  one  who
seeks  after  them ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  we  do  not  doubt
that  this  great  universal  whole  will  always  seem  so  vast  and
so  impossible  to  take  in  at  one  view  that  each  individual
will  still  find  indispensable  for  the  feeling,  thought,  and
action  which  fill  his  life,  the  narrower  home  which  he  can
find  nowhere  but  among  his  own  people,  in  his  own  father-
land, under  his  own  government.

Only  a  nation  to  which  there  have  been  left  or  given  in
the  course  of  history  those  favourable  conditions  of  existence
which  we  have  hitherto  presupposed,  can  have  at  the  same  time
means  for  the  complete  development  of  a  State,  and  a  natural
impulse  to  such  development.  Wrecks  of  nations  speaking
different  languages,  which  by  the  course  of  events  have
become  attached  to  territories,  the  unfavourable  position  of
_  which  prevents  their  making  up  for  the  smallness  of  the
■ population,  may  be  constrained  by  strong  economic  interests

556  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

a  widely  extended  community  of  administration  and  of
organization  for  defence,  lias  rather  the  character  of  a  Federa-
tion than  of  a  State.  The  individual  members  are  lacking  in
independence,  and  the  whole  in  a  permanent  and  natural
unity ;  for  even  the  economic  conditions  of  countries  vary  in
course  of  time,  and  parts  which  at  one  time  seemed  to  belong
to  each  other  may  at  a  later  period  show  a  tendency  to  dis-
integration. Eegard  to  advantages  which  international  inter-
course, properly  arranged,  would  of  itself  bring,  has  here  become
the  determining  cause  for  the  construction  of  a  political  unity,
all  the  essential  conditions  of  which  are  not  given ;  and  the
lack  of  these  cannot  be  altogether  supplied  by  the  unifying
force  of  a  long  history  common  to  all.

The  State  is  developed  from  Society  by  the  recognition  of
an  historical  obligation  on  successive  generations  to  maintain
and  increase  a  store  common  to  all  of  material  and  mental
wealth,  which  each  living  generation  of  men  has  to  regard  as
a  trust  from  past  ages,  and  for  the  use  and  development  of
which  it  is  answerable  to  posterity.  Every  association  freely
formed  is  entitled  to  complete  liberty  in  the  choice  of  its
ends  and  means,  and  in  every  temporary  alteration  of  both ;
the  only  thing  it  is  bound  to  do  is  to  make  allowance  for  the
minority  who  will  not  follow  the  new  path  ;  and  as  no  one
can  have  an  indissoluble  right  to  participation  in  an  arbitrarily
formed  combination,  the  minority  will  have  to  content  itself
with  such  allowance.  Life  as  a  whole  is  no  matter  of  free
contract,  but  individuals  are  born  into  it;  society  at  any|
moment  is  not  entitled  to  ignore  the  legal  constructions  ol
past  times  or  to  fetter  all  future  ages  by  its  decisions ;  it  hi
neither  the  right  nor  the  power  to  make  allowance  for  those
who  will  not  follow  its  changes  of  opinion.  Prosperoua]
human  life  is  only  possible  when  society  endeavours  to  pro-
tect itself  against  itself,  and  secures  all  the  essential  founda-
tions of  its  existence — not  only  the  general  principles  of  right!
accepted  by  the  national  conscience,  but  also  those  maxims  of  life]
and  administration  which  its  position  makes  necessary — against]
the  influence  of  its  own  changeable  moods,  by  the  formation  of  j

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  557

a  strong  and  stable  government  tliat  keeps  watcli  over  all  the
traditions  of  justice.  The  four  elements  which  go  to  form  the
State  are  (1)  a  people  speaking  one  language  and  having  a
natural  interest  in  its  own  unity ;  (2)  an  inherited  territory-
furnishing  it  with  means  for  the  maintenance  of  its  independ-
ence ;  (3)  a  government  which  represents  the  historical  con-
tinuity of  the  national  mind ;  and  finally  (4)  the  general
conviction  that  all  freedom  of  individual  development,  all  its
struggle  and  its  progress,  must  result  from  the  possibility  of
legal  harmony  between  the  people  and  the  government.

This  too  is  an  ideal  the  realization  of  which  may  be  sought
in  various  forms  of  the  relationship  between  the  people  and.
the  government.  Certainly  every  constitution  which  is  inten-
tionally adapted  to  certain  circumstances  is,  under  such  circum-
stances, to  be  preferred  to  any  other  which  is  not  adapted
to  them ;  but  in  saying  this  we  do  not  mean  to  deny  generally
that  different  forms  of  political  constitution  have  different
degrees  of  value.  We  are  far  from  wishing  to  show  from  any
doctrinaire  grounds,  which  have  no  significance  in  practical
life,  that  Hereditary  Monarchy  is  a  necessary  institution ;  but
we  agree  with  the  modern  view  that  practically  in  it  alone
has  been  found  the  form  of  government  which  in  itself  and
under  present  conditions  offers  the  greatest  security  for  steady
development.  "We  cannot  hope  by  any  possible  discovery  to
hinder  all  disease  and  all  evil  and  all  unhappiness ;  there  is
no  social  institution  which  can  prevent  the  possibility  of  its
own  abuse  or  imperfection  in  its  accomplishment ;  and  finally,
there  is  no  constitution  which  can  secure  full  satisfaction  to
the  restless  and  envious  desires  of  folly — a  satisfaction  to
which  those  who  cherish  such  desires  can  have  no  claim
whatever  except  as  simply  being  members  of  the  society.
With  regard  to  every  form  of  government,  it  is  necessary  that
no  more  should  be  demanded  from  it  than  is  possible ;  but
hereditary  monarchy  seems  to  afford  more  possibilities  than
other  forms.

What  is  necessary  above  all  is  that  the  natural  struggle
between  different  classes  of  society,  of  which  each  pursues  its

L

558

BOOK  Vin. CHAPTER  V.

special  iuterests  as  far  as  possible,  should  not  become  a
struggle  for  political  power ;  and  tbis  one  condition  it  is  that
prevents  Eepublican  Constitutions  from  being  salutary  except
under  certain  conditions.  "Where  in  a  small  state,  the
peculiarity  of  its  soil  and  position  or  special  historical
circumstances  seem  to  point  out  that  all  the  members  should
have  a  similar  occupation  and  similar  sources  of  gain,  this
homogeneity  of  interests  may  allow  a  great  number  of  indi-
viduals to  take  part  in  their  representation.  There  have  been
agricultural  republics,  pastoral  republics,  commercial  republics ;
but  none  of  them  have  cultivated  all  branches  of  human  civilisa-
tion until,  having  become  rich,  they  have  produced  an  aristo-
cracy which  left  to  the  majority  no  political  influence  worth
mentioning.  The  assumption  of  a  republican  form  of  govern-
ment by  a  larger  society  with  a  multiplicity  of  occupations
working  into  one  another  wiU  alv/ays  be  detrimental  to  the
many-sidedness  of  civilised  existence ;  and  wealth,  being  in  the
ascendant,  and  restrained  by  no  counterbalancing  power  or
individual  currents  of  life  which  influence  the  whole,  will
make  use  of  political  institutions  in  a  one-sided  way  for  private
advantage,  or  by  stirring  up  opposition  expose  them  to  con-
tinual unsteadiness.  It  is  fair  that  the  different  classes  of
society  with  their  wishes  and  demands  should  be  heard  and
considered  by  government,  but  it  is  not  desirable  that  they
themselves  should  constitute  government.  In  every  form  of  con-
stitution in  which  either  the  supreme  head  or  the  governing
body  is  elected,  whether  for  life  or  for  a  fixed  period,  the
jealousy  of  the  different  ranks  and  callings  and  beliefs  have
an  undue  influence,  disturbing  to  the  steady  continuity  of
national  development ;  it  is  essential  that  the  highest  power
in  the  State  should  be  raised  above  all  competition,  that  the
governing  will  should  belong  to  no  class  of  society ;  that  it
should  not  be  forced  to  seek  maintenance  and  gain  and  all
that  adorns  life  by  the  one-sided  pursuit  of  any  particular
interest;  but  that  rather  the  exceptional  position  which  it
enjoys  should  afford  to  it  from  the  beginning  all  the  goo
things  of  life,  and  leave  no  other  goal  for  its  ambition  but  thi

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  659

glory  of  employing  its  power  conscientiously  for  the  preserva-
tion and  increase  of  that  which  has  been  entrusted  to  it.

That  society  consists,  as  some  say,  of  concentric  or,  as  others
say,  of  intersecting  circles,  or  that  it  rises,  pyramid-like,  from
a  broad  foundation,  and  that  all  these  constructions  require
some  indivisible  central  or  terminal  point — all  this  is  indeed
no  argument  for  hereditary  monarchy,  which  is  neither  a
geometrical  object  nor  a  matter  in  which  we  are  concerned  to
produce  a  picturesque  effect.  It  seems  to  us  to  be  of  more
consequence  that  a  nation  desires  to  see  itself,  its  interests
and  its  genius,  embodied  in  some  Eepresentative  Person ;  for
this  embodiment  is  in  fact  of  psychological  efficacy,  because
it  is  not  mere  abstract  symbolism,  but  establishes  a  relation
between  persons,  capable  of  pervading  even  the  minutiae  of
life  with  its  influence — with  living  feelings  of  fidelity,  reverence,
admiration,  and  love  on  the  one  side,  of  justice,  benevolence,
and  favour  on  the  other.  But  this  embodiment  of  the  State
is  not  necessarily  presented  in  the  unity  of  one  supreme  head ;
it  may  also  be  imagined  to  exist  in  an  aristocracy,  a  patrician
order  of  leading  families  ;  and  so  great  is  the  natural  inclina-
tion of  the  multitude  to  let  itself  be  led,  that  if  its  interests
and  feelings  are  but  considered  to  some  extent,  it  will  rever-
ence even  in  this  plurality  of  persons  the  embodied
representation  of  the  whole.  But  generally  speaking  a
favoured  class  is  more  narrow  in  its  prejudices  (which  are
nourished  by  continual  echoes  from  within),  more  arrogant  in
temper  and  more  harsh  in  its  conclusions  than  an  individual
whose  position,  raised  above  all  comparison  with  others,  needs
no  defence  against  the  intrusion  of  claims  similar  to  his  own.
"We  should  sooner  expect  forbearance  and  the  removal  of
unfair  pressure  of  laws  and  conditions  from  an  individual
monarch  than  from  aristocratic  and  democratic  majorities,
to  whom  on  the  one  hand  the  greatest  harshness  of  doctrinaire
consistency  and  on  the  other  hand  cruel  passion  are  made
easy  by  division  of  responsibility  and  the  impersonality  of
their  resolves.  But  what  history  warns  us  above  all  things
not  to  do  is,  by  dividing  monarchical  power  among  a  plurality

560  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

of  individuals,  to  make  that  power  an  object  of  competition,
each  striving  to  get  undivided  possession  of  it  by  splitting
up  the  nation  into  parties  and  unjustly  favouring  the  moie
powerful  interests.

The  primitive  leadership  of  tribal  princes  sprang  from  a
tfense  of  these  reasons,  but  later  developed  monarchy  did  not ;
they,  however,  are  the  motives  which  permanently  keep  up  in
nations  a  readiness  to  regard  the  guidance  of  public  affairs  as
attaching  of  private  right,  as  a  heritable  possession,  to  the
family  to  which  in  the  course  of  history  royalty  has  come  to
belong.  The  more  definitely  this  ground  of  legitimacy  has
been  recognised,  the  more  necessary  has  it  seemed  to  the
nation  to  oppose  to  the  possible  abuse  of  this  power  represen-
tatives of  popular  rights  ;  and  thus  there  has  been  founded
Constitutional  Monarchy — the  favourite  political  product  of
the  last  century.

§  9.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  beforehand  what
later  times  will  think  of  the  Constitutionalism  of  the  present
day.  They  will  certainly  be  wrong  if  they  wish  to  give  up
its  fundamental  thought,  which  is  that  there  should  be  an
ever-renewed  understanding  between  the  living  men  of  any
generation  and  the  government — which,  to  whomever  entrusted,
represents  the  historical  Idea  of  the  whole  as  opposed  to  the
changing  interests  of  the  hour.  They  will  perhaps  have  more
reason  if  they  doubt  whether  the  system  of  constitutional
forms  which  at  present  prevail  are,  taken  as  a  whole,  the
happiest  possible  arrangement  considering  the  circumstances
of  the  time  ;  and  they  will  certainly  be  right  if  they  hold
that  this  system  is  not  an  ideal  in  the  sense  in  which  it
has  been  lauded  by  well-meaning  doctrinaires,  as  though  it
were  the  product  of  perfect  political  insight.  The  extremely
unjust  oppression  of  the  third  estate,  which  being  over-
loaded with  burdens  was  not  able  to  command  any  regular
representation  of  its  interests,  had  aroused  at  the  time
of  the  Eevolution  passionate  hatred  towards  all  legal,  I
political,  and  social distinctions ; the not less oppressive |!

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  561

and  corporations  opposed  to  the  free  movement  of  labour
caused  even  the  more  peaceably  disposed  of  the  reforming
party  to  prefer  the  complete  abolition  of  these  institutions
to  the  transformation  which  they  so  urgently  required.  Thus
there  arose  the  notion  of  a  CUizen  of  the  State — a  strange
theoretic  invention,  superfluous  if  merely  intended  to  in-
dicate those  who  without  being  under  some  other  guardian-
ship are  directly  subject  to  laws  the  same  for  all  and
directly  bound  by  general  obligations — but  very  dangerous  if
intended  also  to  indicate  that  these  legally  equal  constituents
are  also  equal  in  political  importance.  I  am  indeed  in  complete
disagreement  with  the  prevailing  opinions  of  the  time,  in  that
I  regard  this  low  estimation  of  the  corporate  element  as  our
most  essential  fault.  Of  course  we  do  not  want  to  go  back
to  corporations  for  the  subsistence  of  which  we  can  find  no
even  plausible  reason,  in  order  to  accumulate  privileges  for
which  there  is  still  less  any  conceivable  rightful  claim ;
but  on  the  one  hand  a  living  bond  between  those  who
are  really  connected  would  maintain  the  discipline  which  we
so  greatly  need,  but  which  yet  we  cannot  enforce  by  means
of  general  laws  ;  on  the  other  hand  such  combinations —
representing  partly  the  most  important  callings  (agricul-
ture, manufactures,  commerce,  art  and  science),  partly  the
special  local  interests  of  different  districts — would  form  the
true  unities,  the  representatives  of  which,  by  equilibration
of  the  interests  of  each,  would  cover  the  wants  of  the
whole.

I  will  not  weary  my  readers  by  attempting  to  set  forth  the
rank  and  number  of  these  unities,  but  will  merely  remark
that  they  cannot  be  of  equal  importance  either  among  them-
selves or  for  every  state  ;  a  more  detailed  determination  of
their  co-operation  is  the  business  not  of  Formal  but  of  Material
Politics.  Here,  too,  again,  I  am  in  conflict  with  modes  of
thought  which  are  received  with  favour  at  the  present  day.
As  corresponding  to  the  notion  of  Citizen  of  a  State,  these  lay
\  stress  also  upon  the  notion  of  the  State  itself  in  such  a  way
as  to  imply  that  instead  of  political  forms  being  developed  by
VOL.  IL  2  »

L

562

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

nations  to  further  the  ends  of  their  existence,  we  should  rather
regard  the  State  as  a  rigid  framework  to  which  all  national
life  must  accommodate  itself.  It  is  certainly  true  that  ovdug
to  the  homogeneity  of  the  needs  of  all  human  societies,  the
formal  outlines  of  different  constitutions  are  to  a  great  extent
analogous ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  certain  that
some  conclusions  are  valid  only  within  the  limits  of  the
individual  state  from  the  representatives  of  which  they  pro-
ceed, and  are  commonly  caused  only  by  such  circumstances  as
exist  in  these  cases.  But  though  it  may  hence  be  true  that
in  particular  instances  this  deification  of  the  notion  of  the
State  may  not  have  an  injurious  effect,  yet  it  gives  a  false
colouring  to  our  endeavours ;  it  gives  rise  to  a  superfluous
abundance  of  doctrinaire  wisdom,  which  seeks  to  centralize
and  establish  as  political  functions  much  which  should  be
alterable  with  altering  conditions  of  time  and  place  ;  while
conversely  it  is  disposed  to  approve  and  enact  only  temporarily
measures  which  belong  to  the  irrevocable  necessities  of
national  life.  We  owe  the  unification  of  Germany  to  t\u
military  resources  created  by  political  powers ;  but  that
readiness  of  self-sacrifice  which  secured  its  success  resultec
from  love  for  the  German  fatherland,  and  not  from  enthusiasi
for  "  The  State " — the  most  various  examples  of  whicl
general  notion  Europe  offers  for  our  choice.  In  fact  the
more  we  regard  this  abstraction  as  the  highest  source  of  oui
rights  and  the  recipient  of  our  services,  the  more  doubtfi
becomes  the  ground  of  our  obligation  to  render  these  services
to  this  one  state  and  to  shun  as  treason  the  lending  of  our|
support  to  foreign  states.  Other  nations  are  not  influencec
by  such  ideas.  When  a  supreme  moment  comes  we  hearj
England  expects  every  man  to  do  his  duty — or  France  demanc
it — or  Holy  Bussia  calls  her  children,  and  the  Starry  Bannei
summons  its  follov;ers ;  it  is  only  the  strong  hand  to  whicl
our  external  affairs  are  entrusted  that  can  raise  aloft  the
national  flag  as  a  rallying  point  for  our  internal  life  too,  anc
this  national  flag  it  is  that  we  shall  follow ;  the  mere  general
State  flag, without colour or device,  which is waved bi

J

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  563

theorists  and  party  leaders,  is  hardly  likely  to  attract  an
enthusiastic  following.  What  we  lament  is  not  that  great
branches  of  commerce  should  be  brought  under  public  adminis-
tration ;  for  the  needs  of  the  nation  itself  may  justify  this
measure  ;  but  we  think  that  much  danger  will  be  incurred  if
the  nation  choose  to  regard  its  whole  life  as  being  held  in  fee
of  the  self-created  state,  and  to  look  upon  the  existence  which
is  common  to  all,  as  a  legal  relation — hence  seeking,  with
logical  consistency,  to  replace  the  government,  which  is  always
an  essentially  political  activity,  by  mere  state-administration.

These  are  but  theories.  If  I  could  specify  measures  that
would  enable  them  to  be  easily  put  in  practice,  I  should
believe  that  I  had  solved  one  of  the  great  problems  which
exercise  statesmen.  Only  this  is  clear — that  existing  institu-
tions can  never  be  adapted  to  the  accomplishment  of  our
wishes.  To  ensure  to  the  votes  of  experts  on  every  question
that  weight  which  is  their  due,  by  means  of  a  representation
based  upon  incorporations  of  the  different  classes,  would  no
doubt  be  regarded  as  a  punishable  attack  upon  the  rights
enjoyed  by  the  citizens  of  the  State — rights  which  men  have
become  accustomed  to  think  can  only  be  exercised  by  means
of  popular  representation.  And  yet  a  simple  calculation
teaches  us  that  though  any  mechanism  of  direct  or  indirect
election  by  the  body  of  the  people  may  indeed  afford  to  the
individual  the  small  formal  satisfaction  of  having  taken  part
■  in  it,  yet  the  further  result  slips  out  of  his  hands  altogether
— and  it  is  party  leaders  and  their  supporters  who  take  all
decisive  resolutions,  without  reference  to  the  wishes  and
expectations  of  the  individual  elector.  It  is  also  clear  that
the  proceedings  of  great  assemblies  are,  at  any  rate,  no  longer
the  only  possible  form  of  such  reciprocal  action  between  the
factors  concerned  as  we  should  wish  to  see  substituted  for  the
present  condition  of  things.  On  this  point,  indeed,  we  are
i  i  not  altogether  without  experience ;  and  I  suppose  I  shall  not
meet  with  overwhelming  opposition  if  I  say  that  it  would  be
worth  while  to  offer  a  prize  for  an  answer  to  the  question
whether  it  is  not  possible  to  obtain  the  real  advantages  of

564  BOOK  VIII. CHAPTER  V.

constitutional  government  without  the  form  of  popular  pailia
mentary  representation  ?

And  from  another  quarter  the  existing  order  is  pressed
upon  by  Socialism ;  and  Socialism,  too,  demands  that  the  life
of  the  community  shall  be  established  upon  quite  new  founda-
tions. But  it  has  not  yet  been  able  to  show  that  the  intro-
duction of  the  new  order  could  be  accomplished  without  the
pressure  which  now  falls  upon  one  part  of  the  people  being
transferred  in  all  its  burdensomeness  to  another ;  and  just  as
little  has  it  been  able  to  show  that  the  desired  institutions
have  so  much  adaptation  to  practical  life  as  would  justify  the
attempt  to  establish  them.  The  theory  of  the  abstract  State
equally  fails  to  supply  a  remedy ;  a  system  of  privileges  and
obligations  may  be  developed  from  it,  but  not  any  information
as  to  the  means  of  using  the  one  and  fulfilling  the  other,
Here,  if  anywhere,  do  we  need  a  pliant  and  active  imagine
tion  that  will  be  guided  by  circumstances  and  not  by  immu
able  principles ;  it  is  such  alone  that  wiU  not  only  be  able
meet  the  ills  which  Nature  sends,  but  also  and  above  all  to
fulfil  the  task  of  alleviating  the  misery  that  springs  just  from
the  existing  organization  of  social  relations.  No  machine  has
yet  been  discovered  which  will  work  without  any  friction  what-
ever, and  Mechanics  aims  at  no  such  impossible  achievement
but  it  has  means  of  diminishing  the  friction  which  does  arise,"
or  of  rendering  it  innocuous.  "We  would  sooner  look  for  the
spring  of  such  serviceable  action,  as  well  as  for  the  capacity
of  counteracting  immediate  evils  by  known  and  attainable
means,  in  corporate  bodies,  than  in  those  unorganized  assem-
blies where,  for  the  most  part,  all  that  takes  place  is,  struggles
between  some  few  wide  and  well-known  party  questions  which
leave  difficulties  of  detail  undecided.

§  10.  A  great  part  of  political  evils  is  due  to  the  inter
national  relations  of  states,  and  to  the  complete  absence  of
developed  and  recognised  system  of  International  Law.  The
permanence  and  obligation  of  treaties ;  the  rightness  or  wrong-
ness  of  intervention  in  foreign  affairs ;  the  difficulties  cause
in  the  case  of  hereditary  dynasties  by  the  political  union

M

I

POLITICAL  LIFE,  AND  SOCIETY.  565

separation  of  foreign  or  allied  peoples — these  have  always
been  and  still  are  points  which  are  usually  decided  in  indi-
vidual cases  upon  grounds  of  interest,  well  or  ill  understood,
and  with  reference  to  which  fixed  rules  of  justice  have
scarcely  yet  begun  to  be  formed,  far  less  have  obtained  general
recognition.

To  regard  as  irrevocable  every  treaty  which  has  once  been
agreed  to  by  two  contracting  parties  would  involve  the
assumption  that  these  were  possessed  of  superhuman  wisdom ;
for  only  such  could  foresee  that  circumstances  would  never
arise  to  make  them  change  their  mind,  or  to  make  the  carry-
ing out  of  the  treaty  senseless,  or  to  make  it  turn  out  excess-
ively injurious  to  the  one  side.  Treaties  between  nations  and
their  governments  must  be  not  more  but  less  irreversible  than
these ;  since  it  is  impossible  that  the  will  of  one  generation
should  bind  irrevocably  the  generation  which  succeeds  it.
Not  because  centuries  ago  some  old  treaty  established  the
eternal  union  of  two  countries,  ought  that  union  still  to  be
held  indissoluble ;  but  only  because  the  present  mind  of
living  men  declares  in  favour  of  the  agreement,  and  freely
consents  to  it  If  this  free  consent  is  wanting,  all  force  of  any
treaty  is  wanting  too,  and  the  only  obligation  remaining  is  that
of  carefully  discharging  the  legal  claims,  based  upon  its  previous
validity,  which  have  grown  up  in  course  of  time.  It  must
be  required  that  nations  should  respect  a  public  treaty  during
the  time  that  it  is  received  as  valid ;  treaties  that  have  not
been  made  public,  inevitably  succumb  to  the  logic  of  facts ;
and  when  at  last  they  are  broken,  no  one  can  complain — since
in  fact  they  were  concluded  without  due  authorization.

The  moral  duty  of  trying  to  settle  any  strife  of  wills  is
limited  in  private  life  by  the  respect  due  to  the  personal
independence  of  others;  this  respect  preventing  the  inter-
ference of  a  third  as  long  as  the  strife  does  not  imperil  his
own  interests.  But  no  one  denies  to  his  opponent  a  right  to
\  accept  the  active  partisanship  of  a  third  person,  or  to  this
!  third  person  a  right  to  make  the  quarrel  his  own ;  it  is  only
the  privilege  of  coming  between  the  combatants  as  arbiter.

5G6

BOOK  VIII. CHAPTEK  V.

and  of  not  taking  either  side,  that  will  be  unwillingly
acknowledged  by  him  who  is  favoured  and  always  decisively
disowned  by  the  other  party.  The  attitude  of  nations
towards  combats  between  nations  is  just  the  same.  They
have  never  complained  of  injustice  when  the  number  of  their
declared  foes  has  been  increased  by  alliances ;  they  have
never  doubted  that  others  had  a  right  to  become  their  open
enemies ;  but  the  notion  of  intervention,  which  involves  the
assumption  of  arbitrative  power  over  their  internal  affairs  on
the  part  of  some  foreign  nation,  has  always  provoked  irrita-
tion and  revolt.  Nevertheless  it  is  just  this  doctine  of  the
right  of  arbitration  that  the  science  of  modern  politics  delights
to  develop.  As  individual  vengeance  has  been  replaced  by
the  public  administration  of  justice  in  societies,  so  it  is
desired  that  at  least  in  the  circle  of  European  nations  bloody
outbreaks  of  self-defence  on  the  part  of  individual  nations
should  be  averted  or  suppressed  by  the  verdict  of  the  whole
body,  which  now  (in  consequence  of  the  intimate  connectioi
between  the  nations)  sees  its  common  interests  threatened  byl
every  struggle.  At  present  there  is  nothing  wanting  to  this
theory,  excellent  in  itself,  except  the  conditions  necessaryj
in  order  to  make  it  practicable,  and  uprightness  of  intentioi
in  its  advocates.  The  national  Areopagus,  the  incorruptible
integrity  of  which  this  scheme  of  international  arbitratioi
presupposes,  does  not  exist;  and  it  is  hardly  likely  that  iH
ever  will  exist  except  in  the  shape  of  a  few  great  powers^
which  will  adjust  the  claims  of  the  less  powerful  in  accord-
ance with  their  own  special  interests.  But  even  if  in  practice
the  egoism  of  these  motives  could  be  paralysed  by  a  genera
representation  of  states  in  the  arbitrative  congresses,  the
analogy  between  this  jurisdiction  and  that  which  an  individual
state  exercises  over  its  subjects  would  still  be  incomplete  ii
many  essential  points.  There  would  be  lacking,  for  instance
(1)  the  possibility  of  making  the  matters  in  dispute  perfectly
clear  to  a  court  of  foreign  delegates,  who  (being  influenced  bj
different  national  feelings  and  different  historical  memories)
would  be  neither  able  nor  willing  to  appreciate  the  value  anc

POLITICAL  LIFE.  AND  SOCIETY.

667

urgency  of  the  claims  and  counter-claims  that  would  be  made;
(2)  the  established  rule  of  universally  valid  International  Law,
in  place  of  which  an  untenable  regard  to  passing  expediency
would  be  substituted  by  a  narrow  diplomacy,  having  regar:l
only  to  the  immediate  future ;  (3)  the  absence  of  any  personal
interest  on  the  part  of  the  judges  in  the  matter  in  dispute  (an
absence  which  could  not  be  compensated  for  by  mutual
jealousy,  which  instead  of  making  people  anxious  to  decide,
generally  makes  them  only  anxious  to  delay) ;  and  finally
(4)  the  possibility  of  carrying  out  with  certainty,  against  the
resistance  of  the  non-contents,  any  sentence  that  might  be
pronounced.  Not  one  of  the  great  international  problems
which  have,  so  far,  been  taken  up  by  European  Congresses,
has  received  a  satisfactory  solution ;  not  one  of  the  political
constructions  which  they  have  brought  into  existence  has
showed  that  it  is  endowed  with  a  capacity  of  permanent
vitality;  not  one  of  those  which  they  have  suppressed  has
been  so  broken  as  to  be  prevented  from  subsequently  disturb-
ing the  general  tranquillity  with  ever-recurring  convulsions.

No  one  can  say  what  the  course  of  history  would  have  been
if  such  or  such  conditions  had  been  different ;  yet  one  of  the
follies  of  our  time  consists  in  this,  that  so  often  in  historical
discussions  (which  can  regard  only  the  actual,  and  not  any
merely  possible,  course  of  events)  we  allow  ourselves  to  con-
sider some  brief  series  of  good  results  (which  is  all  that  has  so
far  come  under  our  observation)  as  a  justification  of  preceding
perversities — not  thinking  that  the  very  morrow  may  bring
tardy  retribution.  And  just  because  we  do  not  know  the  future,
it  must  be  the  business  of  politics,  under  all  circumstances,
to  respect  the  Eight  so  long  as  it  is  in  any  way  cognisable ;  but
where  human  wisdom  is  no  longer  btble  to  recognise  it  with
certainty,  it  is  perhaps  best  to  defend  at  all  hazards  that
which  one  honestly  believes  to  be  right,  and  to  commit  the
result  to  Providence ;  better  than  to  act  Providence  oneself,
and1)y  maintaining  a  hollow  truce  to  increase  for  society  in
future  times,  difl&culties  of  which  it  will  make  quite  enough
for  itself  without  any  such  addition.

BOOK  IX.

THE  UNITY  OF  THINGS.

669

CHAPTER I.

OF THE BEIXG OF THINGS.

Introduction — Three  Elemental  Forms  of  Knowledge  and  the  Problem  of  their
Connection — The  Being  of  Things  a  State  of  Relatedness — Comparability
of  the  Natures  of  Things — Necessity  of  the  Substantial  Connection  of  Finite
Multiplicity  in  the  Unity  of  the  Infinite — Summary.

^  1.  J I IHEEE  are  certain  problems  concerning  our  origin
-JL  and  destiny — questions  as  to  the  significance  of
the  world  which  surrounds  us  and  our  own  position  in  it ;  as
to  the  ends  which  are  set  before  us  in  the  great  whole  of
cosmic  order  and  the  good  things  that  await  us  in  the  future
' — which  men  have  reflected  upon  in  all  ages,  sometimes  with
passionate  zeal  that  hopes  to  find  at  last  a  solution  which  yet
has  never  hitherto  been  found,  sometimes  with  the  moderation
of  conscious  weakness  which,  giving  up  all  hope  of  complete
fiuccess,  contents  itself  with  credible  opinions  concerning  what
seems  so  far  beyond  us.  We  behold  the  results  of  this  intel-
lectual effort  in  the  cosmic  theories  of  religions,  in  philosophic
speculations,  in  the  widespread  inspirations  which  animate
art  in  different  ages,  in  the  convictions  which  have  impressed
.  their  character  on  many  forms  of  national  life  and  morality —
■and  all  this  lies  before  us  in  its  many-hued  attractiveness  as
the  most  worthy  of  all  objects  of  consideration  in  which  we
can  become  absorbed.  But  it  is  hardly  possible  for  any  such
attentive  consideration  to  attain  results  different  from  those
which  have  been  afforded  by  our  hasty  survey ;  men  have
never  succeeded  in  forgetting  the  old  doubts,  except  during
brief  and  historically  favoured  periods,  animated  by  some
freshly  roused  enthusiastic  practical  activity,  or  some  hopeful
inspiration  of  new  ideas  that  seemed  full  of  promise ;  but  this
temporary  lulling  of  doubt  has  never  been  transformed  to  a

172

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

permanent  solution  at  any  time,  either  by  the  spirit  of  the
age  or  by  the  discoveries  of  individuals.

And  do  we  yet,  notwithstanding  all  this,  desire  once  more
to  attempt  the  impossible  ?  Do  we  desire,  in  this  concluding
Book,  to  try  and  lay  the  foundations  of  a  true  philosophy  which
shall  for  ever  dispel  the  doubts  of  preceding  centuries  ?

It  would  indeed  seem  so  in  a  certain  sense — yet  what  we
desire  is  not  quite  this,  and  we  shall  not  be  justly  open  to  the
reproach  of  outrageous  boastfulness  even  if  most  of  the
expectations  which  we  have  unintentionally  aroused  should
meet  with  .disappointment.  For  the  reader  himself  is  an
accomplice  in  our  attempts ;  as  long  as  the  world  lasts,  the
human  mind  will  go  on  wearying  itself  out  in  labouring  at
this  impossible  task,  and  perhaps  in  doing  so  find  greater
enjoyment  than  in  the  initiation  and  prosecution  of  labours
which  experience  has  taught  us  are  capable  of  completion  and
lead  to  indubitable  results.  And  how  could  the  leisure  of  life
be  worthily  filled  up  if  there  were  permanently  excluded  from
the  occupations  of  men  all  reflection  which,  sometimes  more  and
sometimes  less  near  and  perhaps  never  reaching  its  goal,  yet
in  unceasing  movement,  circles  about  those  problems  ?  We  are
with  respect  to  them  much  more  helpless  still,  when  at  isolated
moments,  stirred  and  shocked  by  the  events  of  life,  we  are
forced  to  think  of  them,  but  with  thoughts  that  are  hasty,
unsteady,  and  fragmentary.  I  make  no  higher  claim  for  the
remainder  of  my  book  than  this  (which  it  will  perchance
justify) — that  it  may  present  to  the  reader  the  coherent
results  of  long  reflection  which  have  grown  dear  to  me,  with
the  candour  that  every  one  ought  to  use  in  communicating  his
best  thoughts  in  any  earnest  converse,  so  that  moments  of
leisure  may  be  exalted  to  moments  of  mental  concentration
the  effects  of  which  will  not  pass  away.  This  living  personal
relation  to  the  mind  of  the  reader,  if  I  should  succeed  in
establishing  it,  would  be  worth  more  to  me  than  the  happi-
ness of  seeing  a  place  in  the  development  of  philosophy
accorded  to  the  philosophic  view  of  which  I  am  now  about
to  summarize  the  outlines. For  nowadays  all  of  us  certainly

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  573

doubt  to  some  extent  the  convincingness  of  a  faith,  accepted
not  so  long  ago,  according  to  which  the  very  essence  of  cosmic
history  was  to  be  found  in  the  progress  of  philosophy,  and  in
every  change  of  speculative  systems  the  dawn  of  a  new  phase
in  the  life  of  the  Unconditioned  Cause  of  the  universe.  And
even  if  we  had  no  reason  for  such  doubt,  the  consideration
whether  any  philosophic  theory  which  one  had  to  propound
fitted  into  the  rhythm  of  an  evolutional  history  already  begun
— whether  it  were  not  late  or  premature,  or  altogether  out  of
course  and  to  be  banished  from  the  regular  succession  of
systems — these  and  all  other  similar  questions  of  etiquette
would  seem  to  me  unimportant  in  comparison  of  the  serious
doubt  whether  that  which  I  wished  to  communicate  would  be
capable  of  comforting  or  relieving  or  refreshing  any  oppressed
soul,  by  clearing  up  some  obscurity,  by  solving  some  doubt,  or
by  revealing  some  fresh  point  of  view.  Not  in  playing  at
development,  but  in  such  services  from  one  living  man  to
another,  is  to  be  found  the  worth  even  of  those  speculations
which  are  concerned  about  the  highest  truths.

No  other  and  no  higher  has  been  the  aim  of  all  the  pre-
ceding portion  of  this  work  ;  and  the  sympathy  with  which  it
has  been  received  encourages  me  to  press  on  to  the  conclusion.
My  aim  would  indeed  remain  unattained  if  I  did  not  try  to
weave  together  the  loose  threads  which  I  have  spun,  in  a
jflB  pattern  that  presents  the  results  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  may
be  reached  in  estimating  the  subjects  of  which  I  have  treated.
I  feel  the  need  of  such  a  synoptical  conclusion  all  the  more
because  I  have  not  felt  that  I  was  entitled  in  the  foregoing
portion  of  my  work  to  make  explicit  use  of  a  philosophic
view  from  which  its  parts  taken  separately  might  seem  to  be
logically  developed.  I  held  that  it  would  be  more  fit,  and
thought,  moreover,  that  I  should  best  earn  the  reader's  thanks
(supposing  I  could  earn  them  at  all)  if  I  entered  fully  into  the
doubts  which  life  calls  forth  with  reference  to  those  several
questions  which  have  been  in  turn  the  object  of  our  considera-
tion. I  have  everywhere  endeavoured  to  trace  the  prejudices,
partly tacit, partly  appearing only in isolated indications,

574

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

which  (springing  from  aesthetic  interests  of  the  feelings,  and
other  mental  needs)  are  the  roots  that  really  give  to  the  most
different  opinions  their  hold  upon  our  minds.  Hence  but
little  use  could  be  made  of  philosophic  notions  and  principles,
which  for  the  most  part  are  furbished  and  sharpened  only  at
a  later  and  dialectical  stage,  for  the  establishment,  defence,  or
refutation  of  such  prejudices,  permitting  but  little  recognition
of  the  real  and  living  worth  which  these  have  for  the  human
heart.

My  work  taking  this  course  I  have  not  been  able  adequately
to  present  the  connection  that  exists  between  the  views  which
I  hold ;  I  shall  now  have  to  show  that,  looked  at  in  the  light
of  that  connection,  many  apparently  conspicuous  contradictions
do  not  exist ;  that  many  later  turns  of  thought  were  at  the
foundation  of  earlier  ones  with  which  they  seem  to  be  in
conflict,  and  that  taken  as  a  whole,  the  convictions  which  I
liave  here  sought  to  communicate  are  connected  with  that
which  I  pointed  out  at  the  beginning  as  the  aim  of  my  whole
work.  The  unusual  nature  of  my  task  must  be  an  excuse  for
the  imperfection  of  this  concluding  portion — both  for  the
repetitions  which  I  shall  not  be  able  altogether  to  avoid,  and'
for  the  references  which  solicit  the  attention  of  the  reader  to
earlier  sections,  in  order  that  the  repetitions  may  not  be
altogether  too  numerous.

§  2.  Various  philosophic  systems,  setting  out  from  stand-
points not  wholly  similar,  and  having  the  course  of  thei
investigation  governed  by  the  special  interest  of  some  par^
ticular  mode  of  putting  the  question,  have  believed  that  the]
have  found  more  than  one  exhaustive  expression  for  the
ultimate  source  of  those  difficulties  in  which  our  view  of  the
cosmos  is  involved.  Recalling  in  a  synoptic  view  the  points"
at  which  the  lines  of  our  previous  consideration  have  come
into  contact,  it  would  seem  as  though  this  supreme  problem
were  to  be  found  in  the  reciprocal  relation  of  three  elemental
forms  of  our  knowledge,  forms  upon  which  we  must  base  all
our  judgment  of  things,  without,  however,  being  able  to
embrace  all  three  in  one  comprehensive  notion,  or  from  any

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  5  /  5

one  to  obtain  the  other  two  by  logical  deduction.  All  our
analysis  of  the  cosmic  order  ends  in  leading  our  thought  back
to  a  consciousness  of  necessarily  valid  truths,  our  perception
to  the  intuition  of  immediately  given  facts  of  reality,  our
conscience  to  the  recognition  of  an  absolute  standard  of  all
determinations  of  worth.

But  none  of  those  necessary  truths  reveals  to  us  what  is ;
as  universal  laws  they  speak  only  of  that  which  must  be  if
something  else  is ;  they  show  us  what  inevitably  follows  from
conditions  the  occurrence  of  which  they  leave  wholly  doubtful.
On  the  other  hand,  none  of  those  intuitions  which  present  to
us  the  actual  features  of  reality,  exhibit  those  features  to  us
as  necessary ;  however  difiBcult  it  may  be  for  our  imagination
to  free  itself  from  the  impression  of  those  forms  in  which
experience  as  a  whole  has  accustomed  us  to  see  things  be  and
happen,  yet  we  do  not  find  in  them  any  reason  why  we
should  regard  them  as  indispensable ;  they  might  either  not
be,  or  be  different  from  what  they  are.  Finally,  none  of  our
Ideas  of  what  has  worth,  of  what  is  holy  or  good  or  beautiful,
can  of  itself  give  rise  to  a  definite  world  of  forms  as  its  own
proper  consequence;  even  where  reality  clearly  reflects  the
content  of  any  such  Idea,  this  realization  still  remains  in  form
and  colouring  but  one  out  of  many  possible  realizations,  con-
ditioned by  existing  facts,  while  other  and  different  facts  are
quite  conceivable  which  would  have  caused  the  same  content
to  take  an  embodiment  wholly  different  in  form  and  colour.
Still  more  obscure  than  this  connection  of  the  necessary  laws
of  thought  on  the  one  hand  to  the  worth-determining  Ideas,
|lBand  on  the  other  to  the  factual  condition  of  reality,  is  the
hbond — wholly  concealed  from  us — rwhich  connects  together
fthose  Ideas  of  what  is  holy  and  good  and  beautiful  with  the
■  indifferent  but  immutable  content  of  mathematical  and
[metaphysical  truth.

This incoherence not  only  hinders our  knowledge from

'becoming  complete,  but  is  also  the  source  of  the  doubts  which

■oppress  our  life. As  long  as  we  cannot  help  thinking  that

the  world as  by  an unfathomable  fate follows  the fiat  of

576

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

necessary  laws ;  that  then  from  some  fresh  and  independent
quarter  there  comes  in  the  reality  which  is  required  for  the
carrying  out  of  these  laws ;  that  finally,  there  are  added  Ideas
of  that  which  ought  to  be,  which  have  to  be  realized  so  far  as
on  the  one  hand  the  limitations  of  those  it  'priori  laws  and  on
the  other  hand  the  inertia  and  resistance  of  this  underived
reality  permit — so  long  as  we  cannot  help  thinking  all  this,
our  cosmic  theory  has  not  the  unity  necessary  for  knowledge,
and  our  hopes  lack  that  confirmation  which  would  make  them
strong  and  vigorous.  That  it  is  not  so — that  there  is  but
one  origin  of  the  world  from  which  flow,  as  from  a  common
source,  its  laws,  its  realities,  and  its  worth — that  this  origin
is  not  to  be  sought  in  that  which  in  itself  is  unmeaning  though
necessary,  but  that  that  which  is  most  worthy  is  at  once  the
Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  all — by  this  conviction  (which  has
animated  all  our  considerations  hitherto)  we  abide ;  and  we
now  seek  for  it  both  a  more  exact  expression  which  may  take
the  place  of  that  just  used,  and  such  verification  as  it  is
capable  of.  Neither  that  expression  nor  this  verification  will
in  all  respects  come  up  to  what  in  other  cases  we  have — and
with  justice — required  from  scientific  statements  ;  we  must
to  a  large  extent  content  ourselves  with  making  clear  what  it
is  that  we  mean  and  that  we  require,  without  being  able  to
show  how  that  which  we  require  and  mean  can  be  ;  we  shall
not  be  able  to  prove  throughout  the  necessity  of  that  which
we  are  seeking,  and  to  develop  its  whole  content  with  the
certainty  of  a  strict  logical  deduction  from  undeniable  premises,
but  must  be  content  to  remove  the  difficulties  that  hinder  a
living  faith  in  its  existence,  and  to  exhibit  it  as  the  ultimate
goal  to  which  we  have  to  approximate,  although  we  may  not
reach  it.

These  preliminary  remarks,  which  anticipate  the  special
questions  in  the  prosecution  of  which  only  their  real  meaning
cm  be  made  clear,  are  offered  merely  in  order  that  imprac-
ticable demands  may  be  met  beforehand  with  a  confession  of
general  inability  on  our  part.  I  will  add  to  them  but  one
Dther  observation,  which  may  serve  to  indicate  our  proxim

1

II

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  577

task  or  the  nearest  way  to  the  accomplishment  of  our  task.
Convinced  of  the  formal  incorrectness  of  views  which  teach
that  for  an  explanation  of  the  world  nothing  need  be  con-
sidered except  the  animating  breath  of  a  creative  Idea,  our
considerations  have  hitherto,  and  for  quite  long  enough,  been
occupied  in  taking  the  part  of  the  Finite  against  the  Infinite,
of  the  blind  necessity  of  the  mechanism  of  Nature  against  the
freedom  of  Spirit-life,  of  Plurality  against  Unity ;  to  many  it
will  seem  as  though  they  had,  in  all  essential  points,  taken
the  side  of  the  small  against  the  great,  which  they  have  pro-
visionally neglected.  Now  that  we  take  the  opposite  stand-
point (being  convinced  of  the  perfect  legitimacy  of  claims
which,  in  the  form  in  which  they  are  generally  put,  we  felt
bound  to  reject),  we  cannot  consider  that  we  should  gain
anything  by  setting  the  view  which  this  standpoint  opens  to
us  in  opposition  to  the  one  we  formerly  took,  as  being  also
existent  and  having  also  a  foundation  in  the  condition  of
things.  We  should  only  gain  if  the  earlier  mode  of  thought,
traced  back  to  its  real  principles,  itself  constrained  us  to  enter
upon  the  path  which  leads  inevitably  to  this  other  view  of
the  world.  It  may  make  one  happy  to  exhibit  the  world,  in
fresh  enthusiasm  of  feeling,  as  presenting  an  unspeakably
lofty  and  beautiful  content,  which  rather  possesses  our  mind
than  is  possessed  by  it ;  but  the  nearer  we  come  to  particulars
the  more  are  they  felt  as  hindrances  which  compel  the  lowering
of  this  lofty  flight ;  we  should  be  really  raised  higher  if  from
a  right  handling  of  these  particulars  we  could  derive  an
upward  impulse,  which  would  give  us  hope  that  at  the  end
of  our  way  (now  secure  because  all  hindrances  have  been
overcome)  we  should  reach  that  which  is  highest.

The  way  that  we  would  indicate  is  familiar  to  the  natural
course  of  men's  thought.  Almost  every  attempt  to  justify  or
to  communicate  the  fundamental  truths  of  religious  conviction
is  introduced  by  the  assertions  that  if  there  is  a  conditioned
then  there  must  be  also  an  unconditioned,  if  something  that
passes  away,  then  something  that  is  eternal,  if  plurality  and
something  that  may  change,  then  also  something  that  is  neces-

VOL.  II.  •  2  0

678

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

sary,  some  being  that  is  one  and  immutable.  It  would  not
be  easy  to  show  a  valid  connection  between  antecedent  and
consequent  in  any  of  these  concise  maxims ;  as  commonly  used,
they  juxtapose  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  a  long  train  of
thought,  suppressing  the  intermediate  links  by  which  they  must
be  connected.  They  meet  with  approval  and  seem  evident
to  the  hearer,  because  he  too  has  been  long  accustomed,  by  a
combination  of  ideas  the  justification  for  which  he  has  per-
haps never  been  clearly  conscious  of,  to  strive  to  pass  from
the  thought  of  the  Finite  to  that  of  the  Infinite,  from  that  of
the  Many  to  that  of  the  One ;  whilst  whatever  essential  ground
there  may  be  in  the  content  of  the  one  idea  on  account  of
which  its  reality  guarantees  also  the  reality  of  the  content  of
the  contrasted  idea,  this  recovery  of  the  links  which  justify
the  maxims  and  connect  their  members,  may  be  regarded  as
the  task  which  first  demands  our  attention.

§  3.  Things — each  of  which  is  an  harmonious  group  of
properties — seem,  when  we  first  look  at  the  world,  to  be,  in  all
essential  respects,  immovable  wholes,  untouched  at  bottom  by
the  alterations  which  some  of  their  less  important  characteristics
undergo.  But  when  investigation  begins,  it  soon  appears
that  the  disturbance  which  seemed  only  lightly  to  graze  the
surface  of  things,  really  penetrates  far  deeper  into  them,  and
finally  affects  everything  in  them  which  we  had  thought  to
be  permanent  and  unchanging.  Each  of  their  properties
appears  to  be  ultimately  dependent  upon  conditions,  and  to
change  when  these  conditions  change ;  and  all  these  condi-
tions consist  of  variable  reciprocal  relations  subsisting  between
many  things — that  is,  of  activities  which  they  exercise  and
are  affected  by.  Thus  in  the  most  favourable  case  we  leam  the
relation  and  behaviour  of  things  under  definite  circumstances,
but  not  what  they  must  be  in  order  that  they  may  be  able
to  exhibit  such  relation  and  behaviour.  But  it  is  not  only
the  content  of  what  is  that  remains  enigmatical  to  us,  the
significance  of  its  being  is  so  too — as  far  as  we  are  concerned
it  resolves  itself  into  mere  action.  For  even  the  most  stabL
properties  of  things,  properties  which  in  their  permanence  o

I

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.

579

imagination  may  use  as  the  very  image  of  a  changeless  being,
appear  upon  close  investigation  to  be  undergoing  continuous
growth  and  decay;  their  existence  at  every  moment  is  the
transitory  result  of  reciprocal  action  between  many  elements,
unceasing  renewal  of  this  action  being  required  in  order  that
their  apparently  steady  continuance  may  extend  for  even  but
a  small  space.  Where  then  can  we  find,  and  wherein  con-
sists, that  uniform  undisturbed  permanent  being  which  we
have  been  used  to  regard  as  comparable  to  the  unchanging
channel  in  which  the  current  of  events  flows  on  ?  Even  now
we  do  not  find  that  we  can  do  without  it ;  for  the  content  of
one  moment  conditions  that  of  the  next,  so  that  there  must
be  some  stable  reality,  embracing  equally  all  phases  of  Be-
coming, and  assuring  to  each  its  power  to  condition  the  next ;
what  then  is,  and  in  what  consists,  this  Being  ?

Let  us,  in  order  to  be  brief,  follow  the  path  which  has  been
i  taken  by  an  ingenious  modern  system.  Our  first  question
concerning  the  to  tI  of  things  has  regard,  not  to  that  nature
by  which  each  is  differenced  from  others,  but  to  that  in  virtue
of  which  all  are  similar  and  all  are  things.  But  this  name,
thing,  indicates — as  far  as  known  to  us — nothing  other  than
the  performances  which  we  expect  from  what  we  call  things
'  as  evidence  of  their  reality ;  they  are  things  in  as  far  as  they
are  at  least  participant  in  immutable  independent  being,  and
present  the  fixed  points  to  which  is  attached,  in  whatever
way,  the  varying  course  of  events.  Now,  having  once  become
doubtful  of  the  correctness  of  the  ideas  which  we  formerly
applied  with  unquestioning  confidence,  we  must  first  consider
and  make  clear  to  ourselves  what  that  being  is  which  we
Require  in  things  in  order  that  our  theory  of  the  world  may
find  in  them  a  firm  foundation ;  in  the  second  place,  we  must
ask  how  and  what  things  may  and  must  be,  in  order  that
they  may  participate  in  this  being,  of  which  we  have  found
the  meaning.

The  content  of  the  simplest  notions  does  not  admit  of
being  built  up  out  of  constituent  parts,  but  only  of  being
detached  from  the  examples  in  which  it  occurs. Therefore

580

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

we  are  justified  in  starting  from  the  fact  that  existence  is  first
present  and  intelligible  to  every  one  in  sense-perception ;  that
is,  which  is  seen  or  heard  or  in  any  way  perceived,  and  at
this  first  stage  nothing  indicates  the  existence  of  things  except
their  being  perceived  by  us.  But  even  at  this  first  stage  we
recognise  too  that  this  illustration  of  existence  does  not  suffice
to  express  that  which  we  mean  by  it.  For,  as  we  think,  the
existence  of  things  remains,  even  when  our  attention  is  turned
from  them ;  they  were  when  we  did  not  perceive  them,  and
for  that  reason,  when  our  senses  are  again  applied  to  them,
they  may  afresh  become  objects  of  sense-perception.  Conse-
quently their  existence,  which  at  first  consisted  for  us  only  in
their  being  perceived,  must  belong  to  them  without  reference
to  our  sense-perception ;  but  in  what,  then,  does  it  consist  ?
This  question,  too,  is  readily  answered  by  ordinary  thought,
according  to  which,  whilst  things  are  not  perceived  by  us,
and  perhaps  when  they  have  never  been  perceived  by  any
one,  they  still  continue  to  stand  in  relations  of  various  kinds
to  one  another ;  it  was  these  relations  that  formerly  gave  to
them  a  firm  hold  upon  reality ;  and  these  constituted  their
existence  up  to  the  moment  of  their  being  again  perceived  by
us.  But  this  being  perceived  is  itself  nothing  but  a  new
relation  which  is  added  to,  or  dissolves,  the  old  ones ;  while  of
greater  importance  for  us,  because  it  is  only  through  it  that
we  come  to  have  cognisance  of  existence,  it  is  to  the  existent
thing  itself  not  more  indispensable  for  its  existence  than  those
relations  which  subsist  or  subsisted  between  it  and  other
things.

Ordinary  thought  generally  keeps  to  this  standpoint;  a
state  of  relatedness  is  regarded  by  it  as  being  the  existence
which  it  has  in  view ;  it  is  only  philosophic  reflection  that
tries  to  reach  beyond  this  and  in  a  reality  devoid  of  relations,
in  a  wholly  self-sufficing  self-dependence,  to  find  the  true  and
pure  existence  which  belongs  to  things  in  themselves,  and  first
makes  them  capable  of  serving  as  points  from  which  relations
may  start.  And  in  fact  to  stand  in  no  relation  to  anything
else — neither  to  be  known  nor  to  know — not  to  be  brought

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  581

into  connection  with  any  other  thing,  either  as  having  position
in  space  or  order  in  time — neither  to  be  affected  by  anything
nor  to  have  any  perceptible  effect — is  exactly  what  in
ordinary  thought  is  regarded  as  the  fate  of  the  non-existent,
but  not  as  the  nature  of  the  existent ;  and  it  asks,  and  with
reason,  In  what  respects  then  is  this  pure  existence  distin-
guished from  non-existence,  if  not  in  the  fact  that  we  choose
to  understand  by  it  the  opposite  of  non-existence  ?  Now
this  question  would  undoubtedly  be  foolish  if  it  were  the
expression  of  a  curiosity  to  know  the  process  or  the  inner
structure  by  which  such  existence  is  endowed  with  the  reality
that  differences  it  from  non-existence ;  but  the  impossibility
which  we  here  find  of  separating  that  which  we  mean  from
that  which  we  do  not  mean,  even  by  determinations  of
thought,  points  to  some  error  of  commission  which  we  will
now  endeavour  to  discover.

From  the  total  content  of  any  idea  by  which  we  think
some  fact  of  reality,  analytic  abstraction  easily  separates
individual  ideas  which  are  admissible  and  just  as  long  as
they,  conjoined  with  others  in  the  further  course  of  thought,
lead  to  conclusions  that  are  again  coincident  with  real  facts,
whilst  they  have  not  the  kind  of  validity  which  would  enable
them,  of  themselves  and  out  of  such  combination,  to  denote
any  reality  whatever.  From  the  idea  of  the  movement  of  a
body,  an  idea  which  in  its  completeness  denotes  a  fact  of
{■  observation,  we  drop  all  reference  to  the  body,  and  lay  stress
^  upon  the  idea  of  movement  alone ;  we  analyse  further  this
idea  itself  and  thus  get  the  notions  of  velocity  and  direction —
pure  abstractions,  which  are  just  and  useful  because  their
content  is  capable  of  an  elaboration  in  thought  the  results  of
which  when  again  applied  to  the  complete  idea  of  the  move-
ment of  a  body,  gives  us  enlarged  insight  into  the  nature  of
this  movement ;  but  neither  velocity  in  itself  without  direc-
tion, nor  direction  without  some  movement  in  some  direction,
I  can  denote  anything  which  could  of  itself  actually  exist.
That  the  notion  of  pure  existence  is  to  be  reckoned  among
these  notions,  which  are  in  themselves  valid  but  can  have  no

582  BOOK  IX. CHAPIEE  I.

real  independent  existence,  is  most  easily  shown  by  the  other
names  which  are  given  to  it — the  names  of  absolute  Positing
or  Affirmation,

Affirmation  would  be  a  most  inadequate  mark  of  that
which  we  mean  by  existence  ;  it  is  only  our  habit  of  virtually
thinking  of  the  real  and  not  of  the  unreal  as  that  which  our
affirmation  concerns  that  can  mislead  us  into  thinking  that  we
exhaust  the  notion  of  existence  by  the  notion  of  affirmation.
It  is  plain  that  existence  is  denoted  not  by  affirmation  simply,
but  by  affirmation  of  existence  ;  and  both  the  meaning  of  this
and  its  difference  from  non-existence  remain  wholly  untouched
by  appeal  to  an  affirmation  which  may  apply  to  its  opposite
just  as  much  as  to  itself.  The  notion  of  Positing  gives  us
nothing  better.  It  is  readily  conceded  that  something  or
other  must  be  thought  which  the  positing  posits,  or  the
affirmation  affirms  ;  but  even  this  addition  does  not  give  to
either  of  the  two  notions  such  completeness  as  would  make
it  possible  to  accept  them  in  the  sense  here  assigned.  The
affirmation  of  a  single  notion  has  no  meaning  which  we  can
specify ;  we  can  affirm  nothing  but  a  proposition  in  which  the
content  of  one  notion  is  brought  into  relation  with  that  of
another ;  and  just  as  unmeaning  is  it  to  speak  of  any  positing
in  general  without  at  the  same  time  thinking  of  and  naming
those  relations,  the  being  brought  into  which  constitutes  the
very  positing  of  that  which  is  posited.  Nothing  can  be
simply  posited  without  being  posited  in  some  way  or  other,  in
some  specified  circumstances  or  connection — and  the  assertions
that  characterize  the  true  existence  of  things  as  unconditioned
irrevocable  absolute  positing  cannot  compensate  for  the  failure
to  state  in  what  this  positing  consists  and  what  its  effect  is,
by  predicates  that  emphasize  its  importance.  Undoubtedly
the  general  notion  of  Affirmation  may  be  separated  from
affirmations  of  various  propositions,  and  the  notion  of  Positing
from  the  manifold  positings  by  which  we  bring  various  things
into  various  relations,  and  both  will  furnish  serviceable
abstractions ;  but  neither  can  we  in  thought  make  an  affirma
tion  thus  without  content,  or  a  mere  bare  positing,  nor  ca:

I

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  583

there  be,  beyond  our  thought,  any  reality  corresponding  to
either.

The  failure  of  a  definition  does  not  do  away  with  the
validity  of  the  notion  intended  to  be  defined.  Hence  we
shall  have  no  difficulty  in  admitting  the  fruitlessness  of  these
attempts  to  cover  the  true  meaning  of  existence  by  the
notions  of  empty  Affirmation  or  Positing,  while  yet  there
may  be  very  plausible  considerations  leading  men  to  think
themselves  justified  in  seeking  it  nevertheless  in  an  absence  of
relatedness  which  we  thought  to  be  equivalent  to  non-existence.
For  no  view  can  bind  the  reality  of  things  to  a  definite  number
of  definite  and  immutable  relations ;  but  things  are  things
just  because  their  existence  lasts  on  undisturbed  throughout
the  ceaseless  change  of  all  their  relations.  If  we  now  take
away,  all  at  once,  all  those  relations  that  we  are  undoubtedly
justified  in  taking  away  one  after  the  other  and  separately — if
we  deny  all  relations — this  denial  will  not  concern  that
which  was  independent  of  what  we  denied ;  there  will
remain,  it  is  supposed,  as  the  object  of  a  distinct  and  assured
opinion.  Pure  Existence — which  now  without  relations  is  the
same  reality  that  it  formerly  was  with  relations  ;  less  easily
described  indeed  in  its  simplicity  than  it  would  be  in  any  of
its  relations,  which  would  give  us  an  opportunity  of  telling
something  about  it,  but  not  the  less  something  certain  and
positive  in  itself,  because  of  our  inability  to  characterize  its
self-dependence  in  any  other  way  than  by  denial  of  that
which  it  excludes.  Thus,  it  is  thought,  do  we  reach  a  con-
firmation of  that  which  we  vainly  attempted  to  call  in  question
— things  must  he,  hefore  they  can  stand  in  the  relations  in
which  indeed  alone  their  reality  can  become  perceptible  to  us ;
and  it  is  thought  that  this  hidden  existence  is  permanently
distinguished  from  non  existence  by  the  capacity  of  that  which
exists  to  enter  at  any  moment  into  that  network  of  relation-
ships in  which  its  reality  becomes  apparent.

What  I  object  to  in  this  train  of  thought  is  this  insignificant
lefore.  When  we  recall  those  individual  ideas  by  the  joining
of  which  we  make  clear  the  simple  meaning  of  existence,  it  is

L

584

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  L

very  natural  that  this  idea  of  reality  which  cannot  be  furthei
analysed,  should,  just  because  it  is  contained  in  the  notion  of
emry  existent  thing,  take  the  favoured  position  of  something
precedent  to  the  various  and  changeable  determinations  by
which  one  existent  thing  is  distinguished  from  another — these
determinations  being  only  subsequently  added  to  the  pre-
existent  reality.  If  this  were  expressed  thus  : — In  order  to
think  the  existence  of  things  one  must  first  grasp  that  reality
or  affirmation  by  which  all  existence  is  distinguished  from
non-existence,  and  then  understand  as  that  to  which  this
affirmation  relates,  all  those  determinations  and  relations  by
which  one  definite  existence  is  differenced  from  another — we
should  have  no  objection  to  make  to  this  logical  arrangement
of  the  notions  referred  to.  But  this  succession  of  ideas,
which  always  arises  in  a  similar  way  when  we  compare
numerous  examples  of  some  universal,  does  not  always
correspond  to  a  uniform  actual  process  in  the  compared
objects  themselves  ;  and  even  in  the  case  which  we  have
taken  it  may  be  shown  that  the  priority  of  unrelated  to
related  existence  is  merely  this  logical  priority,  not  the
metaphysical  priority  which  would  be  expressed  in  the
assertion  that  there  is  real  unrelated  existence,  taking  real  in
the  same  meaning  in  which  we  apply  it  to  related  existence.

We  only  speak  of  things  and  of  their  existence  because
these  ideas  are  indispensable  for  the  intelligibility  of  the
changeable  phsenomenal  world.  Now  it  may  seem  quite  allows
able  to  assume  that  a  thing  may  emerge  at  any  moment  out^
of  the  complete  unrelatedness  in  which  it  reposes,  secure  of
itself  but  not  as  yet  contributing  anything  to  the  play  of
events  in  the  world,  and  may  enter  into  those  relations  to
others  in  which  it  is  capable  of  making  an  efficient  con-
tribution to  the  sum  of  what  is  going  on  in  the  universe.
But  nothing  can  enter  into  relations  at  all  without  enter-
ing into  some  definite  relation  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other
Yet  wherein  can  lie  the  grounds  of  decision  for  the  choice^
of  this  relation,  if  not  in  other  relations,  which,  however
unobserved,  have  long  subsisted  between  that  solitary  element

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THING «.  585

and  the  rest  of  the  world,  with  which  it  appears — but  plainly
only  appears — to  enter  now  for  the  first  time  into  conjunc-
tion ?  If,  allowing  ourselves  to  use  a  spatial  image,  we  repre-
sent the  whole  of  reality  as  a  sphere  of  infinite  diameter,  but
that  solitary  element,  which  as  yet  has  no  relation  to  it,  as
actually  having  a  non-spatial  existence  from  which  it  will
pass  into  spatial  reality,  its  entrance  into  space  must  take
place  at  a  definite  point  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others ;  it  is
impossible  to  find  any  reason  for  the  choice  of  this  place
except  in  the  direction  of  some  movement  which  the  solitary
element  already  had  towards  it,  even  when  it  seemed  to  us  in
its  spacelessness  to  be  devoid  of  all  definite  relation  to  spatial
reality.  Therefore  if  we  leave  undecided  whether  there  is
admissible  at  all  the  notion  of  unrelated  existence  separated
from  related  existence  (in  the  idea  of  which  indeed  the  idea
of  unrelated  existence  is  contained),  yet  we  must  maintain
that  anything  which  actually  was  so  unrelated  could  never
enter  into  those  relations  through  which  it  would  assert  itself
in  reality  as  a  real  thing  among  other  real  things.  And  just
as  little  is  it  possible  that  any  existing  thing  which  had  once
been  in  relation  to  others,  should  get  rid  of  all  relation  to  the
rest  of  the  world ;  it  could  only  get  to  a  greater  distance  from
it,  this,  however,  being  just  as  much  a  relation  as  its  former
proximity.  Hence  there  was  an  error  in  concluding  that
because  it  may  be  possible  to  deny  an  individual  relation
therefore  some  real  existence  would  remain  when  all  relations
have  been  denied.  In  the  same  way  consciousness  remains
when  any  individual  idea  is  removed,  but  it  disappears  if  all
[are  removed  simultaneously.

Then — it  will  be  finally  objected — there  is  nothing  stable  at
all,  since  the  existence  of  everything  presupposes  the  existence
■of  some  other  to  which  it  must  be  related,  and  thus  neither
can  be  without  the  other  which  is  its  foundation.  Without
doubt  this  is  the  most  erroneous  of  all  objections ;  it  wholly
mistakes  the  business  of  philosophy.  For  that  business  is
not  to  state  a  mode  of  procedure  according  to  which  the  world
might  be created  if  unfortunately  it  did  not  yet  exist,  but

586  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  L

only  (and  especially  here)  to  understand  the  connection  of  the
world  which  already  exists.  We  do  not  inquire  what  diffi-
culties a  world-creating  power  might  have  in  producing  this
reciprocal  tension  of  all  those  constituent  parts  of  the  whole
arch  which  mutually  presuppose  one  another ;  perhaps  it  had
no  difficulty  at  all,  for  why  should  this  power  have  been  so
one-armed  that  it  could  only  fix  one  element  at  a  time  ?  It
is  just  this  continuous  arch  of  mutually  related  things  which  is
the  primal  reality  that  constitutes  the  object  of  all  our  investi-
gations— the  object  which  is  given  and  which  alone  we  can
recognise  ;  to  seek  to  discover  the  laws  according  to  which
the  course  of  changes  takes  place  in  it  now  that  it  exists
seems  to  us  a  possible  aim  of  these  investigations ;  but  to  ask
by  what  device  it  has  been  made,  or  how  it  has  been  brought
about  that  there  is  any  coherent  world  whatever,  instead  of
none  at  all,  we  hold  to  be  a  wandering  flight  of  fancy  that
shoots  beyond  the  mark.  Hence,  we  may  observe  incident-
ally, it  would  be  an  advantage  to  banish  from  the  considera-
tion of  existence  those  expressions  Affirmation  and  Positing
which  have  already  troubled  us.  Being,  in  form,  designations
of  actions,  their  use  keeps  up  the  prejudiced  belief  that  some
process  may  be  stated  by  which  the  existence  of  that  which
exists  is  produced — as  if  in  existence  itself  there  took  place
that  succession  which  obtains  among  our  ideas  when  we  try  to
comprehend  it.

And  so  perhaps  we  may  most  quickly  come  to  terms  with
the  mode  of  thought  opposed  to  us,  in  the  following  way.
When  it  maintains  that  each  Eeal  being  in  its  own  pure
existence  floats  in  a  condition  of  complete  unrelatedness,  but
not  only  can  enter  into  relations  with  others,  but  does  so  in
reality  with  infinite  frequency,  we  only  ask  to  be  allowed  to
regard  this  relatedness — which  is  admitted  in  fact,  and  there-
fore recognised  as  possible — as  the  only  kind  of  real  existence;
but  that  pure  existence  to  which  reference  has  been  made,  as
something  that  does  not  occur  in  any  place  or  at  any  time.
If  according  to  that  view  existing  things  need  no  external
relation  in order  to  exist,  we  would  add  that at  any  rate

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  687

existing  things  now  have  enough  and  to  spare  of  such  relations,
and  have  them  everywhere  and  from  all  eternity,  and  that  in
point  of  fact  reality  contains  nothing  that  is  or  could  be
isolated  in  its  own  pure  existence,  and  out  of  all  relation.  If
then  there  is  nothing  that  is  unrelated,  we  are  entitled  to  say
that  it  belongs  to  the  notion  and  nature  of  existence  to  be
related.  For  he  who  holds  that  existing  things  devoid  of
relation  are  conceivable  but  admits  that  none  such  do  actually
exist,  plainly  does  not  speak  metaphysically  of  existent  things,
but  logically  of  what  is  possible  but  not  actual,  and  hence
certainly  not  existent.

§  4.  We  have  already  had  repeated  occasion  to  distinguish
between  the  relations  which  seemed  to  belong  to  things
themselves  and  others  into  which  they  are  merely  brought
arbitrarily  by  our  thought.  It  is  only  in  the  first  class  that
we  shall  now  seek  to  find  those  relations,  to  be  in  which
constitutes  the  existence  of  things ;  and  yet  those  of  the  other
class  are  not  less  important,  and  it  is  only  apparently  that
they  are  foreign  to  the  nature  of  things.  For  to  establish  by
arbitrary  conjunction  relations  which  have  no  foundation  in
the  content  of  the  things  conjoined  would  be  not  thought  but
mental  aberration ;  even  a  relation  of  comparison  must,  in  as
far  as  it  is  correct,  have  its  root  in  the  actual  condition  of
that  which  is  compared.  If  we  compare  things  as  contrary
or  greater  or  smaller,  it  is  not  our  comparison  that  makes
them  contrary,  greater  or  smaller,  but  the  things  compared
actually  had  these  relations  to  one  another  before  we  came  to
consider  them,  and  the  relations  are  found,  not  invented,  by
our  thought.  Yet  their  remains  a  difference.  Sometimes
the  contrasts  are  brought  together  and  exhibit  their
opposition  only  in  our  thought ;  sometimes  they  encounter  in
reality  and  cancel  one  another;  sometimes  in  our  thoughts
the  greater  is  opposed  to  the  less  without  affecting  it,  some-
times in  conflict  it  makes  its  superior  power  felt.  It  will
easily  appear  from  a  generalization  of  these  examples  that  the
former  relations  afford  definite  grounds  for  the  form  and
content  of  future  action,  and  that  the  latter  are  the  effective

588  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  L

conditions  of  actual  action,  in  which  the  related  elements  do
and  suffer  as  those  conditions  indicate.  It  is  to  this  last
relation  that  we  now  wish  to  devote  some  attention.

That  all  which  takes  place  in  the  world  takes  place  in
obedience  to  laws  will  be  readily  admitted  by  every  one ;  but
there  is  less  agreement  as  to  wh/it  that  is  which  the  most
general  laws  of  existence  and  action  impose  upon  the
demeanour  of  all  things.  Yet  it  is  not  this  variety  of  views
as  to  the  last  point  which  stirs  us  up  at  present,  but  just  that
assumption  in  which  they  all  agree.  But  whilst  we  raise  a
special  question  as  to  the  conceivability  of  this  assumption —
that  there  are  universal  laws — we  must  be  careful  to  guard
the  meaning  of  the  question  itself  against  misapprehensions.
Of  course  we  cannot  demand  to  know  how  it  is  that  a  primi-
tive truth,  which  is  not  derived  from  any  other,  can  be  true,
nor  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  an  universal  truth  should  be
valid  in  all  the  cases  of  its  application  which  we  think  of ;
the  only  thing  that  we  wish  to  make  clear  to  ourselves  is,
how  a  law  can  be  not  only  a  valid  truth  in  the  realm  of
thoughts,  but  also  a  determining  power  in  the  world  of  things.
And  this  question  we  do  not  ask  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a
graphic  picture  of  the  arrangements  by  which  the  subordina-
tion of  things  to  the  law  is  brought  about ;  all  we  want  is  an
explanation  of  the  several  thoughts  which  always  accompany
the  notion  which  we  have  when  we  think  of  any  general  law
as  a  valid  truth ;  for  when  we  desire  to  transfer  the  law  to
reality  as  a  governing  power,  we  must,  as  a  condition  of  the
possibility  of  that  transference  of  the  law,  carry  with  us  in
our  thinking  the  content  of  those  thoughts,  into  the  sphere  of
reality.

Now  every  law  regarded  as  a  valid  truth  attaches  some
definite  consequence  to  a  relation  that  either  always  exists  or
can  be  established  between  some  two  factors.  But  in  order
that  it  may  be  general  and  not  the  expression  of  an  individual
case,  it  not  only  assumes  that  that  consequence  and  the  con-
ditioning relation  to  which  it  is  attached  belong  each  to  a
series  of  which  the  members  are  connected  in  some  definite

jy

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  589

way;  but  it  also  has  to  make  the  same  assumption  as  regards
the  factors  between  which  there  is  this  connection  of  condition
and  consequent.  And  indeed  it  needs  but  little  consideration
to  show  that  not  only  must  each  one  of  these  factors  be  of  a
kind  belonging  to  some  genus,  but  that  also  both  the  genera
themselves  (to  which  the  two  factors  severally  belong)  though
not  indeed  necessarily  kinds  belonging  to  a  higher  common
universal,  must  be  at  any  rate  members  of  some  relation  in
which  they  occupy  definite  positions.  Under  these  conditions
the  law  expresses  the  general  mode  of  dependence  by  which
in  each  individual  case  the  kind  and  magnitude  of  its  conse-
quent is  determined,  in  accordance  with  the  given  kind  and
magnitude  of  an  assumed  connection  which  may  be  variable,
and  with  the  special  nature  of  the  factors  between  which
this  connection  has  place.  The  general  axioms  of  mechanics
would  furnish  a  multitude  of  illustrative  examples  for  the
further  consideration  of  these  briefly  indicated  relations  ;  here
I  would  only  once  more  emphasize  the  point  (which  is,  in  this
place,  of  importance  for  us)  that  on  the  one  hand  the  relations
between  things,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  effects  resulting
from  them,  must  be  comparable  though  different  cases  of
general  events,  and  not  only  so  but  also  the  natures  of  the
things  from  the  relation  between  which  an  effect  is  to  arise,
cannot  differ  to  an  immeasurable  and  incomparable  degree,  as
long  as  the  part  which  those  natures  are  to  contribute  to  the
formation  of  the  result  in  any  case  is  to  be  determinable  by
some  general  law.  And  indeed  it  is  not  sufficient  to  allow
to  the  things  such  homogeneity  as  causes  them  to  be  co-
ordinated under  the  general  notion  of  thing ;  it  is  further
necessary  that  the  qualities  by  which  one  of  them  is  distin-
guished from  the  other  should  be  comparable  values  of  general
qualities.

In  developing  this  demand,  more  laboriously  than  perhaps
might  seem  necessary,  what  we  have  been  insisting  upon  is
not  some  assumption  that  is  not  naturally  made  everywhere
in  attempts  at  philosophic  explanations  of  the  world,  but
certainly one the significance of which men, when they

590

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

make  it,  do  not  adequately  perceive.  For  we  only  give  a
different  expression  to  the  meaning  of  this  assumption  when
we  maintain  that  it  makes  impossible  any  thought  of  the
independence  of  things  which  allows  an  individual  thing  to  be
what  it  is  without  reference  to  otliers  ;  that  on  the  contrary  it
constrains  us  to  regard  the  specific  nature  of  everything  as
being  a  definite  member  of  an  all-embracing  series  in  the
existible  world — a  series  of  which  the  equally  special  natures
of  other  things  constitute  the  remaining  members.  That  this
assumption  is  everywhere  tacitly  made  we  learn  from  the
procedure  of  those  who  formally  deny  it.  Wholly  un-
determined— they  say — are  the  qualities  of  Real  beings ;  each
may  be  what  it  will,  if  only  what  it  is  is  something  simple
and  positive,  and  if  in  order  to  be  what  it  is,  it  needs  no
relation  to  anything  else.  But  as  soon  as  the  explanation
of  phsenomena  makes  it  necessary  to  give  an  account  of
the  consequences  which  arise  from  the  relation  that  (not-
withstanding their  independence)  comes  to  exist  between  two
Eeal  beings,  this  assumption  has  to  be  supplemented  by  a
correction  which  makes  it  useless  in  itself.  For  the  simple
natures  which  make  it  impossible  to  divine  how  the  conjunc-
tion of  the  beings  to  which  they  belong  could  produce  any
result,  it  is  thought  that  there  may  be  substituted  combina-
tions of  several  qualities  as  equivalent  expressions  of  their
content,  and  this  without  detriment  to  the  supposed  simplicity  ;
and  because  all  opposites  tend  to  cancel  one  another,  these
substitutory  expressions,  by  analysing  the  simple  qualities  into
similar  or  opposite  or  otherwise  contrasted  constituents,  give
us  some  insight  into  the  way  in  which  the  reciprocally  acting
natures  of  things  work  into  each  other  so  as  to  produce  a  new
condition  of  reality.  And  thus  contingent  aspects  skilfully
reach — by  a  roundabout  path,  and  in  a  form  which  has  dangers
of  its  own — the  same  assertion  which  we  held  from  the  begin-
ning, namely  that  the  natures  of  things  do  not  differ  in  an
incomparable  degree,  but  that  they  are  members  of  a  series
(or  a  system  of  series)  susceptible  of  comparison.  Each
indeed  has  a  value  of  its  own,  by  which  independent  of  others

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  591

it  is  what  it  is,  but  all  these  values  are  in  a  condition  of
relatedness  through  which  it  first  becomes  possible  that  the
conjunction  of  several  of  them  should  furnish  adequate  ground
for  a  definite  result.  Eealism  has  an  intelligible  but  unfair
interest  in  preferring  this  roundabout  path  ;  it  desires  that
the  independence  of  each  individual  Eeal  being  should  not  be
endangered  by  the  thought  that  the  commensurability  of  its
nature  with  the  natures  of  the  others  belongs  to  the  very-
notion  of  it ;  only  as  a  completed  fact,  and  a  fact  which  might
have  been  otherwise,  does  it  admit,  as  something  supplemen-
tary, this  comparability  of  things.  But  here  again  it  does  not
escape  confusion  between  an  effort  of  logical  thought  and
metaphysical  knowledge.  For  to  assume  that  in  itself  the
notion  of  an  existent  thing  does  not  require  that  it  should  be
comparable  with  others,  and  then  to  admit  that  in  point  of
fact  what  exists  is  comparable,  can  only  signify  that  just  that
being  which  is  insusceptible  of  comparison  belongs  not  to
what  exists  but  to  those  possibilities  of  thought  with  which
abstraction  plays  when  it  takes  to  pieces  the  notion  of  reality
and  for  its  own  ends  substantiates  parts  which  in  reality  only
occur  in  combination.

Now  whilst  in  practice  explanations  of  the  world  admit
the  comparability  of  things,  they  misunderstand  (as  we
remarked  above)  the  significance  of  this  admission,  for  they
regard  the  content  of  it  as  far  more  natural  and  self-evident
than  it  is.  According  to  them  just  because  nothing  keeps
the  differences  between  the  natures  of  things  within  certain
definite  limits,  it  is  equally  possible  that  they  should  all  be
comparable  and  that  each  should  be  immeasurably  different
from  the  others.  Now  if  in  reality  only  the  first  and  not  the
second  alternative  is  met  with,  there  need  not  on  that  account
be  any  more  intimate  relationship,  any  bond  between  indi-
vidual things  that  could  in  any  way  detract  from  their
independence ;  each  might  be  wholly  independent  of  others,
the  reality  of  its  content  (as  in  every  instance  of  a  general
notion)  might,  in  spite  of  its  similarity  to  some  other,  yet  be
wholly  independent  of  that  other. Hence if  things  should

592  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

happen  to  be  partly  similar  and  partly  contrary,  there  would
be  no  reason  for  regarding  such  a  state  of  things  with
suspicion,  and  it  would  be  self-evident  that  the  reciprocal
action  of  things  would  have  the  same  result  which  the
opposition  or  the  similarity  of  natures  brought  together  in
some  definite  relation  must  always  have.

But  is  it  a  fact  that  all  this  is  self-evident  ?  Or  if  it  seems
so,  does  not  the  self-evidence  result  from  long  custom,  which
dulls  our  apprehension  of  what  is  wonderful  in  familiar  things  ?
The  combined  impression  of  all  experience  early  taught  us
to  know  the  world  as  a  coherent  whole,  within  which  each
several  content,  every  state,  every  quality,  every  nature
of  anything  comes  into  conjunction  with  other  contents,
states,  qualities,  and  natures  in  such  a  way  that  from  the
combination  there  may  arise  the  complete  cause  of  a  new
result.  At  present,  after  having  this  experience,  it  does
indeed  seem  to  us  self-evident  that  each  individual,  however
isolated  and  independent  it  may  at  first  seem,  is  yet  included
in  the  web  of  this  universal  world,  embracing  truth  and
correspondence  of  all  existence ;  but  considered  in  itself  this
fact  is  calculated  to  excite  inexhaustible  wonder.  And  this
wonder  is  by  no  means  allayed  by  the  cool  reflections  which
we  have  just  cited ;  the  equal  or  unequal  probability  of
various  cases  can  be  discussed  in  such  a  manner  only
when  those  cases  themselves  are  regarded  as  being  already
constituents  of  a  world  with  reference  to  which  there  has
already  been  established  from  the  beginning  the  universal
validity  of  certain  laws — ^laws  that  enable  us  to  distinguish
the  possible  from  the  impossible,  and  to  estimate  the  different
or  equal  probability  of  different  cases.  Only  when  we  have
already  assumed  that  there  is  one  truth  which  is  valid  amid
the  multiplicity  of  reality,  and  have  once  for  all  resolved  to
regard  the  signification  of  this  validity  as  clear,  and  not  to
ask  further  in  what  it  is  precisely  that  this  dominion  of  truth
and  subordination  of  existence  to  it  consist — only  then  is  it
that  everything  in  reality  which  is  in  accordance  herewith
seems  to us to be self-evident,  and to have its  validity

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  593

guaranteed  by  that  universal  truth  which  is  past  compre-
hension. But  what  exactly  is  it  that  we  do  in  making  this
assumption  ?  How  do  we  reach  the  assurance  that  truth,
if  only  it  be  true,  will  achieve  dominion  over  all  things,
whatever  the  nature  of  these  may  consist  in  ?

There  is  a  perverse  way  of  representing  these  things  which
I  have  already  found  frequent  occasion  to  criticise.  "We  aro
accustomed  to  speak  of  the  laws  of  Nature  and  of  the  cosmic
order  as  though  each  were  something  independent,  and  were
between  or  outside  of  or  above  things,  and  ready  to  enforce
their  obedience  to  its  commands.  A  glance  at  social  relations
showed  us  a  case  of  this  error.  Where  would  be  the  law  of  a
state  if  all  its  citizens  slept,  or  if  the  plague  had  swept  them
all  off,  or  if  all  willed  something  different  from  the  law  ?  lu
the  last  case  it  would  at  any  rate  have  an  efficient  existence
as  causing  reproaches  of  conscience  in  the  minds  of  the
disobedient;  in  the  first  two  it  would  exist  only  in  the  form
of  a  temporary  continuance  of  that  order  of  material  conditions
that  it  had  created ;  in  general  it  has  cpntrolling  efficacy  only
as  it  lives  in  the  citizens,  as  conscious  idea,  as  disposition,  as
personal  conviction,  and  as  conforming  will ;  it  never  exists
between  or  outside  of  or  above  them.  And  with  the  laws  of
things  the  case  is  no  otherwise.  It  is  not  that  they  constrain
things  to  act  as  they  do ;  but  things  themselves  act,  and  act
in  such  a  fashion  that  in  reflecting  upon  their  action  we  are
able  to  find  a  law  guided  by  wliich,  in  predicting  a  consequence
from  given  conditions,  we  reach  a  conclusion  that  coincides
|with  reality.  But  after  we  have  developed  this  thought  of  a
|few  which  at  bottom  is  nothing  more  than  the  unvarying
'nature  of  real  things  and  of  their  action,  this  creation  of  our
jthought  grows  under  our  hands  and  easily  comes  to  wear  the
(appearance  of  a  truth  valid  in  itself  and  preceding  reality ;
hud  it  then  seems  to  us  self-evident  that  even  existent  things
should  obey  that  which  is  in  itself  true  and  necessary.  The
self-evidence  we  may  now  admit;  but  not  for  the  reason
given,  which  represents  it  erroneously.  It  exists  for  us  in  so
far  as  we  regard  it  as  belonging  to  the  innermost  being  of

VOL.  II.  2  P

594

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  L

things — the  being  in  virtue  of  which  they  are  things — that
their  natures  are  not  incommensurably  different,  but  are  com-
parable ;  that  none  of  them  is  simply  unique  of  its  kind  ;  that  J
even  a  thing  which  had  no equals would  be  distinguished  I
only  by  the  special  position  which  it  occupied  in  the  cosmic  |
system,  or  by  some  peculiar  combination  of  qualities  which
are  also  found  out  of  that combination as constituents ofj
"  contingent  aspects" — thus  having  definite  relations  among!
themselves  and  to  other  things. It  is  only  if  these  presup-]
positions  be  made  that  it  is,  in  our  view,  conceivable  thati
One  Truth  should  control  the  Manifold  of  Eeality,  and  that
changing  relations  should  produce  a  system  of  causes  from]
which  springs  an  ordered  sequence  of  results.

We  do  not  ascribe  to  this  assertion — that  there  is  a  corre-
spondence between  all  things  which  is  a  necessity  of  thought — ■]
greater  significance  than  it  can  possess ;  it  contains  no  reason
for  understanding  the  connection  of  things  as  being  yet  closer]
— of  intensifying  it,  for  instance,  to  a  common  origin  from
one  source  or  to  continuous  inherence  in  one  substance. Yet
it  abolishes  the supposed  self-dependence,  in unconstrained]
freedom  and  isolation,  of  each  thing,  and  draws  attention  to  a  *
connectedness  between  the  contents  of  things  which  is  every-
where assumed  in  attempts  to  explain  the  world  without  its
being  made  quite  clear  how  much  the  assumption  admits.

^  5.  We  have  been  hitherto  speaking  only  of  the  com-
parability of  things  or  of  the  relations  between  them  whidiy
contain  the  ground  of  some  future  event;  we  have  not  as
yet  spoken  of  those  connections  the  introduction  of  which
constrains  that  nature  in  things  to  which  we  have  referred
actually  to  produce  these  possible  results  by  their  reciprocal
action.  In  turning  to  this  subject  we  shall  for  the  present
disregard  some  questions  which  at  this  point  are  beginning
to  force  themselves  upon  us,  but  would  divide  our  atten-
tion detrimentally.  It  may  remain  undecided  under  what
form  of  intuition  we  are  accustomed  to  imagine,  or  have  to
imagine,  those  connections  between  things  which  constrain
them to reciprocal actions;, and we may likewise leave

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  59o

undisturbed  the  question  whether  we  should  regard  them
generally  as  sometimes  being  present  and  sometimes  absent;
or  on  the  other  hand  as  always  subsisting,  but  as  being  some-
times forced  upon  our  observation  and  sometimes  withdrawn
from  it  by  an  infinitely  varied  gradation  of  their  intimacy  or
closeness,  and  the  correspondingly  varying  magnitude  of  the
effects  that  depend  upon  them.  We  will  set  out  from  the
fact  that  they  have  hitherto  appeared  to  us  as  relations
between  things ;  connecting  with  this  fact  the  question  how
they  can  exist  thus  ietween  things ;  and  how — supposing  that
they  do  thus  exist — they  could  act  upon  things  as  condition-
ing forces.

When  in  thought  we  compare  two  things  of  which  one  is
greater  and  the  other  less,  and  recognise  a  difference  between
them,  the  dividing  and connecting between  that  arises  here
consists  in  the  consciousness  of  a  change  of  our  inward  con-
dition which  we  experienced  when  our  ideation  of  the  greater
passed  into  ideation  of  the  less. This  third  idea,  which  is
a  state  of  our  mind  in  the  same  sense  as  the  two  previous
ones  which  are  compared  in  it,  partakes  of  the  same  kind  of
reality  as  they do. Now  what  is  it  that  can  give  to  the
between  of  things  themselves — to  the  connection  which  joins
them  and  not  their  ideational  images — a,  reality  similar  to
that  possessed  by  the  things  ? Besides  what  exists  there  is
nothing  except  what  is  non-existent ;  that  which  neither  is
le  things  themselves,  nor  is  in  them,  must  sink  unsupported
ito  a  complete  vacuum  in  which  it  neither  can  simply  exist,
jtlior  exist  with  various  definite  values ;  and  can  least  of  all
l&ubsist  as  a  unifying  and  connecting  power  superior  to  things.
fit  is  easy  to  imagine  a  connecting  background  of  all  things,
*on  which,  as  a  firm  support,  connections  may  run  from  one
;thing  to  another; but  as  long  as  things  themselves  do  not
'Constitute this background, on further consideration the
question  will  always  recur.  How  can  the  connection,  being  a
state of this bond between things, have  any power over
things  which  are  themselves  other  than  the  bond  ? Between
this  bond  and  things  there  must  be  another  Between,  which

596

BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I

tbe  connections  must  include — and  yet  could  not  include,  eitliei
if  the  Between  were  empty  nothing  or  if  it  were  filled  up  by
some  reality  foreign to  the  things  themselves. This ever-
recurring  difi&culty  will  later  force  us  to  recognise  that  the
thought  of  an  objective  connection  between  things  is  altogether
impossible,  and  that  what  we  use  to  call  by  this  name  is  in
all  cases  some  state  or action in things themselves. But
at  the  present  stage,  when  further  elucidation  of  this  asser-
tion would  lead  us  astray  from  the  proximate  topic  of  dis-
cussion, we  will  content  ourselves  with  the  recognition  that
at  all  events  connections  which  exist  between  beings  would
be  without  significance  as  long  as  they  existed  only  between
ihem,  and  had  not  produced  any  internal  state  in  the  things
themselves. As  long  as  things  feel  and  know  nothing  of  thel
connections  that  hold  between  them,  these  cannot  contain  th(
cause  of  a  change  in  things,  and  just  as  little  tlie  cause  of
their  reciprocal  action  upon  each  other. Any  being  can  be,
caused  to  change  its  state  only  by  something  that  is  actually  i:
itself,  by  some  passion  of  its  own  ;  only  in  as  far  as  two  bein;
cause  this  passion  in  one  another,  can  they  be  reciprocall;
acting  causes. But  since  they  cannot  produce  this  passion  in^
each  other  by  means  of  connections  between  them,  the  chang<
which  we  assume  in  one  must  he  a  direct  passion  in  the  other^
and  the  question  arises,  Upon  what  assumption  is  the  fulfil-
ment of  this  requirement  thinkable  ?

We  may  escape  the  tediousness  of  the  explanation  here
required  by  a  reference.  We  have  repeatedly  had  occasion  (cf*
i.,  p.  3  5  8)  to  consider  the  possibility  of  reciprocal  action  between
things  and  the  suppositions  that  have  been  made  in  the  hope  of
explaining  it.  We  convinced  ourselves  that  all  ideas  of  some
influence  passing  from  one  thing  to  another,  ended  in  impossi-
bilities and  contradictions.  It  could  hardly  be  made  clear
what  exactly  that  should  be  that  did  thus  (as  was  supposed)
pass  between  them — if  it  was  some  third  real  element,  that
detached  itself  from  a  first  in  order  to  pass  over  to  a  second,
its  movement  between  the  two  might  indeed  be  capable  of
presentation  in idea,  but  the problem  of  reciprocal  actio*

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  597

would  remain  unsolved  ;  and  indeed  doubled — for  we  should
need  to  ask  how  this  third  element  could  be  sent  out  from
the  first,  and  how  its  reaching  the  second  could  be  the  cause
of  any  passion  in  that  second ;  if  the  third  something  were  a
force,  an  effect,  or  a  state,  neither  of  our  two  obscure  points
would  be  made  clearer,  but  even  what  before  was  plain  would
become  obscure — namely,  how  all  these  which  can  exist  only  as
attributes  of  a  being  could  detach  themselves  from  any  one
element,  float  for  an  instant  in  the  vacuum  between  the  two,
and  then  taking  a  definite  direction,  arrive  at  the  second  as
the  goal  of  their  movement ;  this  second  being  at  the  same  time
the  point  of  their  return  to  the  sphere  of  existence.  All  these
difficulties  have  frequently  led  to  the  attempt  to  deny
altogether  this  inexplicable  reciprocal  action,  and  to  put  in
its  place  a  predetermined  harmony  of  cosmic  order,  according
to  which  the  states  of  the  different  things  accompany  and
correspond  to  one  another,  without  having  to  be  produced  by
reciprocal  action.  But  it  was  quite  idle  to  imagine  an  order
separated  from  the  things  in  the  changes  of  which  alone  it
could  have  any  reality.  Only  if  the  course  of  all,  even  of  the
most  trivial,  events  were  fixed  by  immutable  predestination,
could  the  assumption  of  a  Pre-established  Harmony — not
indeed  explain  anything,  but  —  tolerably  well  describe  the
facts.  But  it  is  impossible  that  there  could  be  such  a  harmony
which  as  a  general  law  should  predetermine  the  necessary
consequences  of  contingent  events ;  for  if  a  change  of  some
jnstituent  of  the  universe  (and  it  is  of  such  that  all  these
msequences  must  finally  consist)  has  to  follow  and  corre-
spond to  any  event  that  may  or  may  not  happen  whenever  it  does

|iiappen,  then  that  constituent  must  be  able  to  distinguish  the
jccurrence  from  the  non-occurrence of  the event by some

[l^assion  which  the  event  produces  in  it,  and  the  action  and

^.reaction  which  it  was  desired  to  banish  would  thus  be
lecessary  for  the  comprehension  of  that  harmony  which  is

intended  to  replace  it.  And  the  most  desperate  efforts  to  find
in  the  continual  mediating  activity  of  God  the  bond  to  which
it  is  due  that  the  states  of  one  thing  become the efficient

51>3  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

causes  of  change  in  another,  cannot  obviate  our  speculative
scruples,  as  long  as  they  separate  God  and  things  from  one
another  in  the  same  way  as  individual  things  used  to  be
separated  from  one  another.  For  these  views,  too,  only  double
the  unsolved  problem — they  suppose  an  action  of  things
upon  God,  and  a  reaction  of  God  upon  them,  and  explain
neither  the  action  nor  the  reaction.  It  has  seemed  to  ua
indispensable  to  remove  this  separation,  and  in  a  substantial
community  of  being  between  all  things  to  find  the  possibility
of  the  states  of  one  becoming  efficient  causes  of  the  changes  of
another.  It  is  only  if  individual  things  do  not  float  inde-
pendent or  left  to  themselves  in  a  vacuum  across  which  no
connection  can  reach — only  if  all  of  them,  being  finite  indi-
viduals, are  at  the  same  time  only  parts  of  one  single  Infinite
Substance,  which  embraces  them  all  and  cherishes  them  all
within  itself,  that  their  reciprocal  action,  or  what  we  call  such,
is  possible.  For  only  then  can  the  change  which  any  one  of
them  experiences  le  at  the  same  time  a  state  of  the  Infinite,
so  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  its  influence  to  extend  across  a
gulf  which  can  never  be  filled  up,  in  order  to  produce  this
state ;  only  then  can  the  result  which  this  state  produces  in
the  Infinite,  in  accordance  with  the  truth  of  its  own  nature,
appear  at  the  same  time  as  a  change  of  other  individual
things  without  there  being  any  need  of  some  fresh  process  by
which  it  may  be  produced  in  them.

Now  how  this  itself  is  thinkable — under  what  form  that
one  all-embracing  Being  may  be  represented  in  idea,  and  how
in  its  unity  the  plurality  of  finite  things  may  be  contained —
is  a  question  which  we  reserve  for  later  consideration,  being
quite  conscious  that  what  we  have  hitherto  done  has  been  to
make  a  demand  which  was  unavoidable,  without  having  as
yet  shown  that  it  was  capable  of  being  satisfied.  But  there
is  another  question  which  we  do  not  reserve  for  later  con-
sideration, and  the  repetition  of  which  would  only  convince
us  of  the  fruitlessness  of  all  previous  considerations — the
question  how  within  any  one  being  that  action  could  take
place  which  we  must  presuppose  in  order  to  understand  how

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.  599

any  fresh  state  of  the  being  in  question  could  result  from  ita
preceding  states  ?  I  should  be  glad  to  hope  that  I  had
succeeded  in  making  clear  the  self-contradictory  circle  which
this  curiosity  involves.  For  whatever  process  it  may  devise
to  fill  up  the  apparent  chasm  between  reason  and  consequent
this  process  would  always  consist  of  a  longer  or  shorter  chain
of  events  of  which  every  two  consecutive  ones  would  be
connected  by  the  same  uncomprehended  action,  the  very
possibility  of  which  it  had  been  attempted  to  explain  by
means  of  their  collocation.  It  is  not  at  this  impossible
explanation  that  we  have  aimed ;  how  a  cause  begins  to  pro-
duce its  immediate  effect,  how  a  condition  is  the  foundation  of
its  direct  result  it  will  never  be  possible  to  say;  yet  that
cause  and  condition  do  thus  act  must  be  reckoned  among
those  simple  facts  that  compose  the  reality  which  is  the
object  of  all  our  investigations.  But  there  was  an  intolerable
contradiction  in  the  assumption  that  though  two  beings  may
be  wholly  independent  the  one  of  the  other,  yet  that  which
takes  place  in  one  can  be  a  cause  of  change  in  the  other;
things  that  do  not  affect  each  other  at  all,  cannot  at  the  same
time  affect  each  other  in  such  a  manner  that  the  one  is  guided
by  the  other.  It  was  necessary  to  remove  this  contradiction,
in  order  to  make  room  for  recognising  the  fact  of  that  ever-
incomprehensible  connection  of  states ;  but  we  have  never
held  that  by  removing  a  hindrance  that  stood  in  the  way  of
acknowledging  its  occurrence,  one  could  make  more  intelligible
the  actual  way  in  which  this  connection  is  brought  to  pass
(if  I  may  for  once  make  use  of  this  self-contradictory
expression).

§  6.  The  detail  with  which  on  a  previous  occasion  (cf.  i.,
p.  365)  the  last  part  of  this  train  of  thought  was  elucidated,
may  justify  the  comparative  brevity  of  the  present  repetition,
k.which  is  only  intended  to  call  to  mind  the  results  which  we
tnow  wish  to  combine  with  the  preceding  results  of  our
reflection.

I.  To our  minds all  intelligibility  of  the  cosmic  course
depends  upon  universal  relations,  which  connect  aU  things

600  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  I.

I

together.  Of  course  things  must  he  in  order  that  they  may
be  connected  with  one  another,  but  the  being  which  we  think
as  yet  unrelated  and  which  we  represent  to  ourselves  in  idea
as  the  ground  of  the  possibility  of  related  being,  is  not  a
reality  that  occurs  independently,  beginning  from  which  things
enter  later  into  reciprocal  relations,  and  to  which  (getting  rid
of  all  relations)  they  can  return  again ;  the  triith  rather  is
that  it  is  latent  in  the  forms  of  related  being,  and  inseparable
from  these,  and  is  in  truth  only  the  affirmation,  positing,  or
reality  of  these  relations  themselves.

II.  Also  that  TO  Tt  of  things — namely  their  nature — by
which  each  individual  one  is  distinguished  from  every  other,
is  at  least  so  far  similar  or  comparable  for  all  things,  that
there  can  be  one  universal  truth,  valid  throughout  the  world,
according  to  which,  from  certain  definite  relations  of  things,
there  flow  definite  results,  and  from  other  relations  other
results.  The  possibility  that  any  combinations  whatever  of
things  should  become  adequate  grounds  of  a  consequence
definite  in  itself  or  capable  of  being  specified,  forbids  the
assumption  that  anything  whatever  can  have  a  content
absolutely  unconditioned  or  unique ;  at  most  it  could  only
be  the  sole  actual  example  of  one  content  which,  whether
simple  or  compound,  may  be  thought  as  an  universal  occurring
in  various  examples,  and  being  combined  in  thought  with
other  contents,  according  to  the  universal  laws  of  truth,
may  be  regarded  as  the  adequate  ground  of  any  third
content.  ^H

III.  Not  only  are  the  natures  of  things  actually  so  adaptea
that  they  can  supplement  one  another  so  as  to  become  the
causes  of  results,  but  also  this  fact  of  their  correspondence
must  be  understood  by  reference  to  a  continuous  and  sub-
stantial unity  of  all.  That  correspondence  is  not  a  lucky  hit
which  alone  has  been  realized  among  many  equally  possible  |
but  actually  unrealized  cases  of  non- adaptation  of  beings  •
independent  of  one  another  and  perfectly  self-dependent  as  j
regards  their  content — but  it  depends  upon  this,  that  all  h
which  exists  is  but  One  Infinite  Being  which  stamps  upo:

po||i

M

OF  THE  BEING  OF  THINGS.

601

individual  things  in  fitting  forms  its  own  ever-similar  and
self -identical  nature.  Only  on  the  assumption  of  this  sub-
stantial unity  is  that  intelligible  which  we  call  the  reciprocal
action  of  different  things,  and  which  in  truth  is  always  the
reciprocal  action  of  the  different  states  of  one  and  the  same
ihinj^

CHAPTER  II.

THE SPATIAL AND SUPERSENSUOUS W0RLD3.

The  Doctrine  of  the  Ideality  of  Space — The  Correspondence  of  the  Real  Intel-
lectual and  of  the  Apparent  Spatial  Places  of  Things — Removal  of  even  the
Intellectual  Relations  between  Things  ;  Sole  Reality  of  Reciprocal  Action —
Notion  of  Action — Summary.

Si.  TN  considering  the  connection  between  bodily  and
-I-  mental  life  we  have  had  frequent  occasion  to  ask
what  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  real  to  ri  and  nature  of  things.
The  numerous  transformations  which  in  the  course  of  our
reflection  are  undergone  by  the  answers  which  we  at  first  put
forth  with  undoubting  confidence,  and  the  gradual  removal  of
the  prejudices  by  which  at  the  beginning  we  commonly  allow
ourselves  to  be  ruled,  will  have  been  sufficiently  traced  in  our
previous  considerations  to  allow  of  our  now  connecting  further]
reflections  with  the  results  which  we  had  provisionally  reached,]
without  the  need  of  repetition.  The  things  of  the  sensuous]
world  will  first  occupy  our  attention.

We  have  long  ago  left  behind  us  the  standpoints  from]
which  it  appeared  at  first  that  things  consisted  directly  in
combined  multiplicity  of  sensuous  qualities,  and  then  that  tho]
matter  which  was  at  the  foundation  of  them  all  constantlyj
occupied  space ;  even  the  atoms  into  which  the  need  of
explaining  Nature  necessarily  drove  us  to  resolve  that  which
is  efficient  in  the  world  of  sense,  we  could  not  regard
homogeneous  but  minute  particles  of  that  ever-extendec
universal  matter ;  spatial  extension,  form,  and  magnitude  coulc
not  belong  to  their  being,  much  less  constitute  the  whole  and
exhaustive  content  of  that  being.  It  seemed  to  us  that  these
spatial  properties  belonged  only  to  what  was  composite,  not
to  the  simple  elements  from  the  repetition  of  which  the  com-^

602

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPEESENSUOUS  WORLDS.  603

posite  arises ;  that  unextended  beings  sending  forth  their  effects
from  different  points  of  space,  and  by  their  forces  reciprocally
prescribing  positions  to  one  another  and  maintaining  tnese
positions,  produce  images  of  extended  substances  which  we
intuit,  and  which  with  more  or  less  intensity  of  coherence
and  impenetrability  seem  always  under  different  conditions  to
occupy  different  parts  of  space.  The  nature  of  those  simple
beings  themselves  we  left  undecided ;  we  only  characterized
them — in  expressions  chiefly  of  negative  signification — as
supersensuous,  intellectual,  and  intensive,  in  contrast  to  that
which  we,  in  accordance  with  common  opinion,  had  up  to
this  point  regarded  as  the  to  rl  of  things;  we  could  only
point  to  the  nature  of  souls  as  furnishing  an  illustration  of
what  was  meant  by  these  words  (cf.  L,  pp.  326  seq.).  But
throughout  all  these  considerations  we  have  in  one  point  held
fast  to  common  opinion — we  have  retained  the  idea  of  an
infinite  space  stretching  beyond  us  and  between  things,  in
order  to  serve  as  a  place  for  things ;  as  the  theatre  of  their
actions  and  reactions  and  an  ever-present  background,  making
possible  the  existence  of  connections  between  them ;  and
finally  (by  the  alternations  of  remoteness  and  nearness  which
it  allows)  conditioning  the  exercise  of  these  effects  sometimes
as  hindrance  and  sometimes  as  furtherance.  We  have  now
come  to  the  point  at  which  we  must  reject  this  assumption —
the  temporary  acceptance  of  which  was  necessary  for  the
simplification  of  the  problems  with  which  we  have  had  to
deal,  and  was  possible  because  the  changed  view  which  we
must  now  substitute  for  it  will  allow  without  detriment  of
our  using  in  all  the  details  of  our  investigation  of  Nature,  the
modes  of  expression  founded  upon  it.

Although  obscured  by  the  last  stage  of  modern  philosophy
(which  regards  its  retrogression  in  this  point  as  a  particularly
successful  step  in  advance),  Kant's  doctrine  of  the  Ideality  of
Space  is  still  so  fresh  in  the  remembrance  of  modern  culture,
that  I  shall  most  simply  express  what  is  essential  in  my  own
view  by  briefly  agreeing  with  it.  I  hold  that  space  and  all
spatial  connections  are  merely  forms  of  our  subjective  intui-

\

604  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  iL

tion,  not  applicable  to  those  things  and  those  relations  of
things  which  are  the  efficient  causes  of  all  particular  sensiious
intuitions  —  this  kernel  of  Kant's  doctrine  I  accept  un-
reservedly. I  should  be  happy  if  I  could  accept  with  equal
unreserve  the  arguments  by  which  he  supports  it,  or  the  way
in  which  he  uses  it  for  the  construction  of  his  philosophic
theory.  But  I  can  do  neither ;  and  being  unable  to  refer  to
any  accepted  doctrine,  I  am  constrained  to  attempt  a  very
brief  outline  of  my  own  view,  which  could  onlj''  be
demonstrated  by  a  special  scientific  investigation,  since  it
would  necessarily  involve  laborious  examination  of  countless
objections.

Our  ideas  are  not  what  they  signify — the  idea  of  sweet  is
not  sweet,  the  idea  of  half  is  not  half.  And  our  intuitions  of
extended  things  do  not  themselves  possess  those  properties
which  make  up  the  content  intuited,  and  there  do  not  exist
between  them  those  spatial  connections  the  existence  of  which
between  the  objects  intuited  are  indicated  by  them.  Our
idea  of  the  greater  is  not  itself  greater  than  that  of  the  less,
our  idea  of  a  triangle  is  not  triangular,  and  our  idea  of  some-
thing which  is  to  the  left  is  not  itself  situated  to  the  left  of
the  idea  of  something  else  which  is  to  the  right,  having  the
same  position  and  distance  with  respect  to  it  which  are,  ly
the  two  ideas,  ascribed  to  some  two  particular  points  of  an
object.  Therefore,  however  certainly  it  may  appear  to  our
senses  that  endless  space  extends  around  and  beyond  us —
however  self-evident  it  may  seem  that  the  definite  local
relations  of  things  which  we  perceive  do  exist  outside  of
us  and  between  the  things  themselves  —  yet  our  intuition
of  this  space  and  our  perception  of  these  relations  proceed
from  the  reciprocal  action  of  impressions,  or  inner  states  of
our  being,  of  which  none  has  in  itself  spatial  form,  and
the  mutual  relations  of  which  are  like  anything  rather  than
relations  of  position  in  space.  Hence  space  and  extension  are
not  forms  of  intuiting,  that  is,  not  forms  in  which  those  mental
activities  work  which  produce  our  ideas  of  the  extended
universe  ;  but  they  are  forms  of  intuition,  if  by  this  name  we

tf

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSENSUOUS  WORLDS.  605

mean  to  indicate  the  result  of  those  activities,  the  finished
picture  itself,  the  vision  of  endless  extension  which  fioats
before  our  consciousness  as  contrasted  with  the  non-spatial
and  merely  intensive  activities  of  ideation  to  which  that
vision  is  due.

If  now  the  very  means  by  which  this  space-world  that  we
intuit  takes  hold  of  our  own  mind  are  so  wholly  unlike  that
world,  we  may  easily  be  tempted  to  conclude  that  there  will
therefore  be  as  little,  or  if  possible  still  less,  likeness  between
it  and  the  outer  world  by  the  influence  of  which  upon
our  mental  states  the  space-intuiting  activity  of  our  soul  is
aroused.  Things  without  form,  not  therefore  unsubstantial
but  characteristically  differenced  by  the  variety  of  their
supersensuous  content,  arranged  in  a  multiplicity  of  rela-
tions not  spatial  but  intellectual,  would  then  by  the  direct
reciprocal  action  subsisting  between  them  and  men's  souls
constrain  those  souls  to  make  the  various  impressions
communicated  by  things  the  objects  of  intuiting  conscious-
ness. But  in  concluding  thus,  we  should  have  arrived  at
a  right  conclusion  by  a  wrong  road  ;  for  the  way  in  which
spatial  intuition  arises  from  the  reciprocal  action  of  non-
spatial  impressions  in  us,  decides  nothing  concerning  the
spatial  or  non-spatial  character  of  the  external  world  from
which  these  impressions  come.  We  have  long  ago  reached
the  conviction  that  it  is  in  this  way  that  our  intuition  of
space  must  arise,  whether  an  extended  universe  exists  outside
us  or  not.  For  even  if  it  existed,  our  mind,  which  is  not
extended,  could  never  be  entered  by  extended  images  of
things,  with  their  relations  of  magnitude  and  position ;  and
even  if  such  did  enter  the  mind,  their  actual  existence  in  the
soul  would  have  a  difi'erent  significance  from  their  being
intuited.  Even  the  impressions  of  a  real  space-world  must,
in  order  to  exist  for  us,  be  transformed  into  an  ordered
multiplicity  of  non-spatial  excitations  of  our  soul ;  and  iu
any  case  it  is  only  from  these  that  our  intuition  of  the
world  of  space  could  be  built  up.  And  hence  psychological
investigations as  to  the  way  in  w  hich  the  intuition  of  what

606  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IL

is  extended  arises  in  us,  or  does  not  arise,  but  is,  may  be,
innate,  cannot  decide  the  question  with  which  we  are  con-
cerned. Only  a  metaphysical  discussion  as  to  the  kind  of
reality  that  space,  after  it  has  been  thought  and  as  it  has
been  thought,  could  have  on  account  of  that  which  it  then  is
or  signifies,  can  establish  its  ideality  or  its  Eealness.

Now  apparently  it  is  not  quite  easy  to  say  what  we  really
hold  space  to  be,  when  we  think  of  it  as  empty  and
infinite  extension ;  the  attempt  to  do  so  soon  makes  us  feel
the  uniqueness  of  this  idea,  for  the  elucidation  of  which  we
can  find  no  homogeneous  analogies,  and  hardly  any  images
which  are  not  borrowed  from  the  wholly  peculiar  nature  of
just  that  which  is  extended.  To  regard  space  as  something
infinite  or  as  a  property  of  things,  is  to  entertain  thoughts
which  no  one  in  the  present  day  will  think  it  necessary  to
turn  back  and  refute,  for  even  in  the  pre-Christian  era  it
was  plainly  seen  in  what  contradictions  we  should  be  in-
volved by  this  assumption,  partly  as  to  the  existence  of
things  in  space,  and  partly  as  to  their  movement  through
space.  And  the  habit  which  modern  culture  has  of  calling  it
a  form,  a  relation,  or  an  order  of  things,  is  little  more  satis-
factory ;  for  all  this  is  just  what  it  plainly  is  not — formless  in
itself,  it  could  serve  but  as  a  background,  lending  itself  to  the
purposes  of  form,  relation,  or  order,  and  being  in  its  nature
capable  of  having  an  endless  variety  of  forms  inscribed  in  it,
countless  relations  subsisting  in  it,  and  the  most  varied
imaginable  arrangements  of  a  plurality  presented  in  it.  But
it  will  scarcely  escape  observation  that  this  name  background
is  but  another  denomination  of  space  itself;  and  hence  from
this  correction  of  the  ordinary  view  we  learn  not  so  much
what  space  is  as  what  services  it  can  render  to  our  com^
bining  and  discriminating  intuition  of  a  conceived  manifold
it  appears  as  the  possibility  of  the  juxtaposition  of  a  plurality  jj
but  what  it  is  in  itself  that  makes  it  capable  of  affordin
this  possibility  remains  unexplained.  To  this  we  may  add
that  even  this  last  expression  involves  a  circle,  for  juxta-
position is  a  kind  of  simultaneity  which  is  distinguished  from

ich
>m->^^

tyfl

in<T  ^i

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSENSUOUS  WORLDS.

607

other  kinds  of  simultaneity only by  its  thoroughly  spatial
character.

And  this  very  remark  may  put  us  into  the  right  way  of
fixing  our  attention  not  primarily  on  space  but  on  the  general
laws  of  extension,  letting  space  itself  arise  at  a  later  stage
from  the  application  of  these  laws — as  without  doubt
psychologically  the  intuition  of  space  as  an  infinite  whole
comes  later.  For  we  have  given  to  us  originally,  whether  as
innate  gift,  or  as  the  first  result  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  our
impressions,  the  certainty  that  any  point  can  be  reached  from
any  other  point  by  one,  and  only  one,  straight  line,  that  all
the  points  in  this  line  are  perfectly  homogeneous  and  equal  in
value  when  considered  with  reference  to  the  two  terminal
points,  and  that  they  hold  a  similar  relation  to  every  other
point.  We  have,  I  say,  the  certainty  expressed  in  these  state-
ments, or  in  any  others — we  need  not  here  inquire  what — by
which  the  nature  of  juxtaposition  is  so  completely  expressed
that  the  first  principles  of  geometry  may  be  based  upon  them.
In  logical  form,  our  expression  is  an  universal  law,  as  must  be
also  any  more  exact  expression  by  which  its  place  may  be
supplied;  but  yet  the  peculiarity  of  its  content  essentially
distinguishes  it,  even  formally,  from  the  formative  law  which
every  universal  concept  imposes  on  its  particular  examples.
The  concept  only  requires  that  each  instance  of  it,  regarded  in
itself,  should  contain  a  definite  group  of  characteristics  com-
bined in  a  definite  manner ;  hence  it  does  indeed  subordinate
to  itself  its  individual  examples,  but  it  does  not  establish
between  them  any  significant  connection,  by  which  they  may
reciprocally  work  upon  and  affect  each  other.  For  what  we
logically  call  their  co-ordination,  only  indicates  the  complete
similarity  of  the  way  in  which  they  are  swi-ordinated  to  the
universal,  and  beyond  the  similarity  which  must  of  course
belong  to  them  on  account  of  this  subordination  it  has  no
effect  upon  their  reciprocal  behaviour,  this  remaining  wholly
undetermined  by  it.  The  same  thing  holds  of  all  other
general  laws  which  comprise  under  them  a  variety  of  in-
dividual cases  ;  they  are  valid in  every one of these cases

608  BOOK  IX. CHAPTFR  IL

taken  separately,  but  do  not  bring  the  different  cases  into  any
mutual  connection.

It  is  quite  the  reverse  with  the  law  of  juxtaposition.
When  it  declares  that  between  any  two  points  one  and  only
one  straight  line  is  possible  and  necessary,  it  not  only  asserts
in  a  general  way  that  every  second  or  third  pair  of  points  is
subject  to  the  same  law  of  connection,  but  it  requires  at  the
same  time  that  the  second  pair  should  be  regarded  as  con-
nected with  tlie  first — in  short,  every  pair  with  every  other
pair — in  the  same  way  and  after  the  same  fashion  as  the
members  of  every  pair  with  one  another.  Thus  it  combines
all  the  different  instances  of  its  application  into  one  wliole
which  coheres  together  according  to  the  same  rule  by  which
any  two  of  its  parts  are  connected,  and  does  not  allow  us  to
think  of  any  single  case  of  its  application  existing  as  it  were
isolated  in  a  world  of  its  own,  without  attaching  itself  to  this
whole  as  a  part  of  it.  Hence  it  is  that  here  for  the  first  time
co-ordination  has  a  special  meaning;  particular  spaces  are  not
only  subordinated  to  a  general  notion  of  extension  as  examples
of  it,  but  they  are  at  the  same  time  joined  to  and  co-ordinated
witli  one  another  according  to  the  general  laws  of  space-con-
struction as  parts  of  one  space.  Thus  it  is  that  space  is  as  it
were  a  picture,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  we  prefer,  and  see
preferred,  for  it  the  name  of  intuition,  which  denotes  some-
thing essentially  different  from  that  which  is  denoted  by
notion.  In  the  same  peculiarity  of  the  law  of  extension  or
juxtaposition  which  we  have  emphasized,  there  is  at  the  same
time  contained  (as  in  the  nature  of  every  series)  the  possibility
of  endless  progression  by  which  to  the  members  already  given
new  ones  may  constantly  be  added,  according  to  the  same
formula  by  which  the  old  ones  are  connected ;  thus  it  is  that
space  extends  to  infinity.  By  an  arbitrarily  chosen  expression
that  has  a  tinge  of  contempt,  we  may,  it  is  true,  describe  this
by  saying  that  space  is  unending  because  of  its  inherent
incapacity  of  self-limitation.  Without  going  into  scholastic
controversies  we  may  cheerfully  accept  even  this  inter-
pretation ;  we  are  not  aware  of  needing  any  other  infinity  of

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSENSUOUS  WORLDS.  609

space  than  that  which  is  here  asserted,  and  we  can  hardly
regard  as  the  mere  lack  of  some  better  property  its  cha-
racteristic of  not  only  not  resisting  any  advance  beyond
temporarily  assumed  limits,  but  of  moreover  pointing  out  a
definite  path  for  such  progression.  If  we  put  together  what
we  have  said,  space  appears  to  us  as  a  kind  of  integral  by
which  that  whole  is  given  which  proceeds  from  the  summation
of  all  the  infinitely  numerous  applications  of  the  law  of  juxta-
position, when  we  abstract  wholly  from  the  nature  of  the
reality  that  stands  in  those  relations,  and  substitute  for  it  the
mere  empty  framework  of  the  related  points.  Now  when
we  have  once  got  hold  of  the  intuition  of  space,  space
appears  to  us  as  the  all-embracing  whole,  in  which  and
through  which  is  possible  the  multiplicity  of  all  those
relations  from  the  summation  of  which  it  has  itself  really
originated.

Now  if  this  is  the  signification  of  space,  the  question  as  to
the  nature  of  its  reality  scarcely  needs  a  special  answer.
Even  those  who  regarded  space  as  mere  empty  form  fitted  for
the  reception  of  things,  must  have  acknowledged  that  empty
forms  could  be  thought  existing  previous  to  real  things  only
as  formed  material,  and  therefore  themselves  something
real  and  capable  of  receiving  the  other  real  things ;  as  unreal
forms,  unsupported  by  matter  of  which  they  are  the  form,  they
can  of  course  exist  only  in  thought  that  has  abstracted  from
matter.  Just  as  little  could  relations  and  arrangements  have
^an  independent  existence  previous  to  the  things  which  are  to
enter  into  them ;  they  too,  if  separated  from  those  things,
fould  have  a  place  of  existence  only  in  that  activity  of  mind
[)y  which  they  are  thought.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add
jihat  still  less  can  space  as  comprising  the  collected  results
^f  an  infinite  number  of  possible  relations  have  its  existence
mywhere  else  than  in  the  activity  of  intuition  which  is  con-
scious of  this  result  of  its  relating  movement,  manifested  in
jombination,  division,  and  systematization.  Space  does  not
&xist  between  things  and  preceding  them  in  such  a  way  that
things  are  in  it,  but  it  diffuses  itself  in  things,  at  least  in

VOL.  n.  2  Q

610  BOOE  rX. CEAPTEE  II.

souls,  as  the  extension  which  can  exist  only  for  thought,  in
which  we  assign  their  places  to  impressions  which  we  receive
through  reciprocal  action  between  our  minds  and  the  outer
world,  that  is  the  things  which  are  not  ourselves.  It  is  only
misplaced  respect  for  a  venerable  error  which  would  rejoin
that  even  the  non-existent  may  exist,  and  that  even  relations
which  have  nothing  real  in  them  may  have  an  objective
existence  independent  of  our  thought.  There  is  but  cheap
wisdom  in  asserting  that  even  mere  appearance  and  nothing-
ness and  error  do  exist  after  a  fashion;  that  the  sense  in
which  the  past  and  the  future  are  non-existent  is  different
from  the  sense  in  which  what  has  never  been  and  what  is  for
ever  impossible  are  non-existent ;  it  is  just  this  fashion  and
the  meaning  of  this  existence  which  we  have  above,  in  treat-
ing of  our  present  subject,  space,  endeavoured  to  fix  in  a
somewhat  better  way  than  by  means  of  these  indefinite
expressions.  We  did  it  by  trying  to  ascertain  the  kind  of
reality  that  can  be  attributed  to  space,  instead  of  consigning
space  offhand  to  the  region  of  non-existence.  And  this  reality
is  to  be  found  in  its  existence  as  intuition  in  ideating  beings,
not  in  existence  as  a  vacuum  independent  of  them.  By  such
determination  its  reality  is  not  diminished,  but  its  nature  is
fixed.  As  events  really  happen  although  they  never  are ;  as
light  really  shines  although  only  to  the  eye  that  perceives  it ;
as  the  power  of  money  and  the  truth  of  mathematical  laws
really  eoxrt  their  influence,  though  the  first  exists  nowhere
except  in  the  estimation  of  men,  and  the  second  nowhere
except  in  the  actual  things  to  which  they  relate — so  space  has
reality  although  it  does  not  exist  but  only  appears.  For
reality  is  like  a  sun  that  rises  upon  the  just  and  upon  the
unjust;  it  embraces  not  only  the  existence  of  that  which
exists,  but  also  the  process  of  that  which  happens  and  the
validity  of  relations  and  the  appearance  of  phsenomena ;  the
mistake  is  in  attributing  to  any  one  of  these  the  kind  of  reality
which  can  belong  only  to  one  of  the  others,  and  in  complain-
ing when  there  is  assigned  to  each  of  them  the  place  and  the
particular  kind  of  existence  possible  for  it.

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSENSUOUS  WORLDS.  611

§  2.  It  was  Other  reasons  than  those  here  advanced  that  led
Kant  to  his  doctrine  of  the  Ideality  of  Space,  and  caused  a
further  development  of  that  doctrine  to  which  we  cannot  give
our  adhesion.  Among  the  thoughts  that  belong  to  this
subject  we  will  only  briefly  mention  the  practice  of  regarding
space  as  being  a  subjective  form  of  huinan  intuition  alone,
and  of  considering  it  possible  that  other  knowing  beings  may
make  use  of  other  forms  of  intuition  which  we  cannot  even
guess  at.  If  the  chief  stress  is  laid  upon  reckoning  space  as
an  innate  <i  priori  possession  of  the  mind,  as  contrasted  with
that  content  of  knowledge  which  is  brought  to  us  by  experi-
ence, it  is  natural  to  bring  into  prominence  the  thought  that
its  peculiarity  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  intuiting  mind,
and  that  in  differently  constituted  minds  different  forms  of
intuition  may  take  its  place.  Herbart's  recent  attempt  to
•exhibit  all  the  d,  priori  forms  of  our  knowledge  as  results
which  must  necessarily  be  produced  by  the  reciprocal  action
of  different  ideas  in  every  ideating  being,  has  led  to  the
opposite  presupposition  with  regard  to  space  itself — namely,
that  to  every  being  whose  mode  of  cognition  depends  upon  a
mechanism  of  reciprocally  acting  individual  ideas,  the  plurality
of  his  impressions  must  appear  in  space-relations.  I  do  not
consider  it  possible  to  choose  decisively  between  these  two
opposed  views.  It  seems  to  me  that  all  the  deductions  have
failed  which  have  attempted  to  show  the  necessity  that  space
mst  be,  or  must  be  intuited,  either  from  assumptions  con-
jming  the  necessary  development  of  the  cosmic  content  or
from  self-evident  laws  of  the  reciprocal  action  in  all  ideation.
Such  attempts,  when  they  took  the  first  way,  have  only
leduced  certain  abstract  postulates  from  the  notion  of  a  self-
ieveloping  Absolute — postulates  which  did  not  even  posit
space  or  show  how  space  could  be  deduced  from  them;  postulates
such  that  he  and  he  only  who  was  already  acquainted
with  space,  could  guess  that  by  it  they  would  be  satisfied.
Where  they  took  the  second  way  they  have  only  succeederi
in  producing  space  by  taking  certain  figurative  expressions
borrowed  from  it  (expressions  which,  as  they  at  first  main-

Ik.

612  BOOK  IX. CHAPTEE  11.

tained,  they  used  only  in  an  abstract  non-spatial  sense),  and
reintroducing  into  them  somewhere  in  the  course  of  the
deduction  their  proper  spatial  meaning.  Hence  it  does  not
seem  to  me  to  be  proved  that  in  every  ideating  being,  whose
mode  of  cognition  may  be  compared  with  ours,  the  intuition
of  a  manifold  must  everywhere  take  place  under  the  form  of
space;  I  would  not  precisely  assert,  but  still  I  conjecture
that  this  demonstration,  which  has  always  hitherto  failed,  is
impossible.

It  was  natural  and  right  to  oppose  this  space-world  as
phsenomenal  to  the  world  of  real  existence,  but  erroneous  to
exaggerate  the  distinction  between  the  two  to  such  an  extent
as  to  make  it  appear  that  they  were  insusceptible  of  com-
parison, and  especially  (after  the  fashion  adopted  by  popular
culture  when  penetrated  by  the  doctrine  of  the  ideality  of
space)  to  revel  expressly  in  the  thought  of  this  incompara-
bility,  as  though  it  were  a  guarantee  of  everything  that  is  best.
It  was  erroneous  to  regard  space  as  a  form  of  our  intuition,  by
which  things  were  received,  extension  being  quite  alien  to
things  as  they  are  in  themselves ;  for  it  is  certain  after  all
that  nothing  can  be  received  by  a  form  to  which  it  is  not  in
some  way  suited.  Equally  inexact  was  the  expression  used
by  Kant  himself — that  cognition  having  for  so  long  accepted
from  experience  the  laws  by  which  it  judged  of  things,  it  was
time  to  see  whether  conversely  cognition  could  not  prescribe
laws  to  things,  if  only  the  laws  of  their  appearance — for  it  is
obvious  that  the  cognizing  mind  itself  may  determine  the
general  colouring  of  the  reality  that  appears  to  it,  but  in  order ,
that  it  may  cognize  at  all  it  must  receive  from  the  nature  j
of  that  which  appears,  at  least  the  special  outlines  of  the
phsenomenon.  More  generally  expressed,  the  inadequacy  of
this  view  lay  in  this — that  while  it  attributed  the  intuition  of
space  to  the  mind  as  an  innate  possession,  it  did  not  attempt
to  explain  the  application  of  this  possession.  We  have  not,
only  an  intuition  of  empty  space,  but  also  a  spatial  intuition
of  the  fuU  content  of  the  world ;  and  it  remained  to  show
how  in  those  empty  forms  with  which,  as  it  was  said,  w^

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSENSUOUS  WORLDS.  613

encounter  the  reality  of  experience,  this  reality  can  take  its
appointed  position,  and  assume  its  appointed  form.  The
solution  of  this  problem  was  impossible  without  the  assump-
tion that  there  exist  between  things  themselves  manifold
connections  the  special  distinctions  and  meanings  of  which  are
reflected  in  corresponding  forms  of  spatial  relation,  or  may  be
transposed  into  the  language  of  space  ;  however  unknown  and
inscrutable  in  other  respects  the  nature  of  things  may  be
considered  to  be,  the  view  in  question  cannot,  without  can-
celling itself,  disclaim  this  much  knowledge  concerning
them.

In  order  that  this  standpoint  which  we  have  taken  up  in
the above  discussion, and  which we  do not  wish  to  keep
always  to  ourselves,  may  become  sufficiently  familiar  to  be
intelligible,  we  need  only  call  to  mind  how,  when  we  draw
comparisons,  whatever  the  object of  our  thought may be,
spatial  images always press  in spontaneously to give the
;  greatest attainable degree  of  clearness  by  making  it,  as  it
were,  visible  to  the  mind. We  may  indeed  think  of  a  non-
patial  plurality ; but we  never  represent it to ourselves
^without  distributing  the plurality  in  different  parts  of  co-
presented  space ;  we  illustrate  any  unity  by  spatial  boundary
lines  by  which  it  is  shut  off  from  others  and  shut  into  itself ;
there is no abstract  idea  of  variety,  contrast,  or  degree  of
relationship that we present  to ourselves in idea  without
mentally  endowing  the  content  of  these  notions  with  visible
form,  by  images  of  various  spatial  situation,  form,  direction,
and distance. And even these words (content, contrast,
presentation,  and so forth), as  well  as innumerable words
which  indicate  relations  (to  which  the  progress  of  civilisation
has  gradually  attached  the  abstract  signification  which  they
now  possess),  plainly  show,  when  etymologically  considered,
hat  they  owe their  origin  to  spatial  intuitions. Therefore
e  scarcely  need  to  exhibit  further  this  capacity  of  space  to
ive sensible form to  the most multifarious variety and
adation  of  intellectual  relations  by  the  unbounded  multi-
licity  of  the  possible  relations  between  its  points ;  we  rather

614  BOOK  IX. CHA.PTEE  11.

need  to  convince  imagination,  accustomed  as  it  is  to  this
symbolism,  that  those  very  relations  which  it  loves  to  repre-
sent spatially  have  a  special  meaning  of  their  own,  that  is
merely  reflected  in  this  spatial  form  without  being  bound
to  it.  The  structure  of  the  world  of  sound  or  of  mathe-
matical truth  may  serve  as  illustrations  of  such  relation.
Without  the  spatial  images  of  height  and  depth  and  intervals,
the  relations  between  tones  would  not  be  clear  to  us  in
thought,  although  in  sensation  we  are  conscious  of  their
simply  qualitative  nature ;  as  regards  mathematical  truths  or
the  relations  of  pure  number,  since  they  have  no  sensuous
images,  we  more  easily  comprehend  them  as  what  they  really
are — as  systems  of  members  the  reciprocal  dependence  of
which,  varying  extremely  in  degree,  is  of  a  wholly  abstract
nature,  neither  standing  in  need  of  spatial  symbolism  for  its
subsistence  nor  even,  in  some  cases,  admitting  of  it.  These
examples  will  suffice  to  illustrate  provisionally  those  intel-
lectual relations  which  we  assume  to  hold  between  the
manifold  things  which  exist.  Whatever  the  natures  of  things
may  be,  and  whatever  the  general  kind  of  relationship  between
them,  the  things  will  not  be  insusceptible  of  comparison,
and  the  closeness  of  the  relationship  will  be  capable  of
unlimited  gradation ;  hence  everything  by  its  nature  and  the
totality  of  its  relations  to  all  other  things  is  not  only  dis-
tinguished from  all  other  things  and  thereby  isolated,  but  also
— like  a  note  which  has  its  own  immutable  place  in  the  scale,
or  like  a  truth  which  has  its  own  definite  place  in  the  system,
coming  between  those  upon  which  it  depends,  and  those  which
depend  upon  it — everything  has  its  own  definite  place,  in  the
fabric  of  reality,  between  other  things  whicli  are  related  to  it
with  different  degrees  of  nearness  or  contrast.  And,  more-
over, in  correspondence  with  this  intellectual  order,  every-
thing will  appear  to  a  soul  in  which  its  influence  encounters
a  capacity  for  spatial  intuition,  to  have  that  definite  place
among  the  images  of  other  things  which  seems  to  be  assigned
to  it  by  the  totality  of  its  intellectual  relations  to  them ;  and
this  place  which  it  has  will  seem  to  change,  and  the  thing

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSEXSUOUS  WORLDS,  615

itself  to  Tuove  through  the  intuited  space,  if  these  relations
which  it  has  to  the  rest  of  the  world  are  changed.

The  spatial  appearance  of  the  world  does  not  altogether
result  from  the  mere  existence  of  the  intellectual  order  among
things ;  it  is  only  complete  when  this  order  exerts  its  infiuence
upon  those  to  whom  it  is  to  appear.  It  cannot  therefore  be
the  same  to  all  by  whom  it  is  intuited  ;  for  in  this  intellectual
whole  of  the  universe  souls  themselves  occupy  places  at
different  points  of  the  structure ;  on  these  parts,  which  have
different  values,  the  action  of  the  whole  is  different,  and
accordingly  that  whole  wears  for  them  a  different  aspect ;  to
each  of  them  there  appears  but  a  section  of  it,  and  this  with
that  specially  foreshortened  projection  which  corresponds  to
the  difference  of  the  position  in  the  world  which  this  being,
as  compared  with  its  neighbours,  occupies  in  the  intellectual
order  of  things.  So  as  a  whole  it  is  indeed  the  same  world
which  we  see,  but  to  each  it  is  different  in  detail ;  one  person
could  share  exactly  the  view  of  another  only  if  he  could  be
transferred  from  his  ovm  relations  to  the  world  as  a  whole,
into  those  in  which  the  other  stands — a  change  which  to  him
must  seem  to  be  a  spatial  movement  of  himself  through  the
space-world  which  appears  to  him.  An  easy  continuation  of
these  considerations  teaches — what  to  exhibit  here  in  detail
would  require  a  superfluous  expenditure  of  words — that  as
the  images  formed  by  different  souls  of  the  space-world
surrounding  them  on  the  one  hand  are  not  identical,  so  on  the
other  hand  they  are  not  without  connection.  Each  appears
to  every  other  to  have  some  definite  position  in  the  space-
world  intuited  by  that  other,  and  each  attributes  at  the  same
time  to  his  own  image  in  the  space-world  which  he  beholds
such  a  position  with  regard  to  the  image  of  the  other,  that  in
order  to  change  places  opposite  movements  in  the  same  line
must  seem  necessary  to  each  ;  hence  within  the  space-world,
which  to  each  seems  to  stretch  between  him  and  the  other,
whilst  in  truth  it  exists  only  in  themselves,  each  will  be  able
to  find  the  other  out,  and  they  will  be  able  by  definite  move-
ments to  meet  and  enter  into  reciprocal  action. It  is  neces-

616  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  II.

sary  to  think  this  out  thoroughly  for  oneself;  for  philosophic
theories  have  little  value  if  they  can  only  be  laboriously
demonstrated  in  the  lecture  room,  and  in  practical  life  remain
uncredited  because  it  is  not  easy  to  find  the  connection
between  them  and  everyday  occurrences.  Without  myself
making  the  attempt  here  in  detail,  I  venture  to  hope  that  a
further  pursuit  of  the  indications  1  have  given  will  wholly
remove  the  appearance  of  paradox  which  the  doctrine  of  the
ideality  of  space  generally  has  at  first  sight  for  the  common
consciousness.  Under  the  above-explained  conditions  of
merely  subjectively  intuited  space,  we  have  in  point  of  fact
exactly  what  would  be  afforded  us  by  a  real  objective  exist-
ence of  space  if  such  were  possible ;  no  part  of  the  phsenomena
with  which  we  are  familiar  and  of  their  persuasive  evidence
is  inexplicable  on  our  assumption  as  to  the  real  state  of  the
case;  even  when  our  presupposition  has  been  accepted  in
principle  and  on  the  whole,  it  does  not  make  necessary  a
violent  change  in  received  expressions  and  ideas  that  refer  to
details.  As  we  always  speak  of  the  rising  and  setting  of  the
sun,  and  shall  never  substitute  for  them  awkward  expressions
framed  according  to  the  actual  and  well-known  condition  of
things,  we  may  continue  to  look  at  the  world,  as  far  as  all
practical  details  are  concerned,  as  though  space  were  spread
around  us  and  we  ourselves  were  floating  in  it;  it  is  only
when  we  are  concerned  to  establish  ultimate  principles
according  to  which  all  the  connection  of  phsenomena  is  to  be
judged,  that  we — just  as  astronomers  are — shall  be  obliged  to
recur  to  the  true  condition  of  things  as  the  foundation  of  all
the  rules  of  phsenomena.

At  this  point  I  would  exclude  from  the  circle  of  subjects
we  are  considering,  a  department  of  thought  the  development
of  which  is  indeed  important  in  itself,  but  would  require  a
diffuseness  of  treatment  which,  for  the  object  that  we  have  in
view,  would  not  be  compensated  by  any  counterbalancing
advantage.  For  the  fundamental  notions  of  natural  philosophy
which  we  must  form  concerning  the  concatenation  of  physical
events  will,  it  is  plain,  take  a  very  different  turn  when  we

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUrERSENSUOUS  WORLDS.  617

consider  space  as  a  real  stage  upon  which  all  occurrences  are
presented,  and  when  we  regard  it  as  a  mere  phaenomenon  in
the  semblance  of  which  real  action  between  things,  which  was
originally  of  quite  a  different  kind,  comes  afterwards  to  be
clothed.  In  the  latter  case  we  can  no  longer  regard  move-
ment in  space  as  a  performance  by  which  we  overcome
distance,  as  though  that  distance  were  a  reality ;  we  cannot
speak  of  forces  having  a  tendency  to  move  bodies  nearer  to  or
further  from  one  another  in  space,  or  which  at  a  certain
distance  would  encounter  a  certain  amount  of  opposition  to
their  action.  For  us  all  these  simplest  intuitions  of  natural
philosophy  will  need  reconstruction  upon  a  new  foundation.
This  reconstruction  we  do  not  here  attempt,  and  will  only
remark  by  the  way  that  for  it  many  oft-discussed  difiiculties
vanish  into  nothingness,  and  in  their  place  others  arise  at
points  where,  to  the  hitherto  accepted  mode  of  thought,
nothing  whatever  suspicious  seemed  to  lurk.  But  the
problems  with  which  we  are  at  present  concerned  urge  us  in
quite  another  direction.

§  3.  Let  us  grant  that  the  reader  was  in  a  certain  respect

deceived  when  we  compared  the  intellectual  order  of  things,

on  which  we  held  the  order  of  their  spatial  appearance  to  be

dependent,  to  the  relations  of  sound,  or  to  the  articulation  of

a  system  of  abstract  doctrines. What  we  then  needed  was  a

provisional  illustration,  and  to  it  we  sacrificed  for  the  moment

.the  exactness  which  we  must  now  turn  back  and  seek. The

[two  comparisons  are  inappropriate  because  they  liken  the  order

)f  immutable  and  eternally  valid  systems  to  an  order  that  is

mtable  and  merely  factual. A  system  of  truths  is  connected

[^together  in  but  one  way,  and  that  a  way  that  never  changes ;

|we,  choosing  different  points  of  departure,  may  bring  its  several

Jparts  into  special  prominence  in  various  combinations,  and

interpret  for  ourselves  the  results  that  flow  therefrom ;  but

jthese  results  do  not  arise  from  our  procedure ;  they  are  eter-

lally  valid,  and  it  is  only  in  our  consciousness  of  them,  that

in  the  real  state  of  a  real  being,  in  our  own  conscious  soul,
bhat  something  happens  which  has  not  existed  eternally. The

618  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  11.

relations  of  sound  too  are  eternally  the  same ;  they  may,  like
those  of  the  hody  of  truths  referred  to,  afford  material  for  one,
but  only  for  one,  spatial  symbol!  zation.  Eightly  constructed,
this  would  for  ever  express  the  immutable  organization  of  the
scale,  and  be  capable  of  being  exhibited  instead  of  the  scale
itself,  as  an  object  of  consideration,  and  its  whole  wealth  of
inner  relations  being  simultaneously  present  would  as  known
vary  with  arbitrary  movements  of  attention.  Things  on  the
other  hand  do  not  constitute  a  motionless  organization  of  a
manifold,  in  which  every  individual  element,  in  virtue  of  its
constant  nature  and  the  unchangeableness  of  its  total  relations
to  the  rest,  occupies  an  immutable  position ;  they  are,  on  the
contrary,  subject  to  movement,  and  obviously  change  their
places  in  the  intellectual  whole  of  the  cosmos  no  less  than
their  phsenomenal  images  change  their  places  in  space.  Hence
it  follows  either  that  their  natures  cannot  be  immutable,  but
must  be  mutable  in  order  that  the  change  in  their  reciprocal
relations  (which  corresponds  to  the  change  in  themselves)
may  explain  the  mutability  of  their  spatial  appearance — or
the  relations  in  which  things  stand  to  one  another  must  in
themselves  be  accessible  to  a  mutation  which  does  not  at  the
same  time  affect  the  nature  of  the  things.

If  one  is  led  to  this  alternative  by  the  attempt  to  deduce
the  spatial  places  of  phaenomenal  things  from  the  intellectual
places  of  real  things,  it  is  hardly  doubtful  that  one  will  pre-
fer to  make  an  attempt  to  affirm  in  the  first  place  the  second
member  of  the  disjunction.  For  do  not  things  as  appearing
in  space  seem  to  move  without  any  mutation  of  their  nature  ?  or
if  they  seem  to  undergo  any  such  mutation,  is  it  not  just  the
change  of  place  which  introduces  the  mutation  and  constitutes
its  cause  ?  But  if  we  think  of  things  as  being  enclosed  in  a
net  of  mutable  intellectual  relations,  or  as  being  moveable
within  this  network,  we  encounter  an  inconceivability  which
is  essentially  the  same  as  that  which  we  have  so  long  been
trying  to  refute  under  the  name  of  extension,  which  though
empty  is  yet  real  in  itself.  For  we  regarded  objective  space
as  unthinkable,  not on account  of  its special geometrica!-

3al|l

■

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPEKSENSUOUS  WOELDS.  619

nature,  but  because  of  its  presenting  a  system  of  empty  rela-
tions as  an  independent  whole.  But — to  take  up  again  a
consideration  previously  indicated — all  relations  as  such  have
existence  and  reality  only  in  the  consciousness  of  him  whose
mind  exercises  a  definite  relating  activity;  apart  from  con-
sciousness they  have  not  themselves  an  independent  existence
between  the  things  related  or  relatable,  but  there  is  a  foundation
for  them  in  the  nature  of  things  which  are  so  framed  that
consciousness  is  constrained  and  enabled  by  their  influence
upon  it,  to  connect  and  estimate  by  means  of  these  relations
the  impressions  which  those  things  make  upon  it.  Hence  in
the  intellectual  world  also  there  is  nothing  between  individual
beings,  nothing  by  change  in  which  the  beings  themselves  can
be  removed  from  or  brought  near  to  one  another,  or  have  their
reciprocal  action  roused  or  hindered;  but  all  these  relations
are  part  of  the  appearance  which  the  intellectual  world  as  a
whole  assumes  for  each  of  its  parts  which  is  capable  of  having
anything  whatever  presented  to  it ;  moreover,  by  them  there
is  interpreted  only  that  being  which  springs  up  within  indi-
vidual beings,  that  multiplicity  of  inner  reciprocal  actions
which  in  reality  things  exercise  directly  upon  one  another,
being  upon  being,  without  the  mediation  of  any  such  middle
terms.

It  must  necessarily  be  difficult  for  us,  considering  the  mode

of  apprehension  to  which  the  consideration  of  daily  experience

has accustomed  us, to  carry out  the  abstraction  which  we

here  demand ;  and  it  is  worth  while  to  elucidate  it  by  some

r supplementary  observations  before  we  go on to deduce  its

[further  consequences. It  seems  to  us  all  so  self-evident  that

Uf  an  effect  arises  which  previously  did  not  exist,  there  must

^tave  been  some  mediating  process  by  which  it  was  brought

ibout,  and,  moreover,  all  our  previous  considerations  have  so

[expressly  and  repeatedly  made  it  a  duty  to  seek  the  mechanical

inks  in  all  action,  that  the  demand  which  we  now  make  will

lave  a  confusing  efiect  not  only  in  a  general  way  but  also  as

^regards  the  coherence  of  our  train  of  thought  itself. But  not-

p'ithstanding,  we  have  for  a  long  time  been  leading  up  to  this

620  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  II.

demand.  We  have  already  repeatedly  emphasized  the  asser-
tion that  we  cannot  go  on  indefinitely  requiring  intermediary
machinery  for  the  bringing  about  of  the  most  simple  results
and  the  elucidation  of  the  most  simple  effects  ;  at  some  point
or  other  the  chain  of  intermediaries  must  consist  of  simple
members  connected  together  immediately  and  not  requiring
something  else  to  hold  them  together;  somewhere  or  other
there  must  be  simple  processes  of  reciprocal  action,  which
consist  in  this,  that  the  inner  condition  of  some  being,  as  soon
as  it  exists,  is  the  direct  producing  cause  of  some  fresh  inner
condition  in  a  second  being ;  there  must  be  somewhere  that
real  sympathetic  afi&nity  between  existent  things  which  a
widespread  superstition  unfortunately  imagines  it  sees  only
where,  according  to  the  unanimous  testimony  of  experience,  it
does  not  exist.  We  have  already  had  often  enough  to  con-
vince ourselves  that  all  attempts  to  explain  still  further  these
most  simple  elements  of  action  and  occurrence,  to  elucidate
them  by  showing  the  way  in  which  they  come  to  pass,  must
invariably  fail ;  but  they  fail  not  on  account  of  the  imperfec-
tion of  our  knowledge,  but  because  the  very  existence  of  thatj
which  they  erroneously  seek  is  impossible.

There  is no  process  of  action  adapted  to  bring  to pass'
events  which  though  all  their  conditions  are  present  are  notj
as  yet  actual,  but  only  a  process  of  the  gradual  completion
of  causes  as  yet  incomplete. If  any  inner  state  of  a  being]
is the adequate cause of change in another,  the change
happens  forthwith  and  does  not  need  any  process  of  realiza-
tion ;  if  that  state  is  not  an  adequate cause,  no  process  of  j
action could constrain  it to a  result that  does  not  spon-
taneously flow  from  it; finally,  if  that  state  can,  through  aj
series  of  intermediate  links,  pass  into  a  second  state,  which]
would  constitute  the  complete  cause  of  such  a  result,  and  if]
there  is  a disturbance  of  states  by  which  this  transition  is
accomplished,  then  previously  to  the  accomplishment  each  of]
these  intermediaries  must  be  followed  by  the  event  which  j
corresponds  to  it  as  result  to  cause,  and  only  when  this  series
has  been  coinj)leted  will  that  event  occur  which  flows  from

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPEESENSUOUS  WORLDS.  621

the  thus  established  final  state  of  the  acting  being  as  its
necessary  consequence.  Hence  the  only  path  by  which  the
primarily  given  state  can  attain  its  final  operation,  leads
through  these  intermediate  events ;  taken  together  and  in  the
order  of  their  succession,  they  constitute  what  we  call  the
mechanism  by  which  a  result  is  realized.  Therefore  we  can
never  refer  to  mechanism  to  explain  how  a  result  arises  the
complete  cause  of  which  already  exists  in  actual  states  of
actual  things,  and  we  shall  always  need  a  mechanism  in  order,
in  any  real  occurrence,  to  connect  the  first  member  with  a
final  member  of  which  the  complete  cause  had  not,  under,
the  form  of  inner  conditions  of  existing  reality,  been  realized
by  that  first.  For  the  significance  of  mechanism  never
consists  in  its  being  a  kind  of  magic  artifice,  by  which  is
brought  about  an  event  which  though  all  its  conditions  are
complete,  yet  in  some  incomprehensible  way  delays  to
happen ;  in  every  case  it  is  required  only  in  the  interests  of
the  constancy  and  regularity  of  the  cosmic  course,  which
demand  not  only  that  every  real  occurrence  should  have  an
adequate  ground,  but  also  require  that  every  intermediate
link,  by  which  the  inadequate  passes  into  the  adequate,
should  itself  be  previously  realized  as  an  actual  state  of  some
real  being.  For  only  thus  is  each  of  these  members  an
active  cause,  which  not  only  within  the  being  of  which  it  is
itself  a  state  carries  on  the  mutation  of  the  inner  states  of  that
being,  but  also  becomes  the  cause  of  mutations  in  other  beings.
Our  previous  remarks  have  been  intended  to  show  that
reciprocal  action  is  not  rendered  less  thinkable  by  our  not
allowing  of  anything  between  beings  which  can  separate  them
or  combine  them  or  connect  them  with  one  another.  It  is
not  external  mediation  that  is  needed  in  action ;  not  a  multi-
farious transporting  from  this  place  to  that,  and  from  that
\  place  to  this ;  we  are  relieved  from  all  this  apparatus  by  the
!  knowledge  that  all  things  being  parts  of  an  Infinite  that
unites  them  as  in  one  substance,  they  need  no  other  bond  than
[this  in  order  that  the  states  of  one  thing  may  have  a  deter-
l  mining significance for  those  of  another. Those  mediating

622  BOOK  IX. CHAPTEE  II.

links  were  themselves  of  an  internal  and  intellectual  kind ;  to
things  which  by  the  universal  metaphysical  justice  of  this
Infinite  cannot  in  accordance  with  their  meaning  follow
directly  one  from  another,  they  give  reality  by  making  actual
the  intermediaries  which  render  it  possible  that  those  things
should  follow  from  one  another  in  accordance  with  this
meaning.  There  is  therefore  nothing  else  than  an  eternal
universal  inner  stream  of  reciprocal  action  in  things ;  its
individual  waves  are  not  caused  by  impulses  communicated
to  things  from  without,  they  arise  from  the  native  consistency,
according  to  which  any  previous  state  of  a  being  that  is  not
separated  by  any  gulf  from  the  inner  existence  of  another,
becomes  directly  a  subsequent  state  of  this  other ;  we  must  get
rid  once  for  all  not  only  of  the  thought  of  a  network  of
spatial  relations  along  which  the  conditions  of  action  run
backwards  and  forwards  between  things,  but  also  of  all  idea
of  supersensuous  intellectual  bonds  of  connection  which,  lying
outside  of  things  and  sometimes  contracting  and  sometimes
expanding,  at  one  time  bring  things  together  so  as  to  produce
action,  and  at  another  break  the  contact  necessary  for
reciprocal  action.

If  I  have  succeeded  in  making  clear  what  I  mean,  I  shall
certainly  be  expected  to  give  an  answer  to  one  other  question.
The  ordinary  view  took  pains  to  ward  off  all  mutation  from
the  inner  nature  of  things,  and  held  that  change  was  only  to
be  admitted  in  external  relations.  Now  how  can  our  present
view — which  puts  all  action  wholly  in  things,  and  supposes
universal  mutability  of  their  states  —  comport  with  the
assumption  of  the  unity  which  we  ourselves  have  repeatedly
pointed  out  as  essential  to  the  nature  of  everything?  I
might  fairly  pass  this  question  over,  if  I  were  less  in  earnest;
for  even  the  views  which  most  strongly  emphasize  the  unity
of  the  nature  of  things  must  in  the  end  reconcile  with  that ;
unity  not  only  a  change  of  inner  states  but  also  a  simul-
taneous plurality  of  such  states,  as  otherwise  they  would  be
destitute  of  a  source  from  which  to  derive  an  explanation  of
the  way  in  which  events  can  occur  at  all. I  forego  this  way

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSENSUOUS  WORLDS.  623

of  escaping  the  difficulty,  though  at  this  point  I  cannot  fully
answer  the  question  proposed  ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  expressly
admit  that  I  only  wish  to  dispose  of  it  provisionally  by  (for
the  present)  merely  referring  to  a  previous  exposition
(cf.  L,  pp.  168  seq.,  536  seq.)  concerning  the  meaning  of  that
unity  which  we  really  have  reason  to  require  in  things.
That  exposition  taught  us  to  seek  this  meaning  only  in  the
consistency  with  which  changing  states  of  anything  are  so
connected  together  that — having  regard  to  the  conditions
under  which  they  arise — they  appear  to  be  varying  and
manifold  expressions  of  one  and  the  same  thought,  in  the
realization  of  which  the  being  of  the  thing  consists.  But  we
could  never  require  unity  in  the  nature  of  a  thing  in  the  same
sense  in  which  we  are  accustomed  to  use  this  expression  to
denote  the  monotony  of  an  absolutely  homogeneous  quality ;
unity  of  this  kind  can  never  be  real,  but  is  always  a  property
of  something  else  which  is  Eeal,  and  even  this  not  in  the  signifi-
cation which  it  would  have  if  it  could  ever  he  even  a  part  of  the
nature  of  this  something  else ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  every-
where but  a  partial  appearance  which  that  thing  wears  for  some
consciousness  which  intuits  it.  Every  simple  quality  exists
only  when  it  is  perceived  and  only  for  him  who  perceives  it ;
if  it  could  exist  anywhere  independent  of  him,  it  would  still
certainly  not  be  the  nature  of  anything,  for  in  its  simplicity  it
can  only  be  or  not  be ;  it  cannot  so  change  as  to  remain,  in
some  fresh  condition  of  its  existence,  the  same  that  it  was  in  a
previous  condition.  But  only  that  which  is  capable  of  and  can
[outlast  change  can  be  substance,  and  this  capacity  things  must
lliave  in  order  to  be  things ;  the  invariable,  which  can  only
[either  (1)  he  while  it  continues  entirely  homogeneous,  or  (2)  be
[annihilated  and  give  way  to  some  other  that  takes  its  place — •
[that  thus  may  indeed  have  its  turn  of  existence  with  othei'S
|but  cannot  change  itself — is  always  something  unsubstantial
that  may  be  a  predicate,  but  can  never  be  a  subject  of
jredicates.  However,  I  admit  that  this  consideration  does
lot  completely  answer  the  doubt  expressed,  further  discussion
)f  which  we  reserve  for  a  short  time.

624  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  II.

S  4.  Having  given  these  somewhat  detailed  explanations,
we  can  now  briefly  add  our  later  results  to  the  previous  ones,
in  somewhat  changed  order.

IV.  The  nature  of  everything  by  which  it  is  distinguished
from  other  things  is  one,  as  regards  its  consistency,  but  never
simple  in  the  sense  in  which  a  homogeneous  quality  is  simple.
An  adequate  knowledge  of  that  nature  (supposing  such  to  be
possible)  would  understand  it  in  the  form  of  a  thought  or  of
an  Idea,  for  the  unchanging  meaning  of  which  there  are
innumerable  differing  expressions,  appearances,  and  verifica-
tions under  differing  conditions.  With  the  limitation  of  never
being  or  appearing,  doing  or  suffering  anything  that  is  not  a
consistent  expression  of  the  fundamental  thought  which
constitutes  the  being  of  anything — with  this  limitation  every-
thing is  mutable,  and  can  only  be  a  thing  or  substance  if  it
is  mutable  after  this  fashion.

V.  The  objective  relations  by  which the  commensurable
natures of  individual things are brought  together for  the
realization  of  the  result  of  which  the  content  that  is  thought
together  is  the  hasis,  do  not  consist  in  spatial  movements. The
case  is  not  that  things  are  in  space,  in  which  they  can  move,
but  space  is  in  things  as  the  form  of  an  intuition  through
which  they  themselves  become  conscious  of  their  supersensuous
relations  to  one  another. The  place  occupied  by  any  element
at  any  definite  moment  on account  of  the  totality of  the^
relations  which  it  then  has  to  all  the  rest  in  the  intellectual  i
order  of  the  world,  determines  the  place  in  space  at  which  this  |
element  must  be  intuited  by  the  rest ;  to  the  change  which  j
the  element  experiences  in  the  intellectual  order  there  cor-
responds in  spatial  intuition  the  movement  which  hence  has]
to  be regarded  as change  of  place,  but  not — at  least  notj
primarily — as  a  passage  through  space.

VL  The  supersensuous  order  upon  which  we  suppose  that]
of  the  apparent  spatial  cosmos  to  depend,  cannot  be  regarded
as  a  mere  intellectual  counterpart  of  space  in  such  a  fashion]
that  it  too,  like  a  web  of  independent  and  changing  but  non-j
spatial  relations, comprehends  things in itself and  extends

THE  SPATIAL  AND  SUPERSENSUOUS  WOELDS.  625

between  them  just  in  the  same  way  as  (according  to  an  earlier
view)  space  was  supposed  to  have  an  independent  existence
as  an  encompassing  background  and  as  empty  extension.
All  relations,  even  these  intellectual  relations,  exist  as  rela-
tions only  in  the  relating  mind  at  those  times  when  it
exercises  its  relating  activity.  Therefore  the  supersensuous
order  of  the  world  does  not  consist  in  a  tissue  of  complicated
relations  between  things,  sometimes  contracting,  sometimes
expanding,  but  only  in  the  totality  of  the  reciprocal  action
between  things  taking  place  in  the  world  at  every  moment.
The  actions  are  not  produced,  changed,  and  organized  by  a
multitude  of  impulses  running  backwards  and  forwards
between  things,  but  they  themselves  being  comparable  in
meaning,  and  hence  subject  to  universal  laws,  produce  in  one
another  impulses  that  become  realized  without  the  help  of
any  mediating  mechanism,  and  arrange  themselves,  according
to  their  meaning  (as  constituents  of  the  world's  content  which
stand  in  need  of  one  another),  in  that  intellectual  order  which
is  valid  for  them  but  does  not  exist  heivmen  them.

uVOL.  II.  2r

CHAPTER  III.

THE REAL AND THE  IDEAL.

Conti-adictions  in  the  Notion  of  Things  and  in  their  Formal  Determinations-
Idealistic  Denial  of  Things — All  that  is  Eeal  is  Mind — What  it  is  that  we
must  seek  to  Construct,  and  "What  it  is  that  we  have  to  Recognise  as
immediately  given — Summary.  ^

S  1.  "TITTHAT  we  have  recorded  hitherto  as  the  results  of
T  T  our  reflection  has  been  of  essentially  formal
significance ;  we  have  sought  to  make  clear  to  ourselves  the
conditions  under  which  it  seemed  that  reality  ( Wirklidikeit)  of
existence  could  belong  to  any  being  whatever  its  nature,  and
reality  of  occurrence  to  any  event  whatever  its  content ;  but  we
have  not  yet  sought  to  determine  what  that  may  be  which  is,
or  happens,  according  to  these  conditions.  In  doing  this  we
have  perhaps  had  in  some  measure  the  feeling  of  a  rich  man
wlio  is  not  concerned  for  the  moment  to  reckon  up  his  posses-
sions in  detail,  but  contents  himself  for  the  present  with
marking  in  such  a  way  his  numerous  flocks  and  herds  what-
ever they  may  consist  in,  that  in  case  of  need  he  would  be  able
to  recognise  and  to  find  his  property.  But  a  certain  feeling
of  perplexity  takes  hold  upon  us  now  that  the  time  is  come  for
really  (wirklich)  showing  in  what  our  possessions  consist,  and
giving  an  account  of  what  actually  are  the  things  and  the  events
which  really  being  or  happening  satisfy  the  conditions  that
we  have  sketched  out.  Wherever  we  may  look  there  seems
to  be  nothing  that  we  can  specify — all  that  according  to  the
ordinary  view  forms  the  content  of  reality,  the  many-coloured
impressions  of  sense  and  the  multifarious  forms  and  move-
ments of  the  extended  universe,  we  have  been  forced  to  regard
as  phsenomena  which  do  indeed  reveal  changing  relations  in
that  which  is  truly  real,  but  do  not  point  out  what  it  is  that
this  true  reality  consists  in.

J

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  627

Now  one  might  hope  to  get  rid  of  this  perplexity  by  a
candid  confession  of  human  incapacity — ^by  acknowledging  that
>yhat  things  are  in  themselves  and  what  effects  they  actually
have  upon  one  another  in  reciprocal  action,  must  remain  for
ever  unknown  to  us ;  that  only  from  the  varying  relations  of
that  which  appears  is  it  possible  for  us  to  conclude  to  formally
corresponding  variations  of  this  unknown,  variations  of  which,
however,  we  can  never  cognize  the  actual  content.  But  the
more  certain  we  may  be  that  at  some  point  or  other  we  shall
be  brought  to  this  confession,  the  more  necessary  is  it  not  to
reach  it  prematurely,  and  by  so  doing  avoid  investigations
which  we  ought  to  undertake  even  though  they  may  promise
no  other  result  than  the  knowledge  that  we  were  mistaken
with  regard  to  that  which  our  confession  of  incapacity
assumed  to  be  the  highest  attainment  of  cognition  possible
for  us.

We  shall  do  well  to  distinguish  two  kinds  of  ignorance.
It  may  be  that  of  anything  which  we  are  seeking  in  order  to
the  fulfilment  of  some  definite  requirement  of  cognition,  the
general  notion  under  which  it  should  be  thought  is  clear,
while  we  perhaps  only  lack  grounds  for  deciding  among  which
of  the  various  species  of  this  universal  we  should  reckon  that
which  we  seek.  It  may,  however,  also  happen  that  nothing  is
clear  to  us  except  the  need  which  we  desire  to  satisfy  by  that
for  which  we  are  seeking,  and  that  of  the  essential  nature  of
that  which  would  be  fitted  to  afford  such  satisfaction,  we  have
not  even,  as  it  were,  a  generic  image  showing  the  possibility
of  that  which  we  seek.  If  with  regard  to  the  question
which  at  present  occupies  us,  we  found  ourselves  in  the
first  of  these  two  cases,  we  should  be  satisfied.  To  speak
figuratively,  we  should  then  know  not  indeed  what  colour
things  and  events  would  wear,  but  that  they  would  have
some  colour,  that  is  that  their  nature  would  be  determined  by
some  species  of  a  genus  familiar  to  us,  the  existence  of
which  would  be  guaranteed  to  us  by  the  generic  image  that
we  have  of  it.

Certainly  in  the  present  day  people  often  think  that  with

628  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  III.

regard  to  the  notions  by  which  it  has  hitherto  been  attempted
to  determine  the  being  of  things,  we  are  in  this  comparatively
favoured  position,  and  possess,  in  those  notions,  truths  which
rightly  mark  out  the  genus  of  reality,  and  only  leave  undeter-
mined the  special  colouring,  the  knowledge  of  which  we  can
if  necessary  do  without.  But  to  me  it  seems  as  though  we
were  in  the  second  and  less  favoured  position,  like  a  geometer
who,  having  before  him  the  result  of  an  analytic  calculation,
cannot  hit  upon  any  geometrical  construction  by  which  that
which  is  abstractly  required  may  be  presented  in  intuition.
It  seems  that,  as  regards  the  formal  conditions  which  we
require  from  being  and  action,  we  are  not  only  not  in  a
position  to  point  out  any  essential  characteristic  of  that  which
is  Eeal  {Real),  by  which  those  conditions  may  be  satisfied,  but
that  those  demands  themselves  require,  with  reference  to  reality,
much  of  which  either  we  perceive  that  it  can  only  be  thought,
and  cannot  he  and  happen  elsewhere  than  in  thought,  or  at
least  of  which  we  cannot  perceive  how  it  can  be  anything
more  than  thought,  how  it  can  hold  good  of  reality  or  occur  in
reality.  Taking  a  brief  retrospect,  I  will  illustrate  the  import-
ance of  this  consideration  by  the  thoughts  which  we  have
gradually  developed  concerning  the  to  tI  of  things,  their
unity,  and  the  mode  of  their  existence.

In  the  popular  view  the  essence  of  things  seems  at  first
sight  to  consist  in  sensible  qualities.  But  it  soon  becomes
plain  that  these  are  only  states  of  our  sensation,  resulting
in  the  most  plausible  case  from  reciprocal  action  between
things  and  ourselves,  but  neither  capable  of  existing  except
in  him  who  feels,  nor  fitted,  even  if  they  could  so  exist,  to
constitute  the  nature  of  a  thing.  We  took  refuge  in  super-
sensuous  intellectual  qualities.  That  this  name  is  not  a  mere
combination  of  words  destitute  of  an  object,  that  there  is
something  corresponding  to  it,  we  believed  we  could  show  by
reference  to  mental  properties  which — as  the  properties  denoted
by  good,  evil,  holy — seemed  as  a  matter  of  fact  to  present
examples  of  a  content  supersensuous  and  at  the  same  time
like  sensible  qualities  in  their  simple  intuitable  definiteness.

THE  KEAL  AND  THE  IDEAL,  629

But  this  was  only  seeming.  Having  regard  to  constancy  of
action,  learnt  from  past  experience  or  assumed  for  the  future,
beings  might  have  these  attributes  imputed  to  them,  and  in
contrast  to  the  individual  actions  manifesting  the  attributes,
the  attributes  themselves  then  look  like  original  simple
qualities ;  yet  in  themselves  they  only  indicate  a  kind  of
demeanour  of  things,  not  what  things  are  in  order  that  they
should  demean  themselves  thus — this  latter,  however,  being
what  we  sought.  And  then  one  might  think  for  a  moment
what  it  would  be  to  look  away  from  all  illustrative  examples,
and  to  seek  the  being  of  things  in  qualities  of  quite  another
kind — a  kind  of  which  no  one  can  form  the  slightest  idea.
But  in  doing  this  one  would  commit  the  error,  so  often
blamed,  of  confusing  the  expression  of  a  necessity  of  thought
with  actual  knowledge  of  the  object  in  question,  and  of
believing  that  demands  have  been  fulfilled  by  the  mere
fixation  of  them  in  a  verbal  expression  —  whilst  either  it
cannot  be  shown  that  those  demands  are  capable  of  being
fulfilled  by  the  reality  to  which  they  refer,  or  it  can  be  shown
that  they  are  not  capable  of  being  fulfilled  by  it.  For  the
name  unknown  qualities  does  indeed  express,  by  the  name
unknown,  our  incapacity  of  cognizing  those  qualities ;  but  in
calling  them  qualities  it  keeps  up  the  erroneous  appearance  of
our  having  at  least  the  general  notion  under  which  this
unknown  may  be  correctly  thought  as  one  of  its  species.
Now  not  only  have  we  no  idea  what  kind  of  quality  con-
stitutes the  being  of  things,  but  we  err  even  in  thinking  that
we  may  subsume  this  under  the  general  notion  of  quality.
For  this  name  quality,  as  long  as  it  has  any  definite
meaning  at  all,  always  denotes  something  that  by  its  nature
has  reality  only  as  a  state  of  feeling  of  some  sensitive  being,
but  which  except  in  such  a  being,  except  as  felt,  cannot  exist
either  independently  or  in  dependence  on  something  else.

It  would  seem  then  that  nothing  remains  for  us  to  do  but
to  regard  the  being  of  things  not  as  an  unknown  quality  but
simply  as  unknown.  But  even  this  complete  renunciation  of
all  pretensions  to  knowledge  proves  untenable ;  for  as  long  as

630  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  HL

we  wish  to  speak  of  things  at  all — and  it  is  not  apparent
how  we  can  comprehend  phaenomena  without  supposing
things — we  must  assume  that  things  have  a  nature  capable
of  producing  varying  appearances  under  varying  conditions.
In  this  respect  too,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  a  simple
quality,  even  if  it  could  be,  would  be  incapable  of  constituting
the  being  of  things- — that  being,  it  seemed  to  us,  could  only
consist  in  the  unchanging  significance  of  a  thought  which,
without  changing  its  meaning,  manifests  itself  in  different
ways  under  different  conditions.  Now  the  word  tliought  has
a  double  meaning,  signifying  on  the  one  hand  the  activity  of
the  thinher,  in  virtue  of  which  all  his  thoughts  are  thoughts,
and  on  the  other  hand  the  content  thoiight,  by  which  one
thought  is  distinguished  from  another.  We  have,  of  course,
intended  here  to  employ  only  the  second  meaning ;  things  are
not  the  thoughts  of  a  thinker,  hut  their  being  is  so  constituted
that  if  knowledge  of  their  content  were  possible  at  all,  it  could
be  adequate  only  in  the  form  of  a  thought,  combining  many
individual  ideas  by  definite  relations  into  one  significant  whole  ;
this  nature  of  things  itself,  however,  remaining  an  undivided
unity,  and  by  no  means  consisting  of  the  plurality  of  relations
and  related  points  which  we  require  for  its  representation  in
cognition.  That  this  mode  of  thought  also  has  its  secret
defects  was  betrayed  by  the  difficulty  which  we  had  in  rather
silencing  than  refuting  objections  to  it.  The  question  how
that  which  is  in  us  the  content  of  a  thought  can,  independent
of  us,  be  a  thing,  we  put  off  by  the  remark,  just  in  itself,
that  this  difficulty  would  recur  in  any  case  ;  that  whatever
image  we  may  frame  in  thought  as  to  the  nature  of  the  thing,
we  are  still  left  asking  how  that  which  is  in  us  a  thought-
image  can,  without  us,  be  a  thing ;  that  therefore  we  should  not
seek  to  know  how  reality  is  produced,  and  that  it  is  enough
to  know  the  content  which,  when  realized  after  a  fashion
which  must  be  always  incomprehensible,  is  a  Eeal  thing.
But  all  this  is  not  quite  convincing ;  a  thought  in  order  to
become  a  thing  needs  not  merely  this  affirmation  of  reality  that
requires  only  to  take  it  as  it  is  found  and  posit  it,  but  the

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  631

tbonslit  itself  lacks  something  in  order  to  be  that  which  when
posited  would  be  a  thing.  The  thought,  however  affirmed,
posited,  or  realized,  would  remain  an  existing  thought  and  no
more,  and  that  this  is  not  quite  what  we  mean  by  the  name
thing,  we  certainly  feel,  although  we  may  find  it  hard  to  point
out  what  is  lacking.  We  shall  perhaps  most  easily  get  a  clear
notion  of  it  by  recalling  a  view  which,  little  fettered  by  such
scruples  as  ours,  delights  to  characterize  the  being  of  things
with  the  utmost  brevity  as  an  operative  Idea.  Here  we  see
exactly  what  we  want — the  possibility  of  being  operative  is
lacking  to  the  realized  thought,  if  it  is  nothing  more  than  that.
That  identity  with  itself  of  the  thought-content  which  wo
presupposed,  as  confirmed  in  the  most  diverse  forms  of  its
expression  or  manifestation,  actually  has  reality  only  in  as  far
as  we  think  it,  and  follow  it  out  in  a  train  of  thought  which,
bringing  together  its  different  steps,  can  become  conscious  of
itself;  we,  the  thinkers,  in  accepting  a  definite  Idea,  as
determining  the  direction  of  our  reflection,  or  in,  as  it  were,
putting  at  the  disposal  of  that  Idea  the  real  living  power
of  our  thought — we  alone  it  is  who  realize  its  identity  with
itself,  by  seeking  for  and  finding  that  identity ;  it  is  we  alone
who  by  so  doing  give  to  the  Idea  (which  yet  certainly  was  a
valid  truth  without  any  co-operation  of  ours)  the  only  kind
of  reality  that  could  possibly  belong  to  it,  namely  that  of
being  a  thought  really  thought  by  some  thinker.  Our
intention  and  our  living  efibrt  either  theoretically  to  recognise
the  meaning  of  the  Idea,  in  all  its  instances  or  consequences,
as  self-identical,  and  to  remove  all  apparent  exceptions  to  this
consistency,  or  in  practice  to  carry  out  the  Idea  under  the
most  diverse  circumstances,  to  get  rid  of  all  opposition  to  it,
and  to  secure  an  adequate  expression  of  its  essential  content
under  the  most  varied  conditions — all  this  alone  it  is,  this
action  of  our  own,  that  lends  to  the  Idea  the  appearance  of
real  active  efficacy,  power  of  self-conservation,  and  impulse  to
development ;  these  appertain  to  the  Idea  only  in  as  far  as  it
is  thought  by  us,  while  according  to  our  previous  view  they
appertained  to  it  in  as  far  as  being  an  unthought  and  objec-

632  BOOK  IX, CHAPTER  IIL

tive  content — thinkable  indeed,  but  only  incidentally  so — it
constitutes  things.  This  requirement  is  one  that  cannot  be
iulfiUed ;  for  the  permanent  and  tangible  difference  between
thoughts  and  things  will  ever  consist  in  this,  that  the  contents
of  thought,  both  when  differing  and  when  similar,  may  be  put
in  opposition  without  having  any  effect  upon  one  another ;
things  on  the  other  hand  are  disturbed  by  one  another  and
offer  resistance ;  it  is  true  that  they  do  this  in  accordance
with  the  content  of  their  nature,  which  is  perhaps  susceptible
of  being  expressed  by  thoughts,  but  this  capacity  of  conflict
and  this  active  efficacy  do  not  accrue  to  them  from  that  Idea
of  their  being  which  they  vindicate  through  them.  This  then
is  what  was  wanting ;  if  we  express  the  being  of  things  as
actively  efficacious  Idea,  we  do,  it  is  true,  express  correctly
enough  what  we  need,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  active  efficacy
does  not  on  that  account  accrue  to  the  Idea  with  the  ease  and
speed  with  which  we  can  bestow  it  on  the  Idea  in  speech  bv
means  of  an  adjective.  On  the  contrary,  it  remains  doubtful
whether  the  name  of  operative  Idea  without  addition  or
omission  denotes  anything  which  exists  or  can  exist;  the
presumption  is  against  its  validity,  for  it  is  plain  that  in  it
we  transfer  to  Ideas  regarded  not  as  thought  but  as  existent,
a  power  which  demonstrably  belongs  to  an  Idea  only  when  it
is  thought.

The  difficulties  to  which  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  the  thing
in  the  course  of  its  mutations  is  subject,  are  not  merely
connected  with  what  we  have  referred  to  above,  they  are
intimately  related  to  it.  After  having  convinced  ourselves
that  things  could  no  longer  be  things  if  they  had  the  absolute
rigidity  of  complete  unchangeableness,  we  found  their  per-
manence to  consist  only  in  the  logical  connection  between  their
internal  states.  What  then  exactly  are  the  states  of  a  being  ?
We  know  what  we  mean  by  this  expression  in  two  cases —
the  first  is  where  we  are  concerned  with  the  various  possible
arrangements  of  a  plurality ;  there  is  reason  for  understanding
these  arrangements  as  being  not  really  different  facts  but
different  states  of  this  plurality,  only  in  as  far  as  one  feels

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL,  633

justified  in  regarding  this  plurality  as  a  coherent  whole,  and
some  primary  order  as  an  original  law  destined  for  the  self-
conservation  of  this  whole.  The  second  case  is  presented  by
our  own  inner  life ;  in  it  our  ideas,  feelings,  and  efforts  appear
to  be  in  their  nature  the  states  of  a  being,  of  the  necessary
unity  of  which,  as  contrasted  with  them,  we  are  immediately
conscious.  The  first  case  has  no  interest  for  us ;  and  that
which  in  the  second  case  makes  inner  states  possible,  does
not  seem  transferable  from  the  Ego  to  the  non-Ego.  Eor  these
inner  events  appear  to  us  as  states  only  through  the  marvellous
nature  of  mind,  which  can  compare  every  idea,  every  feeling,
every  passion  with  others,  and  just  because  of  this  relating
activity  with  reference  to  them  all,  knows  itself  as  the  per-
manent subject  from  which,  under  various  conditions,  they  result.
Now  it  might  be  said  that  though  on  account  of  its  lack
of  consciousness  it  may  not  be  possible  for  a  thing  to  know
its  states  as  belonging  to  it,  in  the  same  way  that  we  know
our  states  as  being  ours,  yet  in  the  unity  of  the  thing  its
states  may  always  exist,  for  even  our  states  do  not  become  ours
by  becoming  apparent  to  us.  But  such  reasoning  we  cannot
admit.  If  a  thing  within  those  limits  within  which  we  have
admitted  that  it  may  change,  setting  out  from  the  value  a,
gradually  acquires  the  values  i,  c,  d,  .  .  .,  then  our  thought,
comparing  these  values,  may  always  recognise  in  them
members  of  a  series  which,  taken  altogether,  are  connected
together  in  the  logical  coherence  of  one  identical  law  of
development — but  in  what  way  could  it  be  shown  that  those
values  are  more  than  the  realized  members  of  that  series,
simultaneous  or  successive,  yet  independent  of  one  another  ?
that  they  are  to  be  thought  not  as  separate  realities  that
alternate  with  one  another,  but  as  states  of  one  being  that
changes  in  them,  and  holds  them  together  by  the  continuity
of  its  presence  in  them  ?  It  is  of  no  use  whatever  to  say,
We  believe  that  it  is  so,  and  liave  never  held  any  other
opinion ;  the  important  point  is  rather  to  be  certain  that  in
real  things  those  conditions  are  fulfilled  under  which  that
which  is  thought  can  be  actualized. Now  the  possibility  of

634  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IIL

regarding  our  inner  experiences  as  our  states  depends  not  at
all  upon  the  bare  general  predicate  of  unity,  appertaining  to
every  substance,  not  to  the  Ego  alone  but  also  to  things ;  but
upon  the  special  nature  of  consciousness,  by  which  the  Ego  is
distinguished  from  the  non-Ego.  It  is  only  because  memory
and  recollection  can  range  the  past  beside  the  present,  only
because  a  relating  activity  of  attention  can  comprehend  variety
and  produce  in  contrast  to  it  the  idea  of  the  permanent  Ego
— in  short,  only  because  we  appear  to  ourselves  to  be  unity,
that  in  truth  we  are  unity.  Supposing  that  a  mind  reacted
at  every  moment  to  external  stimuli,  and  that  these  reactions
taken  together  would  constitute  for  a  second  observer  a  series
as  logically  coherent  as  the  most  scientifically  developed
melody,  but  that  the  mind  itself  knew  nothing  of  this,  but
was  destitute  of  memory  and  at  every  moment  absorbed  in
the  action  that  at  that  moment  it  was  carrying  out,  and  at
every  succeeding  moment  forgot  in  the  new  reaction  all
remembrance  of  the  preceding  one — then  this  mind  would  no
longer  be  a  changing  unity,  a  substance  self-conserving  in  the
midst  of  change;  it  would  be  a  series  of  real  existences
succeeding  one  another  according  to  a  definite  law — existences
of  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  say  wherein  their  simil-
arity differed  from  the  similarity  of  substances  that  were
originally  distinct  and  continued  to  be  distinct.  Hence  there
would  not  be  the  slightest  ground  for  calling  the  members  of
this  series  the  states  of  one  being,  and  that  unity  which  wo
are  thinking  of  when  we  speak  of  the  states  of  a  being,
cannot  therefore  be  simply  transferred  from  the  Ego,  in  which
is  the  special  ground  of  its  reality,  to  things  in  general,  in
which  this  special  ground  is  lacking.

Let  us  pass  on,  finally,  to  our  third  difficulty.  It  seemed
that  we  must  characterize  the  existence  of  things  as  related-
ness.  But  when  we  tried  to  give  a  name  to  the  relations
referred  to,  it  seemed  that  spatial  connections  (which  really
afford  us  the  only  intuitable  example  of  that  which  we  mean
by  relation)  are  received  by  us  as  holding  not  of  existent
things  but of  their  appearance. We  substituted  for  them

THE  EEAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  635

siipersensuous  intellectual  relations;  that  this  expression
really  signifies  something  that  is  actually  to  be  met  with,  we
believed  to  be  testified  by  all  the  graduated  relationships,
similarities,  and  contrasts  which  we  find  between  non-spatial
sensuous  qualities  or  abstract  truths.  But  when  we  came  to
examine  these  cases  more  closely,  they  all  turned  out  to  be
something  different  from  what  we  wanted.  It  is  true  that
they  all  as  causes  determine  the  content  of  some  future  event
as  their  result ;  but  we  could  not  regard  them  (as  we  formerly
did  spatial  relations)  as  variable  conditions,  which  sometimes
bring  together  things  the  natures  of  which  remain  unchanged,
so  as  to  cause  the  realization  of  consequences  which  have
their  basis  in  those  natures,  and  sometimes  hinder  this
realization.  And  here,  again,  we  might  for  a  moment  have
amused  ourselves  by  inserting  between  things  changeable
relations  of  quite  another  kind,  namely  such  relations  as  no
one  can  frame  an  idea  of,  and  by  making  the  changeable
action  of  things  dependent  on  their  sometimes  increasing  and
sometimes  diminishing  closeness.  But  then  we  remembered
how  perfectly  vain  it  would  be  to  invent  a  special  and
mysterious  kind  of  connection  for  this  end ;  the  general  con-
cept of  relation  is  wholly  adverse  to  every  attempt  at  such
objectifying.  No  kind  of  relation  could  be  assumed  as  sub-
sisting between  things,  acting  upon  them,  conditioning,  pre-
paring, favouring,  or  hindering  their  reciprocal  action ;  but
reciprocal  action  itself,  the  passion  and  action  of  things,  must
take  the  place  of  relation.  Just  when  and  in  as  far  as  things
act  upon  one  another,  are  they  related  to  one  another ;  there
are  no  objective  relations  other  than  this  living  action  and
passion,  and  least  of  all  relations  in  which  things  merely  stand
provisionally,  without  having  any  effect  upon  each  other's
natures,  only  coming  to  act  later,  as  a  result  of  this  related-
ness ;  the  mode  of  expression  here  reprobated  is  figurative,
and  we  now  no  longer  doubt  that  in  a  metaphysical  point  of
view  it  is  wholly  meaningless.

But  have  we  now  reached  the  conclusion  of  the  matter  ?
Hardly — for  what  more  could  we  understand  by  the  action  of

636  BOOK  IX CIIAPTEB  IIL

a  thing  than  that  a  change  of  its  states  is  followed  by  a
change  of  the  states  of  some  other  being  ?  To  this  succession
it  is  due  that  as  we  reflect  and  compare,  we  regard  the
second  event  as  emanating  from  the  first,  because  perception
of  it  is  conditioned  by  perception  of  the  first ;  but  there  does
not  exist  between  things  any  authenticated  connection  of  such
a  kind  as  that  a  state  of  one  is  wrought  by  the  activity  of
the  other.  When  we  call  the  active  element  active,  properly
speaking  we  say  of  it  nothing  whatever ;  we  simply  affirm
that  a  second  being  suffers  in  consequence  of  its  states.  But
is  this  suffering  or  passion  itself  clearer  and  more  significant
than  that  action  ?  "What  meaning  has  this  expression  when
applied  with  such  generality  to  the  changes  of  state  of  any
existing  thing  we  choose  to  consider  ?  We  fear  that  it  has
not  any  which  can  be  specified.  For  in  characterizing  the
change  of  any  being  not  merely  as  the  appearance  of  a  new
condition  in  place  of  an  earlier  one  which  vanishes  away  but
as  passion,  our  intention  plainly  is  to  indicate  that  the  unity
of  the  being  feels  and  wards  off  the  imputed  change  as  pre-
judicial to  its  own  permanent  nature.  But  what  we  thus
require  can  never  be  performed  by  a  being  in  the  nature  of
which  we  presuppose  nothing  but  a  capacity  of  being  changed
and  also  of  being  not  wholly  changed,  but  of  preserving  or
restoring  from  change  an  abiding  part  of  its  essential  content
— it  is  only  we  who,  feeling  pain  and  joy,  desire  and  aversion,
measure  by  them  the  value  of  our  inner  states  for  our  own
being.  It  is  only  in  this  feeling  that  actual  suffering,  to
which  we  have  here  tacitly  referred,  really  has  a  place ;  and
every  time  that  we  apply  this  word  to  unconscious  existences
its  real  meaning  vanishes,  and  with  it  that  for  the  sake  of
which  we  desired  thus  to  transfer  it.  That  which  does  not
feel  good  and  ill  suffers  as  little  as  it  acts ;  but  that  which
cannot  suffer  is  no  Eeal  (reale)  unity,  and  is  not  for  itself,  but
only  for  the  apprehension  of  some  other,  a  whole  that  deserves
to  be  called  by  one  name.

§  2.  If  we  bring  together  the  results  of  the  foregoing  obser-
vations— which,  dry  as  they  are,  we  could  not  well  avoid —

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  637

we  find  that  concerning  that  nature  of  things  which  has  to
he  assumed  in  order  to  make  the  course  of  the  world  intel-
ligible, we  are  forced  to  make  definite  presuppositions ;  but
are  not  only  unable  to  say  how  things  could  set  about  satis-
fying these  presuppositions,  but  have  also  to  acknowledge  to
ourselves  that  the  nature  of  things,  thought  as  we  think  it,  is
adverse  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  demands  which  we  make  upon
it.  Three  inferences  which  seem  to  exclude  one  another,  and
yet  finally  lead  to  the  same  goal,  make  it  possible  for  us  to  hold
such  a  conviction.  Either  we  content  ourselves  with  ascribing
to  our  notions  of  things  (as  we  previously  did  to  the  intuition
of  space)  only  a  subjective  validity  as  forms  under  which  there
appears  to  us  the  unity  of  the  real  world,  which  in  its  true  shape
we  are  incapable  of  cognizing ;  or  we  give  up  the  thought  of
things,  which  we  cannot  work  out  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion ;
or  finally,  we  supplement  the  notion  of  things  in  such  a  way  that
it  includes  the  conditions  under  which  those  demands  upon  their
nature  which  we  could  not  retract  become  capable  of  fulfilment.
Against  choosing  the  first  of  these  three  ways  no  objection
can  be  made,  if  it  is  taken  to  signify  a  complete  breaking  off
of  all  investigation,  and  an  unconditional  renunciation  of  all
pretensions  to  knowledge ;  but  as  a  proposition  containing  a
permanent  addition  to  knowledge  in  the  form  of  a  positive
assertion,  the  view  from  which  this  resignation  flows  cannot
be  maintained.  For  however  much  one  may  think  that  the
nature  of  things  is  in  itself  beyond  the  reach  of  all  knowledge,
so  that  even  the  most  unconditional  and  certain  declarations
of  knowledge  concerning  things  can  only  be  understood  sub-
jectively of  the  mode  in  which  they  appear  to  the  cognizing
mind — even  in  such  a  case  our  assertions  are  not  intelligible
unless  we  presuppose  the  existence  of  things,  and  reciprocal
action  between  them  and  us,  for  only  thus  can  we  give  to
tlie  notion  of  their  appearance  a  meaning  that  is  intelligible
and  capable  of  being  stated.  Hence  we  should  always  in  one
breath  both  deny  the  cognizability — even  in  the  most  general
way — of  the  nature  of  things  and  of  action  and  (in  order
that  we  may  be  able  to  speak  of  their  appearance)  presuppose

638  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  III.

afresh  the  validity  of  our  most  general  determinations  of  both ;  a
familiar  circle,  from  which  this  doctrine  of  Subjective  Idealism
has  never  been  able  to  escape.  Kow  this  circle  might  itself
be  put  to  the  account  of  that  imperfection  of  our  knowledge
which  we  are  forced  to  recognise,  and  it  might  be  admitted
that  we  certainly  cannot  explain  how  the  phsenomenal  world
can  originate  for  us  except  by  supposing  that  things  have
some  kind  of  influence  upon  us,  but  that  this  reciprocal  action
of  which  we  have  a  notion  indicates  the  ground  of  that
appearance,  not  as  it  is  in  truth  and  fact,  but  only  in  a
way  that  is  comprehensible  to  us.  But  then  the  things  pre-
supposed by  us  and  the  action  assumed  between  them,  would
be  wholly  emptied  of  all  special  content  of  their  own,
altogether  incapable  of  being  intuited,  indeed  wrongly  called
by  the  names  of  thing  and  action,  and  would  probably
signify  nothing  more  than  the  wholly  unknown  cause  of
our  perception  of  the  world,  or  rather  our  craving  for  some
such  conditioning  cause.  What  is  maintained  from  this
standpoint  would  be  as  follows :  thought,  in  order  to  make
its  own  activities  intelligible,  is  obliged  to  suppose  a  pro-
ducing cause  of  them,  and  to  present  to  itself  in  idea  the
conditioning  power  of  this  cause  as  a  varying  action  of
external  things  upon  itself,  being  yet  at  the  same  time  forced
to  recognise  this  whole  mode  of  presentation  in  idea  as  only
its  own  explanation  of  that  cause,  or  of  the  action  and  passion
which  it  attributes  to  that  cause — this  explanation  being  one
that  is  not  truly  accurate.  And  in  this  case  the  notion  of
things  must  be  reckoned  among  the  ideas  by  which  we  seek
to  interpret  our  perception  of  the  cosmos ;  it  does  not  stand
alone,  established  from  the  beginning  by  a  special  revelation,  so
that  it  would  only  be  our  further  metaphysical  thoughts  con-
cerning the  unity  and  reciprocal  action  of  things  that  would
be  incapable  of  combining  with  it  as  established  truth ;  it  too
is,  on  the  contrary,  a  product  of  our  thought,  the  necessity
and  validity  of  which  may  be  matter  of  question.

And here  we — following the example of the historical
development  of  philosophy — turn  to  the  second  of  the  ways

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  639

above  pointed  out,  namely  that  of  Idealism.  That  all  sensu-
ous impressions  which  supply  the  content  of  our  image  of  the
cosmos,  and  all  ideas  of  relations  to  which  its  order  is  due,
are  subjective  states  and  activities  of  our  mind,  is  an  observa-
tion that  at  an  earlier  stage  (cf.  supra,  pp.  346  seq.)  seemed  to
us  an  inadequate  ground  on  which  to  found  the  conviction  that
the  whole  phsenomenal  world  which  floats  before  our  con-
sciousness is  but  the  product  of  a  mysteriously  ordered  play
of  our  imagination.  But  we  here  reach  a  similar  view  with
better  reason — not  the  subjective  source  of  our  idea  of  the
world,  but  the  very  content  of  that  idea,  as  we  seem  forced  to
think  it  forbids  us  to  concede  to  it  any  other  reality  than
that  of  an  appearance  in  us.  In  pursuing  the  course  of  this
Idealism  for  a  while,  we  will  assume  that  the  lonely  thinker
may  have  been  tempted,  at  least  for  a  moment,  to  regard  all
physical  and  mental  reality  as  an  ordered  dream  of  his  per-
sonal individual  Ego,  the  only  Eeal  thing  which  he  immediately
knows ;  but  then  his  scientific  instinct  will,  by  some  easily
supplied  middle  terms,  have  brought  him  again  so  near  to  the
ordinary  view  as  to  make  the  reality  of  other  individual  minds
with  which  life  brings  him  into  contact,  as  indubitable  to  him
as  his  own.  It  is  only  the  realm  of  things,  an  intermediate
region,  which  to  the  ordinary  view  seems  to  be  spread  out
between  minds,  and  by  its  own  changes  to  initiate,  keep  up,
and  guide  their  inner  life,  that  Idealism  declares  to  be  a  mere
appearance  within  minds.  According  to  Idealism  conscious
beings  interpret  the  connection  of  their  own  direct  action  and
reaction  by  the  image  of  a  world  of  changeable  things  inserted
between  them,  and  acting  upon  them,  in  the  same  way  as
(according  to  our  earlier  assumption)  in  spatial  intuitions  the
intellectual  order  of  a  world  of  things  in  themselves  then
presupposed  by  us,  became  transformed  to  the  image  of  a
space-world  embracing  those  things  themselves.

At  any  rate  (so  this  Idealism  maintains)  the  phsenomenal
v/orld  in  which  all  minds  have  a  common  interest,  and  in
which  yet  different  minds  participate  with  differences  which
have  a correspondence among themselves, cannot have its

640  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  III.

ground  in  individual  minds  as  such.  But  why  should  we  seek
this  ground  nowhere  but  in  the  presence  without  us  of  a  muiti-
tude  of  things,  when,  on  the  one  hand,  what  these  do  towards
explaining  the  microcosmic  order  can  be  done  without  them,
and,  on  the  otlier  hand,  we  always  fail  to  understand  how  things
can  do  tliat  which  they  must  do  in  order  to  be  things.  For
•when  it  comes  to  the  point,  the  assumption  of  things  has  no
other  use  for  us  than  this,  that  things  mark  for  us  fixed  posi-
tions in  the  real  world,  positions  in  which  we  find,  grouped
together  and  realized,  causes  which  give  rise  to  results,  points
of  departure  for  some  occurrences  which  we  call  their  effects,
and,  as  it  were,  the  goal  of  other  occurrences  which  we  call
their  states,  although  we  cannot  make  it  clear  how  these
things  possess  an  inner  nature  from  which  actual  effects
could  proceed,  or  which  could  experience  actual  suffering.  To
regard  these  points  of  intersection  of  action — which  are  in
themselves  wholly  empty  and  selfless,  and  seem  on  the  one
side  to  bring  together  that  which  on  the  other  side  tliey
disperse  again — as  Eeal  beings,  may  be  a  fiction  convenient
for  our  survey  of  the  connection  of  phoenomena,  but  must  not
be  affirmed  as  an  established  dogma;  on  the  contrary,  this
assumption  must  give  place  to  any  and  every  other  wliich
affords  an  equally  intelligible  explanation  of  the  course  of  the
world,  without  requiring  the  impracticable  assumption  of  the
Eealness  (Bealitdt)  of  that  which  is  destitute  of  all  the  inner
conditions  of  Eealness.

Now  such  an  assumption  offers  itself  to  Idealism  in  a
conviction  which  we  have  already  reached  by  another
path — the  conviction  that  all  individual  things  are  think-
able only  as  modifications  of  one  single  Infinite  Being.
What  might  be  the  positive  signification  of  this  word
vwdijication  we  left  in  obscurity ;  it  sufficed  for  us  that
it  denied  the  independence  of  things  with  reference  to  the
Infinite  Being.  We  did  not  mean  that  the  Infinite  should  be
conceived  after  the  analogy  of  some  plastic  material  from  the
various  parts  of  which  all  the  multitude  of  different  things
should  be  cut  out,  and  become  independent  objects;  but  if

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  641

we  now  explain  our  meaning  to  be  that  things  are  states  oi"
the  action  and  passion  of  the  Infinite,  we  do  not  imagine  that
they — though  without  attaining  the  independence  of  self-
sufficing  substances — have  reality  as  such  states  of  the
Infinite,  elsewhere  than  in  minds ;  we  regard  them  rather  as
acts  of  the  Infinite,  wrought  within  minds  alone,  or  as  states
•which  the  Infinite  experiences  nowhere  but  in  minds.
Manifesting  itself  in  the  individual  mind,  and  being  in  it  and
in  all  its  like  the  efficient  source  of  their  life,  the  Infinite
develops  a  series  of  activities,  as  to  which  how  they  take
place  remains  incomprehensible  to  finite  consciousness,  which
intuits  their  product,  as  they  occur,  under  the  form  of  a
multiform  and  changing  world  of  sense.  In  this  appear-
ance which  it  presents  to  the  eye  of  our  mind,  the  Infinite
exerts  its  own  unity  after  a  double  fashion.  For  to  the
observing  consciousness  it  first  shows  that  similar  con-
sequences are  attached  to  similar  causes,  and  different
consequences  to  different  causes,  thus  revealing  the  logical
consistency  of  its  action  which  is  governed  by  general  laws ;
and  also  among  the  changing  phaenomena  produced  by  the
varying  play  of  its  action,  there  are  brought  into  prominence
the  images  of  Things  with  their  perdurable  natures,  as
witness  to  certain  and  constant  activities  that  are  always
maintained  in  it,  and  the  rich  content  and  significant
reciprocal  relatability  of  which  it  unfolds  in  the  multiplicity
of  those  changing  events.  Finally,  being  actively  efficacious
in  all  individual  minds,  as  a  power  which  in  the  whole
spirit-world  has  assumed  innumerable  harmonious  modes  of
existence,  the  Infinite  brings  to  pass  the  exhibition  of  those
same  universal  laws,  by  the  totality  of  the  various  world-
pictures  which  arise  in  various  individuals ;  and  moreover,
the  constant  activities  which  appear  to  every  individual
mind  as  the  real  points  of  contact  and  intersection  for  the
events  within  its  world,  are  exercised  by  the  Infinite  with
such  accord  in  all  that  the  same  things — or  at  any  rate  the
same  world  of  things — appear  to  all  as  a  common  object  of  in-
tuition, as  an  -external  reality  common  to  all  and  connecting  all.
VOL.  11.  2  R

642  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IIL

This  explanation  of  the  world  given  by  Idealism  with
reference  to  the  relation  between  individual  minds  and  the
Infinite  would  still  leave  outstanding  some  obscurities  which
we  do  not  yet  wish  to  draw  attention  to ;  but  it  would
certainly  make  superfluous  the  assumption  of  Keal  things
in  which  are  lacking  all  the  inner  qualifications  of  Eealness.
But  whilst  Idealism  thus  reduces  to  mere  appearance  that
which  as  thought  could  not  be  a  being  at  all,  we  held  it
possible  to  take  a  third  path,  which  amounts  to  this,  that  we
add  to  our  idea  of  things  that  which  their  content  seemed  to
lack  in  order  to  make  Eealness  possible  for  them.  In  fact,
if  the  doctrine  of  Idealism  reserves  to  spiritual  beings  the
Eealness  which  it  refuses  to  selfless  things  (and  this  it  tacitly
does),  what  hinders  us  from  flnding  in  this  mental  nature  that
addition  which  the  previously  empty  notion  of  things  needed
in  order  to  become  the  complete  notion  of  something  Eeal  ?
Why  should  we  not  transform  the  assertion  that  only  minds
are  Eeal  into  the  assertion  that  all  that  is  Eeal  is  mind —
that  thus  things  which  seemed  to  our  merely  external  observa-
tion as  working  blindly,  suffering  unconsciously,  and  being
self-contradictory  through  their  incomprehensible  combination
of  selflessness  and  Eealness,  are  in  fact  better  internally  than
they  seem  on  the  exterior — that  they,  too,  exist  not  merely
for  others  but  also  for  themselves,  and  by  this  self-existence
are  capable  of  being  after  the  fashion  which  we  have  felt
compelled  to  require  of  them,  though  hitherto  without  any
hope  that  our  requirement  could  be  fulfilled  ?

This  assumption  of  a  soul  in  all  things  would  be  much
nearer  common  opinion  than  the  more  artistic  view  of
Idealism;  we  ourselves  have  previously  been  led  to  it  by
other  causes,  and  it  has  so  many  roots  in  the  human  mind
that  from  the  most  varied  standpoints  we  might  describe
the  satisfying  and  interesting  prospects  which  it  opens  to  us
concerning  the  connection  of  things.  But  we  would  now
turn  with  indifference  from  all  these  inducements,  and  devote
ourselves  to  some  other  questions  raised  by  a  comparison  of
the  two  views  which we  have  last  developed. As I  have

THE  EEAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  643

already  noticed  at  an  earlier  point,  their  assertions  have  much
more  affinity  than  at  first  appears,  and  I  fear  lest  there  should
be  maintained  between  them  a  distinction  which  would  rest
upon  an  inadmissible  prejudice.  Idealism,  it  will  be  said,
denies  that  things  have  Eealness,  and  regards  them  as  being
by  their  nature  incapable  of  detaching  themselves  from  the
Infinite,  of  which  they  are  states,  and  attaining  complete
independence ;  whereas  the  last-mentioned  view  allows
Eealness  to  things,  in  that  it  regards  them  as  having  minds,
and  minds  (in  the  self-existence  {Filrsichsein)  which  con-
stitutes the  distinctive  peculiarity  of  their  nature)  possess
that  which  makes  them  capable  of  existing  not  only  within
or  in  dependence  upon  the  Infinite,  as  states  of  it,  but  also
detached  from  it  and  in  self-dependence.  This  mode  of
expression  would  involve  the  thought  that  the  attribute  of
mentality  is  merely  the  legitimate  ground  in  virtue  of  which
beings  which  have  minds  can  obtain  Eealness  as  a  form  of
existence  distinguishable  from  that  self-existence  to  which  we
have  referred.  The  influence  of  this  thought  is  frequently
encountered  in  the  region  of  religious  speculation,  where  it
gives  rise  to  the  familiar  question,  whether  the  world,  or  things,
properly  exist  in  God  or  not,  whether  they  are  or  are  not
immanent  in  Him — the  complete  dependence  of  the  nature  and
existence  of  the  world  (or  of  things)  upon  God  being  conceded
from  the  first.  The  answers  to  this  question,  whichever
alternative  they  may  assert,  plainly  betray  the  opinion  that
it  is  not  existence  in  God  which  would  make  the  complete
Eealness  of  things  indubitable,  but  only  an  existence  external
to  God,  whether  that  existence  were  original  or  due  to  some
creative  act  of  God.  Thus  they  regard  Eealness  as  a  definite
formal  relation  to  God,  which  they  characterize  by  spatial
images  that  are  certainly  wholly  inadequate ;  of  this  relation
they  presuppose  universally  that  it  gives  independent  exist-
ence to  any  content  to  which  it  applies,  and  they  will  only
admit  partially  and  in  detail  that  it  is  not  every  content
which  can  stand  in  such  a  relationship,  but  that  the  title  and
the  capacity  thus  to  stand  must  be  the  result  of  some  peculiar

644  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IH.

advantages  of  natural  endowment.  That  this  could  not  he
our  view,  and  why  it  could  not,  may  most  simply  be  made
clear  by  the  consideration  to  which  we  now  proceed,  in  which
for  the  sake  of  brevity  we  shall  retain  to  some  extent  the
phraseology  of  those  religious  investigations  which  we  have
mentioned,  although  our  doing  so  is  not  perhaps  quite
justified  at  this  stage  of  our  reflections.

Let  us  assume  that  in  God  the  idea  of  a  definite  content  is
thought  in  such  a  way  as  to  include  all  the  consequences
which  it  has  in  the  world  of  the  divine  thought,  these
thoughts  of  God  being  at  the  same  time  the  very  power
which  is  in  finite  minds  the  efficacious  cause  of  their  intuition
of  the  world ;  or,  in  other  words,  let  us  assume  that  in  the
Infinite  a  definite  activity  is  so  exercised  that  at  the  same
time — as  must  happen  in  consequence  of  the  unity  of  this
Infinite — there  are  also  consistently  exercised  all  those  other
activities  which,  in  accordance  with  the  universal  orderliness
of  the  action  of  the  Infinite,  must  flow  from  that  one ;  and
that  this  activity  of  the  Infinite  is  again  the  efficacious
power  which  produces  in  individual  minds  the  image  of  an
external  world : — if  we  assume  this,  then  according  to  the  view
of  Idealism,  these  inner  acts  of  the  Infinite  really  are  the  Eeal
forces  which  (being  in  fact  efficacious  within  the  Infinite,  each
calling  out  and  conditioning  the  other  according  to  law)
produce  true  action,  that  is  at  the  same  time  incidentally
perceived  by  individual  minds  as  a  world  of  external  things
embracing  them  all.  And  now  we  would  ask  ourselves,  AVhat
exactly  would  be  gained  by  these  thoughts  of  God  or  these
states  of  the  Infinite,  both  of  which  have  now  been  thought
as  immanent  in  God  and  in  the  Infinite  as  states  of  the  one
or  of  the  other — what  exactly  would  be  gained  (to  use  the
phraseology  of  the  discussions  referred  to)  by  their  being  ezter-
Tial  to  God,  or  what  exactly  would  be  gained  for  them  by  being
dissatisfied  with  this  their  immanence  in  God,  and  finding  out
for  them  in  addition  to  this  some  transcendental  existence  ?
Finally,  in  what  would  this  existence  external  to  God
ultimately  consist,  and  what  would be  the  real  meaning  of

i

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  645

that  which  is  figuratively  intended  by  this  spatial  expression
external  to  ?

If  one  ponders  these  questions  it  will  be  found  that  nothing
whatever  is  gained  for  selfless  unconscious  things,  but  that
they  rather  lose  by  having  ascribed  to  thera  that  existence
external  to  God;  all  the  stability  and  all  the  energy  which
they  exhibit  as  active  and  conditioning  forces  in  the  changes
of  that  course  of  events  which  is  visible  to  us,  they — thought
as  mere  states  of  the  Infinite — possess  in  all  the  same  fulness
as  if  they  existed  as  things  external  to  it;  nay  more,  it  is
only  through  their  common  immanence  in  the  Infinite  that
they  have  in  any  degree — as  we  saw  earlier — that  capacity
of  reciprocal  action  that  could  not  belong  to  them  as  isolated
beings  detached  from  that  substantial  substratum.  Thus  by
doing  away  the  immanence  of  things  in  God,  we  reap  no
advantage  as  regards  that  which  things  should  be  and  do  for
one  another  and  in  connection  with  one  another ;  but  it  is
true  that  as  long  as  things  are  only  states  of  the  Infinite,  they
are  nothing  for  themselves.  It  is  desired  that  something  should
be  gained  for  things  themselves ;  this  is  plainly  what  is
meant  by  the  insistence  upon  existence  external  to  God ;  but
the  more  genuine  and  true  Eealness  of  bei7ig  something  foo'
oneself,  or  more  generally  of  self-existence,  is  not  attained  by
things  by  their  being  made  external  to  God,  as  though  this
transcendency  (of  which  it  would  be  wholly  impossible  to  give
the  exact  significance)  were  the  precedent  formal  condition  to
which  self-existence  were  attached  as  its  consequence ;  but  in
that  a  thing  is  something  for  itself,  consciously  refers  to  itself,
apprehends  itself  as  an  Ego — by  just  this,  which  is  its  very
essence,  it  detaches  itself  from  the  Infinite.  It  is  not  that  it
thereby  acquires  an  existence  external  to  the  Infinite,  but  that
by  the  very  fact  it  has  such  existence ;  it  does  not  fulfil
thereby  a  condition  by  which  is  secured  to  it  complete
Eealness,  as  a  kind  of  existence  including  and  bestowing
something  other  than  is  contained  in  the  condition  itself — but
self-existence  or  Selfhood  (Ichheit)  is  the  only  definition  which
expresses  the  essential  content  and  worth  of  that  which  we,  from

646  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IIL

accidental  and  ill-chosen  standpoints,  characterize  formally  as
Kealness,  or  independent  existence  external  to  God,  in  contrast
to  immanence.  He  therefore  who,  constrained  by  necessity,
regards  minds  as  well  as  things,  as  being  states,  thoughts,  or
modifications  of  God  or  of  the  Infinite,  yet  as  not  serving
merely  to  propagate  the  logical  results  of  the  nature  of  the
Infinite  from  point  to  point,  being  connected  amongst  them-
selves as  links  of  a  chain,  but  as  also  feeling  that  which  they  do
and  suffer  as  their  states,  in  some  form  of  relation  to  self  {sich),
as  events  experienced  by  their  self  (Selhst) — he  who  assumes
this,  and  yet  believes  in  addition  that  for  these  living  minds
immanent  in  God,  he  needs  to  prove  an  existence  external  to
God,  in  order  that  they  may  be  Eeal  in  the  full  meaning  of
the  word,  does  not,  it  seems  to  us,  know  what  he  is  about — he
does  not  know  that  he  already  possesses  the  kernel  whole  and
complete,  and  that  what  he  painfully  seeks  is  but  the  shell.

The  result  of  these  considerations  admits  of  being  differently
expressed.  If  we  continue  to  use  the  phraseology  in  accord-
ance with  which  we  designated  Eeality  as  the  general  affir-
mation which  belongs  to  action  as  well  as  existence,  then
Eealness  is  the  special  kind  of  reality  which  we  attribute  to
or  seek  for  things,  as  the  points  from  which  action  sets  out
and  in  which  it  is  consummated.  This  Eealness  has  appeared
to  us  as  dependent  upon  the  nature  of  that  to  which  it  is  to
belong ;  it  is  the  being  of  that  which  exists  for  self.  But  we
want  the  name  self-existence  in  order  to  characterize  in  a  more
general  way  the  nature  of  mentality,  which  only  reaches  its
highest  stage  in  the  self-consciousness  of  the  being  that  knows
itself  as  an  Ego  {Teh),  and  is  not,  because  of  this  being  its
highest  stage,  absent  in  the  being  which,  though  far  removed
from  the  clearness  of  such  self-consciousness,  yet  in  some
duller  form  of  feeling  exists  for  itself  and  enjoys  its  existence.
Hence  to  Eealness  in  this  sense  we  can  attribute  various
degrees  of  intensity ;  we  cannot  say  of  everything  that  it  is
either  altogether  Eeal,  or  altogether  not- Eeal;  but  beings,
detaching  themselves  from  the  Infinite  with  varying  wealth
and  unequal  complexity  of  self-existence,  are  Eeal  in  different

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  647

degrees,  while  all  continue  to  be  immanent  in  the  Infinite.
Hence  the  distinction  between  Idealism  and  the  standpoint
which  we  have  just  taken  up  does  not  consist  in  this,  that  we
ascribe  to  things  a  transcendental  and  hence  Eeal  existence,
while  Idealism  ascribes  to  them  only  an  immanent  and  hence
merely  apparent  existence ;  rather  there  exists  between  the
two  this  difference,  that  the  idealistic  view,  convinced  of
the  selflessness  of  things,  on  this  account  will  not  allow
that  they  are  more  than  states  of  the  Infinite ;  while  we,
agreeing  herewith  in  principle,  leave  undecided,  as  something
which  we  cannot  know,  the  question  whether  this  assumption
of  selflessness  is  appropriate,  holding,  however,  that  it  is  far
more  likely  to  be  mappropriate,  and  that  all  things  really
possess  in  different  degrees  of  perfection  that  selfhood  by
which  an  immanent  product  of  the  Infinite  becomes  what
we  call  Eeal.

S  3.  We  seem  now  to  some  extent  to  have  struggled
upwards  out  of  the  helplessness  to  which  we  confessed  at  the
beginning  of  this  chapter.  The  nature  of  that  which  is  Eeal
is  no  longer  so  wholly  unknown  to  us  and  so  wholly  incapable
of  being  showed  forth  as  it  then  seemed  ;  we  are  no  longer
so  completely  limited  to  going  round  about  it  at  a  distance
with  purely  formal  abstract  notions  of  Eealness  and  unity
and  inner  states  of  passion  and  action,  without  being  able  to
make  clear  the  living  meaning  of  any  of  these  notions  by
pointing  to  some  well-known  and  pregnant  intuition.  To  the
nature  of  Mind,  of  the  Ego  that  apprehends  itself,  that  is
passive  in  feeling  and  active  in  willing,  and  that  is  one  in
remembrance  in  which  it  brings  past  experiences  together,
we  can  now  point  as  to  a  similitude  of  that  which  is  the
nature  of  beings  endowed  with  Eealness ;  or  we  may  believe
that  directly  and  without  any  similitude  we  find  the  thing
itself,  the  nature  of  all  Eealness  in  this  living  self-existence.
I  will  leave  undecided  whether  we  are  really  free  to  choose
between  these  two  alternatives ;  in  order  to  cut  short  the  pro-
lixity in  which  this  consideration  would  involve  us,  we  shall
be  satisfied  to  have  it  granted  to  us  that  at  any  rate  there  is

648  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  III.

in  mind  the  nature  of  a  Eeal  being,  although  the  nature  of
things  may  not  be  made  properly  clear  to  us  by  the  analogy
of  mental  existence,  but  only  imperfectly  and  figuratively
illustrated  by  it.

But  will  even  this  be  granted  to  us  ?  Shall  we  not  rather
be  met  with  the  reproach  that  we  have  characterized  as  the
original  being  of  things  that  which,  as  a  late  and  mediated
result,  most  of  all  needed  that  we  should  show  how  it  was
put  together  out  of  more  simple  and  more  essential  material  ?
For  are  not  ideation,  feeling,  volition,  self-consciousness,  events
the  possibility  of  which  can  only  be  understood  by  pre-
supposing the  nature  of  a  Eeal  unconscious  being  which  in
itself  neither  ideates,  nor  feels,  nor  wills,  and  assuming  that
this  nature  is  stirred  by  numerous  stimuli,  and  that  from
the  reactions  by  which — in  accordance  with  its  unknown
peculiarities — it  responds  to  those  excitations,  the  familiar
phsenomena  of  mental  life  are  produced  ?  Has  not  the  more
enlightened  psychology  of  modern  times  devoted  all  its
strength  to  this  problem,  partly  with  valuable  results,  partly,
so  far,  without  any  results  at  all  ?  Must  not  then  this  mental
nature,  this  self- existence  that  we  have  here  inconsiderately
characterized  as  the  essential  nature  of  Eealness,  be  rather
understood  and  explained  as  one  of  the  products  arising  from
conditions  which  act  upon  the  far  more  recondite  nature  of
that  which  is  properly  Eeal  and  which  is  incapable  of  being
intuited,  and  can  only  be  held  fast  in  the  subtlest  ontologic
abstractions  ?

I  may  easily  seem  to  be  contradicting  the  greater  part  of
what  I  have  already  said  when  I  pronounce  the  under-
taking here  indicated  to  be  a  decided  step  into  the  perverse
region  of  those  investigations  which  seek  to  know  by  what
machinery  reality  is  manufactured,  without  considering  that
there  cannot  well  be  any  machinery  unless  there  has  existed
previously  some  reality,  from  the  constituents  of  which,
and  according  to  the  already  valid  laws  of  which,  that
machinery  could  be  put  together.  We  are  tempted  to  take
this  step  wherever  our  interest  in  investigation  has  been  first

THE  KEAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  649

aroused  by  the  varying  values  of  certain  fundamental  pliseno-
mena  or  fundamental  facts,  for  the  alternating  occurrence  of
which  there  must  be  different  conditions  that  make  now  the
one  and  now  the  other  necessary.  And  if  we  have  moreover
had  full  opportunity  to  remark  that  even  diverse  phsenomena,
which  on  account  of  the  difference  of  their  content  seem  at
first  to  be  each  something  special  in  itself,  are  yet  dependent
on  mere  changes  of  magnitude  of  homogeneous  conditions,
we  are  likely  to  be  seized  by  a  sort  of  constructive  passion
from  which  nothing  is  safe,  and  which  would  end  by  deducing
the  whole  positive  content  of  real  things — the  place  of
which  in  the  world  we  have  to  explain — from  mere  modifi-
cations of  the  formal  conditions  upon  which  the  variations  of
those  places  depend.  However,  if  this  remark  is  to  be  of  any
use  to  us,  I  must  try  to  illustrate  it  by  reference  to  some
examples  which  are  not  alien  to  our  subject.

Our  eye  sees  sometimes  light  and  sometimes  shade,  and
sees  various  colours  one  after  the  other.  Now  when  the
student  has  learnt  that  these  changing  sensations  proceed
from  mathematical  differences  in  the  light  waves,  he  generally
becomes  inclined  to  assert  that  colours  are  nothing  whatever
but  different  vibrations  of  ether ;  though  he  may  perchance
bethink  himself  at  this  stage  of  his  scientific  knowledge  and
admit  that  they  do  indeed  proceed  from  those  vibrations,  but
yet  are  in  themselves  something  new  and  different,  namely
special  states  of  psychical  excitation  in  us.  But  now  perhaps
he  learns  in  psychology  that  we  have  reason  to  regard  even
these  qualitatively  different  impressions — indeed  even  those
sensations  of  the  different  senses  which  differ  so  as  to  be
incapable  of  comparison — as  mere  phsenomenal  forms,  under
which  the  soul  becomes  aware  of  a  countless  multitude  of
excitations,  which  qualitatively  are  quite  homogeneous,  and
are  only  quantitatively  or  formally  different ;  that  perhaps  to
a  sensation  of  colour  as  distinguished  from  the  hearing  of  a
musical  note  there  corresponds  only  a  more  intense  degree  of
disturbance,  or  one  that  takes  place  with  a  different  rhythm
in  the  succession  of  its  individual nervous  shocks,  but  that

650  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  III.

this  psychical  disturbance  or  movement  is  always  generically
the  same  in  both,  and  indeed  in  all  cases  of  sensation.  And
having  learnt  this  he  easily  grows  accustomed  to  look  down
upon  the  many-coloured  qualitative  variety  of  mental  phaeno-
raena  with  a  certain  feeling  of  superiority  as  a  sort  of  juggle
of  which  one  has  penetrated  the  secret ;  and  this  feeling  is
appropriately  expressed  thus : — Internal  phsenomena  are  not
actually  different  from  one  another  at  all,  they  only  appear  to
us  to  be  different,  being  in  truth  mere  formal  modifications  of
one  process  which  is  everywhere  in  essentials  the  same.

I  do  not  think  that  I  present  this  perverse  view  in  too
glaring  colours ;  it  is  a  fact  that  many  act  as  though  they
believed  at  the  moment  when  they  come  to  perceive  this
similarity  of  the  origin  of  psychical  processes,  that  their
dissimilarity  has  ceased  to  exist ;  they  forget  altogether  that
it  is  the  mode  in  which  these  supposed  modifications  of  one
homogeneous  process  appear  to  us,  that  is  the  very  point  with
which  we  are  concerned.  If  it  were  certain  past  a  doubt  that
the  sensations  of  light  and  those  of  sound  depend  upon  two
psychical  disturbances  which  at  most  differ  from  each  other
only  as  quantitatively  and  formally  as  vibrations  of  ether
from  sound  waves,  yet  the  disparateness  of  these  sensations,
in  as  far  as  felt,  is  not  thereby  done  away  with,  but  lasts  on
afterwards  just  as  it  did  before ;  their  worth  and  their  reality
are  not  lessened  by  the  fact  that  both  sensations  are  but
modes  in  which  the  processes  referred  to  appear  to  us ;  these
modes  of  appearance  are,  on  the  contrary,  real  permanent
mental  facts,  of  which  those  external  facts  of  physical  sense-
stimulation  or  the  psychical  disturbances  corresponding  to
them,  are  indeed  the  occasioning  causes,  but  the  nature  of
which  is  not  determined  by  those  causes,  and  the  difference
between  which  is  not  in  the  least  diminished  by  the  slighter
degree  of  difference  that  exists  between  tlieir  causes.  Or  if
we  hear  that  feelings  and  stirrings  of  the  will  are  really
nothing  more  than  manifold  pressures  and  movements  which
ideas  cause  in  one  another  by  their  reciprocal  action,  ought  we
to  allow  this  "  nothing  more  "  ? If  we  have  made  the  dis-

I

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  65t'

covery  that  they  are  nothing  more,  does  pain,  on  that  account,
cease  to  hurt,  or  can  we  root  out  from  our  consciousness  the
fact  that  a  motion  of  our  will  is  and  remains,  always  and  for
ever,  something  totally  different  from  a  non- voluntary  rise  and
subsidence  of  ideas  ?  Such  explanations  even  if  correct  teach
us  only  the  occasioning  causes  to  which  it  is  due  that  the
characteristic  content  of  mental  events  appears  upon  the
stage  of  consciousness,  they  do  not  inform  us  as  to  the  pro-
ducing causes  of  this  content ;  they  teach  us  to  know  condi-
tions upon  the  change  of  which  depend  alterations  of  the
consequences  attached  to  them,  but  the  dependence  of  these
alterations  is  regulated  in  such  a  peculiar  manner  that  from  a
comparison  of  two  values  of  the  condition,  no  thinking  can,
without  using  other  data  as  well,  divine  how  that  difference
of  the  two  results  will  appear  which  corresponds  to  the  given
difference  of  the  two  values  of  the  condition.  Hence  as  far
as  changing  action  depends  upon  altering  conditions,  so  far
(taking  the  sense  we  have  indicated)  has  science  in  general,
including  psychology,  to  solve  explanatory  and  constructive
problems.  It  may  seek  out  the  occasioning  conditions  of  the
various  forms  of  presentation  in  idea,  and  feeling  and  willing,
and  of  the  varying  course  of  these  changing  events  and  the
multiform  products  of  their  reciprocal  action ;  but  it  cannot
hope  to  make  out,  from  any  data,  how  it  can  happen  at  all
that  there  can  be  ideas,  feelings,  and  volitions,  and  that  one
inner  state  can  influence  another ;  still  less  may  it  believe  that
in  the  mere  explanation  of  instrumental  machinery  it  has
reached  the  essential  meaning  of  spiritual  events,  or  appre-
hended that  which  actually  and  in  truth  they  are,  as  contrasted
with  that  which  in  direct  inner  experience  they  appear  to  us
to  be.

§  4.  I  feel  that  my  remarks  so  far  have  been  devoted  to
blaming  admitted  errors,  and  that  they  have  not  had  sufficient
reference  to  the  case  before  us.  It  may  be  unhesitatingly
admitted  that  all  explanation  can  but  set  forth  the  inner
regularity  of  a  given  reality  in  its  changing  development,  and
cannot  deduce  back  until  it  reaches  either  the  simplest  elements

652  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  III.

of  action,  the  combinations  of  whicli  it  investigates,  or  the
original  proportions  between  them,  the  consequences  of  which
it  tries  to  trace.  But  within  the  boundary  lines  thus  drawn  may
we  not  yet  find  a  constructive  task  ?  For  the  different  funda-
mental phsenoraena  of  mental  life  are  not,  it  may  be  said,
given  to  us  in  experience  as  unconnected  occurrences,  each  of
which  changes  and  develops  according  to  its  own  law  and  in
dependence  on  the  alteration  of  conditions  that  are  valid  for
it  alone;  on  the  contrary,  they  occur  in  our  observation  as
states  of  beings,  and  indeed  as  all  states  of  one  being,  or  at
least  it  is  only  when  regarded  as  such  that  they  have  meaning
and  significance  for  us.  And  how  it  is  that  in  one  being  the
possibility  of  such  various  manifestations  can  exist,  and  can
exist  in  such  a  way  that  some  appear  under  some  conditions
and  others  under  other  conditions,  is  not  self-evident,  and  we
are  justified  in  attempting  to  investigate  the  inner  structure
which  this  being  must  have  in  order  that  it  may  be  mental ;
nothing  being  less  admissible  than  to  give  out  that  this  mental
nature  is  to  be  recognised  off-hand  as  being  in  general  the
original  nature  of  the  Eeal — as  though  the  nature  of  mind
involved  no  puzzle.

I  still,  however,  hold  to  my  opinion ;  only  I  understand
the  difiRculty  of  refuting  the  prejudices  opposed  to  it,  because
I  am  fully  conscious  of  the  power  of  those  impulses  which
continually  beguile  men  into  such  attempts.  We  have  an
ineradicable  inclination  to  regard  the  laws  which  enable  us  to
apprehend  the  development  of  any  real  being,  hecaiise  it
develops  thus  and  no  otherwise,  as  precedent  conditions  on
account  of  which  it  is  constrained  to  develop  thus ;  we  have
further  an  ineradicable  inclination  to  regard  the  "  contingent
aspects,"  the  analyses,  the  auxiliary  notions  and  relations  by
which  we  succeed  in  thinking  the  connection  between  real
things  when  they  already  exist,  as  actual  machinery  by  means
of  which  those  things  come  to  exist;  and  finally,  we  are
specially  inclined  to  reverence  analogies  to  which  we  have
become  accustomed  through  intercourse  with  the  world  of
sense  as  types  of  universal  validity,  to  which  all  reality  must

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  653

conform.  From  the  first  inclination  arises  the  habit  of
speaking  of  a  world  of  truths  preceding  the  world  of  realities
as  something  which  by  its  very  notion  is  earlier,  an  error  of
which  I  shall  soon  have  occasion  to  speak  more  at  length ;
the  third  inclination  produces  those  materialistic  conceptions
of  the  world  of  mind  to  the  refutation  of  which  we  decline  to
return  again ;  from  the  second  bias  that  we  mentioned  arises
the  mania  for  giving  to  that  which  is  most  real  and  most
original  a  still  more  secure  foundation  constructed  from  its
own  consequences.  How  this  is  to  be  understood  I  will  try
to  make  clear  with  such  means  as  I  can  here  make  use  of.

"We  may  say — not  with  exactitude,  but  as  helping  towards
comprehension — that  in  all  the  notions  of  things — of  their
unity,  their  states,  their  passion  and  action — by  which  we
introduce  order  and  connection  into  our  perceptions,  what  the
mind  in  effect  does  is  to  copy  the  general  features  of  its  own
nature,  and  because  it  feels  that  itself  and  its  reality  subsist
and  are  contained  in  them,  it  seeks  to  transfer  them  to
external  reality  too,  and  to  work  them  into  it,  as  the  only
characteristics  of  true  existence  which  it  knows.  But  in  being
thus  transferred,  these  features  lose  the  living  content  which
they  had  in  the  mind's  sense  of  self,  and  which  the  non-Ego,
observable  only  from  without,  cannot  be  regarded  by  mind  as
possessing  likewise ;  they  are  transformed  in  this  transference
to  forms  empty  of  content  which  do  no  more  than  preserve
and  express  the  modes  of  connection  which  both  relate  the
manifold  content  of  the  mind  to  it,  and  relate  the  constituent
parts  of  that  content  to  one  another.  In  self-consciousness
experience  of  the  Ego  as  the  subject  of  mental  life  is  so
immediate  that  it  brings  with  it  also  experience  of  what  is
meant  by  being  such  a  subject ;  at  present  it  is  the  fashion
for  knowledge  to  attenuate  the  living  intuition  of  the  Ego
into  the  formal  notion  of  a  substance  which  in  some  way,  not
intelligible  to  us,  renders  to  a  manifold  of  external  phaenomeua
the  same  office  of  a  subject  by  which  the  parts  of  that  mani-
fold are  held  together ;  remembrance,  by  which  the  soul  really
connects  into  one  all-embracing  consciousness  its  temporarily

e$4  BOOK  CL CBARtt  UL

s»p>ml<d  wtpmeMtt^  ftides  into  Um  lonMl  aokkm  of  at  unit^r
vith  selC  whkh  m  soma  v«^  w)u^  ire  oertadnly  cumot  tok«
in  aqppntoins  otuk  to  Amim  wnoottsooos  itnd  selfless  sab>
skSBOSs;  aotMNKS  of  stotos  lokd  «cliQ«s  ame  like  emplj  shsdo  V3
of  tiA  ^fatemt  Tolitioi^  «nd  peinM  sttB^riog  of  living  expwi>
«M3^  end  esUbli^  between  ^  sbedows  of  things  many  and
Tenons  alMdovs  of  conaeotMn&  And  then  the  soul  ha\*ing
in  its  intareonise  iri&  Ike  irorid  of  sense  beoome  eocnstomed
to  ^  nse  of  these  abstniClioBS»  it  tons*  ns  it  weie,  sniodaUy
against  itself  end  imagines  that  it  can  comprehend  its  own
natttie  only  bj  help  of  these  ontok^al  notions  which  from
the  Teij  begiinning  had  s^gnifioanoe  only  in  as  far  as  they  were
idkciMins — tifeon^  pele  and  ftdnt — of  the  miiuVs  own  nature.
And  finally,  it  readies  the  point  oi  no  longer  understanding
its  own  self,  and  hits  upon  the  devioe  of  enriching  its  nature
bj  a  ooie  of  nnoonscioiRS  sabstanoe  with  which  in  imagina-
tien  it  endows  itsdl^  and  in  wlu«^  it  tries  to  induce  self-con>
si^oiKaess  by  an  ingenioQsly  devised  system  of  stimulation.

That  this  must  always  happen,  that  there  is  in  the  very
nataie  of  the  soul  a  otaving  whidi  drives  it  to  bring  aU  reality,
indnding  ks  own  life,  nndo-  these  forms,  and  to  make  it  an
olget^  of  v^tedion,  is  a  fact  which  we  do  not  deny,  and  to
the  inevitahlaiess  of  which  we  have  already  referred  (cf.  i
Pl  626) ;  it  is  just  here  that  we  find  the  difficulties  with  which
at  this  poant  we  have  to  straggle.  But  it  is  possible,  never-
theless, to  be  oonataotts  that  all  those  ontological  notions  are
but  piodads  of  thought,  not  conditions  of  the  possibility  of
him  who  tiiinks  or  of  that  which  is  thought,  are  but  aspects
which  tmtii  weais  to  finite  mind,  and  not  the  very  form  of
troth  itself;  and  this  trae  state  of  the  case  forces  itself
npon  ns  on  diffident  occasions  with  different  d^;rees  of  clear-
ness Thns  we  ha^^pen  perchance  to  say,  Omr  Ego  jwttMim  aa^-
wJBMnMH ;  then  stnick  by  the  perveisity  of  mating  out
that  our  veiy  being  is  possessed  by  us,  and  that  the  most
essoktial  featme  of  oar  nature  is  a  possession  of  that  which
is  thus  poBseBsed,  we  amoid  our  expression,  and  say,  /  am  a
acmi;  \kA  evoi  so  we  oaSj  vml  the  still  miremoved  perplexity  ;

I

THE  HEAL  ASD  THE  WEAL.  655

we  know  now  no  mote  ibam  we  did  b^one  in  wbali  CMentMl
relations  the  mlfiect,  oopola,  and  pvedieate  of  diis  jndginept  caa
stand  to  one  aooUiar  as  kM^  as  tlief  aie  that  disdognUied,
And  we  make  op  our  minds  to  admit  tiiat  it  is  rain  to
attempt  to  s^axate  that  whidi  is  one  hy  expiemdng  it  in  tine
fonn  ot  a  jodgmot,  and  Ihea  bj  leeomiwdi^  tlie  parts  to
oonstrnet  a  unit j  wbidi  ean  ool j  be  known  in  dineet  intnitioii,
Bot  tbii^  win  sUn  go  coi  as  b^iwe^  and  the  atten^  wiU
ever  be  lenewed  Wheaevet  we  are  eomadenng  some  mHated
action  of  any  being,  tfae  rest  of  its  natme  appeam  a»  some-
tbing  constant  firoia  width  the  action  proceeds ;  and  continniiig
this  {oooess,  we  come  at  last  to  eontiaet  the  tetany  at  its
actions  and  pn^oties  witk  a  pomaneiit  root  from  wUdi  tJbef
arise,  and  divide  the  bong  into— (1)  something  that  is  ncdung;,
saffennotfaii^  and  does  nothing;  and  (2)  a  host  of  qualities  and
actitms  whidi  proceed  fiom  tiiis  something.  Hev^  after  some
conndeiataon,  there  is  a  division  of  views;  some  rescue  bangi
into  pore  activity  without  an  jthii^  that  acts,  while  othos  in
some  incomprdi^uiUe  wajr  eonneet  activity  with  somethiiig  that
is  inactive ;  if  we  asf  to  both.  The  tiiii^  wfaieii  acts  is  ftadi
the  beln^  tiien  this  and  everjr  similar  expresnoii  invcives
the  error  o€  regarding  the  article  as  indicating  the  true  being
whidi  onfy  participates  in  action.  When  i^on  tibe  j^pliea-
tion  oi  an  ext^nal  stimnlns  a  sensation  arisei^  it  seems  as
though  it,  being  a  reaction  of  the  soul,  must  have  been  preceded
by  some  passion  whidi  calls  it  fcHth,  and  to  whidi  it  corre-
^onds;  thus  we  come  to  imagine  unconsrions  stiningi  of  the
soul,  impresnons  whidi  are  smandtd  by  sensation,  as  by  an
elastic  rebound;  cm  the  other  hand,  we  reflect  that  if  tibe
reaction  is  to  proceed  from  the  pisrinn  there  must  be  pae
moment  in  which  they  are  both  coincident  as  an  indivisiUe
action;  but  itforaae  moment,  uiqr  not  Cdt  all?  aadwhymot
admit  that  tiie  distinction  between  excitation  and  reaction  is  a
fiction  of  theory,  as  induyenaable  lor  many  purposes  of  egm-
pazii^  and  combining  eognition,  but  in  fret  joit  as  unreal  as  tiie
movmnents  along  two  sides  of  a  paolldogam  into  widtkwe
arlnfaarflyanalyBe some  given sim^ movement f Whensome

656  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  III.

idea  hinders  or  obscures  in  consciousness  some  other  idea
differing  in  content,  and  perhaps  not  capable  of  being  com-
pared with  it,  or  when  in  external  Nature  two  substances
differing  in  appearance  produce  in  one  another  movement  or
equilibrium,  we  draw  the  conclusion  that  both  must,  notwith-
standing, have  a  hidden  similarity  in  order  that  they  may  be
able  to  act  upon  one  another,  and  regard  them  as  differing
values  of  a  homogeneous  process  or  a  homogeneous  substance.
But  why  not  admit  that  their  homogeneity  consists  in  just
that  capacity  of  reciprocal  action  which  belongs  to  them, — that
is,  that  they  are  in  truth  only  equivalent,  and  not  homogeneous  in
the  sense  that  they  are  really  constituted  by,  or  have  arisen  from,
some  one  third  thing, — and  that  this  reduction  of  elements,
qualitatively  different  but  equivalent  in  working  to  different
quantities  of  one  identical  substratum,  is  indeed  a  fiction  that
is  very  convenient  for  our  calculations,  but  one  that  certainly
needs  a  special  proof  of  its  essential  truth  if  we  are  to  accept
it  as  valid  ?

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  such  examples ;  cognition
everywhere  seeks  to  make  clear  to  itself  the  inner  connection
of  the  living  nature  of  reality,  by  such  analysis  or  reference
to  co-ordinates  as  it  may  find  convenient — which  after-
wards it  easily  comes  to  regard  as  essential  determinations
of  the  being  of  things.  The  temptation  to  this  is  not
equally  great  in  all  cases.  Often  the  nature  of  the  truth
which  applies  to  all  reality  admits  of  our  reaching  the  same
goal  from  different  starting-points  and  by  different  roads,  and
then  we  easily  convince  ourselves  that  none  of  these  roads  is
that  taken  by  the  thing  itself  and  that  the  relation  of  the
thing  to  the  system  of  co-ordinates  by  the  help  of  which  we
seek  to  determine  it  is  a  relation  of  indifference;  in  other
cases — among  which  we  must  reckon  those  simplest  and  most
general  ontological  notions  of  which  we  have  been  speaking —
we  have  not  such  a  choice,  but  are  constrained  always  to
return  to  the  same  modes  of  conceiving  reality.  And  then
these  inevitably  appear  to  us  as  conditions  which  not  only
make  our  knowledge  of  the  thing  possible,  but  make  the  thing

THE  REAL  AND  THE  IDEAL.  657

itself  possible  ;  and  this  is  the  case  to  such  a  degree  that
doubtless  the  conclusion  of  this  long  exposition  of  mine  will
be  rewarded  by  the  incredulous  question,  But  how  must
it  come  to  pass  that  minds  can  suffer  these  states  and
develop  these  reactions  ?  This  is  once  more  the  question
that  demands  to  know  how  reality  is  created  ;  and  we  once
more  answer  it  by  saying  that  it  does  not  seem  to  us  as
though  it  must  come  to  pass  that  this  should  he  possible,
but  that  minds  do  so  suffer  and  react  that  considered  in
detail  there  is  a  process  of  the  development  of  events  one
out  of  another,  from  point  to  point.  We  shall  soon  have
occasion  to  return  to  this  question ;  and  we  will  defer  until
then  the  explanation  of  any  obscurities  which  may  yet  remain
in  these  considerations,  the  results  of  which  we  shall  now  try
to  formulate,  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  done  the  results
previously  reached.

§  5.  VII.  The  notions  by  means  of  which  we  seek  to  deter-
mine the  nature  and  connection  of  things,  make  demands  with
regard  to  which  on  the  one  hand  we  cannot  understand  how
things  thought  as  selfless  can  set  about  fulfilling  them,  and
of  which  on  the  other  hand  it  is  clear  that  the  nature  of
things  thought  as  it  has  hitherto  been  thought  excludes  their
fulfilment.  For  anything  that  we  could  imagine  as  an  accom-
plished and  concretely  intuitable  fulfilment  of  these  postulates
— not  merely  a  fulfilment  demanded  and  indicated  in  abstract
formulae — is  only  possible  in  some  mind,  in  virtue  of  the  peculiar
nature  which  distinguishes  it  from  that  which  is  not  mind.

VIII.  If  now  that  which  we  must  require  from  things  as
the  subjects  of  phsenomena  at  the  same  time  cannot  be
performed  by  them  as  long  as  they  are  things,  then  either
things  cannot  exist,  or  they  must  exist  otherwise  than  they
have  hitherto  been  thought  to  exist.  Either  only  minds  exist,
and  the  whole  world  of  things  is  a  pheenomenon  in  minds,  or
things  which  appear  to  us  as  permanent  yet  selfless  points  of
departure,  intersection,  and  termination  of  action,  are  beings
which  share  with  minds  in  various  degrees  the  general
characteristic  of  mentality,  namely  self-existence.

VOL.  n.  2  T

658  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  HI.

IX.  The  Eealness  of  things  and  their  self- existence  are
notions  which'  have  precisely  the  same  significance.  The
meaning  of  this  assertion  is  twofold.  First,  that  a  mind
which  continues  immanent  in  the  Infinite  as  a  state,  activity,
or  modification  of  it,  directly  that  (notwithstanding  this
immanence)  it  exists  for  self,  has  in  this  very  self-existence
the  fullest  Eealness,  and  does  not  obtain  Eealness  by  being
detached  from  the  Infinite  and  attaining  the  independence  of
an  existence  out  of  it ;  self-existence  is  the  positive  content  of
this  independence  for  which  we  seek,  the*  meaning  of  which
becomes  quite  incomprehensible  if  it  is  regarded  as  some
different  kind  of  formal  relation  to  the  Infinite  into  which
that  which  possesses  self-existence  has  yet  to  enter.  But  our
proposition  asserts  in  the  second  place  (and  this  second
assertion  is  most  intimately  connected  with  the  first)  that
Eealness  is  not  to  be  understood  as  a  consequence  attached  to
self- existence  as  something  to  be  earned  by  it,  and  hence  dis-
tinct from  it.  Even  the  expression.  Mind  is  Eeal  in  virtue
of  its  self-existence,  has  not  in  this  reference  the  exactness
which  we  would  desire  ;  for  that  in  virtue  of  allows  of  the
misinterpretation  that  Eealness  may  depend  upon  certain
general  conditions,  which  mind  may  fulfil  by  its  self-existence,
but  which  something  else,  for  instance  selfless  things,  may
fulfil  in  some  other  way.  But  there  are  no  such  conditions ;
there  is  no  law  precedent  to  all  reality,  according  to  the  pre-
scriptions of  which  Eealness  and  not-Eealness  are  distributed
among  all  that  is  conceivable.  It  is  only  the  living  mind
that  is,  and  nothing  is  before  it  or  external  to  it ;  but  it  exists
in  such  a  way  that  it  can  only  make  its  own  existence  and
action  objects  of  reflection  by  giving  to  their  manifold  content
a  framework  of  abstractions,  connections,  and  other  auxiliary
constructions  by  which  that  content  is  divided,  combined,  and
systematized — and  these  easily  come  to  appear  to  it  as  not
merely  conditions  of  its  thought  about  itself,  but  as  being  also
conditions  of  its  reality.

I

CHAPTEE IV.

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.

Faith  and  Thought — Evidence  of  the  Existence  of  God — Impersonal  Forms  of
the  Supreme  Being — Ego  and  Non-Ego — Objections  to  the  Possibility  of
the  Personality  of  the  Infinite — Summary.

^  1.  /^UR  exposition,  which  is  now  hastening  to  a
V^'  conclusion,  must,  for  brevity's  sake,  be  allowed  to
omit  the  mention  of  middle  terms  so  obvious  as  to  be  easily
supplied  by  the  reader.  Our  reflections  hitherto  have  been
busy  about  the  nature  of  finite  things  and  the  possible  modes
of  conceiving  their  reciprocal  connection,  but  we  have  not
spent  much  pains  in  attempting  to  elucidate  the  notion  of
that  One  Being  which  we  have  notwithstanding  regarded  as
the  indispensable  presupposition  of  all  intelligibility  in  finite
things.  The  course  of  our  investigation  would  now  naturally
lead  us  to  this  attempt ;  for  however  perseveringly  we  may
have  had  to  turn  away  from  every  expectation  of  an  explana-
tion as  to  how  reality  comes  to  exist,  yet  in  the  assertion  of  a
dependence  of  the  finite  many  upon  the  infinite  One  there  is
involved  the  assertion  of  a  permanent  relation  of  real  to  real ;
and  to  determine  as  far  as  possible  the  meaning  of  this  rela-
tion is  a  task  which  we  are  bound  to  recognise  as  admissible.
But  it  would  not  be  useful  here  to  carry  on  this  investigation
to  further  developments  logically  resulting  from  the  purely
metaphysical  motives  that  have  hitherto  been  its  mainspring  ;
we  find  such  development  of  it  already  existing  in  the  region
of  religious  thought — a  rich  and  full  development,  having  a
form  which  must  attract  our  attention  in  a  high  degree  for
this  very  reason,  that  it  seeks  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  heart
and  the  conscience  as  well  as  of  speculative  knowledge.  To
this  familiar  development  we  will  turn  and  take  as  the  object  of

6j9

660  BOOK  IX, CHAPTER  IV.

our  reflection,  not  the  metaphysical  postulate  of  the  Infinite,
but  instead  of  it  the  full  and  complete  concept  of  the  God
who  is  to  realize  this  postulate.

Here  we  must  think,  at  least  for  a  moment,  of  the  doubt
which  may  arise  at  this  point,  reminding  us  of  the  resultless-
ness  of  philosophic  investigations  concerning  those  ultimate
questions  which  only  the  new  and  special  faculty  of  Faith  is
competent  to  answer.  Whatever  may  be  thought  concerning
the  origin  of  religious  truths,  the  view  taken  will  unquestion-
ably leave  something  to  be  done  by  scientific  cognition.  If
religion  were  a  pure  product  of  human  reason,  philosophy
would  be  the  only  competent  organ  of  its  discovery  and  inter-
pretation. If  reason  is  not  of  itself  capable  of  finding  the
highest  truth,  but  on  the  contrary  stands  in  need  of  a  revela-
tion which  is  either  contained  in  some  divine  act  of  historic
occurrence,  or  is  continually  repeated  in  men's  hearts,  still
reason  must  be  able  to  understand  the  revealed  truth  at  least
so  far  as  to  recognise  in  it  the  satisfying  and  convincing
conclusion  of  those  upward-soaring  trains  of  thought  which
reason  itself  began,  led  by  its  own  needs,  but  was  not  able  to
bring  to  an  end.  For  all  religious  truth  is  a  moral  good  not
a  mere  object  of  curiosity.  It  may  therefore  include  some
mysteries  inaccessible  to  reason,  but  will  only  do  so  in  as  far
as  these  are  indispensable  in  order  to  combine  satisfactorily
other  and  obvious  points  of  great  importance  ;  the  secrecy  of  any
mystery  is  in  itself  no  reason  for  venerating  it ;  a  secrecy  that
was  permanent  and  in  its  nature  eternal  would  only  be  a
reason  for  indifference  towards  anything  which  should  thus
refuse  to  be  brought  into  connection  with  mental  needs ;  and
finally,  above  all  things,  to  revel  in  secrets  which  are  destined
to  remain  secrets  is  necessarily  not  in  accord  with  the  notion
of  a  revelation.

But  must  that  which  is  a  secret  for  cognition  be  always
really  a  secret  ?  Does  not  the  nature  of  faith  consist  in  this,
that  it  affords  a  certainty  of  that  which  no  cognition  can
grasp,  as  well  of  what  it  is,  as  that  it  is  ?  And  does  not  all
science itself,  when  it  has  finished  its  investigations  of  par-

i

THE  PEKSONALITY  OF  GOD.  661

ticulars,  come  back  to  grasp,  in  a  faith  of  which  the  certainty
is  indemonstrable  and  yet  irrefragable,  those  highest  truths  on
which  the  evidence  of  other  knowledge  depends  ?  There  is
certainly  a  germ  of  truth  in  this  rejoinder ;  but  not  the  less
clear  is  the  essential  difference  that  separates  such  scientific
faith  from  religious  faith.  It  is  only  in  universal  propositions,
which  in  innumerable  conceivable  cases  indicate  those  modes
of  relating  a  manifold  which  occur  under  definite  conditions,
that  scientific  faith  places  immediate  confidence.  When  it
declares  that  everything  which  is  thinkable  is  identical  with
itself,  that  similar  things  under  similar  conditions  produce
similar  results,  and  under  dissimilar  conditions  dissimilar
results,  and  that  every  change  is  preceded  by  a  cause — all
these  propositions  are  universal  truths  which  tell  us  indeed
what  must  necessarily  happen  or  take  place  if  any  case  in
which  they  are  applicable  should  arise,  but  tell  us  nothing
whatever  about  the  actual  occurrence  of  something  real.  The
essential  truths  of  religion  have  all  an  opposite  character;
they  are  assurances  of  the  reality  of  some  being,  or  event,  or
series  of  events,  assurances  of  a  reality  of  which  the  content
when  it  has  once  been  recognised  may  certainly  become
indirectly  a  source  of  universal  laws,  but  which  in  itself  is  not
a  law  but  a  fact.  Now  those  universal  truths  in  which
scientific  cognition  puts  absolute  faith,  are  at  bottom  but  the
very  nature  of  cognizing  reason  itself,  expressed  in  the  form  of
principles  of  its  procedure,  and  it  is  conceivable  that  reason,
unable  to  escape  from  its  own  nature,  may  be  overpowered  by
the  evidence  of  these  rules  of  thinking,  which  to  it  are  inevit-
able. But  not  more  than  its  own  being  can  be  known  to  the
mind  in  immediate  consciousness;  it  cannot  have  innate
revelations  of  facts  other  than  itself,  however  great  and
incomparable  the  value  and  significance  of  these  facts  may  be.
Eeligious  faith  is  comparable  not  to  this  immediate  evidence
of  ultimate  principles  but  to  another  element  that  co-operates
in  the  construction  of  knowledge — namely  to  the  intuition  by
which  content  is  given  to  those  principles,  and  by  which
those  universal  laws  are  supplied  with  cases  to  which  they

662  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

may  be  applied.  Even  in  sense -perception  we  receive  the
content  of  sensations  just  as  revelations  which  can  only  be
accepted  as  they  are ;  we  have  no  reason,  we  have  no  need,
we  have  no  means  to  prove  the  reality  of  an  impression  of
colour,  nor  has  knowledge  any  conceivable  task  adapted  to
show  how  this  colour  should  appear.  It  is,  and  is  as  if  is,  by
immediate  revelation  which  we  can  but  receive.  The  same  as
we  here  experience  under  the  influence  of  physical  stimuli,
we  may  experience  from  direct  divine  operation  within  our
heart ;  thus  faith  would  be  an  intuition  of  those  supersensuous
facts  revealed  to  us  by  this  operation.  There  is  truth  in  this
— more  truth  than  in  the  previous  comparison.  But  every
sensuous  impression  regarded  in  itself  is  but  a  way  in  which
we  are  affected,  some  phase  of  our  own  condition  ;  in  itself  it
gives  no  knowledge  of  any  matter  of  fact,  taken  alone  it  con-
stitutes no  experience.  Here  again  it  is  only  our  thought
which,  mastering  the  manifold  revelations  of  sense,  compares
and  combines  them,  or  interprets  given  combinations,  thus
arriving  through  them  at  the  knowledge  of  some  fact.  We
can  hardly  picture  to  ourselves  the  workings  of  God  upon  the
heart  otherwise  than  after  this  pattern ;  we  cannot  imagine
the  recognition  of  any  fact  as  something  that-  can  be  simply
communicated,  something  that  reaches  the  mind  ready  made
and  without  any  activity  on  its  part,  we  can  only  imagine
that  occasion  can  be  given  to  the  mind  to,  as  it  were,  produce
such  recognition  by  exercising  this  activity,  and  in  this  it  is
that  every  appropriation  of  a  truth  must  consist.  As  sense
in  itself  furnishes  merely  an  impression,  so  also  this  divine
influence  would  produce  merely  a  feeling,  a  mood,  a  mode  of
affection ;  what  is  thus  experienced  becomes  a  revelation  only
through  some  work  of  reflection  which  analyses  its  content  and
reduces  it  to  coherence  by  clear  notions  that  are  capable  of
being  combined  with  our  ideas  of  the  real  world.

It  will  not  always  be  possible  for  this  to  happen  ;  much  of
this  inner  life  of  the  believing  heart  must  always  remain
purely  subjective  experience,  and  these  incommunicable  states
will  by  no  means  contain  only  that  which  is  of  least  value  in

I

THE  PilRSONALITY  OF  GOD.  663

our  faith  ;  on  the  contrary,  that  which  is  best  and  fairest  and
most  fruitful  in  our  experience  will  always  be  realized  in  us
only  in  the  shape  of  these  living  emotions  which  are  superior
to  the  forms  of  knowledge.  It  cannot  be  our  business  to
interpret  this  wealth  of  inner  experience — to  interpret  either
that  in  it  which  transcends  knowledge,  or  that  which  is  too
insignificant  to  become  matter  of  knowledge.  The  only  part
that  can  hold  our  attention  is  that  which  is  not  only  beheld
by  the  individual  in  his  rapture,  but  which  every  one  can  com-
municate to  others,  which  is  capable  of  becoming  common
property,  and  which,  by  arguments  that  all  human  reason
must  recognise,  he  can  either  prove  as  truth,  or  justify  to
faith  as  a  convincing  probability,  by  which  formidable  objec-
tions are  refuted,  and  thus  a  possible  solution  furnished  of
problems  that  press  upon  us.

§  2.  Eeason  at  one  time  tried  to  solve  the  essential  part  of
this  problem  of  interpreting  and  defending  the  content  of  faith
by  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God.  It  would  be  unfair  to
reproach  this  form  of  procedure  with  the  contradiction  of  try-
ing to  exhibit  that  which  is  highest  and  (by  its  own  assump-
tion) unconditioned,  as  being,  notwithstanding  the  necessary
and  conditioned  result  of  truths,  the  validity  of  which  must —
since  they  are  to  be  accepted  as  grounds  of  proof — be  earlier
and  more  fundamental  than  the  reality  of  that  which  is  proved
by  them.  Although  this  error  has  not  always  been  avoided,
yet  these  proofs — like  all  investigations  which  strive  to  go
back  from  results  to  their  causes — are  only  intended  to
mediate  our  knowledge  of  the  principle  by  those  of  its  conse-
quences which  are  given,  and  with  this  view  they  presuppose
the  absolute  validity  of  a  truth  which  knits  all  the  world
together,  and  which  allows  of  our  divining  the  notiora  naturce
from  the  notiora  nobis.  But  the  way  in  which  the  under-
taking has  been  carried  out  seems  to  show  that  human  insight
has  not  received  in  sufficient  completeness  those  data  of  reality
which  it  needs  in  order  that  it  may,  under  the  guidance  of
general  principles  of  reason,  reach  with  exactitude  and  com-
pleteness the  end  to  which  it  strains,  and  this  even  if  we  do

664  BOOK  IX. CHAPTEE  IV.

not  reckon  those  chance  wanderings  by  the  way  due  to  defec-
tive criticism  of  the  desired  end  to  which  we  were  pressing  on.
We  will  now  only  take  a  brief  retrospective  view  of  this
region  of  thought,  to  which  previous  reflections  have  already
sufficiently  introduced  us.

The  Cosmological  Proof  concludes  from  the  contingent  and
conditioned  character  of  everything  in  the  world  to  the  exist-
ence of  a  Necessary  and  Unconditioned  Being,  and  it  seems  to
it  that  nothing  but  an  absolutely  perfect  being  can  be  thus
unconditioned.  We  call  that  contingent  which  in  the  realiza-
tion of  some  intention  occurs  as  an  unintended  and  accessory
result  —  occurs  because  the  means  which  we  must  use,
possess,  besides  the  properties  by  which  they  serve  our
purpose,  others  which  for  our  ends  are  indifferent  or  even
obstructive — properties  which,  since  they  are  there,  cannot  be
prevented  from  having  their  own  effect,  as  far  as  general  laws
permit.  If  we  transfer  the  application  of  this  word  contingent
to  the  course  of  Nature,  attributing  intentional  design  to  that
course  as  a  coherent  whole,  then  contingent  signifies  every-
thing that  is  not  part  of  Nature's  plan,  but  only  some  un-
avoidable consequence  of  the  means  and  laws  by  which  Nature
proceeds  at  every  step.  Hence  the  contingent  being  without
end  and  aim,  it  has  only  grounds  and  causes  by  which  it  is
produced  in  the  coherent  whole  of  reality ;  but  as  external  to
this  whole,  neither  being  nor  action  considered  in  themselves
can  be  either  contingent  or  necessary.  For  that  which  in
such  case  would  be  signified  by  the  name  contingent — exist-
ence which  might  be  non-existent  or  might  be  other  than  it
is — .is  not  a  special  and  more  imperfect  kind  of  existence,  in
contrast  to  which  some  other  and  better  kind  might  be
imagined,  but  any  part  of  reality,  considered  as  detached  from
the  rest,  is  contingent  simply  in  the  sense  that  its  non-
existence, or  its  existence  otherwise  than  as  it  is,  is  con-
ceivable. There  is  nothing  which  is  necessary  and  of  which
the  non-existence  is  impossible,  except  the  conditioned,  which
as  consequent  is  determined  by  some  antecedent,  as  an  effect
by  some  cause,  and  as  a  means  by  its  end ;  but  the  notion  of

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  665

a  beiD^  isolated  and  conditioned  by  nothing,  and  yet  possessed
of  necessary  existence,  is  wholly  impossible.  If,  therefore,
contingency  is  so  often  rejected  as  belonging  to  the  ultimate
reason  of  the  universe  and  necessity  so  eagerly  claimed  for
it,  this  happens  because  both  expressions,  having  lost  their
speculative  meaning,  have  come  to  be  used  as  determinations
of  value.  Taken  thus,  contingent  connotes  that  which  does
indeed  exist,  but  has  not  any  significance,  for  the  sake  of
which  it  need  exist ;  necessary  connotes  something  not  that
must  be  but  that  has  such  unconditional  value  that  it  seems
in  virtue  of  this  value  to  deserve  also  unconditional  existence.
Only  in  such  a  sense  can  it  be  required  that  the  Supreme
Principle  of  the  universe  should  be  necessary.  But  to  demand
that  God  should  be  represented  not  only  as  really  existent,
but  as  being  obliged  to  exist,  would  be  wholly  erroneous  and
involve  a  confusion  of  notions.  All  religious  needs  would  be
perfectly  satisfied  by  proof  of  His  reality;  to  wish  to  prove  His
necessity,  would  not  only  be  to  exaggerate  our  demands  in  a
wholly  useless  manner,  but  would  in  fact  also  lead  to  the
contradiction  of  conceiving  God  as  dependent  upon  some
being  superior  to  Himself,  and  containing  the  constraining
cause  of  His  existence.

The  other  part  of  the  Cosmological  Proof  also  gives  occasion
for  similar  remarks.  Perfection  is  an  unequivocal  predicate
only  when  it  denotes  agreement  between  the  nature  of  an
object  and  some  standard  to  which  that  nature  ought  to  con-
form. Hence  it  is  only  failure  to  accomplish  that  which  is
due  which  is  imperfection,  but  a  thing  is  not  imperfect  because
we  do  not  find  in  it  some  merely  conceivable  excellence.
That  we  do  yet  in  such  a  case  speak  of  imperfection,  proceeds
from  the  fact  that  the  word  perfection  has  also  lost  its  specu-
lative meaning  of  conformity  to  a  standard,  and  has  become
an  independent  designation  of  that  which  is  directly  commend-
able, and  worthy  in  itself.  Now  if  a  thing  does  not  fulfil  the
obligations  of  its  own  nature,  we  may  perhaps  have  reason  to
assume  that  it  has  been  restrained  by  some  foreign  power
from  the  attainment  of  that  to  which  it  was  destined ;  but  the

666  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

mere  absence  of  some  conceivable  beauty  or  excellence  does
not  show  that  that  which  in  this  sense  is  imperfect  is
either  dependent  or  conditioned.  For,  in  fact,  unconditioned
existence  may  belong  to  that  which  is  indifferent  and  petty
as  well  as  to  that  which  is  significant  and  great,  and  is  not
the  exclusive  privilege  of  that  which  is  most  excellent.

Thus  then  the  Cosmological  Proof  could  only  conclude  from
the  conditionalness  and  conditioned  necessity  of  all  individual
real  things  in  the  universe,  to  an  ultimate  Real  Being  which,
without  being  conditioned  by  anything  else,  simply  is,  and
simply  is  what  it  is,  and  finally  may  be  regarded  as  the
sufficient  reason  through  which  all  individual  reality  is,  and
is  what  it  is.  And  this  way  of  looking  at  the  proof  clearly
shows  that  it  cannot  of  itself  attain  to  the  religious  conception
of  a  God,  but  only  to  the  metaphysical  conception  of  an
Unconditioned.  And  it  is  not  even  able  to  establish  the  unity
of  this  Unconditioned.  It  is  indeed  possible  that  at  a  further
stage  of  development  the  demand  for  unconditionalness  may
be  found  to  have  connected  with  it  a  demand  for  unity  too ;
but  this  connection  has  not  been  discovered  by  the  proof
which  we  are  considering,  and  hence  it  does  not  refute  the
assumption  of  an  indefinite  plurality  of  cosmic  beginnings,  of
a  plurality  of  unconditioned  Eeal  beings,  in  which,  on  the  other
hand,  students  of  Nature  may  hope  to  find  an  explanation
of  the  multiplicity  of  phsenomena  more  easily  than  in  the
unity  of  the  Supreme  Principle.

The  Teleologic  Proof  seeks  to  attain  certainty  of  the  reality
of  God  from  the  purposiveness  in  the  world.  In  order  to  be
convincing,  it  would  have  strictly  to  fulfil  several  require-
ments with  regard  to  which  we  have  long  ago  seen  that  it
can  satisfy  them  only  with  various  degrees  of  probability.  It
would  first  have  to  show  that  there  is  in  the  world  a  pur-
posive connection  which  cannot  result  from  an  undesigned
co-operation  of  forces,  but  must  have  been  designed  by  some
intelligence.  But  we  have  seen  that  even  conscious  design
can  effect  the  realization  of  its  purpose  only  by  means  of  instru-
ments, from  certain  conjunctions  of  which  that  which  is  desired

I

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  667

proceeds  as  a  necessary  result ;  and  that  even  the  conjunction  of
instruments  for  this  result  is  only  possible  when  the  conjoining
design  works  also  upon  each  of  them  with  a  blind  force,
which  in  accordance  with  general  laws  is  able  to  move  it  in
the  way  necessary  to  bring  it  into  such  conjunction  with  the
rest.  Hence  though  it  may  be  in  a  high  degree  improbable
it  yet  remains  possible  that  a  course  of  Nature  destitute  of
design  may  of  itself  have  taken  all  the  steps,  which  in  oider  to
realize  a  purpose  must  have  been  taken  under  the  guidance  of
design ;  and  therefore  this  first  requirement  cannot  be  fulfilled.

And  we  do  not  succeed  better  in  fulfilling  the  second
requirement — in  showing  that  purposiveness  does  not  occur
merely  here  and  there  but  that  it  pervades  the  whole  world
harmoniously  and  without  exception,  so  that  not  merely  do
intelligent  actions  occur  in  it,  but  the  whole  is  embraced  in
the  unity  of  one  supreme  design.  How  little  does  our  actual
experience  suffice  to  show  this  !  How  much  seems  to  us
wholly  inexplicable,  purposeless,  even  obstructive  to  ends  of
which  we  had  assumed  the  existence !  The  few  brilliant
examples  of  a  harmony  that  we  can  at  least  partly  recognise,
which  are  presented  principally  by  the  animate  creation,  may
w^ell  confirm  an  already  existent  faith  in  God,  in  the  conviction
that  in  that  also  which  we  do  not  yet  understand  the  unity
of  the  same  wisdom  may  work  purposively ;  but  empiric
knowledge  of  the  purpose  in  the  world  does  not  furnish  the
means  necessary  for  enabling  any  one  to  attain  indisputable
faith  who  does  not  yet  possess  it.  Taken  alone  it  would  much
more  easily  produce  the  polytheistic  intuition  of  a  plurality
of  divine  beings,  each  of  which  rules  over  a  special  department
of  !N"ature  as  its  special  genius,  and  the  varying  governments  of
which  agree  so  far  as  to  attain  a  certain  general  compatibility,
but  not  a  harmony  that  is  altogether  without  exceptions.

Not  merely  the  defectiveness  of  the  scientific  knowledge
which  we  have  through  experience  but  also  internal  difficulties
hinder  the  fulfilment  of  the  third  requirement — that,  namely,
of  showing  that  creative  wisdom  in  carrying  out  its  designs
never  experiences  opposition,  and  is  never  forced  to  produce

668  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

that  which  is  even  only  indifferent  as  regards  its  purposes  ;
but  only  if  this  were  so  would  wisdom  be  omnipotent.  Not
merely,  however,  does  observation  show  us  much  which  at
least  our  limited  knowledge  can  understand  only  as  an  acci-
dental and  accessory  effect  of  the  struggle  between  a  formative
design  and  the  independent  and  resisting  nature  of  the
material  to  be  formed;  but,  moreover,  general  reflection
cannot  get  clear  the  notion  of  design  without  contrasting
with  it  some  material  independent  of  it  by  elaborating  which
it  attains  realization ;  and  thus  all  our  consideration  of  purpose
leads  us  only  to  the  notion  of  a  governor  of  the  universe  and
not  to  that  of  a  creator,  which  was  what  we  sought.

Finally,  how  little  men  have  succeeded  in  fulfilling  the
fourth  requirement,  and  in  proving  the  unconditional  worth
and  the  sacredness  of  the  designs  which  we  plainly  see  pursued
in  the  world,  is  taught  by  a  glance  at  the  development  of  the
doctrines  which  attempt  this  proof.  For  has  not  philosophy
often  pointed  out  to  us  as  supreme  and  unconditionally  sacred
cosmic  ends  much  in  which  living  feeling  can  find  no  worth
at  all  ?  Have  not  popular  faith  and  dogmatic  theology  found
cause  in  the  ills  of  the  world,  and  the  logical  consistency  with
which  evil  develops,  to  divide  the  dominion  of  the  world
between  God  and  the  devil,  taking  comfort  in  the  thought
that  even  of  this  apparent  discord  there  may  be  some  explana-
tion inaccessible  to  human  reason  ?  But  though  that  which  is
inaccessible  to  human  reason  may  indeed  be  an  object  of  faith,
it  cannot  furnish  any  proof  that  such  faith  is  true;  and
thus  the  Teleological  Proof  is  destitute  of  all  demonstrative
force,  however  great  and  unmistakeable  may  be  the  efficacy
with  which  it  brings  together  for  the  strengthening  of  faith  all
that  is  best  in  secular  knowledge.

Perhaps,  if  we  were  to  ask  less,  we  should  on  the  whole
obtain  more,  and  the  fundamental  thoughts  which  animate
these  proofs  may  be  not  incapable  of  being  turned  to  account
in  another  way.  The  Cosmological  Proof  prematurely  pushed
its  demand  for  the  full  and  complete  concept  of  God  into  an
assertion  of  the  supreme  perfection  of  the  unconditioned,  not

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  669

having  as  yet  established  the  unity  of  that  unconditioned.
This  it  could  have  done  if  it  had  considered  more  searchingly
what  is  involved  in  the  thought  of  the  conditioned  existence
of  things,  in  the  thought  of  any  ordered  course  of  the  world.
Not  the  purpose  in  the  world,  for  this  is  subject  to  doubt,
but  the  fact  that  there  is  a  cosmic  course  in  which  events
are  connected  according  to  laws,  must  have  led  it  to  the
necessary  unity  of  that  which  is  the  substantial  basis  of  the
world.  But  we  will  not  now  return  to  this  consideration,
which  we  discussed  at  an  earlier  stage,  and  to  which  we
also  devoted  the  beginning  of  this  last  division  of  our
inquiry.  We  found — so  we  thought — the  impossibility  of  that
pluralistic  theory  of  the  world  which  presupposes  a  plurality
of  original  Eeal  beings,  independent  of  one  another,  and  then
imagines  that  from  the  reciprocal  actions  of  these  according
to  general  laws,  a  cosmic  order  may  be  produced.  If  it  had
really  considered  deeply  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  one
truth  holds  of  many  things,  and  that  for  the  many,  of  which
each  at  first  existed  in  a  world  of  its  own,  there  is  yet  the
possibility  of  a  community,  in  which  these  may  act  upon  one
another,  it  would  have  found  that  both  these  conceptions  are
unthinkable  without  an  original  unity  of  existence  of  all  that
is  real — the  activity  of  this  reality,  after  it  works  and
whilst  it  works,  being  capable  of  appearing  as  action  which  in
an  orderly  fashion  ia  bound  together  by  one  universal  truth,
and  produced  by  connections  between  the  separate  elements.
This  unity  of  that  which  while  unconditioned  conditions  all
finite  things,  having  been  established,  it  became  permissible
to  try  and  determine  the  notion  thus  obtained — the  notion  of
an  Infinite  Substance — by  those  more  significant  predicates
by  which  it  was  transformed  into  the  notion  of  a  living  God.

What  the  Teleologic  Proof  has  attempted  to  contribute  here,
seems  to  me  to  have  been  more  impressively  stated  in  the
despised  form  of  the  Ontologic  Proof,  though  it  is  true  that
in  the  scholastic  form  given  to  this  proof  not  much  of  what
I  have  referred  to  is  to  be  recognised.  To  conclude  that
because  the  notion  of  a  most  perfect  Being  includes  reality  as

670  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

one  of  its  perfections,  therefore  a  most  perfect  Being  necessarily
exists,  is  so  obviously  to  conclude  falsely,  that  after  Kant's
incisive  refutation  any  attempt  to  defend  such  reasoning
would  be  useless.  Anselm,  in  his  more  free  and  spontaneous
reflection,  has  here  and  there  touched  the  thought  that  the
greatest  which  we  can  think,  if  we  think  it  as  only  thought,  is
less  than  the  same  greatest  if  we  think  it  as  existent.  It  is
not  possible  that  from  this  reflection  either  any  one  should
develop  a  logically  cogent  proof,  but  the  way  in  which  it  is  put
seems  to  reveal  another  fundamental  thought  which  is  seeking
for  expression.  For  what  would  it  matter  if  that  which  is
thought  as  most  perfect  were,  as  thought,  less  than  the  least
reality  ?  Why  should  this  thought  disturb  us  ?  Plainly  for
this  reason,  that  it  is  an  immediate  certainty  that  what  is
greatest,  most  beautiful,  most  worthy  is  not  a  mere  thought,
but  must  be  a  reality,  because  it  would  be  intolerable  to
believe  of  our  ideal  that  it  is  an  idea  produced  by  the  action
of  thought  but  having  no  existence,  no  power,  and  no  validity
in  the  world  of  reality.  "We  do  not  from  the  perfection  of  that
which  is  perfect  immediately  deduce  its  reality  as  a  logical  con-
sequence; but  without  the  circumlocution  of  a  deduction  we
directly  feel  the  impossibility  of  its  non-existence,  and  all
semblance  of  syllogistic  proof  only  serves  to  make  more  clear  the
directness  of  this  certainty.  If  what  is  greatest  did  not  exist,
then  what  is  greatest  would  not  be,  and  it  is  impossible  that  that
which  is  the  greatest  of  all  conceivable  things  should  not  be.

Many  other  attempts  may  be  made  to  exhibit  the  internal
necessity  of  this  conviction  as  logically  demonstrable ;  but  all
of  them  must  fail.  We  cannot  prove  by  thought,  we  can  only
know  by  experience,  that  anything  endowed  with  beauty  is
beautiful,  or  that  any  disposition  of  mind  has  the  approval
of  conscience — except  in  those  easily  intelligible  cases  in
which,  taking  something  compound,  derived,  or  as  yet
obscure,  to  which  those  determinations  of  worth  had  already
been  attached  by  immediate  feeling,  we  bring  it  under  some
universal  by  a  brief  logical  process  of  analysis.  And  just  as
little  can  we  prove  from  any  general  logical  truth  our  right  to

I

THE  PEESONALITY  OF  GOD,  67 1

ascribe  to  that  which  has  such  worth  its  claim  to  reality;  on
the  contrary,  the  certainty  of  this  claim  belongs  to  those  inner
experiences,  to  which,  as  to  the  given  object  of  its  labour,  the
mediating,  inferring,  and  limiting  activity  of  cognition  refers.
As  such  an  immediate  certainty,  this  conviction  lies  at  the
foundation  of  the  Ontological  Proof;  and  it  too  it  is  which
carries  the  Teleologic  Proof  far  beyond  the  inferences  which
could  be  reached  by  means  of  its  own  impracticable  assump-
tions. For  when  once  the  dominion  of  significant  moral
forces  that  operate  purposively  has  been  confirmed  by  expe-
rience, though  over  but  a  small  portion  of  the  world,  the  silent
enlargement  of  this  experience  into  an  assertion  that  there  is
a  wisdom,  a  beauty,  a  goodness,  and  a  perfection  that  pervade
the  whole  world  without  exception,  rests  in  this  case  not
merely  on  the  common  logical  mistake  of  a  generalization  of
some  truth  proved  to  be  valid  in  a  particular  case,  but  is
supported  by  the  living  feeling  that  to  this,  which  is  greatest  and
most  perfect,  there  belongs  a  perfect  and  all-embracing  reality.

Lively  as  this  conviction  may  be,  and  sufficient  as  its  cer-
tainty may  be  for  us,  yet  it  shares  the  formal  indeterminateness
which  attaches  to  all  the  inner  experiences  of  faith.  Por  it
leaves  us  in  doubt  as  to  what  the  reality  is  which  that  which
is  highest  and  most  worthy  must  possess ;  it  believes  only
that  it  knows  that  this  highest  and  best  must  be  one  with  the
Infinite  which  speculative  philosophy  found  itself  bound  to
recognise  as  the  true  reality.  The  reasons  which-  justify  this
attempt  to  blend  the  Existent  and  the  Worthy  into  the  notion
of  the  living  God  belong  to  those  intermediate  links  of  the
course  of  thought  which  we  may  fairly  skip,  and  this  all  the
more  because  the  following  consideration  of  that  to  which  the
attempt  has  led  will  include  our  opinion  as  to  the  right  and
wrong  of  that  attempt.

§  3.  Two  distinct  series  of  attributes  through  which  man
tries  to  comprehend  the  being  of  God  recall  to  us  the  two
impulses  from  which  arose  the  notion  of  God  and  belief  in  Him.
Metaphysical  attributes  of  Unity,  Eternity,  Omnipresence,
and  Omnipotence  determine  Him  as  the  ground  of  all  finite

672  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

reality;  ethical  attributes  of  Wisdom,  Justice,  and  Holiness
satisfy  our  longing  to  find  in  that  which  has  supreme  reality,
supreme  worth  also.  We  have  no  need  to  give  a  complete
account  of  these  attributes  or  to  touch  doubtful  questions  as  to
their  reciprocal  limits  ;  the  only  really  important  point  for  us  is
to  reach  a  conviction  as  to  the  mode  of  existence  that  is  to  give
a  definite  form  to  this  essence  of  all  perfection,  determining
also  at  the  same  time  the  special  significance  of  several  of  the
attributes  referred  to.  If  these  reflections,  which  are  now
struggling  to  a  conclusion,  were  allowed  once  more  to  run  into
the  prolixity  of  systematic  completeness,  it  would  be  easy  to
develop  from  the  preceding  investigations  as  to  the  nature  of
existence  the  answer  which  we  should  have  to  give  to  this
last  question  as  to  the  nature  of  that  Infinite  which  we  have
there  discovered.  But  just  because  it  is  easy  for  the  reader
to  supply  this  transition  we  will  regard  the  goal  to  which  it
would  lead,  the  notion  of  a  Personal  God,  as  being  already
reached,  and  endeavour  to  defend  this  against  doubts  as  to  its
possibility,  as  being  the  only  logical  conclusion  to  which  our
considerations  could  come.

The  longing  of  the  soul  to  apprehend  as  reality  the  Highest
Good  which  it  is  able  to  feel,  cannot  be  satisfied  by  or  even
consider  any  form  of  the  existence  of  that  Good  except
Personality.  So  strong  is  its  conviction  that  some  living  Ego,
possessing  and  enjoying  Self,  is  the  inevitable  presupposition
and  the  only  possible  source  and  abode  of  all  goodness  and  all
good  things,  so  filled  is  it  with  unspoken  contempt  for  all  exist-
ence that  is  apparently  lifeless,  that  we  always  find  the  myth-
constructing  beginnings  of  religion  busied  in  transforming
natural  to  spiritual  reality ;  but  never  find  them  actuated  by
any  desire  to  trace  back  living  spiritual  activity  to  unintelligent
Eealness  as  to  a  firmer  foundation.  From  this  right  path  the
progressive  development  of  reflection  turned  off  for  a  time.
With  increasing  cosmic  knowledge,  it  grew  more  clear  what
must  be  required  in  the  notion  of  God,  if  He  were  not  only  to
contain  in  Himself  all  that  is  greatest  and  most  worthy,  but
also  to  contain  it  after  such  a  fashion  as  to  appear  at  the  same

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  673

time  as  tlie  creative  and  formative  ground  of  all  reality;  and
on  the  other  hand,  in  more  refined  observation  of  spiritual  life,
the  conditions  became  clear  to  which  in  us  finite  beings  the
development  of  personality  is  attached ;  both  trains  of  thought
seemed  to  combine  in  showing  that  the  form  of  spiritual  life
is  incompatible  with  the  notion  of  the  Supreme  Being,  or  that
the  form  of  personal  existence  is  incompatible  with  the  notion
of  the  Infinite  Spirit.  And  there  arose  attempts  to  find  more
satisfying  forms  of  existence  for  the  Highest  Good  in  ideas
of  an  Eternal  World-Order,  of  an  Infinite  Substance,  of  a
Self-developing  Idea,  and  to  depreciate  the  form  of  personal
existence  which  had  previously  seemed  to  the  unsophisticated
mind  to  be  the  only  one  that  was  worthy.  Among  the
infinitely  manifold  variations  which  these  views  have  experi-
enced we  will  content  ourselves  with  briefly  showing,  of  the
three  we  have  mentioned,  the  grounds  of  their  untenableness.

What  noble  motives  and  what  moral  earnestness  may  lead
to  the  dissolving  of  the  notion  of  the  Divine  Being  in  that  of
a  Moral  World-Order,  as  contrasted  with  crude  anthropomor-
phism, must  be  still  fresh  in  men's  remembrance.  And  yet
Eichte  was  not  right  when,  with  inspired  words,  lie  opposed
his  own  sublime  conception  to  the  common  narrow-minded
idea  of  a  Personal  God ;  because  he  sought  that  which  was
most  sublime,  he  thought  that  he  had  found  it  in  the  concep-
tion which  he  reached ;  if  he  had  followed  out  to  the  end  the
path  which  he  took,  he  would  have  recognised  that  by  it  that
which  he  sought  could  not  be  reached.  The  question.  How  is  it
that  a  World-Order  can  be  conceived  as  the  Supreme  Principle  ?
cannot  he  put  off  by  appealing  to  the  fact  that  we  cannot
demand  a  history  of  the  origin  of  the  Principle  itself ;  he  who,
regarding  Personality  as  an  impossible  conception  of  the  God-
head, prefers  some  other  to  it,  will  at  least  have  to  show  that
the  one  which  he  brings  forward  is  not  contradictory ;  for
nothing  will  be  gained  by  substituting  for  an  impossibility
some  other  assumption  of  which  the  possibility  is  not  proven.
Kow  tlie  fact  is  that  the  one  sufficient  reason  which  will
always  forbid  that  some  World-Order  should  be  put  in  the

VOL.  IL  2  U

674  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

place  of  God,  is  to  be  found  in  the  simple  fact  that  no  order
is  separable  from  the  ordered  material  in  which  it  is  realized,
still  less  can  precede  such  material  as  a  conditioning  or
creative  force ;  the  order  must  ever  be  a  relation  of  something
which  exists,  after  or  during  its  existence.  Hence  if  it  is
nothing  but  Order,  as  its  name  says,  it  is  never  that  which
orders,  which  is  what  we  seek,  and  which  the  ordinary  notion
of  God  (however  inadequate  in  other  respects)  determined
rightly  at  any  rate  in  this,  that  it  regarded  it  as  a  Keal  being,
not  as  a  relation.

But  in  considerations  concerning  these  highest  things,  which
often  make  us  feel  the  defectiveness  of  human  language,
names  seldom  mean  exactly  what  they  connote,  but  generally
more  or  less ;  only  it  mostly  happens  that  what  we  have  to
add  or  to  omit  cannot  without  contradiction  be  combined
with  or  subtracted  from  that  part  of  the  signification  which  is
retained.  For  this  reason  all  the  manifold  views  which  we
here  group  together  will  complain  of  our  interpretation  of
their  proposition,  God  Himself  is  the  Order  of  the  world,  as
being  a  misinterpretation. — In  the  first  place,  the  World-Order
can  not  take  up  that  position  with  regard  to  the  world,  which,
according  to  the  common  view,  is  occupied  by  the  extra-
mundane  God ;  this  position  must  remain  empty,  seeing  that
it  is  an  impossible  place,  which  nothing  could  occupy.  Again,
it  will  be  said,  to  understand  Order  merely  as  a  relation  estab-
lished by  some  ordering  being,  would  only  betray  an  incapacity
to  understand  the  true  reality,  which,  through  and  through,
without  any  residuum  of  dead  substance  is  living  activity,
movement,  and  growth,  not  indeed  indeterminate,  but  deter-
mining itself  in  unvarying  consistency  to  the  coherence  of
one  thought.  But  yet  if  we  more  clearly  analyse  these
enthusiastic  ideas,  must  they  not,  if  they  are  to  mean  what
they  are  intended  to  mean,  return  again  to  that  which  they
avoid  ?  "We  have  already  had  occasion  to  argue  how  little
possible  it  is  by  the  notion  of  a  law  of  Nature  regulating
mere  phsenomena  to  avoid  the  assumption  of  reciprocal  action
between  things,  or  to  explain  their  apparent  effects :  even  if

i

THE  PEllSONALITY  OF  GOD.  675

what  is  meant  by  saying  that  a  law  commands  were  clear,  it
would  still  be  incomprehensible  how  things  or  phsenomena
should  obey  it ;  only  an  essential  unity  of  all  existent  things
could  cause  the  states  of  one  thing  to  be  efficient  conditions
of  the  changes  of  another.  On  the  universal  World-Order
which,  claiming  to  govern  the  moral  world  also,  takes  the
place  of  that  law,  we  must  pass  a  similar  verdict.  To  us,  too,
it  is  not  doubtful  "  but  most  certain,  and  indeed  the  ground
of  all  other  certainty,  that  there  is  this  Moral  Order  of  the
world  ;  that  for  every  intelligent  creature  there  is  an  appointed
place  and  a  work  which  he  is  expected  to  perform,  and  that
every  circumstance  of  his  lot  is  part  of  a  plan,  in  independence
of  which  not  a  hair  of  his  head  can  be  harmed,  nor  (in  another
sphere  of  action)  a  sparrow  fall  from  the  house-top ;  that
every  good  action  will  succeed  and  every  evil  action  certainly
fail,  and  that  to  those  who  do  but  truly  love  that  which  is
good  all  things  shall  work  together  for  good."  (Fichte,
Sdmmtliche  Werke,  v.  p.  188.)  But  now  how  can  all  this  be
thought  ?  Or  more  accurately,  When  we  think  this,  what  is  it
that  we  think  ?  Could  that  World-Order  ever  bring  together
any  plurality  to  the  unity  of  any  definite  relation  or  maintain
such  a  unity,  if  it  were  not  at  the  same  time  present  in  each
individual  of  the  plurality  and  sensitive  to  every  state
occurring  in  all  the  other  individuals,  and  capable  also  of
bringing  the  reciprocal  relations  of  all  into  the  intended  form,
by  an  alteration  of  position  determined  by  reference  to  their
remoteness  from  the  point  aimed  at  ?  This  is  no  sophistical
construction  by  which  we  would  attempt  to  show  how  this
Order  comes  to  exist,  but  it  is  an  analysis  of  that  which  we
must  think,  if  we  would  think  that  which  is  ascribed  to  this
Order.  And  now,  after  all  our  detailed  discussions  on  this
point,  we  cannot  say  exactly  how  this  notion  of  an  Order  which
is  affected  by  facts,  and  by  reaction  correspondent  to  its
nature  and  affection  alters  facts,  is  to  be  distinguished  from
the  true  notion  of  a  being.  But  on  this  account  to  call  it
simply  Order  is  the  mistake  of  an  opposition  which,  shunning
erroneous conceptions of  being,  obstinately tries to attach

676  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV

those  juster  conceptions  of  which  it  is  itself  possessed,  to
a  notion  with  which  they  are  wholly  incapable  of  being
combined.

Now  if  the  notion  of  any  active  order  necessarily  and
inevitably  leads  back  to  that  of  an  Ordering  Being,  the  notion
of  a  Moral  Order  leads  further.  Is  it  possible  to  imagine  a
Being  which,  stimulated  by  the  influence  of  every  existing
condition  of  the  cosmic  course,  should,  with  purposeless  and
blindly  working  activity,  impart  to  that  course  the  ameliorat-
ing impulses  by  which  the  thoroughgoing  dominion  of  what
is  good  is  established, — a  Being  which  cannot  consciously
indicate  the  place  of  each  individual  and  appoint  his  work,  or
distinguish  what  is  good  in  a  good  action  from  what  is  bad  in
a  bad  action,  or  will  and  realize  the  good  with  its  own  living
love,  but  yet  acts  as  though  it  could  do  all  this  ?  It  is  not
open  to  speculation  to  decline  answering  this  question,  for
every  view  must  take  account  of  the  necessary  points  of  con-
nection, without  which  its  own  meaning  would  be  incomplete ;
but  whoever  should  seek  to  answer  it  by  imagining  an  uncon-
scious, blind,  impersonal  mechanism,  of  which  yet  goodness
should  be  the  moving  spring,  would  entangle  himself  profoundly
in  those  impracticable  subtleties  among  which  the  great  mind
whose  error  we  here  deplore,  thought  he  must  reckon  the
conviction  that  Personality  is  the  only  conceivable  form  of
the  Supreme  Cause  of  the  universe.  Whether  the  answering
of  this  question  is  equally  necessary  for  practical  life  may
seem  doubtful ;  but  I  believe  that  it  is  so.  The  conviction
that  there  is  a  World-Order  may  suffice  to  guide  our  conduct
and  to  comfort  us  concerning  its  apparent  resultlessness ;  but
the  religious  mi^d  is  led  to  apprehend  the  Supreme  Good
under  the  form  of  a  Personal  God  both  by  humility  and  by
the  longing  to  be  able  to  reverence  and  love,  motives  which
the  religion  of  a  mere  strict  fulfilment  of  duty  has  too  little
regarded.

We  cannot  consider  the  remaining  views  in  even  as  much
detail  as  we  have  those  above  referred  to.  The  common
admission  of  substantial  unity  in  the  World's-Cause,  connects

I

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  677

US  only  apparently  with  the  reverence  of  Pantheism  for  the
one  Infinite  Substance ;  and,  moreover,  the  conceptions  which
we  have  formed  concerning  the  meaning  of  the  Keal  have
removed  us  so  far  from  the  circles  of  thought  in  which
Pantheism  moves,  that  it  is  not  possible  to  give  a  brief
explanation  of  our  relation  to  it.  It  regards  as  existent  being
what  we  can  conceive  only  as  phaenomenal — the  spatial  world,
with  its  extension,  the  figures  which  it  contains  and  its
unceasing  movements ;  it  regards  it  as  conceivable  that  an
inexhaustible  vital  force  of  the  Unconditioned  and  the  One
should  find  relief  in  manifesting  itself  in  these  extended
figures  and  their  changes  as  though  in  so  doing  it  really
accomplished  something ;  but  for  us  all  this  was  but  the
shadow  of  true  and  supersensuous  being  and  action ;  hence
Pantheism  might  think  it  possible  to  understand  the  spiritual
world  as  an  isolated  blossom,  growing  from  the  strong  stem  of
material  Realness  that  works  unconsciously,  but  to  us  it  seems
inconceivable  that  spirit  should  arise  from  that  which  is  not
spirit,  and  inevitable  that  all  unconscious  existence  and  action
should  be  regarded  as  an  appearance,  the  form  and  content  of
which  springs  from  the  nature  of  spiritual  life.  From  a
metaphysical  point  of  view,  we  could  only  agree  with
I'an theism  as  a  possible  conception  of  the  world  if  it
renounced  all  inclination  to  apprehend  the  Infinite  Eeal
under  any  other  than  a  spiritual  form  ;  from  a  religious  point
of  view,  we  cannot  share  the  disposition  which  commonly
governs  the  pantheistic  imagination — the  suppression  of  all
that  is  finite  in  favour  of  the  Infinite,  the  inclination  to
regard  all  that  is  of  value  to  the  living  soul  as  transitory,
empty,  and  frail  in  comparison  c^  the  majesty  of  the  One,
upon  whose  formal  properties  of  immensity,  unity,  eternity,
and  inexhaustible  fulness  it  concentrates  all  its  reverence.
But  this  as  well  as  the  reason  which  holds  us  back  from
seeing  that  which  is  highest  in  the  universe  in  an  infinite  and
self-conscious  Idea,  we  shall  notice  later — as  far  as  it  is
possible  to  give  a  mere  passing  consideration  to  subjects  that
have  been  so  endlessly  discussed.

678  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

S  4.  An  Ego  (or  Self,  Ich)  is  not  thinkable  without  the
contrast  of  a  ISTon-Ego  or  Not-Self;  hence  personal  existence
cannot  be  asserted  of  God  without  bringing  even  Him  down
to  that  state  of  limitation,  of  being  conditioned  by  something
not  Himself,  which  is  repugnant  to  Him. — The  objections
that  speculative  knowledge  makes  to  the  personality  of  God
fall  back  upon  this  thought ;  in  order  to  estimate  their
importance,  we  shall  have  to  test  the  apparently  clear  content
of  the  proposition  which  they  take  as  their  point  of  departure.
For  unambiguous  it  is  not ;  it  may  be  intended  to  assert  that
what  the  term  Ego  denotes  can  be  comprehended  in  reflective
analysis  only  by  reference  to  the  Non-Ego ;  it  may  also  mean
that  it  is  not  conceivable  that  this  content  of  the  Ego  should
be  experienced  without  that  contrasted  Non-Ego  being
experienced  at  the  same  time ;  finally,  it  may  point  to  the
existence  and  active  influence  of  a  Non-Ego  as  the  condition
without  which  the  being  upon  which  this  influence  works
could  not  be  an  Ego.

The  relations  which  we  need  in  ideation  for  making  clear
the  object  ideated,  are  not  in  a  general  way  decisive  as  to  its
nature ;  they  are  not  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  the  thing
as  they  are  for  us  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  its  presenta-
tion in  idea.  But  the  special  nature  of  the  case  before  us  seems
to  involve  something  which  is  not  generally  included — for  it
is  just  in  the  act  of  ideation  that  Selfhood  (Ichheit)  consists,
and  hence  what  is  necessary  for  carrying  out  such  an  act  is
at  the  same  time  a  condition  of  the  thing.  Hence  the  first
two  interpretations  which  we  gave  of  the  proposition  referred
to  seem  to  run  together  into  the  assertion  that  the  Ego  has
significance  only  as  contrasted  with  the  Non-Ego,  and  can  be
experienced  only  in  such  contrast.  "Whether  we  agree  with
this  assertion  will  depend  in  part  upon  the  significance
attached  to  the  words  used.  We  see  in  the  first  place  that  at
any  rate  Ego  and  Non-Ego  cannot  be  two  notions  of  which
each  owes  its  whole  content  only  to  its  contrast  with  tlie
other;  if  this  were  so  they  would  both  remain  without
content,  and  if  neither  of  them  apart  from  the  contrast  had  a

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  679,

fixed  iiieaniijg  of  its  own,  not  only  would  there  be  no  ground
for  giving  an  answer  one  way  or  the  other  to  the  question
wliich  of  the  two  members  of  the  contrast  should  take  the
place  of  the  Ego  and  which  that  of  the  Non-Ego,  but  the  very
question  would  cease  to  have  any  meaning.  Language  has
given  to  the  Ego  alone  its  own  independent  name,  to  the
Non-Ego  only  the  negative  determination  which  excludes  the
Ego  without  indicating  any  positive  content  of  its  own.
Hence  every  being  which  is  destined  to  take  the  part  of  the
Ego  when  the  contrast  has  arisen,  must  have  the  ground  of  its
determination  in  that  nature  which  it  had  previous  to  the
contrast,  although  before  the  existence  of  the  contrast  it  is
not  yet  entitled  to  the  predicate  which  in  that  contrast  comes
to  belonsj  to  it.  Now  if  this  is  to  remain  the  meaning  of  the
term,  if  the  being  is  to  be  Ego  only  at  the  moment  when  it
is  distinguished  from  the  Non-Ego,  then  we  have  no  objection
to  make  to  this  mode  of  expression,  but  we  shall  alter  our  own.
For  it  is  our  opponents'  opinion  and  not  ours  that  personality
is  to  be  found  exclusively  where,  in  ideation  (or  presentation).
Self-consciousness  sets  itself  as  Ego  in  opposition  to  the  Non-
Ego  ;  in  order  to  establish  the  selfhood  (Selbstheit)  which  we
primarily  seek,  that  nature  is  sufficient  in  virtue  of  which,
when  the  contrast  does  arise,  the  being  becomes  an  Ego,  and  it
is  sufficient  even  before  the  appearance  of  the  contrast.  Every
feeling  of  pleasure  or  of  dislike,  every  kind  of  self-enjoyment
(Selbstgenuss),  does  in  our  view  contain  the  primary  basis  of
personality,  that  immediate  self  -  existence  which  all  later
developments  of  self- consciousness  may  indeed  make  plainer
to  thought  by  contrasts  and  comparisons,  thus  also  intensifying
its  value,  but  which  is  not  in  the  first  place  produced  by  them.
It  may  be  that  only  the  being  who  in  thought  contrasts  with
himself  a  Non-Ego  from  which  he  also  distinguishes  himself,  can
say  /  {Ich)  to  himself,  but  yet  in  order  that  in  thus  distinguishing
he  should  not  mistake  and  confound  himself  with  the  Non-
Ego,  this  discriminating  thought  of  his  must  be  guided  by  a
certainty  of  self  which  is  immediately  experienced,  by  a  self-
existence  which  is  earlier  than  the  discriminative  relation  by

680  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

which  it  becomes  Ego  as  opposed  to  the  Non-Ego.  A
different  consideration  has  already  (cf.  i.,  pp.  241  seq.)  led  us
by  an  easier  path  to  the  same  result,  and  we  may  refer  the
reader  to  this  passage  for  explanation  and  completion  of  what
is  said  here.  The  discussion  referred  to  showed  us  that  all
self-consciousness  rests  upon  the  foundation  of  direct  sense  of
self  which  can  by  no  means  arise  from  becoming  aware  of  a
contrast  with  the  external  world,  but  is  itself  the  reason  that
this  contrast  can  be  felt  as  unique,  as  not  comparable  to  any
other  distinction  between  two  objects.  Self-consciousness  is
only  the  subsequent  endeavour  to  analyse  with  the  resources
of  cognition  this  experienced  fact — to  frame  in  thought  a
picture  of  the  Ego  that  in  cognition  apprehends  itself  with  the
most  vivid  feeling,  and  in  this  manner  to  place  it  artificially
among  the  objects  of  our  consideration,  to  which  it  does  not
really  belong.  So  we  take  up  our  position  with  regard  to  the
first  two  interpretations  of  the  proposition  of  which  we  are
speaking,  thus : — We  admit  that  the  Ego  is  thinkable  only  in
relation  to  the  Non-Ego,  but  we  add  that  it  may  he  experienced
previous  to  and  out  of  every  such  relation,  and  that  to  this  is
due  the  possibility  of  its  subsequently  becoming  thinkable  in
that  relation.

But  it  is  not  these  two  interpretations  but  the  third  that
is  most  obstructive  to  that  faith  in  the  Personality  of  God
which  we  are  seeking  to  establish.  In  one  form  indeed  in
which  it  sometimes  occurs  we  need  not  make  it  an  object
of  renewed  investigation ;  for  we  may  now  consider  it  as,  in
our  view,  established  that  no  being  in  the  nature  of  which
self-existence  was  not  given  as  primary  and  underived,  could
be  endowed  with  selfhood  by  any  mechanism  of  favouring
circumstances  however  wonderful.  Hence  we  may  pass  over
in  complete  silence  all  those  attempts  which  think  to  show  by
ill-chosen  analogies  from  the  world  of  sense  how  in  a  being  as
yet  selfless  an  activity  originally  directed  entirely  outwards  is,
by  the  resistance  opposed  to  it  by  the  Non-Ego  (comparable
to  that  which  a  ray  of  light  encounters  in  a  plane  surface),
thrown  back  upon  itself  and  thereby  transformed  into the

I

THE  PEllSONALTTY  OF  GOD.  681

self-comprehending  light  of  self-oonsciousness.  In  such  ideas
everything  is  arbitrary,  and  not  a  single  feature  of  the  image
employed  is  applicable  to  the  actual  case  which  it  is  intended
to  make  clear;  that  outgoing  activity  is  an  unmeaning
imagination,  the  resistance  which  it  is  to  meet  with  is  some-
thing that  cannot  be  proved,  the  inference  that  that  activity
is  by  that  resistance  turned  back  along  the  path  by  which  it
came  is  unfounded,  and  it  is  wholly  incomprehensible  how
this  reflection  could  transform  its  nature,  so  that  from  blind
activity  it  should  turn  into  the  selfhood  of  self-existence.

Setting  aside  these  follies  which  have  influenced  philo-
sophic thought  to  an  unreasonable  extent,  we  find  a  more
respectable  form  of  the  view  which  we  are  combating  occupied
in  proving  that  though  that  self-existence  cannot  be  produced
by  any  external  condition  in  a  being  to  which  it  does  not
belong  by  nature,  yet  it  could  never  be  developed  even  in  one
whose  nature  is  capable  of  it,  without  the  co-operation  and
educative  influences  of  an  external  world.  For  that  from  the
impressions  which  we  must  receive  from  the  external  world,
there  comes  to  us  not  only  all  the  content  of  our  ideas,  but
also  the  occasion  of  all  those  feelings  in  which  the  Ego,
existing  for  self,  can  enjoy  self  without  as  yet  being
conscious  of  a  relation  of  contrast  to  the  Non-Ego.  That  all
feeling  must  be  conceived  as  (in  some  definite  form  of  pleasure
or  displeasure)  interested  in  some  definite  situation  of  the
being  to  which  it  belongs,  some  particular  phase  of  its  action
and  its  passion  ;  but  that  neither  is  passion  possible  without
some  foreign  impression  which  calls  it  forth,  nor  activity
possible  without  an  external  point  of  attraction  which  guides
it  and  at  which  it  aims.  That  in  any  single  feeling  the  being
which  is  self-existent  is  only  partially  self-possessing ;  that
whether  it  has  self-existence  truly  and  completely  depends
upon  the  variety  of  the  external  impulses  which  stimulate  by
degrees  the  whole  wealth  of  its  nature,  making  this  M^ealth
matter  of  self-enjoyment — that  thus  the  development  of  all
personality  is  bound  up  with  the  existence  and  influence  of
an  external  world  and  the  variety  and  succession of  those

682  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

influences  ;  and  that  such  development  would  be  possible  even
for  God  only  under  similar  conditions.

It  is  not  sufficient  to  lessen  the  weight  of  this  objection  by
the  assertion  that  this  educative  stimulation  is  necessary  only
for  finite  and  changing  beings,  and  not  for  the  nature  of
God,  which,  as  a  self-cognisant  Idea,  eternally  unchangeable,
always  possesses  its  whole  content  simultaneously.  Though
this  assertion  grazes  the  truth,  yet  in  this  form  it  would  be
injurious  in  another  respect  to  our  idea  of  God,  for  it  would
make  the  being  of  God  similar  to  that  of  an  eternal  truth — a
truth  indeed  not  merely  valid  but  also  conscious  of  itself.  But
we  have  a  direct  feeling  of  the  w^ide  difference  there  is  between
this  personification  of  a  thought  and  living  personality ;  not
only  do  we  find  art  tedious  when  it  expects  us  to  admire
allegorical  statues  of  Justice  or  of  Love,  but  even  speculation
rouses  our  opposition  forthwith,  when  it  offers  to  us  some
self-cognisant  Principle  of  Identity,  or  some  self-conscious
Idea  of  Good,  as  completely  expressing  personality.  Either  of
these  are  obviously  lacking  in  an  essential  condition  of  all
true  reality  in  the  capacity  of  svffering.  Every  Idea  by
which  in  reproductive  cognition  we  seek  to  exhaust  the
nature  of  some  being,  is  and  remains  nothing  more  than  the
statement  of  a  thought-formula  by  which  we  fix,  as  an
aid  to  reflection,  the  inner  connection  between  the  living
activities  of  the  Eeal ;  the  real  thing  itself  is  that  which
applies  this  Idea  to  itself,  which  feels  contradiction  to  it  as
disturbance  of  itself,  and  wills  and  attempts  as  its  own
endeavour  the  realization  of  the  Idea.  The  only  living
subject  of  personality  is  this  inner  core,  which  cannot  be
resolved  into  thoughts,  the  meaning  and  significance  of  which
we  know  in  the  immediate  experience  of  our  mental  life,  and
which  we  always  misunderstand  when  we  seek  to  construe  it —
hence  personality  can  never  belong  to  any  unchangeably  valid
truth,  but  only  to  something  which  changes,  suffers,  and
reacts.  We  will  only  briefly  point  out  in  passing  the  insur-
mountable difficulties  which  the  attempt  to  personify  Ideas
thus  would  encounter  if  there  were  any  question  of  determin-

I

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  683

ing  tlie  relation  between  the  Ideas  so  personified  and  the
changing  course  of  the  world ;  it  would  immediately  appear
that  these  could  as  little  do  without  the  additions  necessary
to  transform  them  into  suffering  and  acting  beings  as  the
World-Order  to  which  we  have  before  referred.

Yet  the  transference  of  the  conditions  of  finite  personality
to  the  personality  of  the  Infinite  is  not  justified.  For  we
must  guard  ourselves  against  seeking  in  the  alien  nature  of
the  external  world,  in  the  fact  that  it  is  Hon-Ego,  the  source
of  the  strength  with  which  it  calls  out  the  development  of
the  Ego ;  it  operates  only  by  bringing  to  the  finite  mind
stimuli  which  occasion  the  activity,  which  that  mind  cannot
produce  from  its  own  nature.  It  is  involved  in  the  notion
of  a  finite  being  that  it  has  its  definite  place  in  the  whole,
and  thus  that  it  is  not  what  any  other  is,  and  yet  that  at  the
same  time  it  must  as  a  member  of  the  whole  in  its  whole
development  be  related  to  and  must  harmonize  with  that
other.  Even  for  the  finite  being  the  forms  of  its  activity
flow  from  its  own  inner  nature,  and  neither  the  content  of  its
sensations  nor  its  feelings,  nor  the  peculiarity  of  any  other  of
its  manifestations,  is  given  to  it  from  without ;  but  the  incite-
ments of  its  action  certainly  all  come  to  it  from  that  external
world,  to  which,  in  consequence  of  the  finiteness  of  its  nature,
it  is  related  as  a  part,  having  the  place,  time,  and  character  of
its  development  marked  out  by  the  determining  whole.  The
same  consideration  does  not  hold  of  the  Infinite  Being  that
comprehends  in  itself  all  that  is  finite  and  is  the  cause  of  its
nature  and  reality ;  this  Infinite  Being  does  not  need — as  we
sometimes,  with  a  strange  perversion  of  the  right  point  of
view,  think — that  its  life  should  be  called  forth  by  external
stimuli,  but  from  the  beginning  its  concept  is  without  that
deficiency  which  seems  to  us  to  make  such  stimuli  necessary
for  the  finite  being,  and  its  active  efficacy  thinkable.  The
Infinite  Being,  not  bound  by  any  obligation  to  agree  in  any
way  with  something  not  itself,  will,  with  perfect  self-suflficing-
ness,  possess  in  its  own  nature  the  causes  of  every  step
forward  in  the  development  of  its  life. An  analogy  which

684  LOOK  IX. CHAP'j'  R  IV.

though  weak  yet  holds  in  some  important  points  and  is  to
some  extent  an  example  of  the  thing  itself,  is  furnished  to  ns
by  the  course  of  memory  in  the  finite  mind.  The  world  of
our  ideas,  though  certainly  called  into  existence  at  first  by
external  impressions,  spreads  out  into  a  stream  which,  without
any  fresh  stimulation  from  the  external  world,  produces  plenty
that  is  new  by  the  continuous  action  und  reaction  of  its  own
movements,  and  carries  out  in  works  of  imagination,  in  the
results  reached  by  reflection,  and  in  the  conflicts  of  passion,  a
great  amount  of  living  development — as  much,  that  is,  as  can
be  reached  by  the  nature  of  a  finite  being  without  incessantly
renewed  orientation,  by  action  and  reaction  with  the  whole
in  which  it  is  comprehended ;  hence  the  removal  of  these
limits  of  finiteness  does  not  involve  the  removal  of  any  pro-
ducing condition  of  personality  which  is  not  compensated  for
by  the  self-sufficingness  of  the  Infinite,  but  that  which  is
only  approximately  possible  for  the  finite  mind,  the  condition-
ing of  its  life  by  itself,  takes  place  without  limit  in  God,  and
no  contrast  of  an  external  world  is  necessary  for  Him,

Of  course  there  remains  the  question  what  it  is  that  in
God  corresponds  to  the  primary  impulse  which  the  train  of
ideas  in  a  finite  mind  receives  from  the  external  world  ?  But
the  very  question  involves  the  answer.  For  when  through
the  impulse  received  from  without  there  is  imparted  to  the
inner  life  of  the  mind  an  initiatory  movement  which  it  subse-
quently carries  on  by  its  own  strength,  whence  comes  the
movement  in  the  external  world  which  makes  it  capable  of
giving  that  impulse  ?  A  brief  consideration  will  sufi&ce  to
convince  us  that  our  theory  of  the  cosmos,  whatever  it  may
be,  must  somehow  and  somewhere  recognise  the  actual  move-
ment itself  as  an  originally  given  reality,  and  can  never
succeed  in  extracting  it  from  rest.  And  this  indication  may
suffice  for  the  present,  since  we  wish  here  to  avoid  increasing
our  present  difficulties  by  entering  upon  the  question  as  to
the  nature  of  time.  When  we  characterize  the  inner  life  of
the  Personal  God,  the  current  of  His  thoughts,  His  feelings,  and
His  will,  as  everlasting  and  without  beginning,  as  having  never

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.  685

known  rest,  and  having  never  been  roused  to  movement  from
some  state  of  quiescence,  we  call  upon  imagination  to  perform
a  task  no  other  and  no  greater  than  that  which  is  required
from  it  by  every  materialistic  or  pantheistic  view.  Without
an  eternal  uncaused  movement  of  the  World-Substance,  or
the  assumption  of  definite  initial  movements  of  the  countless
world-atoms,  movements  which  have  to  be  simply  recognised
and  accepted,  neither  materialistic  nor  pantheistic  views  could
attain  to  any  explanation  of  the  existing  cosmic  course,  and
all  parties  will  be  at  last  driven  to  the  conviction  tliat  tlie
splitting  up  of  reality  into  a  quiescent  being  and  a  movement
which  subsequently  takes  hold  of  it,  is  one  of  those  fictions
which,  while  they  are  of  some  use  in  the  ordinary  business  of
reflection,  betray  their  total  inadmissibility  as  soon  as  we
attempt  to  rise  above  the  reciprocal  connection  of  cosmic
particulars  to  our  first  notions  of  the  cosmos  as  a  whole.

The  ordinary  doubts  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  personal
existence  of  the  Infinite  have  not  made  us  waver  in  our  con-
viction. But  in  seeking  to  refute  them,  we  have  had  the
feeling  that  we  were  occupying  a  standpoint  which  could  only
be  regarded  as  resulting  from  the  strangest  perversion  of  all
natural  relations.  The  course  of  development  of  philosophic
thought  has  put  us  who  live  in  this  age  in  the  position  of
being  obliged  to  show  that  the  conditions  of  personality  which
we  meet  with  in  finite  things,  are  not  lacking  to  the  Infinite ;
whereas  the  natural  concatenation  of  the  matter  under  discus-
sion would  lead  us  to  show  that  of  the  full  personality  which
is  possible  only  for  the  Infinite  a  feeble  reflection  is  given
also  to  the  finite ;  for  the  characteristics  peculiar  to  the  finite
are  not  producing  conditions  of  self-existence,  but  obstacles
to  its  unconditioned  development,  although  we  are  accustomed,
unjustifiably,  to  deduce  from  these  characteristics  its  capacity
of  personal  existence.  The  finite  being  always  works  with
powers  with  which  it  did  not  endow  itself,  and  according  to
laws  which  it  did  not  establish, — that  is,  it  works  by  means
of  a  mental  organization  which  is  realized  not  only  in  it  but
also  in  innumerable  similar  beings. Hence  in  reflecting:  on

686  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

self,  it  may  easily  seem  to  it  as  though  there  were  in  itself
some  obscure  and  unknown  substance — something  which  is  in
the  Ego  though  it  is  not  the  Ego  itself,  and  to  which,  as  to
its  subject,  the  whole  personal  development  is  attached.  And
hence  there  arise  the  questions — never  to  be  quite  silenced
— "VVliat  are  we  ourselves  ?  What  is  our  soul  ?  What  is  our
self — that  obscure  being,  incomprehensible  to  ourselves,  that
stirs  in  our  feelings  and  our  passions,  and  never  rises  into
complete  self-consciousness  ?  The  fact  that  these  questions
can  arise  shows  how  far  personality  is  from  being  developed
in  us  to  the  extent  which  its  notion  admits  and  requires.  It
can  be  perfect  only  in  the  Infinite  Being  which,  in  surveying
all  its  conditions  or  actions,  never  finds  any  content  of  that
which  it  suffers  or  any  law  of  its  working,  the  meaning  and
origin  of  which  are  not  transparently  plain  to  it,  and  capable
of  being  explained  by  reference  to  its  own  nature.  Further,
the  position  of  the  finite  mind,  which  attaches  it  as  a  con-
stituent of  the  whole  to  some  definite  place  in  the  cosmic
order,  requires  that  its  inner  life  should  be  awakened  by
successive  stimuli  from  without,  and  that  its  course  should
proceed  according  to  the  laws  of  a  psychical  mechanism,  in
obedience  to  which  individual  ideas,  feelings,  and  efforts  press
upon  and  supplant  one  another.  Hence  the  whole  self  can
never  be  brought  together  at  one  moment,  our  self-conscious-
ness never  presents  to  us  a  complete  and  perfect  picture  of
our  Ego — not  even  of  its  whole  nature  at  any  moment,  and
much  less  of  the  unity  of  its  development  in  time.  We
always  appear  to  ourselves  from  a  one-sided  point  of  view,
due  to  those  mental  events  which  happen  to  be  taking  place
within  us  at  the  time — a  point  of  view  which  only  admits  of
our  surveying  a  small  part  of  our  being ;  we  always  react
upon  the  stimuli  which  reach  us,  in  accordance  with  the  one-
sided impulses  of  this  accidental  and  partial  self-consciousness;
it  is  only  to  a  limited  extent  that  we  can  say  with  truth  that
we  act ;  for  the  most  part  action  is  carried  on  in  us  by  the
individual  feelings  or  groups  of  ideas  to  which  at  any  moment
the  psychical  mechanism  gives  the  upper  hand. Still  less  do

I

THE  PEESONALITY  OF  GOD.  687:

we  exist  wholly  for  ourselves  in  a  temporal  point  of  view.
There  is  much  that  disappears  from  memory,  but  most  of  all
individual  moods,  that  escape  it  by  degrees.  There  are
many  regions  of  thought  in  which  while  young  we  were  quite
at  home,  which  in  age  we  can  only  bring  before  our  mind  as
alien  phsenomena;  feelings  in  which  we  once  revelled  with
enthusiasm  we  can  now  hardly  recover  at  all,  we  can  now
hardly  realize  even  a  pale  reflection  of  the  power  which  they
once  exercised  over  us ;  endeavours  which  once  seemed  to
constitute  the  most  inalienable  essence  of  our  Ego  seem,  when
we  reach  the  path  along  which  later  life  conducts  us,  to  be
unintelligible  aberrations,  the  incentives  to  which  we  can  no
longer  understand.  In  point  of  fact  we  have  little  ground  for
speaking  of  the  personality  of  finite  beings ;  it  is  an  ideal,
which,  like  all  that  is  ideal,  belongs  unconditionally  only  to
the  Infinite,  but  like  all  that  is  good  appertains  to  us  only
conditionally  and  hence  imperfectly.

^  5.  The  more  simple  content  of  this  section  hardly  needs
the  brief  synoptical  repetition  in  which  we  now  proceed  to
gather  up  its  results  and  to  add  them  to  those  already
reached.

X.  Selfhood,  the  essence  of  all  personality,  does  not  depend
upon  any  opposition  that  either  has  happened  or  is  happening
of  the  Ego  to  a  Non-Ego,  but  it  consists  in  an  immediate  self-
existence  which  constitutes  the  basis  of  the  possibility  of  that
contrast  wherever  it  appears.  Self-consciousness  is  the  eluci-
dation of  this  self-existence  which  is  brought  about  by  means
of  knowledge,  and  even  this  is  by  no  means  necessarily
bound  up  with  the  distinction  of  the  Ego  from  a  N"on-Ego
which  is  substantially  opposed  to  it.

XI.  In  the  nature  of  the  finite  mind  as  such  is  to  be  found
the  reason  why  the  development  of  its  personal  consciousness
can  take  place  only  through  the  influences  of  that  cosmic
whole  which  the  finite  being  itself  is  not,  that  is  through
stimulation  coming  from  the  Non-Ego,  not  because  it  needs
the  contrast  with  something  alien  in  order  to  have  self-
existence,  but  because  in  this  respect,  as  in  every  other,  it

688  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  IV.

does  not  contain  in  itself  the  conditions  of  its  existence.  Wd
do  not  find  this  limitation  in  the  being  of  the  Infinite ;  hence
for  it  alone  is  there  possible  a  self-existence,  which  needs
neither  to  be  initiated  nor  to  be  continuously  developed  by
something  not  itself,  but  which  maintains  itself  within  itsell
with  spontaneous  action  that  is  eternal  and  had  no  beginning.
XII.  Perfect  Personality  is  in  God  only,  to  all  finite  minds
there  is  allotted  but  a  pale  copy  thereof ;  the  finiteness  of  the
finite  is  not  a  producing  condition  of  this  Personality  but  a
limit  and  a  hindrance  of  its  development.

CHAPTER V.

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.

Difficulties  in  this  Chapter — The  Source  of  the  Eternal  Truths  and  their  Relation
to  God — The  Creation  as  Will,  as  Act,  as  Emanation — Its  Preservation  and
Government ;  and  the  Ideality  of  Time — The  Origin  of  Real  Things — Evil
and  Sin — Good,  Good  Things,  and  Love — The  Unity  of  the  Three  Principles
iu  Love — Conclusion.

§  1.  "WT"^  traced  back  the  manifoldness  of  reality  to
»  »  one  unconditioned  primary  Cause  ;  and  this
One,  which  can  give  coherence  to  finite  multiplicity  and  the
possibility  of  reciprocal  action  to  individual  things,  we  found
not  in  a  law,  not  in  an  Idea,  not  in  any  cosmic  order,  but
only  in  a  Being  capable  of  acting  and  suffering ;  in  Mind
alone,  self-possessing  and  having  self-existence,  and  not  in  a
substance  developing  with  blind  impulse,  did  we  find  in  truth
and  reality  the  substantiality  which  we  felt  constrained  to
require  in  this  Supreme  Being.  The  rapidity  with  which  we
hurried  towards  this  goal  of  our  thoughts  carried  us  past
difficulties  to  which  we  now  return.

Our  ideas  concerning  even  God  and  divine  things  can
satisfy  us  only  when  they  are  in  harmony  with  those  general
laws  of  thought  and  those  truths  which  reason  sets  before  us
as  having  binding  force  with  regard  to  every  object  of  which
we  can  judge.  Hence  even  that  Supreme  Being  whom  we
reverence  as  the  unconditioned  and  creative  Cause  of  all
reality,  as  soon  as  He  becomes  an  object  of  our  investigation
may  easily  seem  to  be  conditioned  by  general  truths  and  laws
possessing  a  validity  independent  of  and  priot  to  Him.  When
we  speak  of  the  wisdom  of  God  we  seem  obliged  to  think  of  it
as  applied  to  truth,  the  independently  valid  content  of  which
is  recognised  by  God,  and  hence  prior  to  Him ;  we  seem
obliged  to  think  of  His  justice  or  any  other  of  His  ethical

VOL.  IL  ^^^  2  X

690  BOOK  IX. CHAPTEK  V.

perfections  as  expressing  nothing  more  than  the  immutable
and  thoroughgoing  conformity  of  His  being  to  an  ideal  of  all
good,  the  eternal  worth  of  which  is  independently  established  ;
even  creative  activity,  as  it  produces  real  things,  is  hardly
intelligible  to  us  except  as  a  deliberative  choice  that  summons
into  reality  whichever  it  will  from  the  abundance  of  the  con-
ceivable and  possible  forms  of  future  existence,  spread  out
before  it  as  a  store  from  which  to  choose.  All  this  is  incom-
patible with  that  unconditionedness  which  must  belong  to  the
Supreme  Eeality,  not  only  as  regards  its  existence,  but  also  in
such  a  way  that  it  determines  through  itself  alone  the  form
and  object  of  its  activity.  We  will  divide  the  discussion  of
these  difficulties,  and  unite  in  one  inquiry  concerning  the
origin  of  eternal  trutlis,  an  explanation  of  the  relation  to  the
being  of  God  (1)  of  the  laws  of  cognition  and  of  the  course  of
events,  and  (2)  of  the  determination  of  moral  worth ;  and
later  we  shall  turn  to  consider  (3)  in  what  way  we  must
conceive  the  forms  of  reality  to  have  their  foundation  in  the
same  divine  nature.

§  2.  The  philosophy  of  common  sense  generally  seems  to
take  it  for  granted  as  self-evident  that  even  the  divine  activity
moves  within  the  limits  which  the  general  laws  of  all  being
and  action  set  to  any  conceivable  activity.  When  expressly
questioned  on  this  point  religious  faith  may  occasionally
hesitate  somewhat ;  but  for  the  most  part  it  admits  this  tacit
presupposition  and  recognises  eternal  truth  as  primary  and
unconditioned,  as  being  an  absolutely  valid  necessity,  to  which
even  the  living  reality  of  God  is  subject.  If  we  ignore  the
contradiction  with  reference  to  the  unconditionedness  of  God
which  is  plainly  involved  in  this  view,  we  yet  find  that  it
involves  another  contradiction  which  equally  invalidates  it —
namely  one  that  concerns  the  nature  of  truth.  It  is  only  as  re-
gards an  individual  and  finite  thing  that  an  individual  law  before
it  is  realized  in  it  can  appear  as  a  power  existing  external  to  it ;
for  in  such  a  case  this  law  is  realized  in  other  things  in  the
states  of  which  it  is  embodied,  and  by  the  coherent  action  of
which  it  becomes  possible  for  it  to  subject  to  itself  things  which

GOD  AND  ME  .WOKLD,  691

had  as  yet  escaped  its  dominion.  But  the  whole  body  of
truth  cannot  precede  the  whole  of  reality,  or  that  One  Supreme
Being  from  which  it  flows,  as  though  it  were  a  power  existing
independently  in  vacuo ;  for  of  truths  we  can  only  say  that
they  are  valid,  not  that  they  exist.  They  do  not  hover  among
or  external  to  or  above  existing  things ;  as  forms  of  connec-
tion between  multifarious  states,  they  are  present  only  in  the
thought  of  some  thinker  whilst  he  thinks,  or  in  the  action
pf  some  existing  being  at  the  moment  of  his  action.  If  they
rule  not  only  the  present  but  also  the  future,  they  can  do  this
not  because  they  are  enthroned  in  eternal  splendour  beyond
and  above  all  reality  and  all  time,  but  because,  really  being
in  that  which  is  real,  they  are  continually  produced  afresh
by  its  action.  Existing  things  receive  through  their  own
action  in  unbroken  continuity,  and  as  it  were  transmit  to
themselves  from  moment  to  moment,  the  unchanging  forms  of
their  being  and  their  states  and  the  connection  between  these,
and  thus  they  every  moment  reproduce  the  conditions  of  the
influence  which  truth  exercises  upon  them.  If  it  were  think-
able that  the  course  of  the  world  should  suddenly  cease  to  con-
tain the  efficient  causes  of  that  which  truth  commands,  then  this
truth  would  no  longer  he  in  the  world,  and  certainly  he  who
should  then  think  of  it  as  existing  external  to  the  world  in  its
inactive  validity,  would  not  be  able  to  say  how  it  could  happen
that  reality  should  come  to  be  again  subject  to  it.  Hence  it
is  impossible  that  a  realm  of  external  truths  should  in  any
way  exist  external  to  God  as  an  object  of  His  recognition,  or
lefore  Him  as  a  rule  of  His  working,  and  this  impossibility  does
not  disappear  if  we  avoid  the  spatial  and  temporal  expres-
sions, the  figurative  use  of  which  we  have  just  indulged  in.
It  would  only  be  a  useless  change  of  terms  if  we  were  to  call
such  truths  not  external  to  and  before  God  but  in  Him  and
with  Him ;  thought  as  universal  necessities,  to  which  the
Divine  Being  like  all  else  is  subject,  they  would  still  continue
to  lay  claim  to  this  impossible  validity,  preceding  and  trans-
cending all  reality — a  validity  which  we  must  deny  to  them,
and  through  which,  if  they  had  it,  they  would  be  alien  and

692  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

limiting  conditions  of  that  by  which  the  being  of  God  is  dis-
tinjmished  from  all  other  being  in  which  their  influence  is
shown.

The  course  of  our  thought  is  so  thoroughly  accustomed  to
the  perverse  idea  of  an  independent  truth,  giving  laws  to
reality,  that  we  do  not  take  offence  at  the  contradictions
which  it  involves.  But  so  much  the  more  is  natural  feelin<:f
hurt  by  our  detraction  from  that  unconditionedness  of  God
which  cannot  be  surrendered,  if  we  regard  it  as  subject  to  a
truth  which  is  independent  of  it.  So  a  second  form  of  the
view  we  are  considering  resolves  to  regard  the  eternal  truths
as  creations  of  God,  which  He  might  have  left  uncreated,  or
have  created  other  than  they  are.  But  this  opinion  too
speedily  leads  to  contradiction  and  is  incompatible  with  the
notion  of  truth.  For  truths  can  no  more  be  made  than  they
can  exist  independent  of  reality,  and  no  thought  which  is  of
questionable  validity  can  by  the  will,  or  the  recognition,  or  the
command  of  any  one,  be  made  true  if  it  were  not  so  before.
Statutes  may  be  enacted  ;  but  statutes  are  only  commands  which
choose  some  one  thinkable  order  of  relations  from  among  a
number  all  equally  thinkable,  and  that  which  is  chosen  they
do  indeed  endow  with  actual  validity,  but  never  with  that
intrinsic  necessity  which  its  nature  lacks.  But  in  order  that
the  statute  itself  should  be  enacted,  there  must  pre-exist  some
truth  intrinsically  and  independently  valid  which  enables  men
to  distinguish  what  is  possible  from  what  is  impossible,  and
the  cases  to  which  the  order  that  is  to  be  established  applies
from  those  to  which  it  does  not  apply.  Now  if  it  is  unthink-
able that  any  truth  should  arise  by  creation,  it  is  still  more
impossible  to  imagine  creative  activity  directed  to  such  an
impossible  aim  as  the  original  production  of  all  truth.  For
in  whatever  way  we  may  picture  it  to  ourselves,  as  long  as  we
imagine  that  through  this  activity  something  arises  which  but
for  it  would  not  exist,  we  must  imagine  that  the  activity  takes
effect  in  a  certain  sequence  of  events  in  which  as  a  producing
condition  it  brings  its  results  to  pass.  But  in  a  world  in
which  as  yet  there  is  no  truth  (supposing  such  a  world  to  be

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  693

thinkable)  what  could  be  called  a  condition  and  what  could
be  called  the  result  of  a  condition  ?  Where  should  we  find
any  guarantee  of  the  connection  of  the  one  with  the  other,  of
any  act  having  any  result,  or  of  its  having  the  one  at  which  it
aims,  and  not  another  at  which  it  does  not  aim  ?

The  ill-success  of  these  two  extreme  views  is  sought  to  be
avoided  by  a  third  view  which  takes  a  middle  path,  declaring
these  eternal  truths  to  be  neither  objects  recognised  by  God,
nor  creations  of  His  arbitrary  will,  but  the  necessary  con-
sequences of  His  own  being.  But  it  is  a  mistake  to  think
that  the  difficulty  can  be  avoided  in  this  way.  If  there  is  to
be  any  meaning  in  saying  that  something  proceeds  as  a  logical
consequence  from  the  nature  of  God,  we  must,  in  thought  at
least,  oppose  to  this  another  something,  proceeding  as  an
illogical  consequence  from  the  same  nature.  In  order  to
distinguish  the  two  we  need  some  universal  intrinsically  valid
standard,  measured  by  or  compared  with  which  the  one  some-
thing may  be  recognised  as  deducible  from  a  definite  source,
and  the  other  something  as  not  deducible  from  the  same  source.
Thus  we  find  ourselves  led  back  by  a  very  short  road  to  the
necessity  of  assuming  some  unconditioned  primary  truth  as
having  binding  force  even  upon  the  being  of  God,  in  order
that  by  it  we  may  be  able  to  comprehend  as  logical  results  of
the  divine  nature  those  eternal  truths  which  can  be  deduced
from  it.  However  sensible  we  may  be  that  this  attempt
follows  a  true  impulse,  still  this  formulation  of  its  results  is
a  failure,  and  other  considerations  are  needed  in  order  that
we  may  turn  to  advantage  the  good  which  it  does  contain.

The  resultlessness  of  all  these  views,  wliich  we  have  pre-
sented in  their  most  unmodified  and  therefore  most  intelligible
forms,  is  due  to  the  concealed  ambiguity  with  which  they
apply  the  name  of  God.  When  we  doubt  whether  God
recognises  truth  or  establishes  it,  whether  He  wills  that
which  is  good,  or  whether  if  He  wills  anything  it  is  thereby
good,  we  must  first  of  all  get  clear  the  question.  Is  the  God
to  whom  these  propositions  refer  regarded  as  the  God  whom
our  religious consciousness  seeks  and  acknowledges,  in  His

694  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

fulness  and  completeness;  and  are  the  activities  or  pro-
perties which  form  the  predicates  of  those  propositions
already  included  in  the  concept  of  Him  in  such  a  way  that
the  propositional  form  only  serves  to  set  them  out  afresh  for
the  sake  of  explanation  after  the  manner  of  analytic  judg-
ments ?  Or  is  the  name  of  God  here  merely  a  provisional
anticipatory  designation  of  a  being  to  whom  the  content  of
these  predicates  does  not  as  yet  belong,  so  that  the  proposi-
tions referred  to  express,  after  the  fashion  of  synthetic  judg-
ments, some  process,  some  activity,  or  some  event,  which  is
intended  to  endow  that  being  with  these  predicates  for  the
first  time  ?  That  the  second  of  these  assumptions  is  in  a
religious  sense  unmeaning,  and  is  in  itself  unthinkable,  we
will  try  to  show  by  taking  for  illustration  two  familiar  questions,
around  which  the  strife  of  opinions  has  been  concentrated,  as
representatives  of  the  metaphysical  and  ethical  difficulties  of
the  subject.

The  first  of  these  questions — whether  God  recognises  or
brings  to  pass  the  truth  of  the  proposition  3  +  2  =  4,  and
whether  He  could  make  true  the  proposition  2  =  2  +  5,  does
not  very  happily  express  the  point  which  is  here  in  question.
It  gives  an  impression  that  the  point  in  dispute  is  whether
God  could  replace  the  one  proposition  which  is  now  true,  by
the  other  which  is  now  false,  arbitrarily  raising  the  latter  to
the  rank  of  a  truth.  In  doing  this,  however,  He  would  not
create  truth  at  all,  but  presuppose  it.  For  in  order  that  it
may  be  possible  to  express  any  proposition  in  the  form  of  an
equation,  in  order  that  the  correct  proposition  A=A,  the
questionable  proposition  A=B,  or  the  erroneous  proposition
A=-Non-A,  should  have  any  imaginable  meaning,  the  truth  or
untruth  of  which  we  could  discuss,  it  is  indispensable  that
each  of  these  letters  should  indicate  a  content  which  is  in
itself  something  stable,  self-identical,  and  distinct  from-  every-
thing else,  and  can  hence  be  called  by  a  name  which  belongs
to  it  alone.  Hence  from  every  individual  thing  that  is  to  be
thought  as  having  any  relation,  true  or  false,  to  some  other,
the  Law  of  Identity  must  be  of  prior  validity  as  the  simplest

I

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  695

truth,  without  which  there  can  be  neither  other  truths  nor
any  untruth  at  all.  Hence,  more  generally  expressed  the
question  would  run  thus  —  Can  the  will  of  God  establish
the  Law  of  Identity  so  as  by  means  of  it  to  make  true  some
individual  relation  which  contradicts  it  ?  But  the  answer  to
this  question  is  devoid  of  interest ;  there  is  no  natural  and
unavoidable  motive  for  raising  it.  He  who  should  believe
that  he  must  answer  it  affirmatively  for  the  sake  of  uncon-
ditioned divine  omnipotence,  would  be  obliged  both  in  the
question  and  in  the  answer  to  treat  the  notions  of  the  con-
tradictory and  of  the  non-contradictory  as  having  an  already
established  definite  significance,  lefore  it  could  be  decided
what  attitude  the  divine  omnipotence  would  take  with  reference
to  those  notions.  Now  if  it  should  decide  to  estabKsh  as
truth  the  contradictory — that  is  what  was  contradictory  he/ore
its  decision — it  would  not  create  all  truth,  it  would  not  first
establish  the  notion  of  truth,  it  would  be  but  an  arbitrary
will,  struggling  to  upset,  as  far  as  possible,  truth  which  it
found  already  binding.  No  religious  need  drives  us  to  seek
in  God  omnipotence  thus  devoid  of  intelligence.  Hence  the
second  clause  of  this  much-debated  question  must  be  dropped,
and  limiting  ourselves  to  the  first  clause,  we  ask  only  whether
the  truth  which  is  not  yet  can  be  established  by  God  ?  Now
an  omnipotence  which  could  only  accomplish  whatever  was
possible  would  indeed  be  merely  the  greatest  among  all  finite
powers,  but  such  as  could  accomplish  the  impossible  would  bo
none  the  less  finite;  for  it  would  presuppose  something
impossible  in  itself,  that  is  impossible  without  the  help  of
omnipotence — something  that  omnipotence  would  be  able  to
make  possible ;  but  the  only  true  omnipotence  must  be  that
which  first  produces  the  whole  unnameable  region  within
which  there  is  a  distinction  not  previously  existent  between
the  true  and  the  untrue,  the  possible  and  the  impossible.

Now  if  this  is  the  real  meaning  of  creating  truth,  who  is
the  God  to  whom  we  ascribe  this  creation  ?  Is  He  not  the
perfect  and  complete  God  in  whose  being  we  imagine  that  all
truth  already  is — but  if  for  him  who  is  to  create  truth  it  is

696  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

not  yet  valid,  in  what  does  his  being  and  his  omnipotence
consist,  except  in  a  general  capacity  of  doing,  that  is  without
content  and.  without  direction,  and  that  certainly  appears
wholly  unlimited,  but  only  for  this  reason,  that  it  neither
finds  objects  with  which  it  could  enter  into  relation,  nor  rules
by  which  it  might  regulate  its  procedure  ?  This,  however,  is
an  idea  that  signifies  nothing  which  could  possibly  exist.  If
from  examples  of  various  performances  we  frame  the  general
notion  of  capacity  or  power,  we  obtain  an  abstraction  logically
allowable,  and  applicable  in  thought,  the  content  of  which,
however,  does  not  denote  anything  that  can  exist  until  we
supply  that  which  we  had  previously  abstracted.  As  there  is
no  motion  without  velocity  and  direction,  and  none  which
could  be  endowed  with  velocity  and  direction  after  it  had
come  into  existence,  so  we  cannot  conceive  of  any  power  that
has  not  some  mode  of  procedure,  nor  of  any  empty  capacity
that  in  its  emptiness  hits  upon  definite  modes  of  activity.
Hence  even  the  divine  power  cannot  be  thought  as  without
content  and  without  direction ;  and  the  definite  mode  of
action  in  which  it  thus  consists,  and  which  when  we  reflect
seems  to  exclude  every  other  conceivable  mode  of  action,  is
by  no  means  to  be  regarded  as  a  limitation  of  its  uncon-
ditionedness.  It  would  indeed  be  so  for  a  finite  being ;  for
such  a  being  finds  the  modes  of  activity  from  which  its
nature  excludes  it  existing  beside  it  as  regions  really  subject
'0  the  power  of  other  beings,  regions  which  are  closed  to  it,
and  hence  form  impassable  boundaries  of  its  own  activity.
There  is  nothing  of  this  kind  in  the  case  of  the  Infinite ;
being  itself  the  ground  of  all  reality,  it  is  also  the  source  of  the
various  possibilities  of  manifold  activity  which  reality  contains  ;
no  mode  of  action  beyond  its  own  can  be  opposed  to  it  as
independent  of  it,  or  at  least  as  a  reality  inaccessible  and
forbidden  to  it.  If  it  should  be  asserted  finally  that  the
imconditionedness  of  the  Divine  Omnipotence  is  detracted
from  not  only  by  the  reality  but  by  the  very  conceivability  of
other  action  than  its  own,  we  deny  this  also,  and  the  denial
will  serve  to  make  perfectly  clear  the  meaning  of  our  own  view,

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  697

For  we  use  this  necessity  of  associating  with  the  notion  of  any
power  the  thought  of  some  definite  mode  and  kind  of  action,  in
order  to  maintain  that  just  that  which  we  know  as  the  sum  of  the
eternal  truths  is  the  mode  in  which  Omnipotence  acts,  but  is  not
f-reated  by  Omnipotence — in  otlier  words,  this  sum  of  eternal
truths  is  the  mode  of  action  of  Omnipotence,  but  not  its  product.
This  signifies,  in  the  first  place,  that  Omnipotence  remains  an
imperfect  notion,  signifying  nothing  real,  if  eternal  truth  is
not  associated  with  it  in  thought,  showing  the  direction  and
kind  of  its  action ;  it  signifies  further  that  truth  is  real  not
merely  in  itself,  but  only  as  the  nature  and  eternal  habitude  of
the  highest  activity;  and  finally,  it  signifies  that  truth  regarded
as  truth,  that  is  as  a  whole  of  thoughts  connected  together  and
conditioning  one  another,  has  but  a  derived  and  secondary
existence  in  the  mind  of  the  thinker  by  whom  it  is  thought.
Au  intelligence  which  being  itself  a  part  of  reality,  is  itself
under  the  dominion  of  these  eternal  habitudes  of  all  action,
in  comparing  the  various  examples  of  being  and  action
discovers  truths  as  the  general  ideas  which  make  compre-
hensible to  it  the  connection  of  the  details  of  reality  posterior
to  its  existence  as  a  whole.  And  then  for  such  an  intelligence
there  arises  for  the  first  time  the  delusive  appearance  that  this
universal,  which  the  individual  may  think  as  the  precedent
and  conditioning  principle  of  his  thoughts,  has  also  preceded
all  reality  as  a  destiny  existing  and  ruling  in  the  shadowy
emptiness  of  unreality;  it  appears  to  this  intelligence  that
before  the  existence  of  the  world  and  of  God,  there  existed  an
ordered  realm  of  possibilities  and  necessities — that  real  things
which  only  subsequently  come  to  exist,  by  assuming  some  one
of  these  ready-made  forms,  realizing  some  one  of  these
possibilities,  become  thereby  finite  and  limited,  and,  by  the
fiat  of  that  already  existiug  necessity,  excluded  from  being
some  other  possible  thing  which  goes  on  possessing  an  inde-
scribable existence,  in  some  indescribable  locality  beyond  the
world  and  reality,  itself  bounding  and  limiting  all  reality.

We  have  here  touched  an  absolutely  decisive  point  in  our
philosophic  theory ; but  since  it  has  already  so  often,  and

698  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

in  so  many  forms,  been  tlie  topic  of  our  discussion,  it  is
sufficient  here  to  give  it  the  expression  which  we  have  just
done,  which  gives  an  answer  to  the  second  as  well  as  the  first
of  the  questions  raised.  For  impossible  as  it  appears  to
imagine  truth  as  the  creation  of  Omnipotence  for  which  it  is
as  yet  not  valid,  equally  impossible  is  it  to  understand  it  as
an  object  of  recognition  for  any  being  that  does  not  by  its  own
nature  participate  in  it.  Only  he  for  whom  truth  is  true  can
recognise  it  as  truth.  An  intelligence  which,  being  destitute
of  any  innate  rule  of  its  procedure,  should  serve  only  as  a
mirror  to  bring  into  view  everything  existing  external  to  it,
M'ould,  if  it  were  possible  to  imagine  it  at  all,  reflect  truth
and  error  with  equal  impartiality,  and  without  observing  the
distinction  between  them.  The  understanding  can  find  truth
only  where  it  sees  the  content  of  its  thought  agreeing  with  a
standard  which  it  carries  within  itself,  agreeing  that  is  with
the  laws  of  its  own  procedure  in  the  combination  of  given
material.  Hence  it  only  recognises  truth  in  as  far  as  it
belongs  to  its  own  nature  from  all  eternity ;  truth  that  was
originally  unconnected  with  it,  it  would  neither  comprehend
as  such,  nor,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  recognise  in  such  a  way  that
this  could  subsequently  become  a  rule  of  its  procedure.  Thus
it  appears  to  be  in  every  way  impossible  to  set  up  in  opposi-
tion to  truth,  a  God  for  whom  truth  has  as  yet  no  validity,
whether  we  regard  Him  as  its  creator  or  as  accommodating
Himself  to  it ;  truth  cannot  be  created  by  His  act,  but  it  is
only  through  His  existence  that  it  subsists ;  it  cannot  be
external  to  him  who  is  to  recognise  it,  on  the  contrary  its
recognition  is  only  thinkable  as  cognition  of  one's  own  being
in  it.

It  would  be  superfluous  to  analyse  at  equal  length  the
second  example  to  which  we  referred.  The  Good  cannot  be
established  by  any  divine  will,  nor  be  to  it  an  object  of
recognition,  unless  that  will  already  contains  that  Good  in  the
same  way  as  we  have  said  that  truth  must  be  contained  by
the  mind  which  apprehends  it.  If  God,  without  being  deter-
minable by  ethical  predicates,  were  merely  a  power  developing

I

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  69 d

in  some  living  form  or  other,  or  a  will  working  from  the
beginning  in  some  one  direction,  harmony  with  those  forms  of
development,  or  movement  in  that  direction  of  working,  would
certainly  be  a  condition  of  subsistence  and  wellbeing  for  any
finite  thing  dependent  upon  Him ;  and  if  there  subsisted  in
this  finite  thing  a  consciousness  of  its  existence  and  position,
those  conditions  would  appear  to  it  as  commands,  the  neglect
of  which  it  would  be  dissuaded  from  by  fear,  and  punished
for  by  remorse.  But  in  such  a  case  the  notion  of  Good  as  of
an  ideal  having  binding  force  in  virtue  of  its  own  majesty,
could  arise  only  through  a  somewhat  incomprehensible  error
of  limited  finite  insight ;  the  binding  force  could  not  be
deduced  from  such  a  will,  and  faith  in  its  unconditioned
supremacy  would  have  to  be  explained  as  an  illusion  But
for  the  same  reason  Good  could  not  be  an  object  of  recogni-
tion to  God.  Supposing  the  uneonditionedness  of  the  Divine
Being  not  to  be  lessened  by  the  fact  of  its  being  decided
external  to  and  independent  of  Him,  what  is  good  and  what
is  not  good,  yet  even  then  His  will  could  only  recognise  the
value  of  the  Good  thus  given,  if  He  Himself  in  virtue  of  His
own  nature  had  already  attached  equal  value  to  it,  just  in  the
same  way  as  the  understanding  comprehends  given  truth  as
truth  only  because  it  is  true  for  that  understanding  itself.
So  that  in  the  case  of  goodness  as  well  as  in  that  of  truth  it
appears  inadmissible  to  separate  from  God  those  essential
perfections  by  which  only  the  notion  of  Him  is  made  complete,
and  then  to  assume  as  an  already  existing  Being  an  unintel-
ligible Divine  Nature  to  which  these  perfections  are  subse-
quently added  by  a  deed  or  a  series  of  events  which  might
possibly  never  have  come  to  pass.  Every  such  attempt
mistakes  the  arbitrary  circuits  made  by  our  thought  in  the
consideration  of  its  object  for  a  movement  of  the  object  itself,
which,  being  eternally  the  same,  is  simultaneously  all  that
which  our  thought  can  comprehend  only  in  succession.

§  3.  Eeligious  reflection  analyzes  the  relation  of  God  to
reality  into  Creation,  Conservation,  and  Government,  and  we
will now  make  these  three notions  of  divine  working  the

700  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

subject  of  a  question  as  to  tlie  formal  conditions  of  the  relation
between  God  and  the  world  wliich  they  indicate ;  we  do  not
as  yet  touch  upon  the  origin  of  the  inventive  thought  by
which  God  has  given  content  to  that  which  He  created,  order
to  that  which  exists,  plan  and  direction  to  that  which  happens.

Creation  cannot  be  an  object  of  investigation  in  the  sense
of  our  seeking  to  find  the  process  by  which  it  was  brought
about ;  such  processes  can  take  place  only  within  a  world  that
already  subsists,  the  constituents  of  which  are  capable  of
action  and  of  being  combined  in  an  orderly  fashion  so  as  to
produce  results.  But  creation,  regarded  as  having  taken  place,
establishes  a  permanent  relation  between  creator  and  creature,
the  meaning  and  religious  worth  of  which  it  is  the  more
necessary  for  us  to  consider  because  it  is  not  similarly  under-
stood by  all.  Is  reality  a  production  of  the  divine  will  only  ?
Or  is  it  an  act  of  God  ?  Or,  finally,  is  it  a  non-voluntary
emanation  of  His  nature  ?  In  giving  an  affirmative  answer  to
the  first  of  these  questions,  we  receive  only  partial  approbation
from  religious  feeling,  which,  especially  in  the  present  day,
seems  more  inclined  to  regard  as  an  act  of  God  that  which  it
intends  to  indicate  by  the  notion  of  creation.  For  the  soul
feels  that  it  possesses  the  living  God  after  which  it  longs
only  when  it  is  allowed  to  speak  of  a  work  of  creation,  in
which  God,  pervading  every  smallest  part  of  existing  reality
with  His  living  nature,  would  in  truth  produce  that  which,
according  to  our  view,  would  on  occasion  of  His  will  arise  as
it  were  spontaneously.

If  a  movement  of  our  limbs  seemed  only  to  follow  our
volition,  we  should  almost  cease  to  regard  it  as  ours ;  it  would
be  as  foreign  to  our  own  being  as  now  those  further  results
appear  to  be  which  our  action  brings  forth  in  the  external
world — they  come  from  us,  it  is  true,  but  we  are  no  longer
present  in  them.  But  this  is  not  the  case ;  on  the  contrary,
at  the  moment  of  movement  we  think  that  we  directly  feel
the  transmission  of  active  will  into  our  limbs ;  we  think  that
we  directly  feel  even  the  smallest  remission  or  increase  of
Innsion  which  the  will  from  moment  to  moment  calls  forth  in

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  701

the  living  members  of  the  body ;  and  all  this  happens,  not  as
though  at  a  distance  from  us,  so  as  to  be  indirectly  experienced
by  us,  but  we  believe  that  we  are  ourselves  present  at  every
point  at  which  these  processes  take  place  ;  nay  more,  it  seems
to  us  as  though  we  plainly  felt  how  our  active  force  is
efficiently  transmitted  even  to  the  foreign  body  which  we
handle,  and  as  it  were  pervades  and  restrains  the  non-Ego  in
its  own  domain.  It  is  this  self-enjoyment  of  our  own  living
energy  which  the  view  that  regards  creation  as  an  act  refuses
to  omit  from  the  notion  of  God,  and  the  worth  of  this  religious
need  may  be  recognised,  although  we  must  hold  that  this
mode  of  satisfying  it  is  erroneous.

For  a  well-known  psychological  illusion  has  here  misled
men  into  looking  for  the  distinction  between  our  action  and
that  which  merely  has  its  origin  in  us,  in  a  place  wliere  it
cannot  be.  The  feeling  which  accompanies '  our  movements
is  not  a  sense  of  volition  in  the  full  swing  of  an  activity  by
which  it  compels  results,  but  is  a  perception  of  the  effects  of
volition  after  they  have  been  produced  in  a  fashion  wholly
imperceptible  to  us.  Our  will  does  not  really  produce  the
movement  in  the  sense  in  which  this  view  always  holds  that
it  does ;  but  to  every  volition  that  arises,  in  as  far  as  it  is  a
definite  state  of  the  soul,  there  is  attached  as  an  inevitable
consequence  some  definite  movement  in  accordance  with  an
ordered  connection  of  natural  effects  which  is  equally  with-
drawn from  our  insight  and  our  control.  Whilst  this  move-
ment is  taking  place,  or  after  it  has  taken  place,  we  receive
from  the  changed  condition  of  the  limbs  which  it  brings  about,
or  in  which  it  consists,  sensations  of  which  this  changed
condition  is  the  cause,  and  which  do  indeed  reveal  to  us  that
which  has  taken  place  in  us  as  a  consequence  of  volition,  but
not  the  slightest  hint  of  the  mode  and  fashion  in  which  this
result  has  been  brought  about.  That  by  which  our  act  is
made  our  act  and  distinguished  from  that  of  which  we  are
merely  the  cause,  does  not  consist  in  such  an  outgoing  of  the
active  being  beyocd  the  limits  of  its  self  that  it  still  remains
itself  in  that  foreign  object  ol  iis  energy  mto  which  it  flows

702  BOOK  IX. CUAPTEB  V.

with  active  efficacy ;  all  acts  are  consequences  of  volition,
inevitable  consequences,  and  not  requiring  any  special  impulse
to  realization,  provided  the  volition  itself  is  once  definitely
present,  and  the  way  in  which  these  consequences  arise  is
precisely  similar  to  that  in  which  arise  the  consequences  of
other  and  non-voluntary  mental  conditions,  or  the  incidental
consequences  of  volition  directed  to  some  other  end.  The
essential  characteristic  of  an  act  is  that  it  is  the  consequence
of  a  volition  which  willed  it  and  nothing  else,  that  it  is  not
the  consequence  of  a  feeling,  or  of  an  idea,  or  of  any  other
mental  state  except  volition.  The  will  may  be  prevented
from  actually  realizing  its  result ;  but  no  one  can  contribute
more  towards  making  the  result  of  that  volition  his  own  act
than  a  steadfast  and  undistracted  volition ;  it  belongs  to  us
only  because  we  will  it,  and  do  not  by  divided  willing  put
liindrances  in  the  way  of  the  mechanism  by  means  of  which
it  follows  our  volition  as  a  necessary  result ;  but  nowhere  is
there  any  work  of  ours  through  which,  by  fresh  activity  on
our  part,  it  is  either  necessary  or  possible  for  us  to  bring
about  the  result  of  our  volition.

For  a  finite  being  work  is  the  sum  of  all  those  intermediate
operations  which  it  has  to  set  in  action  because  its  will  cannot
influence  directly  the  foreign  objects  which  it  intends  and
strives  to  modify  ;  but  the  finite  being  feels  itself  working  to
the  degree  and  extent  to  which  the  connection  of  natural
processes  furnishes  it  with  direct  sensations  of  the  conse-
quences of  its  action ;  hence  the  movements  of  our  own  body
are  the  only  part  of  the  result  which  seem  to  us  to  be  our
own  work — those  changes  which  we  aim  to  produce  in  the
external  world  do  not  seem  so,  because  we  perceive  them  only
mediately  as  facts  that  have  taken  place,  and  are  not  made
aware  of  them  as  our  act  by  an  immediate  feeling  of  effort.  But
in  this  meaning  of  work  there  can  be  no  work  for  God,  for
His  will  does  not  find  in  the  alien  nature  of  the  objects  with
which  He  deals  the  same  barrier  as  ours  does ;  but  for  the
same  reason  the  self- enjoyment  of  His  own  vitality  and  energy
belonors  to  the  Divine  Beincr  in  boundless  measure  ;  for  stind-

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  703^

irig  in  an  ungraduated  and  equally  intimate  relation  to  all
parts  of  reality  that  either  already  exist  or  are  coming  into
existence,  He  will  be  directly  conscious  of  every  consequence
of  His  will  as  being  what  it  is,  and  it  is  not  conceivable  that
any  event  proceeding  from  God's  will  should  be  for  Him  such
an  alien  development  of  something  external,  as  the  last
ramifications  of  a  series  of  events  which  we  initiate  must
certainly  be  for  us.  Hence  we  may  affirm  in  conclusion  that
we  do  not  attribute  to  God  .any  greater  vitality  by  charac-
terizing His  creation  as  work,  for  all  work,  in  as  far  as  it  is
indirect  action,  belongs  only  to  the  finite ;  the  divine  will  does
not  work  out  its  result,  but  is  that  result ;  we  do  not  impute  to
Him  any  greater  vitality  by  describing  creation  as  His  act  and
not  as  a  simple  consequence  of  His  will,  for  such  a  distinction
does  not  exist,  every  act  being  but  a  consequence  of  volition ;
but  if  we  drop  all  notion  of  mediating  activity  or  of  work,  or
of  action  that  goes  out  of  itself,  and  regard  as  equivalent
divine  volition  and  its  consummation,  then  we  can  imagine
the  living  pervasion  of  the  creature  by  the  Creator  and  bound-
less enjoyment  by  the  Deity  of  His  own  activity — -a  self-
enjoyment  which  we  finite  beings  can  attain  to  only  by  the
roundabout  path  of  that  obliging  psychological  illusion  to
which  we  referred.

If  then  we  do  not  regard  creation  as  an  act,  what  is  the
attitude  which  we  take  up  towards  the  view  which  considers
it  as  an  efflux  of  the  divine  nature,  or  in  the  more  definite
form  which  alone  can  interest  us,  as  an  emanation  of  the
divine  intelligence  ?  Has  it  been  our  intention  to  agree  with
the  view  which  regards  the  imagination  of  God  as  having
indeed  designed  and  planned  the  possible  content  of  the
universe,  but  as  awaiting  the  realization  of  the  same  from
the  will  which  is  to  summon  into  existence  but  one,  and  that
the  best,  of  many  possible  worlds  hovering  in  the  realm
of  potentiality  ?  On  the  contrary,  we  must  characterize  this
splitting  up  of  the  divine  activity  as  also  erroneous.

And  above  all  things  it  would  be  not  the  will  but  the
insight  of  God  which among  many  possible worlds  should

704  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

discern  the  best ;  not  the  choice  but  the  realization  of  that
which  was  chosen,  would  be  the  work  of  the  wilL  But  I  fear
that  for  this  work  he  only  could  specify  a  special  content  who
should  seek  reality  in  a  wholly  incomprehensible  separation
of  the  world  from  God,  whether  as  proceeding  out  from  Him
or  being  established  external  to  Him.  If  we  drop  this  impos-
sible spatial  image,  how  shall  we  distinguish  those  divine
thoughts  which  have  been  realized  from  those  which  hover
unrealized  in  the  divine  imagination  ?  How  but  after  the
same  fashion  as  that  in  which  we  distinguish  our  own  ideas
of  empty  possibilities  from  perceptions  of  reality,  and  unful-
filled projects  from  efficient  motives  of  our  action  ?  All  these
empty  possibilities  too  are,  real — as  real  as  their  nature  {i.e.
the  nature  of  their  content)  permits;  they  subsist  as  our
thoughts,  as  movements  of  our  soul,  and  have  all  the  influence
upon  us  of  which  their  content,  and  the  form  of  their  existence
as  our  states,  makes  them  capable.  But  it  appears  later  that
regarded  as  motives  of  our  action  they  would  not  be  adequate
causes  of  a  desirable  result,  and  hence  they  do  not  become
efficient  motives  of  our  action ;  or  it  appears  that  regarded  as
perceptions  they  are  not  causes  of  those  results  in  the  phaeno-
menal  world  which  we  attributed  to  them,  and  hence  we  come
to  regard  them  as  illusions,  not  because  they  are  nothing
whatever  or  are  non-existent,  but  because  they  are  without
effect  in  the  system  of  things  external  to  us.  And  it  is  in  the
same  way  that  we  distinguish  the  unrealized  from  the  realized
thoughts  of  God  ;  not  by  supposing  that  many  possible  worlds
hovered  before  Him  and  that  His  will  realized  one  of  them  by
an  act  the  content  of  which  must  remain  altogether  incapable
of  being  specified.  For  in  being  all  equally  possible  they
all  possessed  reality  already,  and  we  could  conceive  nothing
else  by  which,  as  by  a  reality  now  starting  up  for  the  first
time,  the  elective  will  might  be  induced  to  prefer  any  one  of
them  to  the  rest.  If  we  may  speak  of  the  subject  after  the
manner  of  men,  then  we  would  say  that  what  remained
unrealized  was  clearly  seen  by  God  from  the  beginning  in  its
resultlessness,  in  its  lack  of  such  consistency  as  would  have

GOD  AND  THE  WOKLD.  705

made  it  possible  for  it  to  become  the  basis  of  progressive
cosmic  order,  and  in  its  incapacity  of  combination  with  that
which  God's  will  had  determined  as  the  content  of  creation.
In  us  finite  beings  there  may  be  permanent  illusions  and
projects  incapable  of  being  carried  into  effect,  to  which  we  yet
continue  to  cling  ;  for  the  ends  at  which  our  action  aims  are
presented  to  us  by  the  course  of  external  circumstances  so
that  we  have  only  an  imperfect  view  of  their  advantages ;
our  knowledge  of  reality  is  gained  not  by  direct  and  penetrat-
ing insight  into  things  but  by  interpretation  of  subjective
excitation.  But  it  is  not  so  with  God ;  and  hence  our
thoughts  concerning  His  creative  action  must  set  out  not  from
the  equal  possibility  of  that  which  was  uncreated,  but  from  its
impossibility  which  was  originally  recognised  by  Him.

But  this  expression  needs  some  correction  and  explana-
tion. Above  all  we  cannot  mean  that  the  images  of  different
worlds  were  present  to  and  known  by  God  as  being  in  them-
selves possible  or  impossible  in  the  same  way  as  many  com-
binations of  our  ideas,  which  we,  being  conscious  of  the  laws
of  a  real  world  independent  of  us,  regard  as  being  in
themselves  impossible,  or  incapable  of  being  carried  out  in
that  world  of  reality.  For  God  there  was  no  reality  within
which  He  had  to  realize  His  creation,  nor  laws  which,  prior  to
Him,  of  themselves  determined  what  was  possible  and  what  was
impossible.  But  when  God  thought  and  wUled  the  thought
of  His  world,  He  created  also  in  it  that  logical  order  in  virtue
of  which  it  became  possible  that  there  should  arise  empty
images  of  other  realities  as  incompatible  with  that  world ;  the
cause  and  ground  upon  which  is  founded  a  distinction  of  the
possible  from  the  impossible  and  from  the  real,  is  subsequent
to  the  reality  of  the  first  real  existences.  And  further,  we  do
not  believe  God  to  have  drawn  such  a  distinction  between
these  two  realms  of  thought — that  which  was  willed  and  that
which  is  alien  thereto — as  to  induce  Him  to  realize  the
content  of  the  first,  and  by  withholding  His  realizing  activity
to  consign  the  second  to  the  eternal  nothingness  of  empty
thought — of  thought  which  is  mere  thought ;  it  is,  we  repeat,

VOL.  II.  2  Y

706  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

simply  impossible  to  say  in  what  the  distinction  between  the
two  could  consist,  if  we  consider  this  distinction  to  be  estab-
lished by  a  divine  act,  and  do  not  seek  its  significance  in  the
difference  between  that  which  has  been  and  that  which  has
not  been  realized.  Both  are  thoughts  of  God;  but  the
thoughts  of  the  non-existent  are  thoughts  which  on  account
of  their  content — of  their  own  resultlessness,  their  incoherence
and  the  incapacity  of  development  of  their  constituents — could
neither  form  worlds,  nor  enter  into  connection  with  those
thoughts  of  existing  things  which  are  connected  and  logically
consistent.  Thus  to  the  consciousness  of  God  they  appear  as
unconnected  with  the  world  which  He  wills,  of  active  inter-
ference with  which  their  own  content  makes  them  incapable,
and  to  finite  beings  they  appear  as  non-existent.  For  the
thought  of  such  beings  can  indeed  produce  the  empty  images
of  them,  but  it  nowhere  discovers  a  trace  of  their  efficient
connection  with  that  order  of  things  which  from  the  stand-
point of  finite  beings,  is  regarded  as  reality  because  it  is  the
thought  of  God  in  which  they  themselves  have  their  place
and  which  influences  them  with  all  the  fulness  of  its  logical
consistency.  And  thus  there  arises  for  finite  minds  the
illusion  that  this  reality  (that  is  the  active  efficiency  of  real
things  that  results  from  their  content)  is  due  to  an  act  by
which  that  is  realized  which  is  in  itself  merely  possible — an
act  that  must  always  remain  insusceptible  of  definition.

And  now  at  last  we  need  no  longer  fear  that  any  one  will
misunderstand  us  to  such  an  extent  as  to  suppose  that  we
have  wished  to  represent  the  world  as  an  emanation  of  the
divine  intelligence  and  not  as  proceeding  from  His  will.  We
do  not  indeed  use  the  expression  product  of  His  will  because
we  do  not  wish  to  call  up  afresh  the  already  rejected  thought
of  a  special  act  of  realization.  But  yet  we  say  that  the  world
was  willed  by  God,  and  this  expression  we  have  already
frequently  used  provisionally.  It  is  only  for  the  finite  being
that  will  is  principally  an  impulse  towards  change,  towards
the  establishment  of  something  which  did  not  exist ;  but  the
real  nature  of  will  is  only  the  approval  by  which  the  being

GOD  AND  THE  WOELD.  707

tliat  wills  attributes  to  himself  that  which  he  wills,  whether
it  is  something  that  is  to  be  realized  in  the  future,  or  some-
thing that  exists  in  eternal  reality.  The  objects  upon  which
a  finite  mind  is  occupied  are  brought  to  it  in  succession  by  a
cosmic  order  which  is  independent  of  it;  and  all  the  more
on  this  account  does  it  seek  its  will  in  the  mobility  which
produces  what  was  non-existent,  changes  or  abolishes  what
was  existent,  and  demeans  itself  as  independent  towards  those
occasions  of  its  exercise  which  it  cannot  with  equal  independ-
ence bring  about.  And  yet  at  last  even  for  the  human  mind
that  which  is  most  important  in  will  is  to  be  found,  not  in  this
mobility  of  the  change-producing  impulse,  but  in  the  approval
or  disapproval  with  which  the  whole  man  wills  or  does  not
will,  accepts  or  rejects,  himself.  It  is  such  an  uniform  and
unchanging  will  that  we  have  regarded  as  connected  with  or
eternally  based  upon  the  divine  thought  of  the  world ;  we
could  not  understand  it  as  the  mere  conclusion  of  deliberations
carried  on  by  unvolitional  divine  insight  without  unduly
assimilating  the  divine  being  to  the  image  of  a  finite  mind.
And  it  would  not  be  impossible  to  show  that  intelligence
without  will  is  as  inconceivable  as  will  without  insight ;  we
are  withheld  from  setting  about  the  proof  here  by  remember-
ing the  extent  to  which  we  have  already  penetrated  into  a
region  where  countless  misunderstandings  may  attach  to  each
of  the  imperfect  expressions  which  we  are  obliged  to  employ
in  order  to  indicate  in  some  way  those  extreme  limits  of
human  ideation  of  which  we  are  forced  to  take  account.

§  4.  Conservation  and  governance  in  as  far  as  they  concern
Nature  and  the  course  of  Nature  have  already  frequently  been
objects  of  our  consideration  (cf.  supra,  p.  130,  and  i.  p.  446).
And  it  is  only  in  so  far  that  they  belong  to  the  task  which
we  have  set  before  ourselves,  and  we  never  considered  it  part
of  that  task  to  exhaust  the  relation  of  God  to  the  spiritual
universe,  to  the  meaning,  end,  and  destiny  of  all  things.  But
a  single  point  in  this  wide  world  of  thought  induces  us  to
make  an  addition  which  is  called  for  by  what  has  gone  before.
If the world  were but  a chain of mutually  conditioning

708  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

events,  if  all  the  future  were  but  a  logical  development  of
the  past,  conservation  and  governance,  without  being  beset  by
any  peculiar  difficulties,  would  be  but  various  expressions  of
the  divine  creative  activity.  But  religious  faith  finds  such  a
mechanism  of  the  cosmic  course  neither  correspondent  to  its
own  need  nor  worthy  of  being  the  divine  creation  ;  it  assumes
that  the  freedom  of  finite  beings  introduces  into  the  cosmic
course  new  beginnings  of  action,  which,  having  once  come  into
being,  proceed  according  to  the  universal  laws  of  that  course,
but  have  not  in  the  past  any  compelling  cause  of  their  appear-
ance. Thus  it  is  that  conservation  and  governance  come  to  have
a  work  to  do.  But  how  does  this  assumption  agree  with  the
unconditionedness  and  perfection  of  God,  how  with  His  omni-
science which  that  perfection  cannot  lack,  and  which  could
not  subsist  without  foreknowledge  of  the  future  ?  To  attain
by  inference  to  a  knowledge  of  the  future  which  has  its  causes
in  the  present  is  a  prescience  possible  for  us  in  a  limited
degree  and  belonging  to  God  to  an  unlimited  extent;  but
what  can  be  the  meaning  of  saying,  as  people  do,  that  God
foreknows  that  which  is  to  happen  through  freewill  in  the
future,  not  as  something  that  must  come,  but  as  something
that  will  come  ?  If  the  future  does  not  exist,  how  could  this
non-existent  (unless  represented  in  the  present  by  its  causes
and  thus  Twt  free)  stand  in  any  other  relation  to  cognition  than
that  which  never  will  be,  and  how  therefore  could  it  be
distinguished  from  the  latter  ?

It  is  certainly  a  somewhat  strange  proceeding  when  we
finite  beings  who  are  so  often  reminded  of  the  limits  of  our
knowledge,  ask  questions  concerning  the  possibility  and  con-
ditions of  omniscience,  and  expect  an  answer  to  our  questions.
We  can  foresee  that  we  shall  end  with  a  postulate,  of  which
we  cannot  describe  the  fulfilment,  satisfied  if  the  reflections
from  which  we  can  start  do  not  make  that  unknown  fulfilment
appear  as  a  dream  that  is  altogether  ridiculous.

It  has  been  attempted  to  make  the  unconstrained  freedom  of
fresh  beginnings  compatible  with  omniscience  by  the  assump-
tion that  time  is  but  a  form  of  intuition  under  which  the  world

I

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  709

appears  to  ns,  but  in  which  it  does  not  exist.  This  inversion
of  the  ordinary  view,  however,  cannot  be  so  easily  carried  out
as  the  similar  inversion  with  regard  to  space ;  space  could  be
given  up  because  without  it  there  still  remained  to  us  a  com-
plexly organized  world  of  intellectual  reality,  clearly  exempli-
fied in  our  own  inner  life ;  but  in  order  that  any  event  should
appear  in  time,  must  we  not  presuppose  that  there  is  an  actual
succession  of  its  phases,  or  at  least  an  actual  temporal  succes-
sion of  ideas  in  us  by  which  the  merely  apparent  succession
of  these  phases  would  then  be  determined  ?

Much  may  be  said  in  answer  to  this  natural  objection
without  invalidating  it.  It  is  true  that  empty  time  in  which
events  take  place,  or  a  current  of  empty  time  flowing  on  of
itself,  could  be  neither  a  producing  nor  a  determining  condi-
tion of  the  course  of  events.  The  passing  moments  could  not
bring  reality  with  them,  they  could  not  choose  what  should
last  or  what  should  pass  away,  they  could  not  determine  the
place  at  which  each  event  should  enter  into  their  current.  It
is  only  through  that  position  with  regard  to  the  whole  which
every  individual  occupies  in  virtue  of  its  significance,  of  its
being  conditioned  by  one  and  having  itself  conditioning  force
with  reference  to  another,  that  the  point  of  its  entrance
into  time  and  the  length  of  its  duration  in  time  are  deter-
mined. Now  if  this  one  essential  of  action — the  direction
which  it  takes  and  the  order  into  which  it  falls — lies  only  in
the  conditioning  bond  of  the  content  itself,  as  it  is  taking
place,  empty  time  is  just  as  little  capable  of  producing  from
this  timeless  connection  the  movement  and  succession  of
action.  Any  given  extent  of  empty  time  is  exactly  the  same
at  the  end  as  at  the  beginning  of  its  course ;  however  great  or
however  small  we  may  imagine  it,  nothing  occurs  in  conse-
quence of  its  lapse  through  which  there  could  be  produced  a
condition  of  or  necessity  for  the  appearance  of  any  event  of
which  the  cause  already  subsists,  more  adequate  or  more
constraining  than  that  cause  and  that  condition  respectively
were  at  the  beginning  of  this  vain  expenditure  of  time.  If
the  causes  which  then  subsisted  were  not  capable  of  effecting

710  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

the  realization  of  the  event  in  question,  then  no  lapse  of  time
of  whatever  length  would  be  sufficient  to  supply  this  lacking
motive  force.  Such  reflections  favour  the  attempt  to  seek
true  reality  only  in  the  conditioning  force  which  every
event  exercises  upon  its  own  result,  regarding  time,  which
appears  to  our  imagination  as  the  unending  form  in  which
this  order  is  embraced,  as  a  mere  form  of  conception  in  which,
for  us  only,  is  spread  out  the  timeless  connection  of  the
cosmic  content.  And  it  is  possible,  up  to  a  certain  point,  to
give  clearness  even  to  this  unusual  mode  of  thought.  In
themselves,  past,  present,  and  future  are  not  different  as  far  as
time  is  concerned,  but  simultaneous — if  we  can  allow  that  this
phrase,  incorrect  in  itself,  is  intelligible ;  in  this  whole  of
reality  nothing  passes  away ;  but  the  whole  is  a  whole  of
members  which  condition  one  another,  and  is  comparable  to  a
system  of  truths  of  which  the  simplest  condition  all  the  rest,
and  (to  make  use  here  of  a  natural  figure)  precede  them  not
in  time  but  in  importance ;  not  only  does  the  series  of  conse-
quences proceed  in  a  straight  course  from  them,  but  also  all
the  propositions  which  depend  in  equal  degree  upon  those
principles,  appear  as  co-ordinate,  simultaneous,  and  of  equal
value.  Eeality,  as  we  know,  is  no  system  of  truths,  and  we
must  allow  for  the  inadequacy  of  the  comparison ;  but  it  is  so
organized  by  means  of  relations  of  reciprocal  conditionings
that  each  of  its  parts  presupposes  immeasurable  series  of
causes,  draws  after  it  an  equally  immeasurable  series  of  results,
and  finds  itself  at  the  same  distance  as  countless  other
members,  from  the  first  causes,  or  from  any  given  member  of
the  whole.  It  is  this  organization  which  is  intuited  by
cognition  in  temporal  succession ;  the  condition  precedes  that
which  it  conditions,  the  latter  follows,  the  causes  and  results
which  are  most  closely  connected  are  in  immediate  juxta-
position, the  more  distant  results  are  divided  from  their
immediate  cause  by  a  space  of  time  which  is  filled  up  by
the  successive  intermediate  links  which  connect  it  with  that
cause.  And  it  is  not  to  a  cognizing  mind,  standing  without
and  regarding  it  as  some  alien  mechanism,  that  this  organiza*

GOP  AND  THE  WORLD.  ^11

tion  appears  thus ;  all  finite  beings  are  themselves  members  of
this  series,  and  to  each,  in  its  due  place  in  the  series,  the
assumptions  which  it  involves,  as  far  as  it  knows  them,  appear
to  be  past,  its  consequences,  as  far  as  it  is  certain  of  them,  to
be  future ;  and  for  the  rest,  the  whole  of  its  unknown  causes
and  of  its  incalculable  effects  appear  as  an  endless  past  and
an  endless  future.

This  view  admits  of  development  so  far,  and  is  right  as  far
as  regards  the  order  and  connection  of  the  events  as  they  take
place ;  but  if  it  denies  with  cogent  arguments  the  existence
of  unending  empty  time,  which  even  according  to  our  natural
way  of  thinking  is  never  held  to  exist  thus,  but  is  regarded
as  unceasingly  passing  away  and  then  again  coming  into
being,  it  cannot  by  any  ingenious  torture  of  thought  really
avoid  that  unceasing  ebb  and  flow,  the  temporal  succession  of
events.  It  is  indeed  true  that  it  does  not  fail  because  the
idea  of  that  which  we  think  as  earlier  must  precede  in  time
our  idea  of  that  which  we  think  as  later ;  on  the  contrary,  it
is  only  a  consciousness  that  comprehends  both  in  one  wholly
indivisible  act,  that  is  in  a  position  to  compare  them  and  to
assign  them  their  different  places  in  the  apparent  extension  of
time ;  but  even  these  indivisible  acts  are  repeated  and  follow
one  another.  Any  finite  being  placed  at  some  particular
spot  in  a  timeless  system  would  always  necessarily  see  as  its
future  some  one  special  content  whether  clear  or  obscure,
and  some  other  as  its  past;  life  which  makes  the  former
more  and  more  clear  and  the  latter  gradually  more  and  more
faint,  is  not  conceivable  without  a  real  stream  of  occurrence
which  carries  consciousness  past  the  content  of  the  world,  or
the  content  of  the  world  past  consciousness,  or  lets  both  change
together.

But  this  necessary  recognition  of  the  course  of  time  is
connected  in  us  with  a  strong  feeling  that  the  recognition
cannot  contain  any  final  utterance  on  the  subject.  We  are
very  ready  to  declare  that  what  is  gone  is  gone  for  ever —
but  are  we  fully  conscious  of  all  that  this  declaration  implies  ?
Is all  the wealth  of  the past  wholly  non-existent  ? Is  it

712  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

^  entirely  broken  off  from  all  connection  with  the  world,  and  not
in  any  way  whatever  preserved  as  part  of  it  ?  And  is  cosmic
history  nothing  but  the  infinitely  narrow  and  incessantly
changing  streak  of  light  which  we  call  the  present,  glimmering
between  the  obscurity  of  a  past  which  is  done  with  and  is  no
longer  anything,  and  the  obscurity  of  a  future  which  is  also
nothing  ?  In  expressing  these  questions  thus,  I  follow  that
turn  of  thought  which  seeks  to  modify  the  monstrousness  of
their  content.  For  these  two  abysses  of  obscurity,  however
empty  and  formless,  are  yet  supposed  to  exist,  and  to  con-
stitute an  environment  of  which  the  unknown  interior  offers
a  kind  of  dwelling-place  for  the  non-existent — a  place  into
which  it  has  disappeared  or  whence  it  comes.  But  if  one
tries  to  do  without  even  these  images  and  not  even  to  imagine
the  emptiness  which  bounds  existence  in  both  directions,  one
will  find  how  impossible  it  is  to  do  with  the  naked  contrast
of  existence  and  non-existence,  and  how  ineradicable  is  men's
desire  to  be  able  to  regard  even  the  non-existent  as  being  in
some  wonderful  way  a  constituent  of  reality.  Hence  we
speak  of  the  distant  future  and  the  distant  past,  this  spatial
image  satisfying  the  need  we  feel  of  not  letting  aught  of  that
which  does  not  belong  to  the  present  escape  from  the  greater
whole  of  reality.

Unable  as  we  are  to  specify  how  the  lapse  of  time  comes
about,  and  how  the  condition  of  any  given  moment  passes
from  existence  into  non-existence,  in  order  to  make  room  for
the  condition  of  the  succeeding  moment,  we  are  equally
unable  to  say  how  on  the  other  hand  there  comes  to  pass
this  comprehension  in  a  contemporary  or  supratemporal
leality,  of  that  which  is  ever  flowing  on.  But  accustomed  to
find  the  world  more  wide  and  rich  than  thought  which  tries
to  follow  its  marvellous  structure,  I  entertain  no  doubt  as  to
the  fulfilment  of  this  postulate,  of  which  indeed  we  can  only
Bpeak  in  a  limited  human  fashion.  There  does  not  exist  for
God  the  condition  which  binds  us  to  one  definite  spot  in  the
universe,  making  it  possible  to  refer  to  this  region  of  our
immediate  experience — our  present — as  past  or  future  every-

GOD  AND  THE  WOELD.  713

tiling  that  is  or  happens  external  to  us  ;  God  Himself  being
not  a  member  of  this  whole  but  its  all-embracing  essence  is
as  near  to  any  one  part  of  this  reality  as  to  any  other,  and
although  there  lie  open  to  His  all-penetrating  knowledge  those
inner  relations  by  which  this  whole  would  be  systematized
into  temporal  order,  yet  for  Him  no  particular  point  has
exclusively  the  specific  worth  of  the  present ;  for  God,  this
belongs  to  the  infinite  whole.

And  finally — to  return  to  the  point  which  gave  rise  to
these  reflections — free  actions  also  find  their  place  in  this
timeless  reality ;  not  as  non-existent  and  future,  but  as
existent.  For  although  not  conditioned  by  the  past,  they
would  be  unmeaning  unless  they  had  reference  to  present
occasions  which  furnish  the  ends  at  which  they  aim,  and
unless  they  attained  reality  by  producing  results.  Hence
their  place  in  this  timeless  existence  is  determined  not  by
members  which  preceded  them  as  conditions,  but  by  members
which  succeed  them  as  conditioned,  or  are  co-ordinate  with
them;  hence  omniscience  need  not  foresee  free  action  as
something  that  will  be,  but  can  observe  it  as  something  real,
which,  regarded  as  a  temporal  phaenomenon,  has  its  place  at
some  definite  point  in  the  future.

§  5.  We  have  already  (cf.  i.,  p.  384)  so  unreservedly
acknowledged  that  it  is  impossible  to  derive  from  anything  else
the  inventive  thought  from  which  spring  the  forms  of  natural
reality  and  also  (as  we  may  now  add)  those  of  the  historical
course  of  the  world,  that  we  need  not  now  venture  on  any
fresh  attempt  in  this  direction.  But  as  far  as  we  are  con-
cerned, one  of  the  motives  which  generally  urge  men  to  such
efforts  has  become  inefficacious.  We  no  longer  hold  that  a
realm  of  eternal  truths,  of  formal  necessities,  of  abstract
outlines  of  all  later  reality,  is  absolutely  prior  to  all  else  in
the  Divine  Being  in  such  a  way  that  the  rich  and  varied
forms  of  reality  when  compared  to  it  must  appear  as  some-
thing wholly  new,  as  sonie  spontaneous  action  which,  showing
itself  under  forms  that  we  cannot  calculate  beforehand,  submits
to  this  alien  Being. The  eternal  truths  are  for  us  onlv  the

714  BOOK  IX. CHAPTEK  V.

modes  in  which  creation  itself  proceeds ;  they  subsist  not
before  it  but  after  it  as  laws  to  which  the  products  of  creative
activity  appear  subject.  And  at  this  point  we  must  go
back  to  a  more  exact  determination  which  in  what  precedes
we  let  drop  for  the  sake  of  clearness.  Properly  speaking,
neither  a  law  nor  the  sum  of  eternal  truths  can  be  accepted
as  the  direct  mode  of  procedure  of  any  power  ;  for  truths  and
laws  determine  only  the  reciprocal  behaviour  of  the  various
manifestations  of  any  force,  but  they  do  not  give  the  very
content  that  can  be  broken  up  into  these  various  manifesta-
tions. Hence  if  we  cannot  derive  from  universal  necessary
truths  the  reason  why  this  particular  reality  arid  no  other
subsists,  we  have  also  to  remark  that  it  is  no  longer  any  part
of  our  task  to  make  such  an  attempt — that  direction  of  the
eternal  power  which  led  to  the  existing  world  of  forms  is  the
original  first  and  only  reality,  and  whilst  it  acts  or  when  it
has  acted  it  appears  to  thought  (which  itself  is  included  in  it
as  its  product)  from  the  double  point  of  view  of  living
creation  in  a  definite  direction,  and  of  an  activity  which  in  its
procedure  follows  universal  laws  ;  and  it  is  then  that  for  the
first  time  occasion  is  given  to  thought  to  dream  of  other
directions  of  that  creative  activity  which  do  not  exist,  and  the
possibility  of  merely  thinking  which  depends  upon  the  reality
of  the  direction  which  does  exist  and  of  the  inner  order  of  the
creative  force  that  works  in  it.

But  this  consideration  does  not  furnish  us  with  a  com-
plete conclusion.  Even  upon  the  assumption  that  we  are
only  concerned  with  a  natural  cosmic  order,  and  are  not
called  upon  to  give  any  account  of  worth  and  goodness,  it
would  still  only  be  satisfactory  if  it  could  be  shown  how  from
the  content  which  the  creative  force  strives  to  realize,  the
sum  of  the  eternal  truths  results,  as  an  abstraction  which
separates  that  which  is  universal  in  the  self-evident  pro-
cedure of  the  force  that  produces  all  the  parts  of  this  very
content  itself.  There  is  no  hope  of  any  such  achievement.
Stress  may  with  justice  be  laid  upon  a  difficulty  which  would
make it  impossible for  us, even if  the connection to  be

I

GOD  AND  THE  WOELD.  715

pointed  out  did  actually  subsist — it  is  ouly  a  very  small
part  of  reality,  only  Nature  as  terrestrial  that  we  know  ;  we
do  not  know  the  forms  of  existence  and  action  which  sub-
sist elsewhere,  or  the  connection  between  these  and  our  own
sphere  of  experience ;  hence  we  are  quite  unable  to  com-
prehend the  tendency  of  creative  force,  the  inventive  and
formative  thought  which  it  obeys,  in  one  notion  which  should
characterize  it  completely,  exhaustively,  and  impartially  ;  hence
it  is  impossible  for  us,  from  the  fragmentary  view  of  the
connection  and  meaning  of  Nature,  which  is  all  that  has  been
accorded  to  us,  to  deduce  the  universal  laws  of  its  procedure
as  they  might  be  gathered  from  the  complete  content  of  the
creative  Idea  as  an  abstract  expression  of  its  action,  by  any
one  who  knew  that  content.  I  do  not  doubt  that  such  an
all-embracing  knowledge  of  Nature  as  a  whole  would  oblige
us  to  give  up  a  number  of  our  ordinary  •  points  of  view,
would  cause  many  perplexities  to  disappear,  and  would
wholly  transform  many  difficulties ;  but  I  need  not  under-
take the  perplexing  inquiry  whether  it  really  would  do
what  is  expected  of  it,  and  make  possible  the  achievement
referred  to,  for  I  have  a  conviction  (which  I  trust  the  reader
shares)  that  just  this  boundless  insight  into  Nature  would
show  the  invalidity  of  the  assumption  with  which  we  set
out ;  it  would  appear  that  there  is  not  working  in  the  world
any  bare  formative  force,  but  that  the  inventive  thought
which  determines  cosmic  forms  is  indissolubly  connected  with
the  realm  of  Worth  and  Good.  The  lesser  question.  How  are
the  universal  laws  connected  with  the  formative  thought  ?  is
absorbed  into  the  more  important  one,  In  what  connection
do  both  stand  to  that  which  has  eternal  worth  ?

Eeligious  faith  is  accustomed  to  consider  some  supreme
good  as  the  guiding  end,  free  creative  divine  imagination  as
the  means  by  which  the  end  is  reahzed,  eternal  truth  as  the
law  according  to  which  this  imagination  and  its  products
work.  Now  if  we  beheld  in  the  world  unequivocal  and
thoroughgoing  harmony  between  these  three  principles,  the
attempt  to  combine  them  might  be  regarded  as practicable.

716  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

Creative  imagination  indeed  could  never  properly  be  derived
from  the  Supreme  Good  ;  for  no  end,  regarded  abstractly  and
in  isolation,  determines  more  than  certain  general  require-
ments which  seem  capable  of  being  fulfilled  by  various
means ;  and  just  as  little  could  laws  be  derived  from  the
direction  taken  by  that  imagination.  But  it  might  perhaps
be  shown  that  just  as  the  power  is  not  conceivable  in  itself
but  only  as  acting  in  some  definite  direction,  so  also  Good,
thought  in  its  universality,  is  but  an  abstraction  from  some
definite  existing  good,  which  would  not  be  opposed  to  the
coming  reality  as  a  formless  end,  the  mode  of  carrying  it  out
being  as  yet  undetermined ;  but  would  be  directly  identical
with  that  which  we  called  the  direction  of  the  creative  im-
agination. And  then  there  would  be  only  one  thing :  only
the  one  real  power  appearing  to  us  under  a  threefold  image
of  an  end  to  be  realized — namely,  first  some  definite  and
desired  Good,  then  on  account  of  the  definiteness  of  this,  a
formed  and  developing  Eeality,  and  finally  in  this  activity  an
unvarying  reign  of  Law.

Before  giving  to  this  view,  which  is  a  confession  of  my
philosophic  faith,  the  furthest  elucidation  which  I  am  able
to  give,  I  would  lay  stress  upon  the  decisive  and  altogether
insurmountable  difficulty  which  stands  in  the  way  of  its
being  carried  out  scientifically — that  is,  upon  the  existence  ot
evil  and  of  sin  in  Nature  and  in  History.  It  would  be  quite
useless  to  analyse  the  various  attempts  that  have  been  made
to  solve  this  problem.  No  one  has  here  found  the  thought
which  would  save  us  from  our  difficulty,  and  I  too  know  it
not.  It  may  be  said  that  evil  appears  only  in  particulars,
and  that  when  we  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  great
whole  it  disappears  ;  but  of  what  use  is  a  consolation  the
power  of  which  depends  upon  the  arrangement  of  clauses  in
a  sentence  ?  For  what  becomes  of  our  consolation  if  we
convert  the  sentence  which  contains  it  thus — The  world  is
indeed  harmonious  as  a  whole,  but  if  we  look  nearer  it  is
full  of  misery  ? — He  who  justifies  evil  as  a  means  of  divine
education,  ignores  the  suffering  of  the  inferior  animals  and

I

GOD  AND  THE  WOELD.  717

all  the  incomprehensible  stunting  of  the  life  of  Mind  which
^ye  see  in  history,  and  limits  the  omnipotence  of  God ;  for
evil  is  only  used  as  a  means  of  education  because  there  is  no
other  means.  And  finally,  we  are  not  satisfied  even  if  this
limitation  is  admitted  not  secretly  but  openly  as  by  Leibnitz,
who  in  every  case  of  irreconcilable  difference  between  the
omnipotence  of  God  and  His  goodness,  believed  himself  bound
to  decide  for  the  latter,  and  to  explain  evil  by  reference  to  the
limits  imposed  by  the  primeval  necessity  of  the  eternal  truths
even  upon  the  free  creative  activity  of  God.  For  of  all  im-
aginable assertions  the  most  indemonstrable  is  that  the  evil
of  the  world  is  due  to  the  validity  of  eternal  truth  ;  on  the
contrary,  to  any  unprejudiced  view  of  Nature  it  appears  to
depend  upon  the  definite  arrangements  of  reality,  beside  which
other  arrangements  are  thinkable,  also  based  upon  the  same
eternal  truth.  If  there  were  retained  the  separation  (which,
however,  we  do  not  admit)  between  necessary  laws  and  the
creative  activity  of  God,  in  our  view  evil  would  undoubtedly
belong  not  to  that  which  must  be,  but  to  that  which  is  freely
created.  Let  us  therefore  alter  a  little  the  canon  of  Leibnitz,
and  say  that  where  there  appears  to  be  an  irreconcilable
contradiction  between  the  omnipotence  and  the  goodness  of
God,  there  our  finite  wisdom  has  come  to  the  end  of  its  tether,
and  that  we  do  not  understand  the  solution  which  yet  we
believe  in.

§  6.  I  was  no  doubt  wrong  when  I  first  offered  these
reflections  to  the  courtesy  of  my  readers,  in  passing  over  this
gap  in  our  philosophic  theory,  which  cannot  be  filled,  with
words  which  though  they  seemed  to  me  emphatic  enough  were
yet  but  brief.  What  moves  me  to  the  following  remarks
is  not  the  hope  of  now  filling  up  the  gap,  but  the  wish  that
no  doubt  should  remain  as  to  the  meaning  and  end  of  all
the  reflections  in  which  the  reader  has  hitherto  been  so
obliging  as  to  accompany  me.  I  have  never  cherished  an
assurance  that  speculation  possesses  secret  means  of  going
back  to  the  beginning  of  all  reality,  of  looking  on  at  its
genesis and growth, and of determining beforehand the

718  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

necessary  direction  of  its  movement ;  it  seems  to  me  that
philosophy  is  the  endeavour  of  the  human  mind,  after  this
wonderful  world  has  come  into  existence  and  we  in  it,  to
work  its  way  back  in  thought  and  bring  the  facts  of  outer
and  of  inner  experience  into  connection,  as  far  as  our  present
position  in  the  world  allows.  I  acknowledge  my  steadfast
adherence  to  the  old-fashioned  conviction,  that  not  only  is
our  scientific  knowledge  but  fragmentary,  but  that  also  there
are  ways  to  lead  us  to  fuller  light  which  are  as  yet  hidden
from  us  ;  the  task  of  our  philosophy  is  not  vast  and  cosmic
but  modest  and  terrestrial — it  has  to  construct  the  image  of
the  world  as  projected  on  the  plane  surface  of  our  mundane
existence.  I  might  work  out  this  simile,  and  appeal  to  the
fuller  dimensions  of  true  reality  in  which  may  be  reconciled
supreme  goodness  and  the  existence  of  evil,  which  in  our
view  must  always  conflict ;  but  all  that  I  should  accomplish
mth  such  a  juggle  of  words  would  be  to  veil  the  admission
which  we  must  frankly  make,  that  we  cannot  even  imagine
the  direction  in  which  the  unknown  conciliation  of  the  differ-
ence is  to  be  sought.

If  I  still  hold  fast  my  confidence  in  the  existence  of  a
solution  which  we  do  not  know,  what  I  wish  to  give
expression  to  is  not  a  didactic  affirmation  to  be  bolstered  up  by
some  kind  of  speculative  support,  but  only  the  watchword  of
a  struggle  in  which  I  desire  that  my  readers  should  participate
— a  struggle  against  the  confidence  of  views  which  impoverish
faith  without  enriching  knowledge.  But  to  regard  the  course
of  the  world  as  the  development  of  some  blind  force  which
works  on  according  to  universal  laws,  devoid  of  insight  and
freedom,  devoid  of  interest  in  good  and  evil — are  we  to  con-
sider this  unjustifiable  generalization  of  a  conception  valid  in
its  own  sphere,  as  the  higher  truth  ?  Is  it  not  rather  the
unsatisfying  conclusion  to  which  weary  thought  may  come
back  at  any  moment,  if  it  gives  up  its  unattainable  but  not
the  less  certain  goal  ?  But  as  to  all  that  is  good  and
beautiful  and  holy — will  the  arising  of  this  light  out  of  the
darkness of  blind development be really  more intelligible

I

GOD  AND  THE  WORID.  719

tlian  is,  for  us,  the  shadow  of  evil  in  the  world  which  we
believe  to  be  cast  by  that  light  ?

§  7.  If  we  go  back  to  the  facts  which  cause  us  to  form  the
notions  of  Good  and  good  things,  we  find  that  our  con-
science approves  and  enjoins  definite  kinds  of  disposition
and  volition  —  what  are  thus  approved  we  call  good ;  we
find  further  that  certain  objects  and  their  impressions  upon
us  are  felt  by  us  to  be  helpful  and  agreeable — as  being
thus  helpful  they  are  called  good  when  they  correspond  to
some  permanent  and  general  need  of  our  nature,  but  useful
in  as  far  as  they  are  conducive  to  some  isolated  end,  the
importance  of  which  as  regards  our  whole  destiny  is  left
undetermined.  Conscience  and  feeling  by  their  indemon-
strable but  irreversible  declarations  directly  assign  these
values  to  very  various  objects ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  the
similarity  of  the  declarations  urges  us  to  seek  in  these
various  objects  similarity  of  the  grounds  upon  which  those
declarations  have  been  made  concerning  them.  This  path  of
abstraction  leads  us  to  find  by  comparison  of  individuals  the
invariable  condition  in  virtue  of  which  any  content  is  good,
useful,  or  beautiful.  But  the  end  of  this  path  may  be
conceived  in  two  different  ways.  Either  there  appears  as
such  a  condition  only  a  universal  formal  relation  which  has
reality  not  in  this  universality,  but  only  in  any  one  of  the
individual  forms  from  which  it  was  abstracted  ;  or  a  hope  is
entertained  of  reaching  some  universal  which  actually  exists
in  such  universality,  and  in  fact  is  that  which  it  indicates  as
a  quality  in  the  individual  real  thing.

With  regard  to  what  is  useful  and  what  is  agreeable,  we
all  think  that  we  are  in  the  first  case,  and  the  scientific
instinct  of  our  time  does  not,  like  that  of  antiquity,  seek
what  is  useful  in  itself  or  what  is  agreeable  in  itself.  We  are
content  if  we  can  find  general  notions  of  both,  which  are  not
in  themselves  that  which  they  denote  in  other  things.  For
as  in  general  no  notion  is  that  which  it  connotes — as  the
notion  of  red  is  not  red,  and  the  notion  of  sweet  is  not  sweet
— so  also the contents of  the  general  notions  of  what  is

720  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

useful  and  of  what  is  agreeable  are  not  themselves  agreeable
and  useful,  but  they  are  conditions  under  which  agreeableness
or  usefulness  appear  as  predicates  of  something  else,  that  is  of
the  individual  real  thing  which  fulfils  these  conditions.  On
the  other  hand,  Beauty-in-itself  and  Good-in-itself  are  still
goals  and  even  starting-points  of  manifold  speculations.  In
these  two  cases  men  seek  to  find  in  the  universal  not  only
conditions  under  which  something  other  than  the  universal
itself,  something  fulfilling  the  conditions,  is  beautiful  or  good,
but  also  seek  to  find  something  which  is  in  itself  the  goodness
or  beauty  which  we  originally  know  only  as  a  quality  in  the
individual.  I  leave  beauty  to  the  reflection  of  the  reader,  and
only  pursue  the  question  whether  and  how  the  peculiar
nature  of  what  is  good  makes  it  possible  to  carry  out  in  its
case  the  task  which  is  not,  in  all  cases,  practicable.

Actions  are  not  good  simply  as  events  that  occur,  nor  their
results  simply  as  facts  that  have  been  established — it  is  only
the  will  from  which  the  actions  proceed  that  is  good.  And
the  will  itself  is  regarded  as  good  not  as  a  mere  impulse  to
execution,  but  as  the  outflow  of  a  frame  of  mind  which  is  not
simply  knowledge  of  a  command  but  also  agreement  with  it,
and  this  agreement  is  not — like  the  obedience  of  any  natural
force  to  the  law  which  it  follows — a  mere  factual  agreement,
but  is  a  case  of  compliance  where  non-compliance  was  possible.
And  it  must  be  not  simply  a  possibility  of  disobedience  which
is  perceived,  but  the  disobedience,  by  its  own  worth,  which  it
opposes  to  the  worth  of  the  command,  must  withstand  the
tendency  of  the  will  to  compliance.  But  worth  can  exist
only  for  a  sensitive  subject ;  whatever  may  proceed  from  an
intelligence  that  feels  neither  pain  nor  pleasure  and  from  a
will  guided  thereby,  no  moral  judgment  could  be  passed  upon
it.  And  finally,  we  should  not  even  call  good  the  frame  of
mind  of  him  who,  by  a  choice  involving  no  sacrifice,  should
simply  prefer  the  worth  which  is  greater,  both  objectively  and
to  him,  to  the  worth  which  is  lesser ;  on  the  contrary,  that
which  for  the  feeling  mind  is  the  nearest  and  most  urgent
worth,  must  be  sacrificed  to  some  other  worth,  which  to  it,  as

i

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD*  721

feeling,  is  not  greater — the  welfare  of  self  must  be  sacrificed
to  the  content  of  a  recognised  command.

rrora  this  point  our  path  diverges  from  that  of  the  popular
view  with  which  hitherto  in  this  hasty  recapitulation  of
familiar  points  of  view  it  has  coincided.  For  as  we  long
since  acknowledged,  we  do  not  agree  with  those  who  seek
this  higher  worth  in  an  Idea  of  the  Good  which  requires  men
to  strive  after  some  formal  relation  of  wills  to  one  another,  or
the  realization  of  some  particular  condition  of  things  as  a
directly  binding  duty  or  as  the  Supreme  Good.  No  relation
however  profound  between  conditions  and  events  which
merely  occur  without  their  harmony  being  enjoyed  by  any
one,  is  a  good  in  itself,  and  no  will  is  good  because,  being
conscious  of  the  complete  unfruitfulness  of  such  relations,
it  yet  devotes  itself  to  establishing  them.  If  any  heart
postpones  its  own  good  to  some  other  good,  this  other  can
only  be  found  in  the  happiness  of  some  one  else,  and  the
sacrifice  is  good  only  because  it  is  made  on  this  account.
Good  and  good  things  do  not  exist  as  such  independent  of
the  feeling,  willing,  and  knowing  mind  ;  they  have  reality
only  as  living  movements  of  such  a  mind.  What  is  good
in  itself  is  some  felt  bliss ;  what  we  call  good  things  are
means  to  this  good  but  are  not  themselves  this  good  until
they  have  been  transformed  into  enjoyment ;  the  only  thing
that  is  really  good  is  that  Living  Love  that  wills  the  blessed-
ness of  others.  And  it  is  just  this  that  is  the  Good-in-itsdf
for  which  we  are  seeking ;  this,  having  reality  as  a  movement
of  the  whole  living  mind  which  feels,  wills,  and  knows  itself,  is
just  on  that  account  not  merely  a  formal  general  condition  the
fulfilment  of  which  by  any  other  thing  would  entitle  that  other
to  the  appellation  of  good,  without  the  condition  itself  being
good ;  but  this  it  is  which  alone  in  the  true  sense  has  or  is
this  worth,  and  all  else — resolves,  sentiments,  actions,  and
special  directions  of  the  will — all  these  share  with  it  only
derivatively  the  one  name  of  good.  We  finite  beings,
included  in  a  world  the  plan  of  which  is  not  revealed  to  us,
cannot  allow  benevolent  love  to  act  unregulated,  in  the  hope

VOL.  i;.  2  z

722  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

that  however  it  may  be  directed  by  our  defective  foresight,
it  will  lead  to  the  good  at  which  it  aims ;  our  conscience
holds  up  before  us  in  a  number  of  moral  commands  the
general  laws  under  the  guidance  of  which  our  action,  however
variously  caused,  is  sure  of  taking  the  right  path — but  there
is  not  set  before  the  Divine  Being  in  like  manner  a  Good-in-
itself  that  takes  the  form  of  a  command  valid  even  for  Him.
JSTo  kind  of  unsubstantial  unrealized  and  yet  eternally  valid
necessity,  neither  a  realm  of  truth  nor  a  realm  of  worth  is
prior  as  the  initial  reality ;  but  that  reality  which  is  Living
Love  unfolds  itself  in  one  movement,  which  for  finite
cognition  appears  in  the  three  aspects  of  the  good  which
is  its  end,  the  constructive  impulse  by  which  this  is  realized,
and  the  conformity  to  law  with  which  this  impulse  keeps  in
the  path  that  leads  towards  its  end.

In  returning  for  the  last  time  to  this  thought,  which,  from  the
beginning  of  these  concluding  considerations,  has  been  hovering
before  us,  I  would  recall  the  confession  of  its  scientific  impracti-
cability made  at  the  commencement  of  this  Book  (supra,  p.  5  7  2
seq).  This  limitation  of  our  capacity  has  in  a  general  way
been  confirmed  by  numerous  attempts,  which  we  cannot  but
respect,  and  which  in  individual  cases  have  borne  much
fair  fruit,  in  clearing  up  and  establishing  our  vague  con-
victions. Christian  ethics  would  be  likely  to  succeed  best
in  exhibiting  particular  moral  Ideas  as  the  various  forms
which  active  Love  must  prescribe  to  itself.  It  would  be
able  to  show  that  all  the  sterner  and  apparently  more
exalted  forms  of  morality  which  distinguished  the  heathen
heroism  that  "  scorned  delights,"  are  yet  nothing  compared  to
the  gentleness  of  Love,  and  nothing  unless  they  have  their  root
in  it ;  that  all  the  commands  which,  in  a  scientific  point  of
view,  particularly  attract  our  attention,  by  the  definiteness  of
their  content  and  the  ease  with  which  they  may  be  drawn
out  into  a  series  of  sharply  defined  maxims,  are  nothing
more  than  a  mechanism  devised  for  its  own  development  by
the  principle  of  Love,  which  seems  comparatively  formless  and,
as  it  were,  merely  potential. On  the  other  hand,  the  attempts

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  723'

to  explain  existing  reality  from  the  same  principle  will  always
be  far  less  convincing.  In  the  first  place,  not  one  of  them,  in
trying  to  express  its  meaning,  has  in  its  description  of  the
tasks  and  the  needs  of  that  Everlasting  Love  which  is  regarded
as  the  source  of  the  universe,  been  able  to  avoid  such  an
extended  use  of  analogies  drawn  from  the  life  of  the  human
sold,  as  must  necessarily  displease  scientific  instinct.  We  cannot
otherwise  than  unwillingly  see  the  core  of  our  conviction,  of
which  in  its  simplicity  we  are  sure,  developed  into  a  system,  if
this  has  to  illustrate  the  origin  of  things  by  ideas  the  meaning
of  which  only  becomes  clear  through  references  to  connec-
tions occurring  much  later  in  the  course  of  the  world  which
we  are  explaining,  and  to  reduce  the  figurative  expression  of
which  to  its  real  significance  (which  in  this  case  is  admissible)
would  be  an  almost  interminable  task.  This  general  insecurity
is  intensified  by  the  frequent  endeavour  to  immediately  derive
particular  forms  of  reality  from  particular  impulses  which  are
supposed  to  be  discovered  in  the  nature  of  the  Supreme  Prin-
ciple. Whatever  the  world  may  be  in  which  Creative  Love
manifests  itself,  that  world  is  undoubtedly  devised  as  a  whole
by  that  Love ;  from  the  whole  of  the  ideal  picture  which
Creative  Love  sets  before  itself,  Nature  and  History  as  wholes
have  their  task  as  a  whole  assigned  to  them,  and  carry  it  out
by  means  of  a  connected  system  adapted  to  its  realization.
The  labour  of  deduction  would  have  to  be  directed  in  the  first
place  to  developing  the  existence  of  an  universal  mechanism
in  the  procedure  of  all  things  from  the  notion  of  Supreme  Love,
and  then  to  developing  from  the  total  content  of  that  which
this  Love  designs,  that  definite  form  of  the  mechanism  which
is  adequate  to  the  production  of  all  reality,  with  steady  order
and  unvarying  fidelity.  The  fulfilment  of  this  task,  as  we
have  already  noticed,  can  hardly  be  carried  out  in  the  form
of  an  unbroken  deduction,  starting  from  the  principle  itself —
it  will  be  possible  only  in  more  modest  measure,  as  an  explana-
tion, by  reference  to  the  principle,  of  actually  existing  facts.
For  we  do  not  possess  either  of  Nature  or  of  History  such
complete  knowledge  as  would  enable  us  to  guess  the  whole  of

724  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

the  divine  plan  of  the  universe ;  the  attempts  that  have  been
made  to  determine  this  from  meagre  earthly  experience  betray
only  too  plainly  the  unfavourable  nature  of  onr  standpoint,
■which,  with  all  the  one-sidedness  of  its  limited  outlook,  wishes
to  be  taken  for  that  topmost  summit,  from  which  the  whole
world  may  plainly  be  seen  spread  out  below.  This  lack  of  a
commanding  view  is  the  reason  why  those  attempts  so  often
err  in  estimating  the  reality  of  their  particular  objects ;  they
present  as  the  immediate  ends  of  the  creative  Idea  that  which
even  an  empirical  knowledge  of  things  regards  as  only  a  very
incidental  consequence  of  general  laws,  and  thus  they  fall  into
permanent  disagreement  with  physical  science,  which  in  its
own  less  lofty  region,  rules  with  an  incomparably  superior
exercise  of  exact  knowledge.

But  it  is  not  only  the  different  moral  Ideas  and  the  forms
of  reality  that  would  have  to  be  explained  from  the  same
source  of  Eternal  Love — the  eternal  truths  also,  the  sum  of
that  which,  as  it  seems  to  us,  we  must  necessarily  think,  and
which  could  not  be  otherwise,  must  be  similarly  explained,
[f  the  scientific  solution  of  this  task  appeared  to  me  possible,
I  would  employ  all  my  powers  in  trying  to  carry  it  out ;  for
only  thus  could  1  furnish  a  complete  justification  of  my  belief
that  the  sphere  of  mechanism  is  unbounded,  but  its  signifi-
cance everywhere  subordinate.  I  should  have  to  show  that
the  fact  that  truth  exists  at  all  cannot  be  understood  by  itself,
and  is  only  comprehensible  in  a  world  of  which  the  whole
nature  depends  upon  the  principle  of  Good  that  we  learnt  to
know  in  Living  Love  itself  ;  and  no  less  should  I  have  to  point
out  specially  how  it  is  but  of  the  nature  of  this  Love,  and,
as  it  were,  its  primary  work,  to  establish  an  universal  order
and  regularity,  within  which  various  individuals,  comparable
in  kind,  could  be  brought  into  a  connection  of  reciprocal
action.  If  this  eternal  sacredness  and  supreme  worth  of  Love
were  not  at  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  if  in  such  a  case
there  could  be  a  world  of  which  we  could  think  and  speak,
this  world,  it  seems  to  me,  would,  whatever  it  were,  be  left
without truth and  order. I sliould  further  have  to  call  to

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  725

remembrance  that  the  strongest  pillar  of  all  truth,  the  Law  of
Identity,  of  which  we  were  conscious  as  a  sheet-anchor  amid
the  complications  of  those  contradictory  phsenomena  of  reality
wliich  we  have  just  been  considering,  might  easily  appear  to
us  as  a  truth  that  prevails  of  its  own  power  and  uncaused;
but  that  even  its  own  content  is  but  the  formal  reflection  of
that  significant  trueness  to  itself,  the  immediate  connection  of
which  with  the  supreme  worth  of  Goodness  we  are  again
strongly  conscious  of,  when  we  assume  the  eternal  identity  of
God  with  Himself  not  merely  as  a  logical  perfection  of  the
notion  of  God,  but  also  as  an  ethical  perfection  of  His  nature.
I  should  then  have  to  show  what  is  meant  by  saying  that
there  is  something  which  we  call  adequate  cause,  and  causal
connection ;  however  impossible  it  may  seem  to  us  that  either
of  these  should  have  been  other  than  absolutely  primary,  we
are  yet  just  as  directly  conscious  that  a  world  would  be
unmeaning  in  which  one  thing  sliould  be  established  or  pro-
duced by  another  merely  in  order  that  things  should  be  or
should  happen  after  this  fashion.  If  the  natures  of  things  are
such  that  two  can  join  in  any  way  so  as  to  become  the
adequate  cause  of  some  third,  this  marvel  is  to  me  intelligible
only  in  a  world  in  which  what  is  aimed  at  is  not  mere
occurrence  of  some  kind,  but  deeds  that  are  to  have  results,
and  the  freedom  of  which  presupposes  an  universal  reign  of
law  as  well  as  fruitfulness  in  the  production  of  new  results  in
the  world  of  things,  results  which  furnish  this  freedom  with
aims  and  objects  of  its  endeavour.  From  this  consideration
of  the  metaphysical  principles  of  all  our  cognition,  we  should
have  to  go  on  to  mathematical  truths  and  their  validity  in  the
world  of  reality.  We  would  not  indeed  commit  the  solecism
of  trying  to  deduce  mathematical  propositions  from  other
principles  than  the  fundamental  ideas  of  mathemdtics  itself;
but  of  those  fundamental  ideas  —  the  ideas  of  magnitude,
recurrence,  equality,  unity,  plurality,  addibility,  divisibility —
we  should  have  to  show  that  the  fact  of  their  thinkableness  is
not  a  bare  and  uncaused  fact,  but  an  essential  presupposition
of  that  order  which  the  Good  as  Supreme  Principle  imposes

726  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  7.

on  the  world,  and  which  another  principle  (to  express  the
empty  thought  for  clearness'  sake)  would  not  have  imposed
upon  it  in  a  similar  fashion  We  should  have  to  refer  to  the
dominion  of  mathematical  truth  over  reality,  and  to  show  as
regards  it  that  it  is  only  in  a  period  of  as  yet  imperfect
elaboration  of  mechanical  science  that  the  regularity  of  Nature
seems  to  be  of  an  unique  kind,  recognisable  only  by  means  of
the  magical  rules  of  an  arithmetic  abounding  in  formulae,  and
not  capable  of  being  reduced  to  simple  ideas ;  the  further
mechanics  progresses,  the  more  do  we  see  its  most  general
results  revert  to  the  form  of  propositions,  the  easily  under-
stood sense  of  which  (pointing  out  everywhere  what  is  most
simple  and  rational  as  the  law  of  action)  may  be  expressed  in
notions,  and  needs  a  mathematical  dress  only  in  order  that  the
signification  of  these  notions  may  be  made  susceptible  of  those
precise  determinations  of  magnitude  which  they  require  in  appli-
cation to  the  concrete.  And  so  the  time  may  come  in  which
these  simplified  propositions  of  all  mechanics  will  become
more  directly  connected  with  the  Supreme  Principle,  and  will
admit  of  being  interpreted  as  the  last  formal  offshoots  of  that
Good  which  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  whole  universe.
Much  might  yet  be  said  upon  this  subject ;  but  I  will  not
part  from  the  reader  with  a  profession  of  holding  back  some
important  knowledge  concerning  these  questions.  On  the
contrary,  any  further  development  that  we  might  seek  to  give
to  these  thoughts  would  not  satisfy  us,  but  in  its  inevitable
incompleteness  would  be  open  to  the  reproach  of  being  mere
sentimental  trifling.  I  participate  fully  in  the  scientific
instinct  whence  this  reproach  would  spring ;  and  since  every-
where in  these  discussions  I  have  contented  myself  with  an
explanation  of  those  intelligible  principles  which  may  be  of
use  in  the  examination  of  our  doubts,  and  on  the  other  hand
have  never  entered  upon  those  vast  regions  which  hitherto
have  been  filled  only  by  the  vague  imaginings  of  poetic  fancy,
it  may  here  be  sufficient  to  express  once  more  my  faith  in  a
goal  from  attaining  which  we  are  held  back  by  a  chasm  which
it  seems  impossible  to  fill  up.

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  *!2T

•

§  8.  It  is  but  seldom  that  after  a  long  journey  we  have
the  satisfaction  of  being  able  to  say  to  ourselves  that  we
have  not  passed  by  any  eminence  which  promised  a  good  out-
look, and  have  examined  all  the  best  points  of  view,  and  that
we  have  never,  through  lingering  in  any  one  spot  longer  than
was  fitting,  on  account  of  some  insignificant  attraction,  neglected
to  seek  out  any  more  important  prospect  obtainable  from  a
neighbouring  point.  And  still  less  shall  we  succeed  in
grouping  together  the  manifold  moods  and  thoughts  which
arose  in  us  by  the  way,  into  one  simple  memory-picture
without  giving  up  much  which  in  the  brightness  of  its  living
individuality  attracted  and  enchained  us.  Such  self-reproaches
and  such  difficulty  do  I  feel  in  parting  from  a  work  of  which
I  desire  to  express  yet  once  more  the  essential  meaning,
unburdened  by  the  special  explanations  which  I  have  under^
taken  in  it.  It  would  be  vain  to  attempt  this  in  any  other
way  than  by  emphasizing  once  again  the  scientific  attitude
which  has  guided  and  been  at  the  foundation  of  the  whole —
on  the  one  hand  a  struggle  against  veneration  of  mere  empty
forms,  and  over-estimation  of  what  is  but  presupposition  or
result,  means  or  mode  of  manifestation,  of  that  which  is  truly
worthy  and  living  and  real;  and  connected  with  this  the
struggle  against  all  fanaticism  which  would  like  to  see  the
Supreme  Good  active  in  some  other  way  than  that  which  it
has  itself  chosen,  or  which  believes  that  Good  to  be  attainable
by  some  shorter  path  than  the  roundabout  way  of  formal
orderliness  which  it  has  itself  entered  upon.

From  this  attitude  arose  our  respect  for  the  scientific  worth
of  mechanical  investigation  in  Nature  and  History,  and  from
it  likewise  our  obstinate  refusal  to  see  in  all  mechanism  any-
thing more  than  that  form  of  procedure — susceptible  of
isolation  in  thought — which  is  given  by  the  Highest  Eeality
to  the  living  development  of  its  content,  which  content  can
never  be  exliaustively  expressed  by  this  form  alone.  And
this  struggle  has  been  not  only  against  materialistic  views,  but
also  and  equally  against  that  Idealism  which  imagines  itself
to  be  fishtinjj  against  them  for  the  right. It  seemed  to  us

728  BOOK  IX. CHAPTER  V.

wholly  indifferent  whether  the  most  essential  core  of  reality
from  which  all  else  is  to  proceed  as  a  matter-of-course
accessory  should  be  sought  in  soulless  atoms,  blind  forces,  and
mathematical  laws  of  action,  or  in  necessary  notions  of  any
kind,  in  relative  or  absolute  Ideas,  and  the  jugglery  of  their
dialectic  movements.  All  these  views  uniformly  degrade
Nature  and  History  by  making  them  representations  of  some-
thing absolutely  indifferent  and  worthless,  the  presence  of
which  in  the  world  of  thought  is  only  comprehensible  when
it  is  thought  as  the  final  formal  reflection  of  the  living  mind
and  its  living  activity.

And  as  in  knowledge  so  it  seemed  to  us  in  life  also  to  be
the  sum  and  substance  of  wisdom  neither  to  neglect  what  is
small  nor  to  give  it  out  as  great;  to  be  enthusiastic  only  for
that  v/hich  is  great,  but  to  be  faithful  even  in  the  least.  We
agreed  neither  with  endeavours  to  arrange  human  relations
in  accordance  with  ingenious  suggestions,  without  regard  for
the  universal  mental  mechanism  by  which  Eight  is  realized,
nor  with  schemes  which  having  stiffened  into  rigidity  in
the  service  of  this  mechanism  can  further  nothing  but  the
establishment  of  orderly  conditions.  It  seemed  to  us  that
everywhere  the  universal  was  inferior  as  compared  with  the
particular,  the  class  as  compared  with  the  individual,  any
state  of  things  insignificant  as  compared  with  the  good
arising  from  its  enjoyment.  For  the  universal,  the  class,  and
the  state  of  things,  belong  to  the  mechanism  into  which
the  Supreme  articulates  itself;  the  true  reality  that  is  and
ought  to  be,  is  not  matter  and  is  still  less  Idea,  but  is  the
living  personal  Spirit  of  God  and  the  world  of  personal
spirits  which  He  has  created.  They  only  are  the  place  in
which  Good  and  good  things  exist ;  to  them  alone  does  there
appear  an  extended  material  world,  by  the  forms  and  move-
ments of  which  the  thought  of  the  cosmic  whole  makes  itself
intelligible  through  intuition  to  every  finite  mind.

It  may  be  thought  that  our  conclusion  is  fanatically  enthu-
siastic; still  we  would  repeat  here  an  avowal  that  we  have  made
before — the  avowal  that  when  we  view  the  world  as  a  whole

I

GOD  AND  THE  WORLD.  729

we  see  everywhere  wonders  and  poetry,  that  it  is  only  limited
and  one-sided  apprehension  of  particular  departments  of  the
finite  that  are  prose.  But  to  this  we  would  add  that  it  is  the
business  of  men  not  to  take  the  name  of  these  wonders  and
this  poetry  in  vain,  and  to  revel  in  continual  contemplation
of  them,  but  above  all  things  to  cultivate  that  more  modest
realm  of  scientific  knowledge  which  is  able  not  indeed  to  lead
us  into  the  promised  land,  but  to  keep  us  from  wandering  too
far  out  of  the  road  that  leads  to  it.

INDEX

Aboeigines,  displacement  of,  by  set- Aristocracies  and  priesthoods,  develop-

tlers,  ii.  248,  249

Absolute  becoming,  conception  of,  i.
551.

Absolute  natural  riglit  and  historic
and  legitimate  right,  contrast  be-
tween, ii.  532.

Absolutism,  mediaeval,  ii.  529,  530,
532.

Acclimatization,  i.  480.

Act,  essential  characteristic  of  an,  ii.
702.

Action  and  reaction,  problem  of  science
in  investigating,  i.  279  ;  adapted  to
ends,  i.  413,  414  ;  and  reaction  of
simple  beings,  i.  434,  435 ;  man's
impulse  to,  i.  659  seq.

jEschylus,  ii.  372.

Esthetic  judgment,  i.  582  ;  its  con-
nection Avith  bodily  organs,  i.  324.

Affirmation  and  positing,  ii.  582  seq.

Agent  and  patient,  part  of,  in  causation,
i.  145,  146,  186,  200,  279,  281,  293,
349,  350,  365.

Ahriman,  ii.  459.

Albumen,  i.  93.

Alexander  the  Great,  ii.  263,  410.

Alternation  of  generation,  ii.  140.

A.merica,  discovery  of,  ii.  285.

Anaxagoras,  ii.  316.

Andromache,  ii.  372.

Animal  body,  structure  of  the,  i.  99
seq.

Animal  forms,  i.  459  seq.  ;  structure,
chemical  type  of,  i,  462  ;  structure,
economic  type  of,  i.  462  ;  structure,
morphological  type  of,  i.  463.

Animals,  bodily  size  and  strength  of,
1.  470.

Animal-worship,  and  belief  in  trans-
migration of  souls,  ii.  455.

Animation  of  matter  involves  unreality
of  extension,  i,  354  ;  of  the  whole
world,  i.  2  seq.,  360,  394,  398.

Anselm,  ii.  670.

Anthropomorphism,  ii.  129.

Aphasia,  i.  331,  332,  611.

Appearance  (phsenomenon,  Erschei-
nung),  i.  157.

Aiabs,  the,  ii.  248.

ment  of,  ii.  249,  250.
Aristocratic  constitution,  ii.  559.
Aristotle, ii.  314,  327,  329,  332,  S40,

344, 373, 374;  philosophy  of, ii.

330  seq.
Artificial  kind  (Spielart),  or  variety,

i.  522-524.
Artistic  activity,  i.  583,  584.
Aryans,  migrations  of,  ii.  256.
Ashantee,  blacks  of,  i.  518.
Asiatic  nomads,  ii.  247.
Assassins,  ii.  59.

Association,  laws  of,  i.  215,  222,  232.
Astronomical  and  geological  theories,

ii.  141,  142,  448,  449.
Atavism,  i.  501.
Athens,  ii.  510,  517.
Atomists,  i.  427-432,  341.
Atoms,  i.  31,  34,  36,  347  ;  unextended,

hj'pothesis  of,  i,  360.

AurapKUX,  ii.  375.

Birds,  singing  of,  i.  607.

Biton,  ii.  464.

Blood,  circulation  of  the,  i.  106  seq.

Blumenbach,  i.  516.

Body  and  soul, bond  between,  i.  273

seq.  ; reciprocal  action  between, i.

316  seq.  ;  contrast  between,  retained,

i.  364  seq.  ;  relation  between,  i.  366

seq.
Bolotuh,  island  of,  ii.  234.
Brahmanism,  ii.  458,  459.
Brain, in what sense an organ of

intelligence, emotion, volition, L

342.
Brain  substance,  i.  94.
Brutes, instinctive  expectation  of,

235.
Buddhism,  ii.  458,  459.

Cannibalism,  ii.  57  seq.
Carbo-hydrates,  i.  93  seq.
Carbon,  i.  92  seq.
Carbonic  acid,  i.  95.
Caste,  ii.  250.

Caucasians,  i.  511,  512,  520.
Causation,  lawof,  i.  259  seq.,  671,  672,
677,  678.

731

732

INDEX.

Cause,  all-embracing,  i.  15  ;  impelling,
i.  15,  etc.  ;  first,  i.  25,  227-234 ;
supreme,  i.  445  seq.

Cellulose,  1.  93.

Cerebro-spinal  system,  i.  129.

Ceremonies,  i.  597  seq.

Chance,  i.  677.

Chaos,  i.  427  ;  elements  of,  i.  432  seq.

Character,  iactors  in  the  formation  of,
i.  340  ;  of  a  coniitrv,  its  connection
with  the  character  of  the  inhabitants,
ii.  14,  15.

Charlemagne,  ii.  278.

Chemical  forces  in  relation  to  life,  i.
80  seq.

Childhood,  i.  660,

China,  India,  and  Egypt,  ancient
civilizations  of,  ii.  251,  etc.

China,  Mexico,  and  Peru,  ancient
states  of,  ii.  504.

Chinese,  i.  520.

Christian  thought,  philosophic  pro-
blems of,  ii.  336  seq.

Christianity,  ii.  269  seq.

Christianity  as  morality  and  religion,
ii.  468  seq.  ;  as  history,  ii  476  seq.

Church,  the,  ii.  282  seq.

Civilization,  ii.  95  seq.  ;  theories  of
the  origin  of,  ii.  177  seq.  ;  theory  of
divine  origin  of,  ii.  179  seq.  ;  theory
of  organic  origin  of,  ii.  183  seq.  ;
difficulties  connected  with  the  be-
ginnings of,  early,  in  the  East,  ii.
245  seq.  ;  harshness  of  its  begin-
nings, ii.  252,  253  ;  citizett  of  the
state,  notion  of,  ii.  661.

Classification,  man's  impulse  towards,
i.  666.

Climate,  influence  of,  ii.  11,  14.

Comparison,  i.  165,  655,  656.

Concept,  i.  233,  663  seq.

Concepts,  classification  by,  i.  536  ;  and
their  relation  to  the  particulars  to
which  they  apply,  iu  521,  522.

Conclusion  of  vol.  L  in  original,  i.
393-401  ;  of  vol.  ii.  in  original,  ii.
119-121.

Conscience,  i.  685  seq.

Consciousness,  i.  161,  166,  328,  329,
330 ;  narrowness  of,  i.  198,  212;
based  on  unconsciousness,  i,  199  seq.

Consonants,  i.  909.

Constitutional  government,  ii.  560.

"Contingent  aspects"  (cf.  art.  "  Her-
bart,"  Encydopcedia  Britannka,
9th  ed.),  ii.  317,  590,  594.

Contingent  and  necessary,  iu  664,  665.

Conversation,  i.  638,

Co-operation,  ii.  392  seq.

Cosmic  history,  idea  of,  ii.  477.

Cosmological  proof,  the,  ii.  664  seq.

Cosmos,  two  conceptions  of  the,  L  374
seq.

Course  of  events,  unity  of,  L  448  seq.

Created  beings,  ends  of,  i.  421.

Creation,  Mosaic  history  of,  i.  0  ;  ii.
139,  140  ;  anthropomorphic  concep-
tion of,  i.  412  seq.  ;  as  will  and  as
act,  ii.  700  seq.  ;  as  emanation,  ii.
703  seq.

Crcesns,  ii.  464.

Crossing  of  ditferent  races,  i.  505,  521
seq.

Cruelty  and  bloodthirstiness,  ii.  59
seq.

Crusades,  the,  ii.  285.

Culture,  and  a  state  of  nature,  ii.  76
seq.  ; conditions  of,  ii.  80,  81.

Cultured  reflection,  ii.  311  seq.

Cyclops,  ii.  406.

Darwin,  i.  526.

Death,  i.  51,  etc.,  61.

Decomposition,  chemical,  i.  52,  etc.

Definition,  i.  630.

Demeter,  i.  5.

Dependence,  i.  228.

Destiny,  ii.  311.

Determinism and freedom, ii. 199

seq.
Development  of  plants  and  of  souls,

i.  646  seq.
Differentiation  and  Connection  of  thb

ditferent  mental  activities,  ii.  305.
Diogenes,  ii.  76.
Dogmatic  theology,  ii.  481  seq.
Dress  and  ornament,  i.  592  seq.
Auva/nii,  concept  of,  ii.  331,  332.

East,  kingdoms  of  the,  ii.  501.

Eastern  life  and  thought,  character-
istic of,  ii.  253,  254  ;  reverence  for
magnitude,  ii.  399  seq.  ;  life  and
thought  compared  with  Western,  iL
444  seq.

Effort  (Strebung),  i.  254.

Ego,  i.  248,  249  se(i.

Ego  and  non-Ego,  i.  11,  ii.  678  seq.

Ego,  empiric,  i.  252,  253.

Ego,  true,  i.  252,  253,  ii.  126.

Egoism  and  universalism,  i.  702  seq,

Egypt,  cosmology  and  religion  of,  iL
456,  457.

Elegance,  ii,  240,  etc.

Elements,  inherent  vitality  of,  i.  434  ;
material,  and  their  distribution,  i.
447  seq.

Emotional  expression,  i.  604.

Emotions  of  self,  i.  700  seq.  ;  of  sense,
i.  697  seq.

'EtipyuK,  concept  of,  ii.  331,  332.

Enlightenment  {Avf Ida  rang),  the,  ii.
178,  286,  291.

'EvTtXt;(^6/«,  ii.  332.

Erect  and  horizontal  cairiage,  i,  480
seq.

Eries,  the,  ii.  233,  234.

Essential heterogeneity of difl'erent

INDEX.

733

things  and  of  individual  souls,  L
540  seq.

Established  order,  advantages  of,  ii.
502,  503.

Etiquette,  ii.  74,  75.

Eudsemonism,  ii.  473,  474,

Eumenides,  the,  ii.  372.

Euirifiiia,  ii.  463.

Evil  and  sin,  ii.  716  seq.

Exact  science  and  its  limitations,  ii.
341  seq.

Excitation,  capacity  of,  i.  68  seq.

Excretion,  i.  118  seq.

Exhibitions,  ii.  395.

Extended  beings,  concerning  the  pos-
sibility of,  i.  356  seq.

Extension,  meaning  of,  i.  357,  359.

Facttlty,  a  single  primitive,  i.  177  seq.

Faith  and  dogma,  ii.  482  ;  thought,  ii.
660  seq.

Family,  the,  ii.  495  seq.

Family  life,  ii.  88  seq.

Fat,  i.  93  seq.

Federation,  ii.  555,  556.

Feeling,  faculty  of,  i,  176  seq.

Feeling,  its  influence  on  ideational
(cognitive)  life,  i.  243  seq.  ;  its  con-
nection with  worth  (value,  Werth),  i.
243  seq.  ;  its  relation  to  mind,  i.
247  ;  its  connection  with  self-con-
sciousness, i,  250 ;  its  connection
with  impulse,  conation,  and  volition,
i.  255  seq.  ;  corporeal  basis  of,  i.  321,
322  ;  and  movement,  connection  be-
tween, i.  585.

Feeling  and  action,  i.  687  seq.

Feeling  and  impression,  i.  689.

Feelings,  philosophy  of  the,  i.  682  seq.

Feelings  (pleasure  aud  pain),  i.  240
seq.

Fellatahs,  i.  518.

Fetichism,  ii.  453.

Feudalism,  ii.  279.

Fibre,  i.  98.

Fichte,  ii.  673,  675.

Finite  and  infinite,  relation  between,
i.  381  seq.  ;  things  parts  of  one  in-
finite Being,  i.  445  seq.  ;  spirit,  be-
lief of,  concerning  itself,  ii.  126 ;
individuals  must  be  parts  of  one
infinite  substance,  ii.  598  ;  beings,
their  personality  a  feeble  reflection
of  the  personality  of  the  Infinite,  ii.
685.

Flood,  legends  of  the,  ii.  207,  208.

Food,  i.  476  seq.,  ii.  55  seq.

Forces  not  communicated  by  one  thing
to  another,  i.  56,  58;  elemental,  i.  59.

Form,  symbolism  of,  i.  489  seq.  ;  beauty
of,  i.  491  seq.

Freedom  of  moral  action,  i.  24  ;  of
will,  i.  146,  226,  256  seq.  ;  of  inter-
nal self-determination,  i.  144.

French  language,  developmont  of  the,
ii.  440  ;  Revolution,  ii.  560.

Future  generations,  men's  care  for,  ii.
172  ;  our  prospect  for  the,  ii.  293
seq.

General  sense  (organic  feelings  or
sensations,  Oemeingefuhl),  i.  133,
330,  331,  334,  341,  343,  568,  ii.  37
seq.  ;  images,  i.  663.

Generic  notions  (Artbegriffe),  i,  657,
668.

Genesis  in  nature  of  living  creatures,
and  impossibility  of  setting  it  out  iu
detail,  ii.  137  seq.

Genghis  Khan,  ii.  248.

Germanic  nations,  the,  ii.  274  seq.

Germans,  heroic  poetry  of  the,  ii.  406.

God,  forms  of  the  existence  of,  ii.  672  ;
as  a  moral  world-order,  ii.  673  seq.  ;
as  infinite  substance,  ii.  677  ;  as  a
self-cognizant  idea,  ii.  682.

Good,  its  relation  to  God  and  to  finite
things,  ii.  698,  699  ;  aud  good
things,  719  seq.

Government  based  on  incorporations  of
classes,  ii.  561,  563,  564.

Gratitude  and  revenge,  i.  700.

Greece,  ancient,  ii.  257-263 ;  in  the
time  of  Homer,  ii.  369  ;  liberal  cul-
ture of,  ii.  369  seq.  ;  political  con-
structions of,  ii.  506  seq.  ;  place  of,
iu  political  development,  ii.  511.

Greek  thought, development of, ii.

314  seq.  ;  sages,  gnomes  of,  ii.  314,

315  ;  language  and  life,  ii.  404  seq. ;
beauty  and  art,  ii.  410  seq.  ;  song,
characteristics  of,  ii.  413 ;  mind,
characteristics  of  the,  ii.  521.

Greeks, religion  of  the,  ii.  460  seq.  ;

and  Romans  compared,  ii.  264,  265.
Greenlander,  the,  ii.  231.
Growth  ( Wachsthum),  mystery  of, i.

58,  60.
Guilds,  ii.  378,  379.

Hayti,  negro  state  of,  ii.  236.

Heat,  production  of,  in  living  organ-
isms, i.  92,  109.

Heavenly  bodies,  worship  of  the,  ii.
456.

Hebrew  sublimity,  ii.  402  seq.  ;  lan-
guage and  literature,  ii.  402  seq.

Hebrews,  the,  ii.  467  seq.  ;  religion  of
the,  ii.  466  seq.

Hector,  ii.  372.

Helios,  i.  6,  14.

Heraclitean  flux,  ii.  344.

Herbart,  ii.  611.

Herder,  i.  481,  486.

Heredity,  i.  497  seq.  ;  and  original
difference  of  endowment,  ii.  47,  48.

Hereditary  callings,  ii.  250  ;  monarchy
iL  557  seq.

734

INDEX.

Herodotus,  ii.  245.

Heroic  age,  the,  ii.  368  seq.

Hesiod,  ii.  345.

Historical  development  towards  perfec-
tion, denial  of,  ii.  169  seq.  ;  order,
laws  of,  ii.  192  seq.  ;  development,
its  uniformities  and  contradictions,
ii.  203  seq.  ;  development,  influence
of  external  conditions  on,  ii.  222  seq. ;
development,  conditions  ot  its  be-
ginning and  advance,  ii.  228  ;  ideal-
ism, ii.  223,  228  ;  realism,  ii.  229  ;
development  influenced  by  geo-
graphic and  climatic  conditions,  ii.
230  seq.  ;  conditions,  force  of,  ii.
542  seq.

History,  what  it  is,  ii.  144,  145;  as
the  education  of  humanity,  ii.  145-
]  54  ;  as  the  development  of  the  idea
of  humanity,  ii.  154  seq. ;  as  a
divine  poem,  ii.  168,  169.

Home  {Heimat),  ii.  83  ;  {daa  Haiis),  ii.
86  seq.

Homer,  ii.  405  seq.

Horace,  ii.  421,  422.

Hottentots,  i.  518.

How  far  do  beings  exist  for  themselves  ?
i.  666,  567.

Human  hand  and  arm,  i.  480,  481,
586,  587  ;  likeness  to  brutes,  i.  503
seq.  ;  life  as  stationary  and  as  pro-
gressive, ii.  3-6  ;  beings,  sacredness
of,  ii.  38,  59  ;  life,  ends  and  aims  of,
ii.  101  seq.  ;  life,  its  relation  to  the
world  of  nature  and  to  the  world  of
man's  own  making,  ii.  225  seq. ;  life,
view  which  antiquity  took  of,  iL  425,
426.

Humanism,  ii.  294,  297,  489.

Hunters,  life  of,  ii.  81,  82.

Hydrogen,  i.  92  seq.

Hyksos,  the,  ii.  248.

Idea  (Idee),  i.  15,  16,  546;  of  the
whole  {Idee  des  Ganzen),  i.  63-66  ;
of  anything  considered  as  its  essence,
i.  545  seq.  ;  of  anything,  unity  of,  i.
551  seq.  ;  double  meaning  of,  i.
554.

Idea  and  particulars,  ii.  577.

Ideal  primitive  state,  theory  of,  ii.  179.

Idealism,  ii.  351  seq.  ;  of  youth  and
realism  of  maturity,  ii.  312;  the
author's  provisional  stitement  of,  ii.
359  ;  subjective,  ii.  639  seq.

Ideas,  Plato's  doctrine  of,  ii.  325
seq.

Ideas  (Vorstellungen),  heterogeneous,
are  kept  distinct  by  consciousness,  i.
164  seq.

Ideas  (presentations),  train  of,  i.  193
seq.  ;  disappearance  from  conscious-
ness of,  i.  196  seq.  ;  persistence  of,  i.
196  seq.  ;  interaction  of,  i.  197  ;  in-

compatibility of,  i.  198  ;  reciprocal
pressure  of,  i.  198;  "unconscious"
or  ' '  forgotten, "  i.  202  ;  strength  of,
i.  203  ;  strength  of,  three  meanings
of,  i.  204  seq.  ;  simultaneity  of,
greater  in  sense-perception  than  in
memory,  i.  212  ;  conditions  of  simul-
taneous plurality  of,  i.  213  ;  associa-
tion of,  i.  215,  222,  232  ;  reproduction
of,  i.  216  ;  connection  between  their
order  in  memory  and  in  apprehension,
i.  220  seq.  ;  necessary  connection
between,  i.  228  ;  train  of,  influence
of  bodily  states  upon,  i.  330,  331  ;
general,  formation  of,  i.  662  seq.  ;
abstract,  ii.  581.

Ideation  (cognition,  presentation,  Vor-
stellen),  faculty  of,  i.  177  seq.

Idee  compared  with  Begriff,  Vorstel-
lung,  Anschauung,  i.  555.

Identitj'',  idea  of,  i.  165 ;  law  of,  i.
671,  672,  673,  676,  677,  694,  695,
725.

Ignorance,  two  kinds  of,  ii.  627.

Imagination,  sympathetic,  i.  584  seq.,
599.

Implements,  use  of,  i.  587  seq.

Impression,  i.  201.

Impressions,  latent,  i.  199.

Impulses  ( T^nefte),  i.  255  seq.  ;  animat-
ing, i.  75.

India,  cosmology  and  religion  of,  ii.
457.

Individual  life,  estimation  of,  among
the  Greeks  and  in  the  modern  times,
ii.  515  seq.

Individual  peculiarities,  origin  of,  i.
602 ;  minds,  their  relation  to  the
yjast  and  the  present,  i.  640  seq.

Individual,  the,  and  ordered  society,
conflict  between,  ii.  97  seq.  ;  the,
and  history,  ii.  100 ;  minds,  un-
steadiness and  incoherence  of,  ii.
117,  118  ;  development  towards  per-
fection, ii.  171.

Individuality,  bodily  and  mental,  in
men  and  animals,  i.  495,  496  ;  worth
of,  for  persons  and  nations,  ii.  554,
555.

Individuals,  historical  importance  of,
ii.  188  seq.

Individuals,  callings  of,  ii.  93.

Infinite,  the,  i.  12,  etc.;  personality  of
the,  ii.  683  seq.

Innate  ideas,  i.  226  seq.,  669,  ii.  226.

Inner  life,  the,  its  constitution  dif-
ferent from  that  of  external  nature,
L  261.

Inner  sense,  the,  i.  214.

Instinct  and  experience,  ii.  224.

Instrument,  conditions  of  employment
of  any,  i.  317.

Intelligence,  development  cf,  L  661
seq.

INDEX.

735

Intensity,  idea  of  degree  of,  i.  165.
International relations,  ii. 564 seq.  ;

arbitration,  ii.  566,  567.
Intuition  and  discursive  thought, i.

634  seq.
Investigation, different stages of, i.

268  seq.
loloff,  blacks  of,  i.  517.
Ionic  communities,  ii.  509,  510.

Japanese,  i.  520.

Judgment, universal  principles of,  i.

226,  233,  234.
Jupiter,  i.  5.
Justice and eternal ideas, ii. 512,

513.

Kaffirs,  i.  518.

Kant,  1. 690,  ii.  548,  603,  604,  611,

612,  670.
Kepler,  i.  596.
Kleobis,  ii.  464.
Klephthen,  the  Greek,  ii.  368.
Knowledge  of change, i. 223 seq.  ;

limitations  of, i. 370,  371  ;  thirst

for,  i.  658.
Knowledge  of  relations  between  ideas,

i.  223  seq.

Labour  and  enjoyment,  ii.  364  ;  de-
velopment of,  ii.  377  seq.  ;  modern
forms  of,  and  their  consequences,  ii.
385  seq.

Language,  syntactical  forms  of,  i.
624 ;  dangerous  pliability  of,  628,
029  ;  order  of  thought  and  of  con-
struction in,  i.  631  ;  organization
of,  i.  678,  679  ;  origin  of,  ii  184
seq.

Latin  language  and  poetry,  ii.  416  seq.

Learning  to  speak,  i.  611,  612.

Legends  and  customs,  origin  of  simi-
larity in,  ii.  207  seq.

Legitimacy,  notion  of,  ii.  531.

Leibnitz,  ii.  717.

Life  and  the  Church,  ii.  489  seq.

Life,  basis  of,  i.  50  seq.  ;  mechanical
conception  of,  i.  51-70  passim;  an
organized  decomposition,  i.  52  ;  pro-
pagation of,  i.  56,  57,  58.

Life,  conservation  of,  i.  121  seq.  ;  with
nature,  ii.  16  seq.

Life,  remedial  energy  (recuperative
power,  curative  energy,  Heillcraft)  of,
i.  61 ;  structure  of,  i.  63  ;  mechanism
of,  i.  75  seq.

Light,  significance  of,  i.  574,  577.

Living  organisms,  processes  of,  i.  76
seq. ;  progressive  evolution  of,  i.  76
seq.

Local  signs,  i.  309,  319,  320.

Xoyos,  the,  ii.  488.

Longevity,  i.  471.

Love,  ii.  721  seq.

Lucretius,  i.  424.
Lycurgus,  ii.  515.

Machines,  i.  69  seq.

Majority,  tyranny  of  the,  ii.  289.

Malays,  i.  512,  519.

Man  not  a  mere  creature  of  nature,  ii.
21,  22 ;  his  worth  and  place  in  the
world,  ii.  103  seq.  ;  as  a  transitory
natural  product,  ii.  106  seq.  ;  his
life,  obscurity  of  its  beginning  and
future,  ii.  125-127.

Man's  origin,  ethical  significance  of
theories  as  to,  524,  561.

Mandingoes,  i.  518.

Mankind,  connection  and  origin  of,  ii.
210  seq.  ;  Mosaic  account  of  the
origin  of,  ii.  212  seq.  ;  supposed
plural  origin  of,  ii.  214  seq.  ;  variety
of  mental  endowments  of,  ii.  218
seq.

Marriage,  different  kinds  of,  ii.  69,  70.

Materialism,  i.  262,  263,  316,  339,
433,  442.

Mathematical  faculty,  i.  580  seq.

Matter,  the  manifestation  of  something
super-sensuous,  i.  355.

Mechanical  working,  conditions  of,  i.
276.

Mechanical  theory,  the,  and  ideals  of
action,  i.  441,  442.

Mechanism,  its  place  in  nature,  i.  387  ;
restricted  application  of,  i.  436  ;  its
place  in  action,  ii.  620,  621.

Memory  Images,  their  degrees  of  clear-
ness, i.  206  seq.  ;  organ  of,  i.  325
seq.

Mental  phsenomena,  their  invariable
connection  with  material  phsenomena
in  our  experience,  i.  143.

Mental  faculties,  i.  169  ;  original  and
acquired,  i.  175,  176.

"Mental  chemistry,"  an  inaccurate
idea,  i.  216.

Mental  form,  dependence  of,  on  con-
tent, i.  661.

Men  and  women,  differences  between,
ii.  39  seq.

Metaphysic  (author's),  i.  531,  note.

Metaphysics  and  logic,  ii.  324,  333.

Mexico,  kingdom  of,  ii.  241  seq.

Microcosm,  the,  i.  401.

Microcosmits,  statement  of  the  essential
meaning  of  the,  ii.  727  seq.

Middle  Ages,  the,  ii.  277  seq.  ;  views
and  character  of  the,  ii.  426  seq.  ;
political  life  and  society  in  the,  ii.
529  seq.

Mind,  essential  attributes  of,  i.  10  ;
unity  of,  i.  228  ;  higher  energies  of,
and  their  connection  with  bodily
organs,  i.  323  seq.  ;  obstruction  to,
caused  by  its  union  with  the  body,
i.  342,  343  ;  more  modifiable  than

736

INDEX.

body,  i.  496  ;  (Geist),  rational,  pecu-
liar to  man,  i.  532  ;  (Oeist)  and  soul
(Seele),  relation  between,  i.  533  seq. ;
is  that  which  thinks,  i.  548  ;  more
than  thinking,  i.  555,  556  ;  and  its
idea  {Idee),  i.  645  seq.  ;  all  that  is
real  is,  ii.  642  seq.

Miracles,  i.  451,  452,  ii.  478  seq.

Modern  times,  economic  character  of,
its  causes  and  effects,  ii.  380  seq.

Modern  times,  characteristics,  prob-
lems, and  difficulties  of,  ii.  286  seq. ;
politics,  ii.  290,  291  ;  science,  ii.
291,  292  ;  science,  character  of,  ii.
338  seq.  ;  humanism,  ii.  294,  297  ;
society,  positive  morality  of,  ii.  295,
296  ;  educatioa,  spirit  of,  ii.  370  ;
art  and  life,  ii.  443  seq.

[Modesty,  ii.  66  seq.

Monad,  ruling,  i.  162.

Monads,  i.  162,  163.

Mongolians,  1.  512,  519.

Moral  ideas,  1.  247 ;  sense,  i.  247  ;
(ethical)  judgment,  its  connection
with  the  body,  i.  323,  324  ;  laws,  i.
693  seq.

Morality,  stages  of,  i.  706  seq.;  con-
tent and  psychological  basis  of,  i.
710-713  ;  basis  and  development  of,
ii.  50  seq.

Motion,  communication  of  i.  56,
58.

Movement,  i.  332  seq.  ;  corporeal
mechanism  of,  i.  332  seq.

Movements,  how  they  arise,  L  203  seq.,
283  seq.

Movements  of  decapitated  animals,
two  explanations  of,  i  338  ;  grace
of,  i.  696,  597.

Muscles,  the,  i.  102  seq.

ilythologic  fancy  and  its  analogues,  ii.
306  seq.

Mythology,  i.  3  seq.,  394,  395  ;  and
common  reality,  i.  6,  ii.  308  ;  Greek,
i.  4  ;  Teutonic,  i.  4.

Nations,  decay  of,  ii.  205  seq.

Natural  kind  (natilrliche  Art)  or
species,  i.  522-524.

Natural  selection,  i.  526.

Nature,  blind  necessity  in,  i.  9  ;  con-
flicting views  of,  i.  1  seq. ;  law  and
order  in,  i.  2 ;  personal  spirits  in,  i.
5,  etc.,  13,  14,  393,  395;  mechanical
view  of,  i.  27  seq.,  28  etc.,  48,  347,
397  seq.,  407  seq.;  mechanical  view
of,  opposition  to  it  of  man's  emotional
nature,  i.  344 ;  idea  of,  i.  406 ;  unity
of,  i.  406  ;  creative,  i.  407  ;  as  law,
i.  407 ;  ideal  interpretation  of,  i.
407  seq. ;  as  the  evolution  of  a  world-
soul,  i.  414  seq.;  as  fact ;  unity  and
purposiveness  of,  questioned  ;  design
ia,  L  425,  428  seq.;  and  the  ration-

ality of  things,  i.  429  ;  unity  of,  as  a
])ro'.luct  of  actions  and  reactions,  i.
439  seq. ;  terrestrial,  limitedness  of,
i.  455,  456  ;  grades  of  the  products
of,  i.  457  ;  terrestrial,  uniqueness  of,
i.  464  ;  external  influence  of,  ii.  6
seq. ;  disparagement  and  exaltation
of,  ii.  67,  68  ;  and  creation,  ii.  127
seq. ;  and  divine  activity,  ii.  130  seq. ;
and  history  (or  necessity  and  free-
dom), ii.  134-137 ;  Greek  attitude
towards ;  as  a  source  of  religious
ideas,  ii.  448  seq.

Negroes,  i.  511,  512,  516  seq.,  624,  ii.
234  seq.

Neptunists  and  Vulcanists,  ii.  448,

Nerve,  axis-cylinder  of,  i.  94.

Nerve-fibres,  isolated,  i.  310  seq.

Nerves,  motor,  i.  105  seq.

Nervous  excitation,  i.  601  seq. ;  and
movement,  i.  603  seq. ;  and  respii-a-
tion,  i.  604  seq.

Nitrogen,  i.  92  seq.

Noah,  ii.  208.

Nominalism  and  realism,  ii.  338.

Non-ego,  i.  11,  248.

North  America,  settlers  in,  i.  621.

N«S,-,  ii.  316.

Nutrition,  i.  113  seq.

Occasionalism,  i.  280.

Odyssey,  the,  iL  93.

Omnipotence,  ii.  695  ;  and  truth,  iL
696  seq.

Ontologic  proof,  the,  ii.  669  seq.

Organic  compensation  of  corporeal  dis-
turbance, i.  122,  123,  128  seq.  ;
constant  activity  of  what  is,  i.  135
seq.

Organisms,  development  of,  from
germs,  i.  83  seq. ,  426  ;  theory  of  the
origin  of,  i.  437  seq.

Organs  of  living  bodies,  L  98.

Origin,  i.  228.

Ormuzd.  ii.  459.

Oxygen,  i.  92,  93,  95  seq.

Pain,  i.  329.

Pantheism,  ii.  195,  677.

Pastoral  life,  ii.  82,  83.

Perfection,  ii.  665,  666  ;  for  man  and
brute,  ii.  24.

Persistence,  law  of,  i.  37,  41,  46,  196,
199,  601.

Personal  rights,  existence  of,  depen-
dent on  society,  ii.  527,  540
seq.

Peru,  kingdom  of,  ii.  243.

Phsenomena,  explanation  of,  ii.  155  ;
recurrent,  ii.  196  seq. ;  conditions  of
uniformity  of,  ii.  198.

Phcenomenologic  meaning  of  common
terms  transformed  to  essential  mean-
ing, i.  537  seq.

INDEX.

737

Plisenomciion  (nppearance,  Erschei-
nung),  i.  157,  ii.  160,  161.

Philosophical  discussion,  starting-point
of,  i.  350.

Philosophy,  three  problems  of,  ii.  346
seq. ;  scope  of  analytic  and  construc-
tive activity  in,  ii.  651  sec[.

Phrenology,  i.  339  sec[.

*uir/f,  i.  415.

Physical  compensation  of  corporeal
disturbances,  i.  122,  124  seq.  ;
research,  sphere  of,  i.  436.

Pindar,  ii.  413,  414.

Plato,  ii.  314,  325,  327,  329,  332,  340,
344,  407,  505,  537 ;  his  ideal  state,
ii.  504,  508.

Pleasure,  and  worth,  i.  690  seq.  ;  as  an
ethical  end,  i.  694  seq. ;  what  it  is,
i.  695.

Political  life,  language,  morality,  and
religion,  rationalistic  theory  of,  ii.
178.

Politics,  tradition  and  reason  in,  ii.
510  seq.

Possibility  involves  adaptability  to
design,  i.  428.

Pre-established  harmony,  ii.  597.

Prima  materia,  i.  372,  374.

Primeval  history,  questions  concerning,
i.  372  seq.

Printing,  dis'^overy  of,  ii.  286.

Private  law  (cf.  law  of  private  riglit),
ii.  642.

Private  right,  law  of  (private  law,
PrivatrecJd,  Jus  Privatum,  cf.  Aus-
tin's Jurisprudence  (student's  edi-
tion), pp.  195,  196,  and  366  seq.),  ii.
524,  525,  526,  542.

Probability  before  and  after  the  event,
estimation  of,  ii.  140,  141.

Proo;ress,  scientific  and  human,  ii.  152,
153.

Protestantism,  its  principle  of  action,
ii.  288,  ii.  492.

[Protoplasmic]  cell,  i.  97.

Psychic  life,  characterized  by  (1)  self-
determination,  i.  144  seq.  ;  (2)  in-
comparability  of  its  processes  with
jdiysical  processes,  i.  148  seq.,  211;
and  (3)  unity  of  consciousness,  i.
152  seq.  ;  influence  of  bodily  organi-
sation on,  i.  558,  560  ;  of  different
human  races  and  individuals,  i.  561,
562;  in  matter,  i.  150  seq.,  161,
162  ;  capacities  in  general,  ditKculty
of  investigating  their  nature  and
development,  i.  193,  194  ;  mechan-
ism, i.  194  seq.,  232  ;  substance
(Seelensubstanz),  i.  539  seq.,  546  ;
life,  is  it  explicable  from  action
and  reaction  of  ideas  ?  i.  540  seq. ;
life  of  men  and  brutes,  i.  556  seq.,
578,  644,  652  seq.,  681,  684,  713,
714,  ii.  294.
VOL.  II.

Psychical  compensation  of  corporeal
disturbances,  i.  123,  124  ;  processes
need  a  special  ground  of  explana-
tion, i  148,  149.

Public  law  {Staatsrecht,  Jus  Publicum,
cf.  Law  of  Private  Eight),  ii.  524,
526,  528.

Purity  in  body  and  mind,  ii.  61  seq.

Pyramids  of  Egypt,  ii.  252.

QtTALiTATiVB  resemblance  taii  differ-
ence, idea  of,  i.  165.

Quality,  simple,  as  the  essence  of
things,  i.  552,  553.

Quetzalkohuatl,  ii.  242.

Race  characteristics,  transmission  of.
i.  497,  505,  506.

Race,  influence  of  external  conditions
on,  i.  511  seq.

Radicalism,  ii.  540,  545.

Rationalism,  ii.  480.

Reaction,  acquired  forms  of,  i.  336,
337.

Real  existence  belongs  only  to  living
beings,  i.  362  ;  involves  relations,
ii.  585  ;  real  unit}',  conditions  of,
ii.  636 ;  things,  origin  of,  ii.  713  seq.

Real,  the  {das  Reale),  i.  546  seq.

Realism,  ii.  350.

Reality  {Wirhlichlceit)  and  realness
{Realitai),  ii.  646.

Really  existent,  necessary  symmetry  of
the,  ii.  318.

Healness  and  self-existence,  ii.  647.

Reason,  infinite,  i.  15  ;  universal,  i.
23 ;  and  consequent,  i.  228,  23C
seq.  ;  and  understanding,  i.  244,  245  ;
practical,  i.  246,  247.

Reason,  unconscious,  in  things,  i.  9,
10,  13.

Reciprocal  action  the  only  real  bond,
i.  274  ;  ultimateness  of,  i.  276  seq.  ;
between  elements,  qualitative  homo-
geneity not  a  sufficient  ground  of,  i.
301,  302,  i.  378  seq.  ;  of  (1)  living
beings,  (2)  material  substances,  i.
492.

Red  Indians,  i.  512,  518,  ii.  238  seq.

Redintegration,  chemical,  i.  252,  etc.

Reflection,  stages  of,  i.  654  seq.

Reflex  movements,  i.  335,  336.

Reformation,  the,  ii.  287.

Relating  knowledge,  i.  164  seq.,  213,
318  ;  forms  of,  i.  220  seq.  ;  three
grades  of  operation  of,  L  229.

Relation,  ii.  635.

Relation  involves  unity,  i.  380  ;  'be-
tween the  good  and  the  actual,  i.
392,  396,  397.

Relations  of  things  all  have  their  root
in  the  things  themselves,  ii. 587_;
between  things  resolved  into  reci-
procal action,  ii.  619  seq.
8  A

738

I^'DEX.

Religiousness,  il  115,  116.

Republicau  constitutions,  ii.  558.

Respiration,  i.  110  seq.

Responsibility,  idea  of,  ii.  115.

Revolution,  the  French,  ii.  289.

Rights  of  man,  i.  709.

Rococo  style,  ii.  441,  442.

Roman  art,  ii.  420  seq.  ;  dignity,  ii.
424  ;  mind,  temper,  and  procedure
of  the,  ii.  522  seq. ;  law  and  political
life,  ii.  524  seq.  ;  jurisprudeuce,  ii.
428  ;  law,  ii.  265.

Romance,  ii.  432.

Rome,  ancient,  ii.  263-267.

Rome,  ii.  520  seq.

Riickert,  i.  5.

Rudolphi,  i.  606.

Sakdanapalus,  ii.  401.

Science  {Wissenschaft),  definition  of,
ii.  152.

Science  and  common  life,  standpoints
of,  i.  271,  272  ;  foundation  of,  due  to
the  Greeks,  ii.  259,  318  seq. ;  and
life,  ii.  361  seq.

Scientific  knowledge  (science,  das
Wissen),  ii.  306,

Seasons,  influence  of,  ii.  11,  12.

Self-consciousness,  i.  248  seq.  ;  -exist-
ence, ii.  643,  645  seq.

Self  and  other,  ditference  between,  i.
249,  250.

Semitic  and  Indo-Germanic  nations,  ii.
255  seq.

Semitic  patriarchs,  life  of,  ii.  366  seq.

Sensation,  i.  318.

Sensation,  unity  of  the  process  of,  i.
201.

Sensations,  how  they  arise,  i.  282,  283;
their  place  and  nature,  i.  348  ;  how
far  connected  with  intelligent  li(e,
i.  563  ;  connected  by  us  with  the
nature  of  their  causes,  i.  573,  574.

Sense,  constant  illusion  of,  i.  345  seq.  ;
has  a  peculiar  worth  of  its  own,  i.
349  seq.

Sentience,  i.  236  ;  central  organ  of,  i.
319  ;  explanations  of,  i.  564  seq.  ;
human,  distinctive  character  of,  i.
571,  573,  578,  599,  627.

Series,  apprehension  of  a,  i.  220  seq.,
229,  230.

Shakspeare,  ii.  437.

Sich  darzvlbben  the  business  of  life,  ii.
71,  72. .

Slavery  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,
iL  372  seq.

Sleep,  i.  328  seq.

Social  life  as  a  source  of  religious  ideas,
ii.  451  seq.

Social  mechanics,  ii.  194.

Socialism,  ii.  564.

Society,  ii.  91  seq.  ;  simple  and  com-
plex sLructure  of, ii. 94  ; and  the  j

State,  510,  518  seq.  ;  autonomy  of,
ii.  534  seq.  ;  limitations  of  its  action,
ii.  545  seq.  ;  an  universal,  ii.  549,
551,  555 ;  ideal  of,  ii.  554.

Socrates,  ii.  318,  320,  407,  410.

Solitude,  conditions  of  the  usefulness
of,  ii.  170.

Solon,  ii.  464,  465,  515.

Sophocles,  i.  531.

Soul,  i.  144,  531,  note.

Soul,  does  not  organize  body,  i.  67  ;
animal,  i  87;  existence  of,  i.  143
seq.  ;  general  belief  in,  i.  143,
144  ;  nature  and  faculties  of,  i.
168  seq. ;  constant  activity  of  its
whole  nature,  i.  180,  181  ;  primary
and  secondary  reactions  of,  i.  181
seq.,  225  ;  its  capacity  of  change,  i.
184  seq.  ;  its  nature,  known  and
unknown,  i.  188  seq. ;  to  ii  (  Was)  of
the,  i.  188,  189  ;  unity  of,  i,  197,
229  ;  immortality  of,  i.  226,  387  ;
influence  on  bodily  form  of,  i.  287-
289  ;  seat  of  the,  i.  290,  291  ;  defini-
tion of,  i.  290  ;  limited  sphere  of  its
direct  operation,  i.  295  seq.  ;  brain
the  seat  of,  i.  297  ;  a  mobile  {Beweg-
lichen),  i.  301  ;  theory  of  its  omni-
presence in  the  body,  i.  313  seq.  ;
organ  of,  i.  316  seq.  ;  what  it  is,  i.
316 ;  unconscious  states  of  the,  i.
320  ;  divisibility  of,  i.  337  ;  the  per-
manent subject  of  mental  phaiuo-
mena,  i.  389.

Soul,  nature  of,  how  far  expressed  in
its  development,  i.  544,  545.

Soul  (Seele),  sentient,  common  to  man
and  brute,  i.  532.

Souls,  origin  of,  i.  390.

Souls,  transmigration  of,  i.  559.

Sound,  articulate,  i.  606  seq.

Sound,  significance  of,  i.  577.

South  Sea  Islanders,  ii.  232  seq.

Sovereign  power,  development  of,  ii.
501,  502.

Space,  i.  226,  227,  229  seq.  ;  relations
of  beings  in — three  possibilities,  i.
291-295 ;  and  unity  of  being,  i.  294,
295,  290-295  passim;  space-percep-
tion (intuition,  Baumanschauung),
conditions  of,  i.  306  seq.,  especially
308,  309  ;  central  organ  of,  i.  320 ;
space  and  time,  order  in,  i.  579,  583 ;
ideality  of,  ii.  603  seq.,  611.

Sparta,  ii.  506  seq.,  517.

Species  visible,  hypothesis  of,  L  806.

Speech,  parts  of,  i.  622,  623.

Speech  influenced  by  acoustic,  pho-
netic, and  syntactic  conditions,  i.
613,  614.

Speech,  corporeal  organ  of,  i.  611.

Speech,  articulate,  conditions  of,  i.
610,  611  ;  and  thought,  relation  be-
tween, i.  618  seq.

INDEX.

739

Spirit,  nniversal  [AUgemeiner  Geist),
i.  30.

Spiritual  life,  physical  basis  of,  ii.  65
seq.

"  Spiritual  organisms,"  ii.  398.

Starch,  i.  93.

State,  the,  ii.  96,  97  ;  and  society,  ii.
649  seq.  ;  conditions  necessary  for
development  of  a,  ii.  f)52  seq.  ;  ideal
of,  ii.  557.

State,  the,  and  national  life,  ii.  561  seq.

Stationary  life  and  agriculture,  ii.  84
seq.

Statistics,  ii.  194  seq.

Structure  and  function,  relation  be-
tween, i.  424.

Struggle  for  existence,  i.  526.

Subjectless  thinking  or  action,  notion
of,  i.  549.

Substance  (material),  changes  of  {Stojf-
wechsel),  i.  54,  55,  87,  88,  92  seq.

Substance,  the  infinite,  i.  381,  382.

Substance,  i.  227.

Sugar,  i.  93.

Sum  of  motions,  conditions  of  a,  i.
160.

Summary,  ii.  599-601,  624-625,  657-
658,  687-688.

Summum  bonum,  i.  11.

Supersensuous  soul  and  material  body,
contrast  between,  i.  166,  167.

Supersensuous  world,  questions  con-
cerning the,  ii.  108  seq.

Superstition,  ii.  113  seq.

Syllogism,  i.  235.

Sympathetic  system,  L  129  seq.

Syrinx,  i.  5.

Tantalus,  i.  5.

Teleologic  proof,  the,  ii.  666  seq.,  671.

Tellos,  ii.  464.

Temperament,  ii.  25  seq. ;  sanguine,  Li.
27-29  ;  sentimental  (Melancholic),  ii.
29-32;  choleric,  ii.  32-34;  phleg-
matic, ii.  34-36.

Teocallis  of  Me,xico,  ii.  252.

Terrestrial  conformation,  influence  of,
ii.  12,  13.

Tespi,  ii.  208.

Theology,  narrow  sense  of,  ii.  487.

Thing,  i.  227  ;  a  thing  is  where  it  acts,
i.  293

Thing  and  thought,  ii.  630,  631.

Things,  impossibility  of  their  being
copied  in  our  perception,  i.  347,  348  ;
inner  activity  of,  i.  353,  354  ;  {Ding)
i.  537  ;  TO  T/  of,  ii.  351,  352,  579,
600,  602,  603,  628  seq. ;  being  of,
ii.  578  seq.;  comparability  of  the
natures  of,  ii.  589  seq.  ;  reciprocal
action  between,  ii.  594  seq. ;  real,
intellectual,  and  apparent,  spatial
places  of,  ii.  613  seq.  ;  and  sub-
stance must  be  capable of  change.

ii.  623  ;  notions  of  the  nature  of,  ii.
626  seq. ;  our  ignorance  of  the  nature
of,  ii.  628.

Things,  unity  of,  ii.  682  seq.

Things  are  acts  of  the  Infinite,  wrought
within  minds  alone,  ii.  640  ;  is  mind
the  original  being  of?  ii.  648  ;  their
reciprocal  action  does  not  prove
their  homogeneitj'-,  ii.  656.

Thinking  (thought,  das  Denken),  i.
232  seq.,  619  seq.  ;  what  it  is,  ii.
354,  355.

Tliought,  train  of,  conditions  deter-
mining, i.  218  ;  form  and  matter  of,
i.  226  ;  and  names,  i.  627,  628  ;
necessities  of,  i.  660  seq. ;  its  rela-
tion to  its  objects,  ii.  321  seq.  ;
(Gedanke),  two  meanings  of,  ii.
630.

Thugs,  ii.  59.

Time,  i.  226,  227,  229  seq. ;  ideality
of,  ii.  708  seq.

Toltekiau  legend,  the,  ii.  242.

Tradition,  ii.  209.

Treaties,  validity  of,  ii.  565.

Tribal  sfcites,  ii.  498  seq.

Trinity,  theological  and  philosophical
doctrine  of,  ii.  486  seq.

Truth,  notion  of,  i.  674,  675 ;  and
things,  ii.  327  ;  and  its  relation  to
God,  ii.  690  seq. ;  relation  to  God  of
mathematical,  ii.  694  seq.  ;  can
only  be  recognised  by  a  nature  to
which  truth  belongs,  ii.  698.

Truths,  facts,  and  determinations  of
worth,  reciprocal  relations  of,  ii.
575  seq.

Truths  as  objects  recognised  by  God,
ii.  691  ;  as  creations  of  God,  ii.
692  ;  as  consequences  of  God's  being,
ii.  693.

Unconditioned,  necessary  unity  of
the,  ii.  669.

Unconsciousness,  i.  328  seq.  ;  based
oji  consciousness,  i.  201,  202.

Understanding,  the,  and  its  action,  i.
236  seq.

Union  of  materiality  and  mentality  in
the  same  being,  assumption  of,  i.
150  seq.

Unity  of  consciousness,  what  it  means,
i.  152  seq.,  164  ;  what  it  does  not
mean,  i.  154,  155 ;  does  not  result
from  the  action  of  a  plurality,  i.  158
spq.

Unity  of  humanity  and  men's  motives
for  seeking  it,  ii.  173  seq.  ;  of
humanity,  Koman,  Cliristian,  and
modern  conception  of  the,  ii.  522,
533  ;  in  things,  how  is  it  compatible
with  change  in  them,  ii.  622,  623  ;
in  love  of  moral  ideas,  forms  of
reality,  and  eternal  truth,  ii.  721.

740

INDEX.

Unity  of  the  supreme  can  so  and  unity

of  a  finite  life,  i.  452  seq.
Universal  laws  as  determining  powers

in  the  world  of  things,  ii.  588  seq.
Universals,  i.  233.

Variation,  i.  526.

Varieties  of  race,  origin  of,  i.  506  seq.,
522,  526,  527.

Veneration,  of  mere  forms,  ii.  536  seq. ;
of  forms  and  facts,  ii.  164  seq.

Vertebrates,  advantages  of,  i.  468.

Vital  force  (Lehenskraft),  i.  22,  50-74
passim,  75.

Vital  reaction,  i.  201.

Voice,  i.  605  seq.

Volition  (Wollen),  i.  254  seq.  ;  dis-
tinguishing characteristics  of,  i.  256.

Vowel  sounds,  i.  608  seq.

Wateu,  its  office  in  living  organisms,

96.
What  is  subordinate  to  what  ought  to
be,  i.  392.

Wiiat  things  are  in  themselves,  ho^
far  important  and  cognizable,  i.  543.

Whole  and  parts,  i.  63,  64 ;  whole
universal  as  fundamental  ideas  of
political  constructions,  ii.  505.

Will  ( Wille),  i.  255  ;  its  limitations,
i.  257,  258.

Will,  faculty  of,  i.  177  seq.

Women,  position  of,  among  the  Greeks
and  American  Indians,  ii.  372.

Words,  meaning  of,  i.  614  seq.

Work,  idealism  of,  ii.  71,  73  ;  (Arbeit),
meaning  of,  ii.  702.

World,  internal  coherence  of  the,  i.
231  ;  the,  not  a  blind  and  necessary
vortex  of  events,  i.  259  ;  conservation
and  governance  oP,  ii.  707,  808.

World  of  values  (worth,  Wcrth),  i.  244,
396,  400 ;  forms,  i.  244,  396,  400.

World-soul  (universal  soul,  Weltseele),
i.  15,  16,  etc.,  23,  396.

Zeus,  i.  6.
Zoroaster,  ii.  459.
