— namely,  in  1865.  Like  all  the  other  Dictate , the
original  was  subjected  to  the  revision  of  Professor
Rehnisch.  The  “Outlines  of  the  Aesthetics”  was
the  last  to  appear  in  the  series  of  eight  published  in
Germany ; it  bears  the  date  of  1 884.

The  original  contains  a relatively  lengthy  appendix
made  up  of  various  matters  chiefly  of  interest  to
German  readers  ; — a eulogistic  and  memorial  sketch
by  Professor  Rehnisch,  copies  of  the  testimonials
{Ab gangs zeugniss)  given  to  Lotze  by  the  Gymnasium
of  Zittau  and  the  University  of  Leipzig,  a list  of  his
“literary  publications,”  and  a survey  of  his  activities
as  a teacher  (a  catalogue  of  his  lecture-courses  year
by  year)  in  the  Universities  of  Leipzig,  Gottingen,


EDITORS  PREFACE.


Vll


and  Berlin.  The  German  appendix  has  not  been
translated  and  incorporated  into  this  volume,  because
most  of  its  material  belongs  to  the  details  of  biogra-
phy, and  it  has  not  been  our  purpose  to  speak,  or
to  cause  others  to  speak,  about  Lotze;  but  rather
to  let  this  philosopher,  in  his  own  chosen  words,
speak  for  himself.  We  note,  however,  that  the  testi-
monial of  his  University,  the  list  of  his  publications,
and  the  catalogue  of  his  lecture-courses,  all  show
how  large  a portion  of  his  earlier  energies  was
devoted  to  the  subjects  of  Medicine,  Pathology,
Physiology,  and  other  most  closely  allied  pursuits.
It  was  this  which  fitted  him  to  approach  philosophi-
cal questions  from  points  of  view,  and  by  ways  of
treatment,  fitted  to  command  the  attention  and
respect  of  an  age  trained  in  the  methods,  and  defer-
ential toward  the  claims  and  discoveries,  of  the
physical  and  natural  sciences.

The  reader  will  find  in  the  theoretical  discussions
of  the  “Outlines  of  ^Esthetics”  a certain  vagueness
and  apparent  unwillingness  to  enter  upon  the  task
of  attempting  clear  definitions.  We  are  not  told
in  any  one  compact  sentence  what  Beauty  is ; nor
is  it  made  perfectly  obvious  in  few  words  how  it  is
that  there  can  be  nothing  beautiful  without  the  self-
enjoyment  of  conscious  spirit,  and  yet  how  at  the
same  time,  “Things”  can  be  objectively  beautiful.


editor’s  preface.


viii

But  we  are  told  that  the  beautiful  is  not  given  to
man  in  the  form  of  a concrete  intuition,  or  of  a
finished  concept  whose  marks  may  be  distinguished
and  read  off  in  order  by  the  aid  of  logical  processes.
The  beautiful  is  rather  given  to  man  in  the  form  of
the  Idea.  No  individual,  therefore,  can  fully  com-
pass it,  can  have  more  than  a share  in  the  under-
standing of  it,  — according  to  the  degree  of  his
attainment  in  the  culture  of  its  appreciation.

If  those  who  are  wise  in  the  principles  and
maxims  of  the  different  arts  differ  from  Lotze  upon
various  points  considered  in  this  volume,  it  will  not
be  at  all  strange.  Even  the  wisest  in  such  matters
differ  among  themselves ; perhaps,  not  infrequently,
the  wiser  they  are,  the  more  they  differ.  And  yet
they  agree  in  holding  that  the  truths  which  under-
lie the  representation  of  the  beautiful  in  art  are
by  nature  universal  and  eternal.  All  such  will
find  a manifest  feeling  of  sympathy  and  a courtesy
of  manner,  which  are  in  themselves  both  ethical
and  aesthetic,  prevading  these  brief  chapters  from
the  mind  and  heart  of  a genial  philosopher.

GEORGE  T.  LADD.


New  Haven,  July,  1886.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


PAGE

FIRST  PRINCIPAL  DIVISION.

Chapter  I.  Of  Beauty  and  of  Fancy  ...  3

Chapter  II.  The  Actualization  of  the  Beautiful  and

its  Kinds 22

SECOND  PRINCIPAL  DIVISION.


Chapter

III.

Music  ....

• 33

Chapter

IV.

Architecture  ....

47

Chapter

V.

Plastic  Art

. 68

Chapter

VI.

Painting  ....

. 80

Chapter

VII.

Poetic  Art ....

. 91

First  Principal  Division.


First  Principal  Division.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  BEAUTY  AND  OF  FANCY.

§ l.  We  are  induced  to  call  anything  ‘ agreeable  ’
or  ‘ beautiful  ’ simply  by  the  impression  of  pleasure
which  it  produces  in  us.  But  we  distinguish  the
‘ agreeable  ’ as  an  impression  which  is  valid  only  for
us  individually,  from  the  'beautiful’  which  we
require  should  be  recognized  by  all  as  such.

From  what  has  just  been  said  we  derive  the  fol-
lowing view : That  is  agreeable  which  harmonizes
with  those  conditions  of  our  being  that  are  individual
and  not  necessarily  of  universal  validity ; on  the  con-
trary, that  is  beautiful  whose  impression  accords  with
that  organization  of  our  nature  which  is  unchange-
able and  common  to  all  individuals.  That  is  to
say,  we  believe  that  whatever  excites  our  cognitive
activity  to  a manifoldness  of  expressions  adapted  to
it  is  beautiful ; and  starting  from  this  point  of  view,
^Esthetics  has  investigated  the  rules  of  art,  in


4


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


accordance  with  which  suitable  encitements  should
be  furnished  to  this  natural  play  of  our  imagination,
by  putting  expectation  on  the  stretch,  by  enhancing
the  impression,  by  surprising  effect,  by  combining
a variety  of  elements  into  a whole  that  admits  of
easy  intuition,  by  subjecting  many  things  under  a
law  easy  to  discover,  etc.

§ 2.  But  such  a universal  validity  as  we  require
our  aesthetic  judgment  should  have  is  not  conceded
to  us ; on  the  contrary,  men’s  views  concerning  what
is  beautiful  are,  in  fact,  less  in  accord  than  their
judgments  concerning  much  which  is  only  agreeable.

The  impression  of  * beauty  ’ therefore  cannot  be
referred  to  some  uniform  standard  actually  existing
in  us,  to  a spiritual  organization  actually  existing  in
all  individuals ; but  only  to  one  such  that  it  has  first
to  be  realized  in  each  person  by  means  of  develop-
ment, and  realized  in  each  only  in  an  imperfect  and
one-sided  way.

Any  impression  will  accordingly  appear  ‘beautiful’
which  harmonizes  with  that  part  of  this  ideal  condi-
tion which  has  been  actualized  in  us  ; and  just  be-
cause we  are  firmly  convinced  that  it  does  not  please
us  merely  as  an  individual  person,  but  pleases  the
universal  spirit  in  us,  we  are  able  to  require  that  our
judgment  should  be  universally  valid.  But,  on  the


9


BEAUTY  AS  IDEAL.


5


other  hand,  because  exactly  the  same  part  of  the
ideal  is  actualized  in  scarcely  any  other  individual,
this  required  accord  is  very  seldom  perfectly
reached ; and  the  aesthetic  taste  may  be  even  more
various  than  the  judgment  concerning  many  a thing
that  is  merely  agreeable  to  the  senses,  for  whose
impression  all  individuals  possess  the  same  suscep-
tibility.

§ 3*  As  far  as  yet  appears,  therefore,  the  beautiful
would  be  that  which  corresponds  to  so  much  of  the
ideal  as  is  actualized  in  us.  But  the  question  arises,
how  beauty,  which  is  so  often  found  in  external
forms,  can  correspond  to  an  ideal  condition  of  the
human  spirit,  which  it  is  customary  to  conceive  of
only  in  the  narrower  domain  of  ethical  sentiment.

It  is  obvious,  however,  that  every  single  moral  idea
— for  example,  the  idea  of  justness,  kindness,  etc. —
as  soon  as  it  commands  the  spirit,  is  not  merely
bound  to  impart  definite  formal  characteristics  to  our
whole  manner  of  conduct;  but  also  that  under  its
command,  the  interchange  of  different  moods  of
mind  and  the  habits  of  the  mental  train  — in  brief,
the  whole  inner  condition  — may  become  habituated
to  definite  forms  of  alteration ; and  that  these,
quite  apart  from  all  reference  to  ethical  problems,
may  recur  as  forms  for  the  combination  of  matters


6


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


in  nature  and  in  the  products  of  art.  Thus  ‘just-
ness,’ for  example,  is  the  formal  predicate  of  con-
sistency, of  steadfast  development,  of  the  avoidance
of  everything  superfluous,  of  the  rigor  and  acerbity
of  stiff  rectilinear  forward  movements.  On  the
other  hand,  the  idea  of  ‘ kindness  ’ suggests  the
habit  of  equalizing  opposites  by  intermediation,
of  avoiding  all  sharp  contrast,  and  evoking  like
forms  of  demeanor.  Both  kinds  of  forms,  however,
we  find  again  in  nature  also;  and  what  either  of
them  supports  is  pleasant  besides  to  the  one  spir-
itual bent  which  lives  in  the  same  forms.

§ 4.  Such  a mode  of  apprehending  the  subject
would,  in  part,  — as  will  be  shown  subsequently  —
explain  many  particulars  very  well ; and,  in  part,  it
would  by  no  means  ill  defend  the  higher  worth  of  the
beautiful  in  contrast  with  the  agreeable.

But  in  all  this  the  beautiful  object  would  always
appear  only  as  a means  which  is  good  simply  in  order
to  produce  by  its  influence  upon  us,  and  in  us  alone,
that  feeling  of  pleasure  for  the  sake  of  which  we  call
it  ‘beautiful.’  In  itself  \ accordingly,  it  would  just  as
little  be  ‘beautiful’  as  an  object  is  in  itself  ‘useful.’
As  ‘ usefulness  ’ is  simply  a predicate  signifying
an  event  which  happens  to  a thing  in  case  it  acts
upon  us,  but  which  does  not  at  all,  like  its  other


BEAUTY  AS  SUBJECTIVE.


7


properties,  help  to  make  out  or  characterize  its  own
nature ; just  so  beauty  would  be  a predicate  signify-
ing an  event,  which  does  not  belong,  strictly  speak-
ing, to  the  constitution  of  the  object  itself,  but  which
only  happens  to  it  because  we,  upon  whom  it  acts,
are  so  organized  that  this  action  causes  us  pleasure.
If  we  were  differently  contrived,  then  the  same  object
might  possibly  be  called  ‘ hateful  ’ ; and  in  such  case
it  would  just  as  little  exist  at  all,  as  in  the  first  case
it  would  be  in  itself  ‘ beautiful.’

In  this  way,  therefore,  ‘beauty’  would  — strictly
speaking  — exist  only  in  our  subjective  impression;
in  objects,  on  the  contrary,  there  would  be  extant
only  a certain  quantum  of  indifferent  properties
which  produce  the  beautiful  in  us  simply  as  their
after-effect.

§ 5.  The  foregoing  view  will  not  be  found  satis-
factory. If  it  is  cheerfully  conceded  that  so  the
matter  must  stand  with  other  properties  — for  ex-
ample, usefulness;  and  that  these  are  therefore
nothing  which  helps  to  constitute  the  object,  but
merely  an  accidental  relation  of  the  ready-made
object  to  us : still  this  is  impossible  in  the  case  sup-
posed above ; because  the  peculiar  value  of  beauty  is
lost  as  soon  as  it  is  assumed  not  to  be  valid  as  the
proper  life  of  the  object,  but  only  as  a state  of  mind
induced  by  it.


8


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


The  attempt  will  accordingly  be  made  in  every
way  to  secure  for  beauty  some  objective  reality ; and
likewise  to  require  that  the  beauty  of  all  which  is
beautiful  be  everywhere  one  and  the  same.  For
this,  too,  would  be  contradictory  to  its  real  worth,
if,  as  is  the  case  with  what  is  merely  useful,  every
single  beautiful  object  were  beautiful  for  a reason
quite  special  to  it,  valid  merely  for  it,  and  repeated
in  no  other  case.  From  such  a necessity  as  this
did  the  inquiry  originate,  which  was  started  even
in  antiquity,  concerning  the  * beautiful  in  itself’;  or
in  modern  form  concerning  the  * idea  of  beauty.’

§ 6.  In  this  effort  to  objectify  beauty,  no  equiva-
lent can  be  discovered  for  the  pleasure  of  the  sub-
jective impression  which  it  affords  us;  even  if  it  be
granted  that  things  enjoy  their  own  beauty.  The
attempt  may,  however,  be  made  to  apprehend  that
which  objectively , in  the  things,  lies  at  the  basis  of
the  beautiful  impression,  as  a predicate  significant
in  itself,  inserted  as  of  great  worth  into  the  entire
structure  of  the  world,  and  belonging  to  the  world’s
completeness ; so  that  the  impression  of  beauty  is
produced  by  something  that  is,  apart  from  the
world  and  even  in  itself,  of  absolute  worth.

§ 7.  On  the  other  hand,  we  soon  become  con-
vinced that  what  we  are  looking  for  as  the  ‘ beautiful


BEAUTY  AS  AN  IDEA.


9


in  itself,’  as  a common  characteristic  in  the  different
beautiful  objects,  can  neither  be  a definite  property
nor  a sum  of  such  properties,  neither  a definite
occurrence  nor  a reference,  — a relation,  nor  yet  a
general  exponent  of  such  relations.  For  beautiful
objects  are  infinitely  various,  as  well  in  respect  to
the  nature  of  their  particular  marks,  as  touching
the  mode  of  their  combination.

Accordingly,  we  cannot  apprehend  ‘the  beautiful’
in  the  form  of  an  intuition,  which  would  always  give
us  only  one  definite  image ; nor  in  the  form  of  the
concept,  which,  in  addition  to  a definite  circle  of
marks,  would  give  us  an  invariable  law  for  their
inner  connection ; but  only  in  the  form  of  an  Idea.
Such  Idea  furnishes  the  essentials  of  an  object
simply  by  means  of  the  significance  of  the  end  to
which  it  is  called;  and,  on  the  contrary,  does  not
include  a definite  form  or  combination  of  marks,  but
rather  admits  of  an  infinitely  manifold  determinable-
ness, with  the  sole  condition  that  in  all  these  many
forms  the  meaning  of  the  end  remains  unchanged.

§ 8.  It  will  now  be  our  task  to  specify  the  content
which  constitutes  beauty  as  conceived  of  under  this
form  of  the  Idea.  Now  we  have  previously  seen  (§  6)
that  an  absolute  worth  can  be  attributed  to  the  beau
tiful  only  in  case  the  relations,  by  means  of  which  it


IO


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


is  beautiful,  belong  to  the  universal,  eternal,  and
most  important  connections  of  reality.  But  reality
manifests  to  us  three  realms  or  powers  that  involve
one  another,  namely  : —

1.  The  realm  of  universal  laws,  which  impress
themselves  upon  us  as  of  binding  force  with  an
absolute  necessity,  which  rule  all  that  is  real,  but
on  account  of  this  very  universality  produce  of
themselves  nothing  definite  whatever;

2.  The  realm  of  real  substances  and  forces,  which
presents  itself  not  as  necessary  but  only  as  existent
in  fact,  and  which,  by  being  active  according  to  the
aforesaid  laws  under  definite  circumstances,  produces
the  manifold  forms  of  phenomena ;

3.  The  definite  and  specific  plan  according  to
which  these  elements  of  reality  are  brought  together
under  each  other,  in  order  to  realize  a definite  end
by  their  action  according  to  the  universal  laws.

§ 9.  Now  the  foregoing  three  principles  appear  to
our  ordinary  conception  of  the  world  to  spring  from
different  sources  quite  independently  of  each  other,
^._and  only  to  traverse  one  another,  and  unite  with  one
jau&ther,  for  the  production  of  the  aforesaid  definite
reality.  None  of  them,  however,  flows  from  any
other.  From  the  realm  of  laws  it  is  not  deducible
that  there  must  be  precisely  this  and  no  other  form


UNITY  IMPLIED  IN  BEAUTY.


II


of  reality ; and  even  from  the  end  served  we  cannot
demonstrate  that  it  was  to  be  attained  only  by
means  of  these  laws  and  forces  and  by  means  of
no  others.

But  with  such  a triplicity  of  independent  begin-
nings, we  are  neither  satisfied  in  ordinary  life  nor
in  science ; and  it  has  always  been  one  of  the  most
serious  problems  of  speculation  to  apprehend  them
all  as  necessary  consequences  of  a single  supreme
principle.

In  general,  it  can  only  be  said,  that  this  problem
has  never  been  completely  solved,  and  never  will  be
solved.  Between  cognition,  however,  which  fruit-
lessly seeks  for  a complete  insight  into  this  con-
nection, and  conduct  which  just  as  imperfectly  en-
deavors to  bring  about  a unity  of  aUthaHs' real  with
its  purposes, — and,  therefore,  between  the  realm  of
the  true  and  the  good,  — feeling  intervenes  in  the
impression  of  beauty,  in  a peculiar  manner ; not,
indeed,  so  as  to  furnish  any  theoretical  insight  or
practical  accomplishment  of  a solution  of  these  con-
tradictions, and  yet  so  as  to  obtain  in  the  intuition
of  the  beautiful  an  immediate  certainty  and  assur-
ance of  the  existence  of  such  a solution.

We  can  therefore  designate  beauty,  in  a prelimi-
nary way,  as  the  appearance  to  immediate  intuition
of  a unity  amongst  those  three  powers  which  our
cognition  is  unable  completely  to  unite.


12


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


§ 10.  In  every  realization  of  an  end  which  must
employ  means  furnished  from  without  in  order  to
actualize  it,  such  means  will  always  possess,  besides
those  properties  through  which  they  fulfil  the  de-
mands of  this  end,  still  others  that  are  in  part  neutral
and  in  part  obstructive.  Only  in  the  totality  of
the  world , which  is  self-formed,  are  we  able  to
presuppose  a perfect  congruity  between  the  end  to
be  fulfilled,  the  free  activity  of  the  means,  and  the
general  laws  of  their  action.

Where  the  same  congruity,  which  we  have  here
no  right  to  presuppose,  nevertheless  actually  occurs
in  a single  phenomenon ; and,  accordingly,  where  the
means  employed  do  not  simply  appear  as  ab  extra
and  partially  subjected  to  the  end,  but  from  their
own  inclination,  and  even  in  those  relations  in  which
it  makes  no  demands  upon  them,  are  still  active  with
the  end  in  mind,  as  it  were,  and  without  compul-
sion repeat  the  forms  of  existence  and  occurrence
that  are  otherwise  required  by  it: -there  the  object.
appears  to  us  to  achieve  more  than  was  its  xlutyr-
And  when  it  excites  in  us  the  feeling  of  pleasure
through  this  superfluity  of  interior  excellence,  we
call  it  beautiful ; because  it  repeats  in  a picture  that
we  can  intuit  and  as  concentrated  in  the  small,  the
general  Idea  of  Beauty,  — the  Idea,  that  is,  of  that
perfect  reciprocal  involution  which  belongs  to  the
aforesaid  three  powers  in  the  structure  of  the  world.


THE  BEAUTIFUL  DISTINGUISHED.


13


§ 11.  What  precedes  will  suffice  to  separate  the
beautiful,  as  well  in  our  immediate  apprehension  in
life  as  also  in  art-criticism,  from  the  following  three
things  : —

1.  From  what  is  merely  correct,  true,  or  right  —
that  is  to  say,  from  that  which  only  corresponds
perfectly  to  general  laws  and  so  does  only  its  duty ;

2.  From  the  merely  manifold  life  of  the  actual,
which  by  its  variety,  its  freshness,  its  surprising  forms,
acts  upon  us,  psychologically  considered,  with  great
strength,  but  is  in  itself  without  worth,  so  that
everything  in  art  which  is  merely  true  to  nature
and  characteristic  can  avail  only  as  a material  means
of  encitement  and  not  as  a justifying  reason  for  our
being  pleased  aesthetically ;

3.  Finally,  from  the  good,  which  although  higher
than  the  beautiful,  is  not  in  and  of  itself  also  beau-
tiful, but  first  becomes  ‘beautiful’  in  the  course  of
its  actualization,  at  the  point  where  the  free  means
complaisantly  subject  themselves  to  it,  or  it  is  itself
in  condition  to  be  the  complete  solvent  of  their  origi-
nal rigidity.

§ 12.  Now  if  beauty  is  a coincidence  of  the  afore-
said three  factors,  which  appear  in  the  realization  of
every  end,  then  it  will  belong,  strictly  speaking,  only
to  what  is  wtovcd / or  to  that  whose  condition,  when


14


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


quiet  in  fact,  can  indicate  to  us  such  motions  as
would  show  the  complete  reciprocal  involution  of
the  end,  the  means,  and  the  general  laws.

And,  indeed,  • beauty  in  the  fullest  sense  would
belong  only  to  the  creative  soul  of  the  world  when
moved,  and  might  be  designated  as  the  form  of  its
development ; for  only  in  the  totality  of  the  world
does  the  aforesaid  coincidence  take  place  perfectly.

Individual  objects,  on  the  other  hand,  would  either
be  beautiful  through  their  bearing  in  themselves,
in  like  manner,  an  active,  animating  principle,  such
as  the  ‘ world-soul  * is  to  its  totality ; or  else  they
are  beautiful, — although  being  in  themselves  indeed
only  mechanical  and  external  compositions  from
separate  parts,  — through  their  reminding  us,  by
the  form  of  their  combination,  of  realities  that  are
products  of  the  world-soul  in  the  same  forms.
It  is  due  to  the  first  reason  that  the  living  organ-
ism appears  to  us  as  the  most  direct  exhibition
of  beauty ; and  to  the  second,  that  we  endeavor  to
apprehend  every  possible  work  of  art  as  an  organism,
in  order  to  be  able  to  point  out  its  beauty  in  like
manner.

§ 13.  Little  as  we  are  able  to  express  at  all  ade-
quately the  supreme  end  of  the  world,  still  it  cannot
consist,  if  we  are  only  to  consider  it  as  having  an


VALUE  OF  HAPPINESS.


15


absolute  value,  in  the  representation  of  any  event
whatever,  or  of  any  fact,  or  in  the  execution  of  any
form  whatever  either  of  movement  or  of  existence.
For  all  this  — the  unremitting  manifestation  of  the
Infinite  in  innumerable  finite  forms,  the  constant
realizing  of  the  Ideal  and  the  re-idealizing  of  the
Real,  or,  finally,  the  self-objectifying  of  a Spirit  which
unceasingly  produces  a world  from  itself  and  with-
draws it  again  into  itself  — all  this,  by  which  it
has  been  thought  possible  to  express  the  supreme
content  of  the  world,  is  of  itself  a matter  of  perfect
indifference,  tedious  and  worthless ; and  one  would
not  know  why  just  this,  rather  than  some  other,  must
needs  be  the  final  purpose  of  the  world.

Nothing  else  affirms  itself  so  unconditionally  and
so  immediately  in  respect  to  its  value,  as  happiness.
Only  it  has  valid  claim  as  the  ultimate  thing  to  be
realized ; only  in  regard  to  it  is  the  question  absurd,
why  it  instead  of  unhappiness  must  be  the  final
purpose  of  the  world.

What  usually  causes  this  conception  to  be  dis-
trusted, is  simply  the  subordinate  thought  of  the
individual,  empirical,  conditioned,  and  revocable  hap-
piness, that  is  sought  for  by  the  individual  with
egoistic  intention  and  without  respect  to  the  ques-
tion whether  it  is  compatible  with  the  happiness  of
the  whole ; and  which  is  self-punished  just  on  account


1 6


OUTLINES  OF  /ESTHETICS.


of  this  fact,  since  the  coherent  system  of  the  whole
of  the  world,  placed  beyond  the  range  of  its  vision,
avenges  itself  through  the  consequences.  Widely
different  from  such  conditioned  happiness  is  that
which,  having  reference  to  the  whole  of  the  world,
is  better  designated  by  the  name  of  ‘blessedness,’
and  so  expresses  the  sequence  of  an  ordering  of  the
world  in  which  there  is  no  being,  no  relation,  and  no
event,  that  is  existent  as  bare  matter  of  fact.  The
rather,  in  such  an  ordering  of  the  world  does  every-
thing which  is,  stand  in  such  relations  that  the
most  manifold,  most  extended,  and  most  profound
enjoyment  for  all  the  single  elements  originates
from  these  relations.

§ 14.  We  must  now  concede  that,  just  as  we  are
in  nowise  able  to  deduce  from  one  final  purpose,  the
necessity  that  precisely  these  and  no  other  means
should  be  chosen  for  its  actualization ; so,  also,  are
we  unable  to  demonstrate  how  the  realizing  of  the
highest  blessedness  demanded  precisely  this  definite
arrangement  of  the  world,  of  which  at  least  a frag-
ment falls  into  our  experience.

Indeed,  in  the  second  place,  we  are  not  in  posi-
tion for  a moment  to  demonstrate  that  the  world  as
it  is  corresponds  to  the  aforesaid  final  purpose.  The
rather  are  we  frequently  brought  by  our  survey  of


BEAUTY  AS  HARMONY.


17

the  evil  in  the  world  to  the  belief  that,  if  such  bless-
edness is  the  final  purpose  of  the  world,  it  at  least
finds  in  the  existent  reality  an  imperfect  and  awk-
ward means  for  its  realization;  so  that  even  here
there  seems  to  be  a chasm  existing  between  the
realm  of  ideas  or  final  purposes  and  the  realm  of  real
means.  Accordingly,  the  latter  seem  to  spring  from
another  source  than  the  former.

In  our  theoretic  cognition  we  shall  never  get
further  than  a faith  founded  on  certain  motifs , that,
nevertheless,  in  the  totality  of  the  world  this  perfect
amcord  does  take  place;  and  that  only  the  individual
as  such  does  penance  for  the  fault  of  its  finiteness  by
experiencing  a transitory  dissonance,  which  will  be
again  dissolved  in  the  harmony  of  the  whole.  On
the  contrary,  wherever  in  a single  phenomenon  such
an  arrangement  takes  place  that  all  its  parts  are  not
only  in  general  complaisantly  subjected  to  a single
end,  but  are  more  especially  productive  by  their
reciprocal  action  of  a manifold  pleasure,  that  has  its
echo  in  each  particular  part  and  spreads  harmoni-
ously through  the  whole  ; there  do  we  discover  again
in  this  beauty  of  the  phenomenon  the  immediate
assurance  of  the  truth,  that,  as  here  in  what  is  par-
ticular, so  also  in  the  whole  of  the  world’s  ordering,
the  aforesaid  opposition  is  annulled.


8


OUTLINES  OF  .ESTHETICS.


§ 15.  Now  enjoyment  or  happiness  is  possible  only
in  beings  with  a soul.  The  highest  objective  beauty
will,  accordingly,  always  be  found  in  the  form  that
has  soul,  whose  single  parts  we  consider  on  that
account  as  capable  of  having  a share  in  the  pleasure
of  the  individual  spirit  that  controls  them,  of  feeling
the  happiness  that  is  involved  in  the  relations  of
each  of  them  to  every  other ; and  so,  from  their  point
of  view,  of  reflecting  the  harmony  that  pervades  the
whole  as  a whole,  as  though  it  existed  for  themselves.

On  this  account,  every  aesthetic  consideration  of
nature  will  always  be  opposed  to  regarding,  in  a
roughly  mechanical  view,  the  body  as  dead  material
for  the  purposes  of  the  one  living  soul.  Not  only
will  it  consider  the  body  as  animated  in  every  part
throughout,  but  also  every  work  of  art,  however  com-
pletely we  may  be  convinced  of  its  really  mechanical
structure,  we  shall  value  aesthetically  only  by  con-
sidering it  as  animated  organism ; so  as,  accordingly,
to  be  in  a position  to  ascribe  to  every  single  part,  not
merely  the  passive  possession  of  certain  forms,  but
likewise  an  enjoyment  of  the  worth  of  these  forms.

§ 16.  Finally : we  shall  not  ascribe  the  title  of
‘ beauty  ’ exclusively  so  much  to  the  forms  of  exist-
ence and  of  mutual  relation,  which  are  in  themselves
merely  preparatory  for  the  subsequent  self-enjoyment


BEAUTY  SUBJECTIVE  AND  OBJECTIVE.


19


of  “Things.”  On  the  contrary,  we  shall  include  the
latter  also  in  the  aforesaid  title,  and  shall  style  ‘beau-
tiful’ every  blissful  self-enjoyment,  such  as  presum-
ably belongs  to  the  totality  of  the  world  on  account
of  the  perfect  coincidence  of  all  real  means  of  actual-
ization with  the  content  of  its  final  purpose;  and
such  as,  — although  it  can  be  disturbed  within  the
individual  (the  finite)  by  means  of  those  dissonances
that  can  occur,  and  that  ordinarily  do  in  fact  occur,
in  the  realization  of  every  purpose,  — on  the  other
hand,  manifests  itself  in  each  of  these  finite  individual
phenomena  (the  beautiful  objects),  in  the  form  of  a
concentrated  expression  that  approximates  perfection.

In  the  foregoing  result,  the  earlier  and  subjective ,
and  this  subsequent,  objective  way  of  regarding  the
beautiful,  coincide.  For,  primarily,  we  found  beauty  to
consist  only  in  the  subjective  feeling  of  aesthetic  pleas-
ure, which  the  impressions  stirred  in  us.  We  then
required  an  objective  existence  to  be  given  to  it,  so
that  it  might  appear  as  the  peculiar  inner  essence  of
beautiful  objects.  We  have  attained  this  require-
ment, when  we  have  considered  beauty,  not  as  a bare
relation,  as  a bare  form,  of  which  the  things  to  which
it  belongs  are  themselves  not  conscious;  since  we,
the  rather,  explain  it  as  the  pleasure  which  the
objects  themselves  receive  from  the  happy  construc-
tion of  their  forms.  They,  therefore,  do  not  merely


20


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


appear  beautiful,  in  so  far  as  they  make  on  us  a
pleasing  impression ; but  we,  in  the  impression,  only
share  with  them  in  their  own  beautiful  feeling  of
pleasure.

§ 17.  By  the  term  ‘ fancy  ’ we  designate,  in  con-
trast with  the  common  power  of  imagination, — which
only  brings  to  the  mind’s  view  a manifold  matter
of  fact  having  various  marks,  forms,  relations,  etc., —
the  higher  capacity,  that  likewise  feels  the  value
in  these  matters  of  fact,  which  they  possess  for  the
soul  that  enjoys  them.  Various  expressions  of  this
‘ fancy  ’ occur  in  the  most  ordinary  spiritual  life ;
and  we  cannot  even  mentally  represent  the  most
abstract  concepts  (like  unity,  opposition,  equilibrium,
and  the  like)  without  likewise  transposing  ourselves
with  our  mind  into  their  content,  and  sympathet-
ically enjoying  the  peculiarly  colored  pleasure  or
pain  which  corresponds  to  it.  But  ‘ fancy  ’ will
appear  not  merely  as  an  apprehending  activity,  which
discovers  the  world  of  values  within  the  world  of
forms,  and  beholds  the  former  everywhere  shining
through  the  latter  ; but  will  likewise  appear  as  a
creative  activity,  which  is  able  to  transport  the  inner
world  of  values  into  the  world  of  forms.

Thus  would  the  ‘fancy’  of  the  soul’s  creative
world  be  the  source  of  all  beauty ; for  it  is  this


THE  ACTIVITY  OF  FANCY.


2


living  activity,  from  which  the  ideal  ends  and  the
realizing  manifestation  of  them  proceed  in  imme-
diate unity.  In  the  ‘ fancy  ’ of  the  human  spirit  we
discover  it  again  active  in  painstaking  of  twofold
form  : partly  in  joyfully  understanding  the  beauty
that  exists ; partly  in  bringing  forth  other  beauty
with  the  self-productivity  of  art.


CHAPTER  II.


THE  ACTUALIZATION  OF  THE  BEAUTIFUL,  AND  ITS
KINDS.

§ 1S-  If  we  investigate  those  domains  of  reality
in  which  beauty  can  manifest  itself,  we  are  able  to
distinguish,  —

(1)  The  universal  forms  of  Space,  Time,  and
Motion,  upon  which  all  reality  is  built;  — further,

(2)  The  definite  typical  species  of  individual  and
actual  beings  ; — finally,

(3)  The  world  of  events,  into  which  the  latter  are
interwoven.

§ 19.  While  forbearing  until  later  all  allusion  to
the  grounds  on  which  certain  individual  forms  of
space,  time,  and  motion  appear  beautiful  rather  than
others,  we  wish  now  to  present  that  on  which  the
beautiful  impression  of  each  one  of  these  forms
always  depends.

Space,  time,  and  motion,  are  so  organized  inte-
riorly, that  they  not  only  comprehend  one  immensity .
by  means  of  their  infinite  extent,  but  by  means  of
their  relations  under  law  likewise  give  to  each  single
point  some  definite  relation  in  a series  of  relations


BEAUTY  AND  SPACE-FORM.


23


to  every  other  point.  Thus  space,  for  example,  makes
it  possible  that  nothing  in  the  world  stand  isolated,
but  everything  have  its  own  definite  surroundings ;
that  motions  in  different  directions  converge  at  one
point  previously  determined,  or  diverge  from  some
other  common  point ; that  every  figure  when  begun
finds  not  merely  a place  for  its  conclusion,  but  also
the  points  fixed  by  a law  through  which  its  outline
must  run  symmetrically ; — and  more  of  the  same
kind  of  thing.

We  are  so  wonted  to  all  these  properties  that
we  overlook  their  value.  Nevertheless,  the  impres-
sion exerted  upon  us — for  example,  by  the  symmetry
of  a figure,  by  the  consistency  in  the  curvature  of
a line,  by  the  peculiar  contrast  between  the  two
equal  branches  of  an  arabesque  that  run  right  and
left,  by  the  fixed  recurrence  of  a melody  to  its  point
of  starting  — depends  in  large  measure  upon  the  fact
that  all  these  individual  phenomena  secretly  remind
us  of  this  universal  nature  of  the  aforesaid  three
great  forms,  by  means  of  which  consistency,  cohe-
rence, possibility  of  a development,  and  the  impossi-
bility of  ever  withdrawing  one’s  self  from  the  close
union  with  reality,  are  everywhere  secured.

§ 20.  In  contrast  with  the  ‘free  beauty’  that,  in
this  first  province,  enters  into  various  combinations


24


OUTLINES  OF  ESTHETICS.


in  themselves  purposeless,  everything  actual,  being
fixed  by  some  conception  of  species,  has  first  to
satisfy  the  demands  of  this  type.  Yet  it  is  not
by  this  means  alone  made  ‘beautiful.’  For  every
type,  like  every  general  notion,  leaves  indefinite  a
great  number  of  proportions  between  its  individual
marks.  These  gaps  the  individual  must  fill  up  by
the  choice  of  definite  relations ; and  only  thus  does
the  generic  type  have  any  actuality  whatever.

Now  the  individual  will  be  beautiful  in  case  it
perfects  these  its  individual  features,  not  only  in
accord  with  one  another,  but  also  in  such  manner
that  by  means  of  them,  in  respect  to  the  proper
significance  of  the  type,  it  surpasses  its  necessary
demands.  It  thereby  shows  how  the  excellence  of
this  type  is  preserved  even  for  its  own  individual
end  as  a self-sufficing  system  of  means.  Conversely,
it  becomes  positively  hateful,  so  soon  as  it  defines
that  which  the  general  type  leaves  indefinite,  con-
trary to  its  significance.  For  in  this  way,  although
it  does  not  escape  from  the  limits  of  what  is  matter
of  command,  still  it  shows  that  it  feels  itself  to  be
ruled  by  the  generic  type  as  by  a foreign  power,
to  which  it  is  opposed  with  its  own  individual
inclinations  and  purposes.

The  attempt  to  discover  or  represent  simply  the
universal  type  as  beautiful  in  itself,  without  any


THE  BEAUTY  OF  GRACEFULNESS.


25


such  individual  and  characteristic  coloring,  will  nec-
essarily be  wrecked.  That  which  is  properly  con-
trasted with  the  ‘ merely  characteristic  * as  being  the
‘ideally  beautiful,’  is  not  attained  by  complete  sur-
render of  what  is  characteristic ; but  only  by  making
the  specifically  individual  directions,  for  which  we
conceive  the  generic  type  to  be  perfected  and  exer-
cised in  the  individual  form,  of  themselves  more
comprehensive,  free,  and  universal ; so  that  they
include  no  limited  construction  merely,  but  a mani-
foldness of  purposes  — and  that  of  such  kind  as
belong  to  the  actual  and  serious  vital  problems  of
the  genus.

The  fact  need  scarcely  be  alluded  to,  that  ‘ charac-
teristic beauty  ’ may  include  also  the  ‘ free  beauty  ’ of
mere  form ; although  in  all  higher  creations  the  forms
of  themselves  are  more  simple  and  quiet,  while  their
beauty  depends  on  the  understanding  of  their  ever-
increasing  spiritual  content.

§ 21.  Beauty  in  the  world  of  events  lies  in  the
concord  between  the  free  characteristic  activity  of
'manifold  living  being,  and  the  universal  laws  of  the
environing  world-plan.  Here  there  may  be,  in  part,
such  a ‘free  ’ beauty  of  grace  that  the  events  act  by
means  of  the  beauty  of  the  form  of  their  concate-
nation ; in  part,  a ‘ characteristic  ’ beauty,  since  a


26


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


definite  individual  form  of  life  is  developed,  in  accord-
ance with  its  own  nature,  by  all  the  events  to  which
it  is  subjected  from  without.

Peculiar  to  this  domain,  however,  and  only  trans-
ferable from  it  to  the  earlier  ones,  is  the  form  of
sublimity . It  accompanies  of  itself  every  great  his-
torical survey  of  the  world’s  destiny.  It  appears  in
the  individual,  where  some  more  than  ordinarily
conspicuous  cycle  of  events,  as  a smaller  whole,
brings  to  the  mind’s  view  the  unconditioned  control
of  the  universal  over  the  activity  of  the  particular.

Nevertheless,  the  impression  of  this  absolute  reign
of  laws,  as  long  as  weight  is  laid  upon  the  vanishing
of  the  particular  before  the  universal,  has  at  first
only  a depressing  effect ; and  it  is  in  no  respect
beautiful  except  as  this  reign  of  law  is  not  held  to  be
the  finality  in  the  world,  but  only  a means  of  which
an  unspeakably  higher  power  avails  itself  for  binding
together  what  is  manifold.  On  the  other  hand,  the
same  impression  becomes  dreadful,  so  soon  as  the
mechanism  of  this  conformity  to  law  is  made  to
hold  good  as  a final  and  supreme  fate,  which  controls
all  that  is  finite  without  being  itself  limited  by  any?
thing  higher.

On  the  other  hand,  what  is  itself  elevated  is  also
elevating ; if  one  lays  weight  upon  the  other  side,
upon  the  inexhaustible  procession  of  the  individual


THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  ART.


27


from  the  universal,  and  upon  the  love  with  which
the  latter  constantly  anew  produces  what  is  perish-
able. Still  even  what  is  elevated  is  beautiful  only
in  case  this  immeasurable  power  of  production  is
itself  again  tacitly  assumed  to  be  the  means  for
a higher  end.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  were  to  take
rank  as  a finality,  it  would  be  transformed  for  us  into
the  tedium  of  the  monotone.

The  supreme  beauty  of  events  will  accordingly
consist  in  the  solemn  sublimity  in  which  the  force
that  negates  the  individual,  as  well  as  the  other  that
is  infinitively  creative,  appears  as  the  peculiar  life-
likeness of  a purpose,  in  itself  valuable  and  sacred.

§ 22.  Now  just  as  fancy  apprehends  these  forms
of  the  beautiful  in  the  reality  of  the  world  as  it  is,
so  does  it  endeavor  to  reproduce  them  in  art.

The  earliest  beginnings  of  art  belong  to  daily  life.
Every  impulse  toward  cleanliness,  adornment,  order
and  comfort  in  surroundings,  is  dependent  on  the
same  pleasure  in  the  opulency  of  that  which  is  mani-
fold yet  concordant,  that  ventures  on  higher  prob-
lems in  the  sphere  of  “art”  customarily  so  called.
And  it  certainly  would  be  profitable  — contrary  to
modern  aesthetics  which,  for  the  most  part,  aims  to
be  ‘a  science  of  the  idea  of  the  beautiful’  — to  con-
sider all  art  scientifically  as  an  element  in  the  history


2 8


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


of  culture.  The  problem  of  what  we  are  wont  to


call  ‘ art  ’ in  the  narrower  meaning  accordingly  con-
sists, in  general,  in  the  reproduction  of  actuality;
not,  however,  of  individual  actuality  as  such,  but  of
the  totality  of  what  is  actual.  That  is  to  say,  art
must  make  obvious,  in  every  exhibition  of  it,  the
structure  of  the  actual  world,  the  forms  of  its  con-
nection, and  the  absolute  value  and  significance  of
these  forms.  It  has,  therefore,  not  so  much  to  ideal-
ize, and  not  to  improve,  the  content  of  the  actual.  It
has  only  to  concentrate  what,  in  the  infinite  extension
of  the  world,  lies  so  scattered  far  apart  in  space  and
time  that  it  can  neither  be  contemplated  in  the  sig-
nificance and  value  of  its  coherency  by  the  individual
mind  ; nor  yet  clearly  enough  surveyed  by  reflexion ;
nor,  finally,  enjoyed  in  immediate  and  living  expe-
dience.

§ 23.  The  conditions,  which  art  must  satisfy  in
order  to  effect  an  impression  of  beauty,1  fall  under
three  classes,  corresponding  to  the  three  measures
in  us  to  which  the  works  of  art  must  be  applied.
For  they  must  —

i.  Please  the  Senses;  and  so  there  indubitably
arises  a series  of  physiological  conditions  of  beauty,


1 Comp.  H.  Lotze,  On  the  Conditions  of  the  Beautiful  in  Art.  — Gottinger
.Studien,  1847,  II.  1.


29


189513


CONDITIONS  OF  BEAUTY.

thus  far  little  studied,  which  not  merely  concern  the
harmony  of  sensuous  impressions  with  one  another
(colors,  tones),  but.  also  have  control  in  the  involun-
tary symbolism  by  which  we,  with  the  common  feel-
ing of  our  body,  with  the  pleasure  and  pain  that
proceed  from  its  motions,  positions,  its  equipoise  or
pressure,  first  learn  besides  to  understand  every  other
combination  of  spatial  forms  and  motions,  and  to
estimate  the  harmony  or  dissonance  in  their  size
and  peculiarities.  The  work  of  art  must  —

2.  Satisfy  all  the  general  Laws,  which  control  the
course  of  our  ideas,  feelings,  and  acts  of  will,  and
which  are  everywhere  the  same  without  regard  to
the  content  and  value  of  what  is  mentally  repre-
sented. This  gives  us  the  psychological  conditions  of
beauty ; which  will  sometimes  most  effectively  proceed
from  the  uniformity  of  one  mood  excited  in  us,  some-
times from  its  vicissitudes,  sometimes  from  steadfast
appeal  to  motive,  sometimes  from  a leap  by  way  of
contrast,  sometimes  from  broad  and  explicit  repre-
sentation, sometimes  from  brief  and  aphoristic  indi-
cation. Our  soul,  however,  in  case  it  has  to  do  with
aesthetic  enjoyment  and  artistic  work,  is  no  longer  an
otherwise  empty  existence,  that  possesses  these  laws
of  its  inner  mechanism  simply  for  some  future  use ;
but  by  experience,  cognition,  and  conduct,  it  has
developed  into  a capacious  spirit,  which  has  formed


30


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


for  itself  a firm  reflective  view  concerning  the  con-
tent, connection,  and  value  of  the  world.

3.  To  this  Spirit  also  must  the  work  of  art  corre-
spond; and  it  fulfils  these  last  ideal  conditions  of
beauty  by  being  constantly  mindful,  in  some  manner
or  other,  of  , jdiose--thTee  greatrfurees-  -orL.wh irh  the^
world  is  built,  and  of  their  harmony,  wherein  pre-
cisely” Ties  the  secret  of  the  world.  Every  work  of
art  must,  therefore,  be  mindful  —

(a)  of  a circle  of  general  laws  that  are  valid  even
beyond  its  own  peculiar  limits.  Just  by  this  means
will  it  show  that  it  is  not  a dream  void  of  all  real
being,  but  a part  or  picture  of  reality.  It  must  —

(b)  bring  before  us  a definite,  specific,  and  con-
crete form  of  life  that,  although  it  follows  the  afore-
said laws,  does  not  follow  from  them  alone.  It  must,
finally  —

(c)  cause  this  form  of  life  to  appear  to  us  as  taken
up  into,  and  set  in  place  within,  a capacious  plan  of
the  world,  to  the  fulfilment  of  which  it  contributes
something  with  the  forces  of  its  own  concrete  nature.  .


Second  Principal  Division.


(


Second  Principal  Division.


chapter  III.

MUSIC.

§ 24.  Tones  are  not,  like  colors,  phenomena  which
(at  least  apparently)  are  attached  to  objects  as  their
predicates,  but  they  are  immediately  experienced  as
events , which  proceed  from  resounding  bodies  and
betray  to  us  the  motion  of  their  interior  parts.  They
are  therefore  in  all  respects  adapted  to  the  expres-
sion of  the  interior  life  of  the  spirit,  and  do  not  repre-
sent ‘ Things  ’ according  to  their  external  appearance,
but  betray  to  us  immediately  that  essential  interior
condition  of  the  things  which  produces  this  appear-
ance. Tones  are  moreover  — since  they  can  never
be  thought  of  as  not  in  time-form  — the  natural
symbol  for  all  activity  that  fills  up  time,  for  all  be-
coming, beginning,  and  ceasing  to  be.

Finally,  since  they  are  subject  to  innumerable
gradations  of  intensity,  they  have  the  power  of  imi-
tating, in  the  most  manifold  forms  of  crescendo  and
diminuendo,  all  those  formal  predicates  of  consist-


34


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


ency  and  firmness,  of  yielding  and  transition,  of
gradual  movement  of  will  and  sudden  bound,  of  elas-
ticity and  sleepiness,  which  exist  in  every  spiritual
life  as  possible  forms  of  its  course,  that  are  of  the
greatest  significance.

§ 25.  Of  even  greater  importance  are  the  quali-
tative relations  of  the  different  tones.

But  it  is  of  no  aesthetic  interest  to  discourse  of  the
acoustic  or  physiological  foundation  for  the  internal
ordering  of  the  ‘ scale  ’ ; because  none  of  these
mathematical  relations  as  such  appear  in  our  expe-
rience.

What  is  important  is  rather  precisely  this,  that
the  ascending  series  of  the  number  of  vibrations
be  experienced  by  us,  not  as  a series  of  numbers,
but  as  an  increasing  pitch  of  the  tone.  For  in  this
so-called  quality  of  ‘ pitch  ’ lies  the  expression,  so
infinitely  significant  aesthetically  considered,  of  one
power  surpassing  another  (that  is,  a ‘lower  tone’),  not
by  a mere  degree  of  some  unchanging  content,  but
by  a difference  that  is  qualitative  and  yet  measure-
able  as  a definite  advance  over  that  other.  No
other  form  of  sensation  so  manifestly  secures  this
expression  of  a ‘qualitative  magnitude,’  which,  how-
ever, as  is  self-evident,  comes  significantly  to  view
in  innumerable  places  in  our  spiritual  life.


PROPERTIES  OF  THE  SCALE.


35


The  second  feature  in  the  series  of  tones,  which
has  an  aesthetic  effect,  is  the  existence  of  harmonies.
The  scale  does  not  simply  proceed  onward  in  a
right  line ; but  between  its  individual  steps  there
appear  peculiar  relations,  which  frequently  bind  the
remote  more  closely  together  than  the  neighboring
parts  in  the  scale.  Finally,  by  the  existence  of
octaves,  and  by  the  recurrence  of  the  same  interior
harmonious  relations,  the  realm  of  tones  is  made
into  a whole  closed  off,  as  it  were ; which  indeed  as
a whole  can  be  repeated  in  higher  and  lower  posi-
tion along  the  scale,  but  which  possesses  a number
of  interior  relations  that  are  established  by  law,
instead  of  an  immeasurable  and  unlimited  quantity.
In  this  way  it  produces  an  impression  similar  to
that  of  space,  with  the  consistency  of  its  interior  rela-
tions established  by  law.

Finally,  no  tone  can  exist  without  the  peculiar
* coloring  ’ which  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  in-
strument that  sounds  it ; and  this  gives  to  the  art
a means  for  introducing  into  its  productions  an  orig-
inal, indefinable,  and  yet  noteworthy  individuality.

§ 26.  Now  if  we  inquire,  what  is  done  with  this
material  in  the  world  of  tone,  we  shall  see  that  the
first  demand  made  upon  every  work  of  art  (§  23,  3 a)
— the  indicating  of  a realm  of  general  laws  that  hold


36


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


good  not  for  it  exclusively,  but  quite  as  mufch  for
innumerable  other  phenomena  besides  — is  fulfilled
by  the  application  of  musical  time.  That  is  to  say,
as  a measure  whose  periods  are  not  directed  toward
the  content  of  the  music,  but  produce  in  it  their
caesuras  with  a complete  indifference  to  this  content,
musical  time  appears  as  the  universal  fate  which,  in
its  own  conformity  to  law,  comprises  everything  finite,
yet  without  having  more  preference  for  any  one  than
for  another.

The  application  of  musical  time,  like  the  metre
of  poetry,  will  be  different  according  to  the  impres-
sion designed.  It  should  wholly  avoid  producing  the
unartistic,  distressing,  elementary  impression,  which
the  tones  of  nature,  for  example,  make.  Especially
to  accentuate  the  musical  time  sharpens,  to  be  sure,
the  impression  of  universal  conformity  to  law.  But
this  will  sometimes  be  elevated,  where  the  music
expresses  the  voluntary  subjection  of  an  activity  in
itself  capable  beneath  a fate  in  itself  severe  (martial
music) ; sometimes  absolutely  tedious,  where  (as  in
dance-music)  a content  that  is  nothing  in  itself  ap-
pears to  accommodate  itself  to  the  endless  customary
loitering  by  the  way.  Religious  music  requires  a
retreating  into  the  background  of  musical  time,  both
in  the  composition  and  in  the  rendering,  such  as
shall  express  that  which  is  of  itself  law ; and  other


THE  NATURE  OF  MELODY.


37


music  (as  the  recitative)  there  is,  which  expressly
designs  by  preference  to  enter  upon  some  individual
course  of  development,  and  would  be  disturbed  by
being  reminded  of  its  nothingness  in  the  presence
of  the  general  law.

§ 27.  The  second  thing  which  should  be  required
(see  § 23,  3 b ) is  the  specific  lifelikeness  that  develops
itself  within  the  aforesaid  limits.  We  find  it  of  course
in  melody.  But  this  of  itself  we  cannot  hold  to
be  anything  else  but  a resolution  of  a simple  chord,  —
at  least  in  its  simplest  examples.  Just  as  a specific
type  lies  at  the  foundation,  as  it  were,  of  every
living  creation,  and  this  type  is  developed  and  em-
ployed by  all  its  subsequent  movements  and  actions,
in  a way  individually  characteristic ; just  so  does  mel-
ody appear  as  an  individual  and  characteristic  ten-
dency to  develop  and  clearly  indicate  the  relations
that  lie  in  the  harmony  of  the  chord.

The  mere  moveableness  of  tones  in  this  direction
and  in  that,  would  make  no  more  musical  impression
than  do  the  noises  of  nature  in  which  the  greatest
manifoldness  of  vicissitude  prevails.  But  the  latter
do  not  proceed  from  one  fundamental  tone,  nor  con-
fine themselves  within  the  typical  species  of  a single
key.  Their  tones  do  not  occur  as  intermediate
members  and  as  preparatory  to  the  discovering  of


38


OUTLINES  OF  ESTHETICS.


harmonious  intervals  upon  which,  as  upon  firm
points,  they  can  come  to  a rest.  Finally,  they  do
not  recur  to  a single  fundamental  tone ; and,  on  this
account,  they  do  not  give  the  impression  of  a devel-
opment which,  although  free,  is  still  organized  by
means  of  the  idea  of  species.  Melody  accomplishes
all  this  ; and  its  impression  is  completely  bound  to  the
fact,  that  the  course  of  the  tones  does  not  run  into
‘the  immeasurable  blue,’  as  it  were,  but  gravitates
constantly  about  the  elements  of  some  original  chord,
as  about  the  source  of  all  their  lifelikeness.

§ 28.  Now  the  essential  element  of  melody  con-
sists, of  course,  in  the  special  form  of  the  movement
with  which  it  weaves  itself  about  the  firmly  fixed
tones  of  its  chord.

Accordingly,  although  the  peculiar  charm  of  a
certain  melody  can  never  be  exhausted  by  logical
considerations,  yet  music  employs  a number  of  pro-
gressive tropes  that  may  be  used  with  frequent  repe-
tition, the  aesthetic  expression  of  which  it  must  be
possible  to  refer  back  to  some  one  thought,  — a thing
thus  far  little  done.

Thus,  for  example,  running  through  the  entire
scale  in  a straight  line,  especially  where  it  occurs
as  a contrast  to  the  more  intricate  movements  of  the
melody,  will  have  its  effect  by  means  of  its  forceful


MUSICAL  TRANSITION.


39


and  yet  simple  reminder  of  the  regular  articulation
of  the  tones  belonging  to  the  key.  Just  so  will  the
division  of  an  interval  by  one  or  more  harmonious
intermediate  tones,  which  serve  the  melody  as  points
of  starting  for  the  minor  and  secondary  movements,
make  the  richness  and  solidity  of  this  articula-
tion yet  more  impressive.  Further,  the  custom  of
not  reaching  at  once  the  tone  which  it  is  sought  to
reach  by  successive  bounds,  as  it  were,  but  of  rest-
ing for  a moment  on  the  next  higher  or  lower  tone
and  afterward  attaining  that,  obviously  has  such
a peculiar  effect  because  it  is  the  universal  way
in  which  vital  energies  act,  in  contrast  to  uncon-
sciously mechanical  ones ; which  latter  reach  their
goal  without  making  any  circuit,  while  the  former
are  taking  a course  too  long  or  too  short.

Any  such  reduction  of  musical  tropes  to  the  rea-
sons for  their  aesthetic  impression  would  be,  of
course,  pre-eminently  valuable  with  reference  to  the
rules  of  composition,  by  which  the  simple  elementary
melodies  are  themselves  developed  into  a greater  and
more  artistic  whole.

§ 29.  In  the  development  of  the  melody  the  tran-
sition into  another  key  that  is  fixed  according  to
well-known  laws,  with  a final  recurrence  to  the  pre-
vious one,  is  a condition  necessary  for  our  aesthetic
satisfaction.


40


OUTLINES  OF  iESTUETrCS.


On  what  this  necessity  of  feeling  depends  is
obscure ; not  so,  however,  the  reason  for  the  aesthetic
impression  which  the  use  of  these  transitions  produces.
The  latter  consists  in  this,  that  here,  as  in  all  other
arts,  the  regular  structure  of  a whole  occurs  much
more  effectively  in  case  it  is  apprehended  not  merely
in  its  original  proportions,  — that  is  to  say,  in  those
which  necessarily  belong  to  its  content,  — but  also
under  such  conditions  as  threaten  to  disturb,  and  yet
do  not  actually  disturb  its  equilibrium  ; since  it  with-
draws from  this  deviation  with  perfect  elasticity  into
its  earlier  form,  or  by  alterations  of  an  opposite  kind
compensates  for  the  impression  of  the  single  dis-
turbance.

§ 30.  In  addition  to  those  means  which  lie  strictly
within  the  nature  of  tones,  there  are  manifold  rela-
tions of  metre  in  which  far  more  general  demands
of  feeling,  such  as  recur  in  all  the  other  arts,  find
their  expression.  Thus  it  is  necessary  that  the  mel-
ody should  not  merely  return  in  general  to  its  funda-
mental tone,  but  that  its  way  back  from  the  farthest
point  of  deviation  should,  in  outward  extent  (and
therefore  in  duration  of  time),  hold  an  even  balance,
as  it  were,  with  its  way  thither ; and  besides  that  it
should  not  travel  back  in  wholly  new  and  unrelated
forms  of  movement,  but  should  repeat  in  inverse


MUSICAL  ACCOMPANIMENT.


41


order  the  forms  of  the  way  outward,  — a demand
which  we  make,  for  example,  on  the  right  and  left
branches  of  an  arabesque,  and  things  of  that  kind.

By  the  foregoing  metrical  means,  which  may  also
be  observed  in  the  metres  of  poetry,  an  immeasure-
able  diversity  is  possible  for  the  inner  development
of  melody  as  well.  But  upon  this  subject  it  is  here
impossible  to  enter  more  particularly.

§ 31.  The  third  requirement  (§  23,  3^),  — namely,
of  exhibiting  the  movements  of  some  specific  form
of  life  in  its  concord  with  a higher  plan  that  deter-
mines it,  — is  fulfilled  within  the  limits  of  a simple
melody  by  its  coincidence  with  an  harmonious
accompaniment  fitted  to  it.  As  long  as  this  consists
in  nothing  more  than  in  repeatedly  striking,  together
with  the  fundamental  tones  of  the  melody,  the  chords
in  whose  successive  development  the  melody  itself
consists,  we  receive  only  the  simple  impression  of  an
elementary  necessity  with  which  the  individual  har-
monizes. The  higher  forms  of  music  must  pass  from
this  to  the  vivifying  of  the  accompaniment  itself,  and
thereby  make  the  transition  to  a weaving  together  of
different  melodies,  for  whose  connection  we  are  able
to  establish  only  very  few  general  aesthetic  points  of
view.  In  what  way  the  melody,  by  being  carried
over  into  another  pitch,  key,  rhythm  ; by  manifold


42


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


repetition  of  the  motif  lying  within  it ; finally,  by
combination,  intersection,  and  elaboration  in  com-
pany with  others  originally  foreign  to  it,  can  be
developed  into  a larger  whole,  must  be  left  to  the
technical  theory  of  music.

§ 32.  Finally,  if  the  question  is  asked,  What  are
the  precise  problems  for  music  to  solve  ? — then  it  is
obvious,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  should  never  try  to
depict  concrete  forms,  definite  conditions  and  events ;
since  no  combination  of  tones  is  able  to  express  a
specific  conception  or  one  of  those  definite  relations
which,  in  the  structure  of  the  sentence,  language
indicates  by  inflections  and  particles.  The  intelligi-
bility of  every  event,  however,  depends  directly  upon
the  sharp  delineation  of  these  points  of  relation.

Of  all  natural  events,  the  rather,  it  is  only  the
form  of  their  flow  and  the  combination  of  their  single
elements  with  each  other,  which  music  is  able  to
imitate  by  similar  combinations  between  the  tones.
Accordingly,  since  it  leaves  out  the  definite  content
of  what  is  to  be  imitated,  the  form  of  motion,  to
which  alone  it  holds  fast,  will  always  be  something
more  general  than  what  is  imitated ; and  the  fancy
will  not  be  reminded  of  this  exclusively , but  of  all
the  different  phenomena  or  forces  which  are  active
in  this  same  general  form,  in  all  their  variety.


MUSIC  EXPRESSIVE  OF  FEELING.


43


On  this  account  music  is  everywhere  adapted  for
the  expression  of  that  supersensible  and  universal
force,  which  is  indeed  capable  of  producing  special
forms  from  itself,  but  has  never  as  yet  actually  pro-
duced them.

§ 33.  It  is  further  obvious  that  music  cannot
transmit  ready-made  feelings,  but  only  tropes  of
tone.  By  this  means  it  primarily  depicts  only  the
form  of  existence  belonging  to  some  actual  thing  or
some  event ; while  it  cannot  express  exactly  the
peculiar  content  of  a definite  feeling  by  means  of
these  tropes  alone.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  same
melody  often  admits  equally  well  of  being  adapted
to  quite  opposite  states  of  mind,  to  pleasure  and
despair,  to  rage  and  love.  Even  in  this  case,  there-
fore, it  does  not  depict  these  feelings  directly,  but
only  the  form  which  they  have  as  movements  of  our
mind  ; — for  example,  the  stability  or  instability,  the
greater  or  less  velocity  and  elasticity,  the  greater  or
smaller  wealth  in  the  vicissitudes  of  the  inner  states
which  are  wont  to  be  combined  with  a feeling,
and  with  respect  to  which,  pleasure  and  despair,
anger  and  love,  may  be  constructed  entirely  alike.

If  therefore  we  give  the  name  of  ‘ feelings  ’ only
to  those  definite  states  that  refer  to  just  as  definite
objects,  recollections,  or  expectations,  then  music


44


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


cannot  set  them  forth;  but  it  will  — just  as  in  the
foregoing  case  — express  something  more  general ,
and  therefore  remind  the  listener,  according  to  the
accidental  direction  of  his  own  course  of  thought,
sometimes  of  this  and  sometimes  of  that  concrete
feeling.

§ 34.  Still  it  would  not  be  correct  to  draw  the
inference  from  the  foregoing,  that  music  in  general
has  neither  the  capacity  nor  the  task  of  producing
feeling.  For  that  which  it  does  immediately  furnish,
— namely,  the  general  forms  of  combination,  of  sta-
bility or  dismemberment,  of  consistency  or  arbitrari-
ness, of  strenuousness  or  yielding,  of  harmonious
advance  and  digression,  and,  finally,  the  possibility
of  returning  again  from  this  variety  to  a regular
development ; — all  these  forms  are  not  merely  an
entertaining  spectacle  for  our  indifferent  cognition.
On  the  contrary,  they  cannot  themselves  be  repre-
sented in  such  abstract  enumeration  without  at  the
same  time  reminding  us  of  the  deep  enjoyment
which  lies  just  in  the  possibility  and  in  the  actual
control  of  such  forms  over  the  world’s  onward
movement.

It  is,  therefore,  not  merely  as  forms  in  themselves
worthless,  that  the  aforesaid  ‘tropes  of  tone,’  remind
us  of  the  valuable  content  which  is  actualized  in  the


THE  PROBLEM  OF  MUSIC.


45


world  within  them  ; but  these  * tropes  ’ appear  (that
is  to  say,  where,  as  in  music,  they  meet  us  with  such
variety  of  phenomena  presented  to  our  view)  as
furnishing  immediately  in  themselves  a foundation
of  absolute  value,  upon  which  every  other  concrete
enjoyment  or  feeling  can  be  developed.

§ 35.  Thus  music  accomplishes  in  the  most
forcible  manner  a problem  which  it  is  possible  for
the  rest  of  the  arts  to  accomplish  only  approxi-
mately. That  is  to  say,  although  we  concede  that
our  definite  human  organization,  and  the  just  as
definite  formation  of  the  external  world  with  which
we  are  in  reciprocal  action,  first  make  possible  for
us  a great  part  of  our  most  valuable  inner  develop-
ment and  of  our  external  good  fortune ; yet  this
organization  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a limitation  for  us
which  hinders  us  from  transposing  ourselves  into  the
interior  of  creatures  that  are  of  a wholly  different
kind  from  us,  or  of  enjoying  somewhat  of  the  dream-
life  which  we  assume  to  exist  everywhere  throughout
the  world,  even  in  what  is  not  alive.

Music  overcomes  the  above-mentioned  limit.
While  it  is,  on  the  one  hand,  wholly  incapable  of
representing  the  concrete  specific  types  and  forms
of  events  in  the  created  world,  the  natura  naturata  ;
it  is  so  much  the  more  suited  to  depict  how  the  inner


46


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


life  and  movement  of  the  creative  world,  the  natura
naturans , or  that  all-penetrating  world-soul,  without
as  yet  creating  anything  definite,  sportively  rejoices
in  the  infinite  variety,  mobility,  and  harmony  of  its
creative  forces.  ~

In  this  way  music  is,  in  some  sort,  pre-eminently
qualified  for  giving  to  the  life  that  is  merely  directed
outward,  a counterpoise  by  way  of  sinking  it  in  the
divine  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  that  is
individual ; but  just  so  is  the  danger  incurred  of
exercising  an  enervating  influence  upon  the  culture
of  the  spirit  by  constant  deviation  from  those  sharply
outlined  forms  of  actuality  which  are  the  objects  of
our  conduct.


CHAPTER  IV.


ARCHITECTURE.

§ 36.  Architecture  is  indeed  defined  by  its  aims ;
but  its  artistic  stamp  need  express  nothing  more  than
the  general  character  of  these  aims,  — for  example,
the  military,  the  ecclesiastical,  etc.  On  this  account
it  is  limited  in  the  development  of  its  forms  only  by
the  most  general  problem,  of  effecting  the  enclosure
of  a space  and,  at  mo^,  covering  it  with  a roof.

Since  it  can  do  this  only  by  means  of  ponderous
masses,  all  its  forms  act  not  by  their  mere  stereo-
metric or  picturesque  beauty,  but  simply  by  the
mechanical  significance  which  they  have  as  massive
forms  ; because  they  indicate  the  directions  in  which
either  gravity  or  the  forces  that  resist  it  are
effective.

So  long  as  such  single  lines  of  force  as,  taken  in
relation  to  one  another,  secure  the  impression  of  an
organic  system  of  co-operating  activities,  are  not
distinguished  in  any  structure,  so  long  it  does  not*
fall  within  the  domain  of  architecture , and  has  only
a value  in  the  history  of  human  culture  (as  do,  for


48


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


example,  the  pyramids).  The  special  art  always
begins  with  this  organizing  ; since  it  —

1.  Through  manifold  forms  reminds  us  of  the  uni-
versal law  of  gravity,  to  which  the  entire  life  of
architecture  and  at  the  same  time  of  all  the  rest  of
nature  is  subjected,  and  to  which  it  is  directly
attached  as  a part  of  reality  ; since  it,  —

2.  In  respect  to  what  we  call  * style?  distinctly
bears  the  stamp  of  a specific  and  consistently
maintained  custom  of  transition  from  one  element
to  another,  or  from  the  support  to  the  load  ; finally,
since  it,  —

3.  In  the  i plan  ’ of  the  building,  effects  the
concentrating  of  the  most  manifold  number  possible
of  vital  elements  into  a single  organism  that  is
a summary  of  them  all.

§ 37.  The  first  definitely  cultivated  * style,’  that  of
the  Greek  columnar  architecture,  makes  the  opposi-
tion between  support  and  load  prominent  in  the
structure  as  a whole,  decidedly  and  without  anything
being  interposed,  — such  interposition  occurring  only
in  the  details.

To  this  end  it  divides  the  function  of  carrying
among  single  supports,  the  columns ; whose  force,
mounting  upward  vertically  carries  the  load  laid
upon  it  at  right  angles,  in  the  form  of  the  entab-
lature.


THE  GREEK  COLUMNS.


49


At  the  place  where  supports  ‘and  load  meet  each
other,  the  transition  from  the  vertical  to  the  horizon-
tal is,  of  course,  mediated  by  an  oblique  surface
placed  between,  which  is  formed  with  a curvilinear
outline,  — the  capital.  But  this  intermediate  mem-
ber has  such  small  dimensions  that  it  does  not  annul
the  aforesaid  principal  opposition  for  the  total  aspect
of  the  structure.

§ 38.  In  this  style  we  find  applied  certain  prin-
ciples which,  with  little  modification,  must  hold  good
for  all  styles  of  architecture.

In  the  first  place,  all  the  lower  parts  of  the
structure,  as  well  as  of  the  single  column,  are  kept
absolutely  plain  and  simple.  The  richest  develop-
ment occurs,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  zone  where  the
opposed  forces  come  into  conflict  (capital  and  frieze

/CVfJLCLTLOV).

We  further  find  a prominence  given  to  the  line  in
which  a force  acts,  by  multiplication  of  the  contours.
So  the  fluting  of  the  columns,  the  vertical  slitting  of
the  triglyphs,  — by  which  means  the  expression  of
the  supporting  force  is  enhanced ; while,  on  the  con-
trary, a similar  division  of  the  load  into  horizontal
layers  diminishes  the  character  of  the  load,  since  it
awakens  the  impression  of  being  reciprocally  carried
and  of  a less  massive  pressure  on  the  supports  (Ionic
and  Corinthian  entablature).


50


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


Quite  commonly  we  further  see  in  such  a case,  as
in  ordinary  life,  great  care  applied  to  the  clear  delin-
eation of  the  ends  of  each  single  member.  Just  as
in  household  use,  seam  and  border  are  employed
for  all  possible  outlines,  edges,  and  circumferences,
while  the  middle  is  left  unadorned  ; so  do  we  see  in
architecture  also  the  end  of  one  member  of  the  struc-
ture (for  example,  a column)  shortly  before  its  occur-
rence, indicated  by  several  ornaments,  bands,  inci-
sions, straps ; as  well  as  the  interval  between  two
essentially  different  parts  of  the  building  expressly
made  prominent  by  a small  low  member  projecting
between  them  (a  plate,  abacus  between  column  and
entablature).

Further,  in  the  outlines  of  the  structure  the  inter-
change of  members  that  spring  back  and  forth  in
places  where  two  principal  parts  abut  on  each  other,
is  constantly  employed  ; just  as  in  music,  before  the
conclusion  of  the  melody,  the  chord  in  which  one  is
to  come  to  the  rest  is  several  times  repeated  with
variations  from  it.  Especially  necessary  is  a final
projection  of  the  lines  of  the  load  toward  the
sides  beyond  the  edges  of  the  support.  This  ‘ out-
loading,’  as  it  were,  we  find  skilfully  observed  in  all
good  works  of  this  style  ; while  it  is  no  longer  neces- .
sary  in  like  manner  in  other  styles,  whose  fundamental
thought  is  not  that  of  such  sharp  opposition  between
force  and  load.


ORNAMENTATION.


51


§ 39.  As  far  as  the  ornaments  are  concerned,  be-
sides those  which  directly  make  prominent  the  con-
structive meaning  of  the  individual  members  (for
example,  the  fluting),  we  find  a preference  shown  for
covering  the  smaller  parts  intermediate  between  the
principal  ones,  with  ornaments  partly  painted  and
partly  carved.  Such  ornaments  in  most  cases  sup-
port the  * profile  line’  of  the  member,  being  repeated
along  its  length  ; and  they  by  this  means  constantly
produce  a connected  and  progressive  series  of  one
and  the  same  pattern  (volutes,  fillets,  egg-and-dart
moulding,  astragals,  coronals,  etc.).

Besides  the  foregoing,  ornaments  modelled  with
perfect  freedom  are  found  at  only  a few  principal
points,  at  the  corners  and  peaks  of  the  building
(acroteria)  ; and  painted  ornaments  principally  at
the  parts  which  do  not  belong  to  the  essentially
constructive  framework,  but  to  the  smaller  pieces
designed  for  filling  out  the  structure.  Finally,  the
free  spaces  of  the  frieze  and  of  the  pediment  are
kept  for  plastic  statues,  while  the  constructive
parts  (like  the  shafts  of  the  columns  and  the  archi-
trave) are  covered  with  ornaments  only  in  wholly
barbaric  times.

The  zones  of  the  most  numerous  and  expressive
ornaments  run,  therefore,  along  in  the  middle  height
of  the  entire  building,  at  the  place  where  the  sup-


52


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


porting  force  of  the  columns  meets  the  load  of  the
entablature  of  the  roof.

§ 40.  On  the  whole,  the  Greek  building  with  col-
umns, on  account  of  its  thorough-going  consistency
in  the  constructive  combination  of  the  elements,  its
avoidance  of  everything  arbitrary,  its  variety  of  the
fairest  proportions,  its  grace  and  correct  employment
of  ornamentation,  must  be  held  to  be  an  absolutely
perfect  solution  for  an  architectonic  problem  that  is
in  itself  considered,  however,  only  a small  one.

That  is  to  say,  it  cannot  — strictly  speaking  — fur-
nish anything  more  than  a hall  composed  of  columns
for  the  aesthetic  enclosure  of  a space.  Even  in  the
structure  of  the  temple,  it  leaves  the  house  proper,
the  ‘ cella,’  aesthetically  unorganized  in  its  rear,  and
only  appears  as  a beautiful  decoration  on  the  outside,
in  front  of  the  temple  itself.

It  is  hindered  in  its  longitudinal  extension  from
comprising  very  large  spaces  by  the  monotony  of  the
columns,  which  are  always  repeated  in  the  same  way,
and  of  the  lines  of  the  entablature  that  run  on  un-
broken ; and  in  its  extension  upward  by  the  necessity
of  covering  the  space  between  two  columns  with  a
single  stone,  which  admits  of  only  a limited  interval
and,  therefore,  also  of  only  a limited  height  of  the
columns  : while,  on  the  other  hand,  to  place  rows  of


THE  GROUND-PLAN.


53


columns  one  above  another  does  not  make  a satisfac-
tory impression  aesthetically ; because,  although  the
springing-forth  of  the  lowest  from  the  mass  of  the
earth’s  surface  is  apparent,  the  origin  of  the  second
row  from  the  entablature  above  the  first  is,  on  the
contrary,  obscure  and  surprising.

The  fact  of  a right  angle  between  columns  and
architrave  led  al£o  to  right-angled  parallelogram
ground-plans,  in  which  one  side  was  uniformly
copied  perfectly  by  the  other  and  opposite  side  ;
and  all  projection  or  retreating  of  the  other  parts
of  the  structure  in  peculiar  lifelike  annexes  and
corners,  as  well  as  all  genuine  architectonic  group-
ing of  essentially  different  members  into  an  organic
whole,  was  thereby  excluded.  In  like  manner
also  within  the  spatially  very  limited  interior,  no
variety  of  perspective,  no  multiplicity  of  change-
able aspects  from  different  points  of  view,  offered
itself.  In  the  same  way,  finally,  on  the  outside  the
building  possessed  only  at  the  pediment  a prominent
point,  while  everywhere  else  very  beautiful  elements
were  repeated  in  a somewhat  monotonous  manner.

This  style  is  therefore  wanting,  not  merely  in
variety,  but  also  in  tendency  that  way ; and  in  all
mysteriousness,  such  as  was  present  for  example

in  Egyptian  architecture  in  far  inferior  forms,

and  was  repeated  in  later  styles,  in  better  forms.


54


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


§ 41.  The  second  general  principle  of  architec-
ture is  that  of  the  arch  by  which  the  roof  is  held
together.  For,  of  course,  it  can  in  the  first  instance
be  used  only  as  a roof ; since  the  aesthetic  impres-
sion constantly  demands  that  at  least  one  stretch
wide  of  material  should  vividly  express  by  a vertical
substructure  the  direct  upward  striving,  as  it  were,  of
the  force  in  opposition  to  gravity.  The  difference
between  the  different  styles  of  the  arch  depends  prin-
cipally upon  the  manner  in  which  they  dispose  this
substructure  in  combination  with  the  arch  which
forms  its  conclusion.

The  pressure  sideways  which  every  arch  exerts
upon  its  substructure  makes  its  strengthening  tech-
nically necessary ; but  this  can  be  divided  among
single  butments  separate  from  each  other.  In  this
way  it  leads  of  itself  to  centralized  ground-plans ;
since  these  butments  are  grouped  around  the  prin-
cipal bodies  of  the  structure,  and  can  then,  after
they  are  once  there,  easily  be  combined  with  each
other  into  available  spaces  by  further  intermediate
members.  Hence  proceeds  forthwith  an  inclination
to  manifold  grouping  in  the  ground-plan,  and  a
reason  for  the  unequal  extension  of  the  heights  of
the  single  parts ; as  well  as,  in  the  interior,  a variety
of  perspective  through  the  multiplicity  of  the  ad-
junct spaces  as  they  are  brought  into  combination
with  the  principal  space.


ROMAN  ARCHITECTURE.


55


§ 42.  The  Roman  architecture  combined  the  struc-
ture of  the  arch  which  was  derived  from  the  Etrus-
cans, with  the  Greek  style,  into  a magnificent,
impressive,  but  inorganic  whole.

The  substructure  was  massive  masonry,  on  which
columns  appeared  only  as  decorative  elements  in
order  to  break  up  the  otherwise  unarticulated  monot-
ony, but  without  being  designed  to  support  anything
in  particular.  They  further  appeared  as  a portico
or  pillared  wall  externally  to  the  building  itself.

Then  on  the  substructure,  almost  wholly  as  one
load,  rests  the  arch,  shaped  for  the  most  part  like
the  hoop  of  a cask,  and  completely  separated  from
the  substructure  by  a jutting  like  an  architrave
which  acts  as  its  proximate  support.  In  itself  it
is  without  any  division  to  correspond  to  the  meaning
of  its  curvilinear  surface,  and  is  adorned  for  the  most
part  with  small  caisson-like  decorations.

The  effect  of  all  this  was  to  render  possible  an  in-
terior architecture  which,  although  it  was  not  strictly
speaking  organic,  was  still  very  magnificent  and
powerful,  such  as  was  wanting  to  the  Greek  style.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Roman  architecture  neither
discovered  a new  form  for  the  exterior,  nor  did  it
hit  upon  one  in  harmony  with  the  interior  in  what
it  borrowed  from  the  Greek.


56


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


§ 43.  The  Byzantine  style  contains  an  advance  in
so  far  as  it  fashions  for  the  arch  separate  special
supports  in  the  form  of  single  strong  aspiring  pillars,
and  unites  them  with  each  other  by  immense  bows.
These  props,  too,  finally  support  a horizontal  entab-
lature of  semicircular  form,  beyond  which  they  are
not  carried  upward,  but  on  which  lies  the  flat  and
architecturally  quite  unarticulated  vaulted  dome,  as
though  it  were  a new  and  foreign  part.

The  great  dimensions  of  these  domes,  the
glimpses  into  the  half-domes  that  frequently  in-
tersect the  principal  dome  and  support  a portion
of  its  lateral  thrust  on  secondary  pillars,  the
communication  of  the  principal  space  through
the  pillars  with  the  secondary  spaces,  the  arcades
of  columns  which  enliven  the  spaces  intervening
between  the  pillars,  and  the,  originally  great  gor-
geousness of  the  material  and  adornment,  — all
produce  an  impression  that  is  great  indeed  but
picturesque  rather  than  architectural ; and  neither
in  the  exterior  nor  in  the  ornamentation  did  the
Byzantine  style  develop  forms  at  once  beautiful
and  coherent  with  its  ruling  principle.  Its  further
transformation  and  degeneration,  respectively,  in
Russian  architecture  and  in  the  Orient,  has  led  to
adventurous  forms.


THE  ROMANESQUE  STYLE.


5 7


§ 44.  The  Romanesque  style,  which  divides  into
very  manifold  varieties,  as  a rule  carries  its  massive
pillars  upward  not  merely  as  supports,  but  makes
them  pass  immediately  over,  without  a common
horizontal  entablature,  into  mighty  arches  by  which
the  single  pillars  are  so  bound  together  — and  that
diagonally  — as  to  make  the  entire  vault  divide  up  into
single  arched  hoods.  These  hoods  now  lie  between  the
offshoots  of  the  pillars  as  though  to  fill  up  the  space,
after  the  latter  have  delineated,  as  it  were,  the  form
of  the  structure  up  to  its  very  conclusion  in  mid-air.

In  a similar  way  the  secondary  spaces  are  arched
over  at  a lower  height.  In  connection  with  this
stands  the  fact,  that  generally  the  circular  form  in
the  ground-plan  (as  well  as  in  the  roofing)  no  longer
occurs  as  such,  but  is  only  indicated  as  broken  up
into  a polygon  (for  the  most  part,  eight-cornered).
And  the  arches  no  longer  appear  as  domes,  but
are  for  the  most  part  covered  by  pyramids.

The  circular  bend  of  the  arches  is  consistently
employed  in  the  entire  structure,  in  portals,  windows,
etc.  ; and  it  is  likewise  repeated  in  extraordinary
manifoldness  of  modelling  as  ornamentation  every-
where.

In  the  forms  of  the  exterior  this  style  prefers  an
obvious  prominence  of  forceful  masses  with  large
divisions,  does  not  avoid  horizontal  entablatures,


58


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


but  very  frequently  carries,  even  to  the  point  of
sacrificing  beauty,  the  external  marks  of  a structure
built  in  stories  (although  this  was  sometimes  not
really  so),  every  floor  of  which  was,  for  the  most
part,  designated  by  a cornice  adorned  with  ornaments
of  circular  bows.

§ 45.  The  aesthetic  character  of  the  Gothic  style,
apart  from  the  historical  properties  which  it  assumed
in  its  development,  is  rightly  referred  to  the  fact,
that  it  secures  simply  the  impression  of  a freely  and
actively  aspiring  force,  yet  scarcely  that  of  a struggle
of  this  force  with  a load  foreign  to  itself.  This  im-
pression depends  upon  the  following  elements : —

The  pillars,  which  in  the  Romanesque  style  still
maintained  a simple  prismatic  form,  acquired  a more
varied  profile ; since  there  appeared  on  their  external
surface  slender  half-columns,  which,  separated  from
each  other  by  the  surface  being  drawn  in  between
them,  indicate  the  main  body  of  the  pillar  from  below
up  to  the  lines  in  which  the  single  forces  united  in
it  mount  on  high.  From  these  columns  the  single
ribs  of  the  arch  spring  upward  ; not  indeed,  as  in  the
Romanesque  style,  in  the  form  of  broad  bands  that
have  their  broad  side  directed  downward,  but  in  the
form  of  narrower  bows  of  tolerably  triangular  sec-
tion, which  send  downward  a sharp  corner  that  often


THE  GOTHIC  ARCH.


59

is  made  especially  prominent  by  being  tapered  off.
These  single  ribs  or  girders  now  spread  out,  crossing
and  subdividing,  into  a network  often  richly  wrought
out,  in  whose  meshes  the  surfaces  of  the  ceiling  are
so  manifoldly  dismembered  and  subdivided,  as  wholly
to  lose  their  character  as  an  extended  ‘ load!

On  the  exterior  the  roof,  of  course,  forms  a load
ordinarily  very  massive  ; but  the  remaining  structure
is  so  arranged  that  the  horizontal  line  of  the  entabla-
ture is  interrupted  and  concealed  by  a multitude  of
parts,  towers  and  gables,  arches  over  windows,  etc. ;
so  that  on  the  whole  the  impression  arises  of  a force
that  everywhere  surpasses  the  load.

The  arrangement  of  the  vault  of  the  roof  permitted
its  whole  pressure  to  be  concentrated  upon  the  pil-
lars, so  that  a strong  counter-thrust  was  necessary
for  these  alone.  On  this  account  single  buttresses
were  formed,  which  shot  forth  from  the  external  out-
line as  distinct  supporting  forces  ; while  the  dead
masonry  between  them  was  made  more  and  more
to  vanish.  Mighty  openings  for  windows  assume
their  place  ; and  their  empty  space  is  subdivided  by
an  even  more  richly  wrought  work  of  bars,  both  ver-
tical and  penetrating  one  above  the  other,  after  the
pattern  of  the  binders  of  the  arch.  It  is  often  only
this  character  of  interrupted  masses,  which  in  smaller
works  produces  the  impression  of  the  Gothic  style  ;


6o


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


but  to  this  must  be  added  the  general  preference  for
making  prominent  the  vertical  and  the  avoidance  of
all  strongly  expressed  horizontal  lines ; so  that  this
style  betrays  itself  in  all  manner  of  small  works,
patterns,  and  the  like,  through  these  mere  relations  of
dimension.

Finally,  the  pointed  bow  is  not  unessential.  Yet
its  form,  fashioned  from  two  intersecting  arms,  is  not
at  all  aesthetically  adapted  for  bearing  a load,  but
only  for  the  expression  of  forces  whose  free  endings
die  out,  as  it  were,  in  one  vertical  resultant ; while
the  curvature  of  the  Romanesque  circular  bow,  on
the  contrary,  returning  as  it  does  upon  itself,  shows
itself  unadapted  for  serving  as  a termination  of  the
structure,  but  only  for  the  support  of  a load.

§ 46.  Besides  the  circular  bow  and  the  ornaments
formed  from  it,  the  Romanesque  style  employs  an-
tique forms  pretty  frequently,  especially  the  shapes
of  cornice,  the  capitals  less  ; and  it  seeks  in  general
to  produce  in  the  arrangement  of  the  entire  structure
a perspicuous  and  definite  partition  into  surfaces  that
are  large  and  easily  definable  with  reference  to  each
other  ; so  that  in  this  characteristic  of  perspicuity  it
most  resembles  the  antique.  On  the  interior,  the
large  surfaces  of  the  walls  and  ceiling,  divided  and
limited  by  the  main  vaults  of  the  roof,  afford  oppor-


THE  GOTHIC  ORNAMENTATION.


6 1


tunity  for  a rich  picturesque  adornment,  which  is
here  of  far  more  significance  than  the  strictly  archi-
tectural ornamentation.

The  Gothic  style  cannot  in  the  same  way  assume
the  antique  forms.  The  columns,  much  prolonged
in  their  height  and  mounting  only  as  secondary
upon  'larger  pillar-formations,  lose  with  their  con-
structive significance  also  their  earlier  regular  form,
and  are  treated  with  free  gracefulness,  yet  always  as
subordinate  parts.  A perfectly  free  but  no  longer
constructive  ornamentation  comes  to  be  very  richly
applied  ; but  it  dwindles  in  its  dimensions  almost
wholly  away  in  comparison  with  the  great  masses  of
the  structure,  and  has  the  appearance  only  of  a kind
of  secondary  adornment,  which  is  placed  upon  an-
other species  of  ornamentation  that  is  strictly  archi-
tectural.

This  latter  decoration  consists  in  the  way  in
which  the  Gothic  structure  in  general,  unlike  the
Romanesque,  makes  from  the  first  the  impres-
sion, not  of  a single  individual  life,  but  of  an
association  of  innumerably  many  beings,  each  of
which  has  its  own  peculiar  life,  and  yet  is  bound
with  the  others  into  the  unity  of  one  plan  and
thereby  also  articulated  with  itself  and,  finally,
freely  terminated,  as  it  were.  We  mean  to  say
that,  on  the  exterior,  this  impression  is  effected  by


62


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


the  various  ascending  pillars,  towers,  and  gables,
which  collectively  appear  according  to  the  general
principle  of  the  style  as  aggregates  of  single  parts ;
and  which,  at  different  altitudes,  separate  from  the
whole  and  terminate,  and  so  cause  their  own  parts
to  terminate,  at  different  altitudes.

On  the  other  hand,  both  styles  agree  in  the
care  with  which  they  treat  the  windows  and  doors,
not  as  mere  openings  in  the  walls,  but  give  to
them  a limitation  that  is  definite,  adapted  to  the
style,  and  richly  prominent ; the  Gothic  style  even
crowning  them  with  gables.

§ 47.  The  most  essential  building-plan  in  the  last
two  styles,  the  form  of  the  cathedral,  has  been
developed  from  a transformation  of  the  ancient
basilica,  which  was  an  oblong  of  mason-work
divided  within  by  two  rows  of  columns  into  three
naves,  — the  middle  and  broader  one  probably
uncovered,  the  anterior  small  side  towards  the
entrance,  and  the  posterior  with  semicircular
structure  covered  over  by  a half-dome  and  de-
signed for  the  judge’s  tribunal.

The  Christian  cultus  demanded  that  the  whole
be  roofed  over,  and  on  this  account  the  middle
nave  had  to  be  elevated  beyond  the  side  naves,  in
order  to  give  it  windows  above  ; it  therefore  lost


THE  CHRISTIAN  BASILICA.


63


the  simple  position  of  the  columns,  and  erected
high  vertical  walls  above  the  architrave  of  the  two
rows  of  columns  to  support  the  roof  and  contain
the  windows.  For  the  necessities  of  the  cultus
a stretch  of  the  back  part  of  the  nave  was  then
shut  off  toward  the  front ; this  ‘ sanctuary  ’ thus
obtained  was  then  expanded  into  a cross-nave,  and
the  tribunal  likewise  extended  out  into  a length-
ened prolongation  of  the  longitudinal  nave  beyond
the  cross-nave.  In  this  way  did  the  form  of  a
cross  originate,  which  was  subsequently  almost
always  retained.

In  this  Christian  basilica  there  was  a living
combination  of  the  parts  in  the  longitudinal  direc-
tion of  the  nave  only ; since  the  space  from  column
to  column  was  spanned  by  arches,  and  the  rectili-
near entablature  and  the  wall  made  to  rest  first  on
these  arcades.  Crosswise  above  these  were  two
walls  simply  united  by  the  one  arch  of  the  ‘ Porta
triumphalis  ’ ; and  this,  in  the  place  where  the
middle  nave  cuts  into  the  cross-nave,  with  a mighty
span  passed  from  one  row  of  columns  to  the
other  and  secured  a perspective  to  the  semicircular
niche  in  which  the  whole  concluded  opposite  the
portal.  Paintings,  mostly  mosaics,  filled  the  walls
in  a continuous  series  over  the  arcades,  over  the
triumphal  arch,  and  over  the  niche.  The  roof  was


64


OUTLINES  OF  ESTHETICS.


either  flat  or  allowed  the  wood-work  of  the  ridge-
lead  to  be  seen.  Any  peculiar  external  architecture
was  lacking.

The  Romanesque  and  Gothic  styles  altered  the
above-mentioned  plan,  in  part  by  their  principle  of
the  arch  in  general,  and  in  part  by  the  fact  that
they  gave  to  all  these  parts  a greater  wealth  of
organism  ; transformed  the  simple  semicircular
niche  into  a polygon  with  much  more  of  life  in  it ;
laid  out  the  arms  of  the  cross-nave  either  in  lateral
portals  or,  with  a termination  likewise  of  polygon-
form,  in  chapels  ; erected  over  the  intersection  of
the  naves  (the  quadrature)  a dome  for  the  most
part  eight-sided  and  ordinarily  supported  by  a polyg-
onal substructure  [merely  indicating  also  the
semisphere  and  the  circle  in  the  upward  direction,
— compare  § 44,  — especially  on  the  outside]  ;
occupied  the  anterior  ends  of  the  side-naves  with
two  towers  corresponding  to  each  other;  and  made
use  of  the  facade  between  them  for  an  ornate
portal.

Manifold  deviations  from  this  plan  appear ; for
example,  five  longitudinal  naves,  only  one  tower
midway  (an  unfavorable  position  on  many  grounds).
Many  other  parts  besides  were  added,  such  as
single  small  towers  in  the  exterior  angles  of  the
intersecting  naves,  etc.


THE  MOORISH  ARCHITECTURE.


6S

Most  consistent  of  all  appears  the  arrangement
which  commits  to  the  towers  alone  the  expression
of  a force  completely  free  and  aspiring  upward
without  load  of  any  kind ; makes  them  on  this
account  the  highest  points  of  all;  does  not  inter-
rupt their  base  by  a portal  but  lets  it  remain  mas-
sive ; makes  the  middle  dome  not  quite  so  high  but
broader,  as  the  expression  of  a protecting  covering
over  the  most  essential  point  of  the  structure  ; and
repeats  the  same  tendency  to  a protecting  con-
clusion of  the  building  with  still  inferior  height  at
the  end  of  the  choir.

§ 48.  Quite  different  principles  appear  to  underlie
the  Moorish  architecture.  It  is  not  alike  in  all
lands,  but  has  made  use  of  the  previously  discovered
element  of  domestic  art  for  very  different  forma-
tions. What  is  peculiar  to  it  and  what  everywhere
appears,  however,  is  the  extraordinary  taste  for  a
peculiar  wealth  of  decoration.

It  shows  itself  first  of  all  in  this,  that  the  walls
are  scarcely  at  all  treated  as  such,  but  — probably
as  a reminiscence  of  tent-building  in  former  times
— almost  wholly  simply  as  curtains.  As  such
they  are  covered  all  over  with  the  most  charming
patterns ; and,  instead  of  being  constructively  artic-
ulated, they  are  in  a suitable  and  spirited  way  so


66  OUTLINES  OF  /ESTHETICS.

disposed  by  means  of  projections,  niches,  and  other
interruptions,  that  the  whole  interior  is  effective  more
by  its  manifold  perspective  than  by  any  reminder
of  architectonic  construction.  Even  the  extremely
slender  columns,  on  which  arcades  of  pointed  bows
are  erected  aloft,  remind  us  more  of  the  supports
of  a tent-hanging  than  of  the  bearers  of  ponderous
masses.  The  soaring,  elastic  bow  of  horse-shoe
shape  has,  with  all  the  grace  which  it  frequently
possesses,  no  properly  constructive  meaning,  but
rather  recalls  the  mighty  opening  of  a cleft.

The  external  architecture  is  insignificant  where  it
did  not  take  up  with  foreign  forms.  But  the  walls
were  masterly  in  this,  that  they  imparted  to  large
structures  a diversity  of  picturesque,  rural,  and
such-like  beauty ; just  as  by  means  of  interior  gar-
dens, courts,  and  galleries,  they  drew  nature  and
the  surrounding  prospect  into  the  circle  of  their
means  of  art.

§ 49.  Private  architecture  cannot,  like  the  monu-
mental, employ  the  means,  in  all  their  seriousness
and  gravity,  which  appear  in  all  these  styles.  It  will
find  itself  compelled  for  the  most  part  to  withdraw
its  regard  from  the  peculiar  constructive  consistency,
and  to  employ  neither  columns  nor  the  Romano-gothic
pillared  vault.  On  the  other  hand,  it  will  borrow


PRIVATE  ARCHITECTURE.


6 7


from  the  ‘ style  ’ the  general  character  of  the  division
and  grouping  of  the  masses,  as  well  as  its  customs  of
decoration.  And  this  it  is,  of  course,  able  to  do  ; for
its  products  make  no  pretence  to  be  perfectly  indi-
vidual unities,  symmetrically  controlled  by  one  law
and  withdrawn  from  everything  fortuitous.  The
rather  are  they  then  most  beautiful  when  they  ex-
press, in  correspondence  with  actual  human  life,
varied  and  manifold  necessities  for  the  satisfaction
of  which  human  activity  has  gradually  discovered
convenient  forms.  This  it  has  done  in  such  manner
that,  whatever  the  individual  component  parts  may
chance  to  be,  they  are  combined,  without  deeper
meaning  indeed  and  yet  with  a taste  for  agreeable
forms  on  the  exterior,  so  as  to  produce  a comfortable
arrangement  of  spaces  in  the  interior  and  a pictur-
esque relation  of  the  whole  to  its  surroundings.

Here,  accordingly,  new  points  of  view  come  to
prominence  ; — instead  of  symmetrical  exclusiveness,
the  picturesque  concurrence  of  particulars  with  one
another ; the  contrast  of  single  parts  with  each  other
and  with  their  surroundings  ; finally  and  principally,
that  peculiar  expression  of  the  whole  coloring  of  life
and  custom  as  we  meet  with  it  in  the  buildings  of
previous  time  which  have  gradually  arisen  in  history.


CHAPTER  V.


PLASTIC  ART.

§ 50.  If  sculpture  first  originated  from  a na'fve
impulse  at  imitation,  still  there  certainly  also  lay  at
its  very  foundation  an  interest  in  the  unity  which
occurs  in  the  living  form  between  the  spiritual
interior  and  the  bodily  appearance  ; for  it  is  to  the
imitation  of  what  is  alive  that  the  aforesaid  impulse
is  wont  to  be  directed  rather  than  to  the  imitation  of
what  is  merely  lifeless  form.

Accordingly,  we  give  to  the  problem  of  sculpture
this  place,  — namely,  to  represent  how  an  individual
spiritual  life  interpenetrates  its  corporal  organization  ;
and  this  in  such  a way  (as  we  have  already  remarked)
that  the  body  does  not  simply  obey  a single  impulse
of  the  spirit  in  a merely  passive  way  and  as  usable
material,  but  appears  in  its  whole  structure  as  a per-
fect expression  for  the  totality  of  this  individual
spiritual  life.

§ 51.  The  entire  monumental  character  which
sculpture  universally  has  on  account  of  its  enduring,
ponderous,  and  rigid  material  (marble,  bronze,  etc.),


THE  SCULPTURED  FIGURE.


69


in  itself  forbids  that  it  should  choose  as  an  object  for
its  representations  aught  that  possesses,  through  its
inferior  significance,  no  right  to  so  lasting  a repre-
sentation. It  will,  accordingly,  either  exclude  or
reckon  only  among  its  subordinate  works  whatever  is
merely  characteristical,  what  is  of  ‘ genre  sort' ; on
the  contrary,  it  will  always  be  compelled  to  seek  its
highest  point  of  attainment  in  the  delineation  of  ideal
characters  or  rather  of  the  sensuous  appearance  of
such  characters.

§ 52.  But  we  further  observe  that  the  principal
thing  for  sculpture  must  always  be,  not  the  action
itself,  but  the  figure  which  acts.  For  the  value  and
meaning  of  the  action  either  does  not  admit  at  all
of  being  expressed  by  the  sensuous  representation  of
it,  but  must  be  added  to  it  by  thought,  as  it  were ; or
else  it  gains  nothing  by  such  representation.

What  can  be  attained  in  sculpture  is  the  exhibition
of  the  way  in  which  either  the  spiritual  life  of  the
figure  expresses  itself  in  the  action  as  an  occasion ;
or  else  how  this,  or  some  occurrence  or  other,  reacts
upon  the  spirit  of  the  figure  and  is  received  by  it.

Now  if  the  action  is  something  very  definite,  and
so  compels  the  figure  on  its  account  to  assume  a very
definite,  specific  position  and  motion;  then  such  a
work  of  sculpture,  even  though  it  should  make  very


70


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


obvious  the  ability  of  the  figure  for  this  one  action  or
its  excitability  by  this  one  occurrence,  would  still  on
this  very  account  so  much  the  more  throw  into  the
shade  the  thing  at  which  it  is  aiming  much  more,  —
and  this  is,  the  constant  and  many-sided  ability  and
dexterity  with  which  the  body  would  execute  every
other  possible  suggestion  of  the  spirit  and  receive
every  other  stimulus  from  without.

In  general,  therefore,  the  figure  should  not  be  a
mere  ‘support  for  the  action’  ; but  only  so  much  of
action  should  be  prominent  as  to  give  to  the  form  an
opportunity  to  display  its  many-sided  aptitude  for  the
expression  of  whatever  is  spiritual,  as  though  by  way
of  example.

§ 53.  Just  as  little  should  the  sculptured  figure
pass  current  as  a symbol  of  a universal  spiritual  prop-
erty, for  example  of  some  virtue.  For  every  organic
body  corresponds,  with  the  diversity  of  its  members,
only  to  an  individual  life  that  is  active  on  very
different  sides,  whose  character  is  never  expressible
by  a single  property.

Accordingly,  every  allegory  which  makes  use  of
the  body  thereto  will  have  too  little  of  spiritual  con-
tent to  be  able  to  make  every  part  of  the  form  appear
penetrated  by  it  as  a law-giving  power  ; that  is  to  say,
the  greater  part  of  the  figure  will,  strictly  speaking,
be  to  no  purpose.


CHARACTERS  FOR  SCULPTURE.


71


§ 54.  But  it  is  further  necessary  that  such  a spirit-
ual life  should  not  be  chosen  for  representation  as,
by  the  requisition  it  makes  upon  itself,  urges  its  form
out  of  its  natural  proportions  into  a pathological
characterization ; although  it  may  at  the  same  time
be  able  to  give  to  itself  in  the  body  a very  perfect
and  many-sided  expression.

Such  subjects  may  serve  for  poetry  and  painting,
because  these  arts  do  not  directly  affront  us  by  the
image  they  present ; or  at  least,  in  the  surroundings
or  the  narrative  which  th^y  add  to  it,  entice  the
attention  away  from  the  form  to  its  more  valuable
content.  To  sculpture  the  characters  are  best  fitted,
whose  doing  of  itself  further  displays  the  body  in
accordance  with  its  own  peculiar  meaning,  and
idealizes  it  in  the  direction  of  its  own  peculiar
proportions.

If  this  is  to  occur  in  the  representation,  then  we
must  know  that  very  direction  in  which  the  natural
ideal  of  the  human  form  lies,  or  the  points  on  which
its  beauty  depends.  And  here  it  at  once  appears
that,  apprehended  as  mere  beauty  of  form,  it  would*
really  be  only  a small  thing;  and  that  its  infinite
worth  depends  upon  nothing  but  the  fidelity  with
which  its  outlines,  simple  in  aspect  and  dispensing
with  all  the  pomp  of  color,  mirror  the  inner  spiritual
sensibility  and  its  finest  gradations.


72


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


§ 55.  In  general,  a kind  of  dualism  is  expressed
in  the  human  form,  between  the  head  as  the  sole
seat  of  consciousness  and  the  entire  remaining  mass
of  the  body.  These  forms,  of  opposition  and  yet
at  the  same  time  of  combination,  as  they  are
stamped  upon  the  human  neck,  we  find  nowhere
else  in  the  whole  animal  series.  All  the  forms  in
the  animal  kingdom,  which  allow  both  parts  to
melt  into  each  other,  as  it  were,  have  a dismal
effect.

The  head  of  man  contains  no  organs  that  reach
out  actively,  but  only  such  as  are  passively  recep-
tive ; and  their  ideal  form  is  therefore,  not  one  of
projection  but  one  of  the  utmost  possible  restraint
within  the  general  contour  of  the  head.  No  system
of  covering  which,  though  organically  produced,  is
not  otherwise  alive,  surrounds  his  body ; but  the
skin  everywhere  appears  penetrated  through  and
through  with  the  vital  heat  ; the  limbs  not  slim,
as  though  barely  calculated  to  meet  the  necessity
of  the  case,  and  not  like  unorganic  instruments
appended  to  the  body,  but  with  a fulness  of  struc-
ture which  is  wholly  foreign  to  the  animal  kingdom.
Their  number,  however,  is  few,  and  expresses,  as
does  the  smallness  of  the  head  and  the  quiet
retreating  of  the  organs  of  sense,  the  secure  dom-
ination of  the  spirit  over  what  is  external,  better


THE  HUMAN  BODY.


73


than  does  the  multitude  and  excessive  flexibility  of
the  instruments  for  motion  and  for  seizing  prey
that  belong  to  the  so-called  lower  animals.  The
appearance  of  artificial  machinery  is  avoided  ; only
in  the  fingers  does  this  mobility  occur  in  miniature,
which  the  purpose  of  man’s  life  requires  should  not
be  wanting,  but  which  is  just  as  little  made  exces-
sively prominent.  Finally,  we  find  everywhere  soft
and  yielding  forms  of  transition  between  the  dif-
ferent parts  which  are  to  co-operate  in  motion  ;
but  acute-angled  outlines  where  rigid  parts  meet
each  other,  in  order  by  their  mere  hardness  to
fulfil  different  functions.

The  aforesaid  indications  — which  might  easily
be  multiplied  — must  be  followed  by  the  effort  at
idealization,  and  are  followed  in  fact  ; so  that
beauty  of  form  is  so  much  the  more  highly  prized,
the  more  it  seeks  perfectly  to  carry  out  these  spe-
cific tendencies  of  the  organic  form  (elongation  of
the  parts  of  the  body ; not  excessive  muscularity  ;
diminution  in  the  size  of  the  head,  etc.).

§ 56.  It  would  be  an  incorrect  mode  of  idealizing,
to  plan  uniformly  to  represent  only  the  life  of  youth
or  the  body  in  the  fulness  of  its  bloom.  To  be  sure,
extreme  old  age  and  earliest  childhood  are  physiologi-
cally imperfect  periods  of  life.  They,  too,  however,


7 4


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


are  represented ; not  in  order  to  bring  this  im-
perfection to  view,  but  on  the  contrary  to  show  how,
even  in  forms  such  as  these , the  spiritual  life  not  only
in  general  finds  means  for  its  expression,  but  can
even  express  itself  more  characteristically  in  them
than  in  the  full  bloom  of  life.  Thus  it  is  much
more  natural  for  the  form  of  gray  old  age  than  for
such  as  is  still  in  its  bloom,  strikingly  to  express  the
gains  of  all  the  past  life  in  a variety  of  clever  traits.
And  the  opening  development  of  the  spiritual  life
in  childhood  or  boyhood  doubtless  offers  a multitude
of  nai've  and  graceful  illustrations  of  the  harmony  of
body  and  soul,  which  can  no  longer  occur  in  such
striking  form  when  this  harmony  has  already  be-
come rigidly  fixed  on  all  sides.

§ 57.  The  pose  of  the  figure  will  always  have  for
its  principal  purpose,  to  show  not  only  the  complete
adaptability  with  which  the  body  obeys  the  spiritual
impulse,  but  also  that  with  which  every  single  part,
by  corresponding  counterpoise,  tension,  or  relaxation,
compensates  for  the  displacement  of  every  other  ; so
that  the  body  appears  as  an  extremely  sensitive  and
elastic  system  of  parts,  which  keeps  itself  in  equilib-
rium, — the  parts  themselves  possessing  a reciprocal
understanding  for  their  various  conditions.  A very
extraordinary  action,  for  a wholly  definite  purpose,


THE  POSE  OF  THE  FIGURE.


75

would  bring  this  excellence  to  view  only  in  a one-
sided manner,  and  just  with  reference  to  this  purpose.
A much  less  important  movement  — perhaps  con-
sisting simply  in  a slight  and  not  uncomfortable
deviation  from  the  wholly  inexpressive  symmetrical
pose  — causes  the  occurrence  of  a much  greater
variety  of  such  reciprocal  compensations.

The  pose  of  the  figure  must,  besides,  be  pictur-
esquely beautiful.  Its  contour  ought  not  to  fall
under  too  rational  and  geometrical  a * scheme  ’ ; the
limbs  ought  not  to  have  parallel  positions,  or  be
withdrawn  from  the  mass  of  the  body  unnecessarily
far  nor  at  extraordinary  right  angles,  but  with  a
gradual  flow  of  lines.  For  all  these  movements  with
which  fault  has  just  been  found  are,  in  themselves,
not  natural  to  the  human  body  ; and  where  they  are
indispensable  for  particular  purposes,  it  is  better  not
to  represent  such  purposes  than  herein  to  be  true  to
nature.

Finally,  the  pose  must  be  capable  of  being  a per-
manent one  ; and  all  representations  of  those  motions
in  which  a body  can  be  maintained  only  momentarily,
are  not  proper  subjects  of  sculpture,  the  wholly  mon-
umental work  of  which  always  carries  an  inclination
toward  the  representation  of  what  is  eternal  and  ever
significant.


76


OUTLINES  OF  ESTHETICS.


§ 58.  All  the  foregoing  demands  are  fulfilled  in
the  simplest  manner  by  that  handling  of  the  vest-
ure so  often  employed  in  ancient  sculpture ; and
especially  of  one  so  formless  as  the  Greek,  which
permits  r to  every  individuality  a free  treatment
adapted  to  his  temperament,  and  does  not,  like  our
own,  make  necessary  any  very  definite  methods  of
putting  it  on  and  taking  it  off.  As  a covering  the
vesture  can  be  used  only  in  the  case  of  statues  of
historical  persons,  whose  significance  is  for  the  most
part  expressed  only  in  the  head,  so  that  the  com-
plete representation  of  the  rest  of  the  body  would  be
useless  and  indecorous  ; and  where,  on  the  other
hand,  the  vesture  by  the  manner  of  its  being  thrown
on  in  folds,  strengthens  the  impression  of  the  fea-
tures by  which  the  spiritual  character  can  express
itself  even  here  in  the  body,  — for  example,  by  its
carriage.  Besides,  the  vesture  is  — strictly  speaking
— nothing  but  that  bit  of  the  external  world  which
lies  next  the  body,  and  on  the  preparation  of  which
the  peculiar  temperament  of  the  figure  is  just  as
truly  stamped  as  on  its  dwelling,  etc.  Accordingly,
it  serves  to  make  obvious  to  the  senses  the  peculiar
mobility  of  the  figure  and  likewise  give  to  it,  by
means  of  the  arrangement  of  its  hanging  folds,  a
semblance  of  the  feeling  which  the  figure  itself  pre-
serves through  its  surroundings  and  its  carriage,  and
in  which  it  delights.


THE  EXPRESSION  OF  CHARACTER.


77

§ 59.  Most  favorable  for  sculpture  would  the  prob-
lem be,  of  simply  portraying  an  unchanging  indi-
vidual temperament  of  mind,  an  enduring  character ;
and  always  in  such  measured  movements  as  have
been  spoken  of.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  ‘ high
style  ’ of  Greek  sculptuie  has  created  a series  of  ideal
images  in  which,  without  noise  and  motion  outward,
the  depth  of  a significant  character  is  most  perfectly
expressed.

Nevertheless,  nothing  hinders  the  movements  of
the  mind,  its  affections,  which  originate  out  of  its
reciprocal  action  with  the  outward  world,  from  being
aesthetically  realized.  But  sculpture,  as  monumental
art,  should  not  portray  such  affections  as  can  only
momentarily  endure  in  a final  and  highest  stage  of
movement ; and  since,  on  account  of  the  lack  of  an
explanatory  environment,  at  least  in  single  free  stat-
ues, it  cannot  always  make  obvious  the  motif  of  the
affections,  it  can  only  choose  those  which  are  of
themselves  intelligible  to  every  one.

Accordingly,  all  passionate  as  well  as  all  historical
actions  would  be  unfavorable  to  it  : — the  one
because,  resting  on  no  reason  themselves,  they
exceed  the  limits  of  beauty  of  form  ; the  other,
because  their  significance  for  the  history  of  the
world  very  rarely  consists  in  a form  of  movement
representable  by  plastic  art,  but  rather  in  a condition
of  circumstances  not  co-representable.


78


OUTLINES  OF  .ESTHETICS.


Finally,  every  motion  which  would  be  significant
of  a lively  relation  of  the  statue  to  the  actual  world
outside,  must  be  avoided.  Its  true  home,  with  which
we  can  think  of  it  as  in  ‘ mysterious  ’ relation,  is  only
the  alike  monumental  world  of  architecture,  and  pre-
eminently the  landscape.  On  the  contrary,  to  repre-
sent the  statue  as  in  mutual  intercourse  with  men
would  be  contrary  to  the  universal  charm  of  sculp-
ture, contrary  to  this  mysterious  vivifying  of  the
petrified,  or  these  petrifactions  of  life.

§ 60.  The  circle  of  ancient  mythology,  beyond
which  there  is  really  nothing  to  be  added,  certainly
best  answers  to  all  the  foregoing  demands,  that  of
course  do  not  with  the  same  strictness  hold  good  of
the  bas-relief ; since  this  renders  expressible,  by  its
uniting  background  and  the  surroundings  represen-
table therein,  much  which  is  not  otherwise  to  be
expressed.  But  still  the  later  Christian  art  has
produced  a great  multitude  of  works,  which  may
doubtless  be  far  inferior  to  the  ancient  sculpture  in
beauty  of  form,  in  understanding  of  the  structure  of
the  human  body,  and  in  skilfulness  of  handling,  as
well  as  for  the  most  part  in  beauty  of  material,  and
yet  which  have  developed  a wholly  new  style  of
representation.

To  antiquity  beauty  of  form  and  the  perfect  incar-


MEANING  OF  CHRISTIAN  ART.


79


nation  of  the  hitman  spirit  was  the  highest  end  of
plastic  art.  It  everywhere  sought  to  portray  life  and
that  for  which  a bountiful  nature  has  made  the  living
human  form.  Christian  art  took  its  point  of  starting
far  more  from  the  thought  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  cor-
poreal to  the  spiritual  world  ; attained  for  the  most
part  to  the  portrayal  of  death  rather  than  of  life  ; and
in  all  its  successful  works  chiefly  expresses  the  effort
to  bring  into  manifestation  that  which  the  living
form  itself  has  created  from  itself,  — the  indestructi-
bility of  its  aspiration,  the  merit  of  its  resignation.
The  domain  of  representation  for  such  art  was  obvi-
ously much  more  limited  than  that  of  the  ancient ;
but  it  can  scarcely  be  denied  that  the  latter  is  lack-
ing precisely  in  that  which  the  former  portrays  ; and
that  there  lies  in  this  very  fact  something  really
great  and  valuable.


CHAPTER  VI.


PAINTING.

§ 61.  Painting  makes  its  appearance  even  in
decoration  as  an  art  of  free  beauty,  the  fancy  occu-
pying itself  only  with  a play  of  forms  and  colors.
Here  it,  in  part,  makes  prominent  the  limits  of  the
larger  surfaces  by  lines  that  correspond  to  the  forces
working  in  them  ; and  then  makes  the  points  of  the
corners,  as  the  places  where  general  directions
intersect,  the  special  seat  of  a more  significant
ornamentation  : in  part  also,  it  decorates  the  sur-
faces themselves,  and  here  has  its  most  happy  ex-
perience in  case  it  either  fills  out  their  entire  extent
with  an  uninterrupted  repetition  of  a regular  ele-
mentary form  in  rigid  or  waving  lines ; or  else,  in
case  it  lets  the  greater  part  of  these  surfaces  remain
as  a background  entirely  free,  and  only  covers  single
prominent  points  with  the  more  important  embellish-
ments thickly  set.  On  the  contrary,  the  scattered
patterns  generally  have  an  unpleasant  effect ; and
where  in  nature  something  similar  to  them  appears
beautiful,  there  are  always  special  accessory  relations
which  make  the  impression  supportable.  Our  feeling


LANDSCAPE-PAINTING.


8l


demands  in  decoration  that  every  part,  however  small
and  in  itself  of  no  sufficient  importance,  should  have
reference  to  every  other;  and,  on  this  account,  it
at  least  enjoins  certain  unobtrusive  combinations
between  the  scattered  parts.  As  concerning  the
coloring  given  to  the  decoration,  the  much  disputed
theory  of  the  harmony  of  colors  must  be  left  to
future  consideration.

§ 62.  In  landscape-painting  the  somewhat  over-
wrought tendency  to  represent  not  the  beauty  of
the  forms  of  the  region,  but  the  mysterious  uncon-
scious rule  of  the  spirit  of  nature,  has  led  to  a pref-
erence for  wild,  unexpected,  and  rugged  shapes,  in
which  immense  natural  forces,  that  appear  not  ad-
justed to  each  other,  contend  together  rather  than
come  to  a peaceful  and  clear  issue.

With  all  the  good  which  this  romantic  inclination
has  awakened,  we  must  still  regard  that  point  of  view
as  the  more  correct,  which  looks  upon  the  landscape
as  a dwelling-place  for  spiritual  life.  The  form  of
the  ground  makes  possible  an  inexhaustible  mani-
foldness of  the  most  varied  well-being,  of  self-deport-
ment and  self-movement  for  every  living  thing ; and
these  are  not  merely  advantages  for  the  comfort  of
man  ; but  even  to  that  which  has  no  life,  to  vegeta-
tion, the  arrangement  of  the  landscape  guarantees


8 2


OUTLINES  OF  ESTHETICS.


the  possibility  of  a varied  propagation,  a half-con-
scious feeling  of  which  we  transfer  to  the  objects
themselves  ; — a feeling  similar  to  the  common  feel-
ing which  we  ourselves  maintain  through  these
diverse  kinds  of  more  or  less  habitable,  homelike,
spacious  or  limited  environment.

Now  although  we  ascribe  to  the  parts  of  the  land-
scape itself  an  enjoyment  of  the  position  which  they
occupy  in  it,  yet  in  truth  our  interest  therein  always
lies  in  those  feelings  which  we  have ; or  the  origin
of  which  we  anticipate  in  case  we  transfer  ourselves
in  the  picture  from  one  point  to  another.  For  we
thus  enjoy  from  each  one  of  these  points  of  view
the  peculiar  stimulus  of  the  now  shifted  surround-
ings, and  rejoice  in  the  fresh  furtherance  of  our
existence,  in  our  motion  and  the  repose  which  we
share  by  means  of  them.

§ 63.  The  composition  of  the  piece  must  have
regard  to  representing  the  landscape,  which  has  a
meaning  only  as  a part  of  the  actual  world,  always
as  being  such  part.  The  surrounding  frame  signifies
that  the  landscape  is  cut  off  at  this  place,  without
ceasing  to  exist ; on  the  contrary,  it  stands  connected
with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Some  highway  or  other,
some  perspective,  or  at  least  some  stream  of  water,
some  trail  of  clouds,  etc.,  must  occur  in  it,  in  order  to


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  LANDSCAPE.


83


strengthen  this  indication  of  a connection  with  the
rest  of  the  world.  Finally,  the  action  of  the  light,
together  with  the  play  of  the  colors,  has  this  gen-
eral significance  of  being  the  most  comprehensive
bond  that  extends  from  every  point  to  every  other  in
manifold  refractions  and  reflections,  and  so  with  love
unites  everything  into  one  common  nature.

Belief  in  the  reality  of  the  landscape  is  further
strengthened  by  a certain  irrationality  in  its  arrange-
ment. It  is  true  that  the  eye  demands  a coordina-
tion of  parts  which  admits  of  a general  survey :
nevertheless  it  is  not  similar  but  different  shapes
that  should  appear  at  the  symmetrical  points  of
space ; so  that  an  equilibrium  in  the  distribution  of
the  masses  is  presented  to  the  look  that  contemplates
them,  and  yet  not  such  precise  symmetry  as  is  for-
eign to  nature.  The  principal  points  in  the  content
of  the  picture  should  not  fall  upon  the  principal
points  of  space,  but  eccentrically  and  at  one  side
of  them.  They  should  not  stand  exactly  at  the  end
of  rectilinear  perspective,  but  should  occur  at  in-
calculable places.  In  general,  all  rectilinear  exten-
sion should  be  considered  inferior  to  spiral  vistas.
The  outlines  of  the  whole  should  likewise  shun  such
symmetry ; and,  especially,  it  ought  not  to  be  re-
quired of  the  eye  to  make  an  abrupt  decline  in  one
direction,  without  offering  it  some  place  of  halting


84


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


for  its  repose.  No  multiplication  of  similar  objects
ought  to  weary  the  gaze  by  its  parallel  arrangement.

§ 64.  If  we  look  about  us  in  life,  we  discover  that,
in  buildings,  in  implements,  in  costume,  in  the  human
form  itself,  it  is  by  no  means  what  is  strictly  unim-
paired, perfect,  normal,  that  gives  the  impression  of
the  picturesque  ; the  rather  does  this  impression  as  a
rule  attach  itself  to  that  in  these  forms  which  — in
part  by  their  destruction  (ruins,  tatters,  etc.)  and,  in
part,  by  a sharper  one-sided  imprint  — awakens  the
recollection  of  a history  in  which  the  spiritual  life
was  in  conflict  with  an  outside  world,  has  assumed
many  remaining  traces  of  it,  but  has  sought  to  place
itself  in  some  kind  of  equilibrium  with  it.

Especially  in  genre-painting  must  this  be  the  preva-
lent and  essential  purpose  of  the  representation,  —
namely,  to  make  it  apparent  how  the  external  cir-
cumstances, the  calling  in  life,  riches  or  poverty  of
surroundings,  etc.,  invariably  imprint  ineradicable
traces  on  the  human  form  ; but  how,  nevertheless,
the  energy  of  the  spiritual  nature  is  so  indestruc-
tible that  it  is  able  to  win  some  kind  of  satisfaction
from  every  situation  however  unfavorable,  or  at  least
to  preserve  its  own  greatness  under  its  burdens.

It  is  only  this  feature  of  the  recognition  of  man’s
worth  which  imparts  to  genre-painting  a higher


DOMAIN  OF  GENRE-PAINTING.


85


significance.  The  mere  faithful  imitation  of  nature
would  indeed  awaken  in  us  the  conception,  that
even  the  possibility  of  representing  something  vul-
gar or  wretched  in  so  striking  a manner  presupposes
at  the  same  time  an  elevation  above  it,  and  also
elevates  the  beholder  above  it.  Still  paintings  of
this  sort  will  stir  us  only  for  once  by  their  technique,
and  subsequently  leave  us  coolly  disposed.

The  domain  of  genre-painting  is  without  limit ;
and,  besides  the  characteristic  which  shows  us  the
skilfulness  and  adaptability  of  the  human  spirit  with
reference  to  altogether  special  relations  of  life,  we
can  distinguish  one  yet  more  universal,  which  ex-
hibits the  typical  ages  of  life  and  their  normal  occur-
rences ; and  finally,  a higher  ideal  one,  which  does
not  so  much  exhibit  ideally  the  individual  figures,  but
rather  causes  us  to  see,  in  the  manner  of  their  deport-
ment, a universal  style  of  life  and  existence,  such  as
the  spirit  of  a time  or  of  a people  has  set  as  its  law
for  itself.

§ 65.  Beyond  this  last  achievement  of  genre-paint-
ing, in  giving  the  exhibition  of  a special  phase  of
human  culture,  even  historical  painting,  for  which
there  is  just  now  somewhat  designedly  a demand,
does  not  get.  The  depiction  of  great  men,  and  of
the  more  significant  historical  epochs,  is  certainly  a


86


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


proper  aim  of  poetry,  but  not  of  painting.  Pictures
will  only  contribute  as  illustrations  to  the  otherwise
well-known  significance  of  history  ; but  they  never
immediately  represent  it.  Historical  persons  and
events,  in  spite  of  all  the  significance  attached  to
their  meaning,  are  often  very  insignificant  in  the
external  form  of  their  appearance.  We  endure  this
in  life  and  in  poetry ; because  we  construct  a pretty
correct  total  picture  for  ourselves  out  of  an  innumer-
able throng  of  successive  views.  Painting,  on  the
contrary,  could  not  depict  such  events  without  being
unintelligible  and  tedious.

The  highest  demand  upon  an  historical  picture
which  can  be  set  up  is,  that  it  shall  always  choose  a
situation  or  transaction  which,  even  in  case  its  his-
torical meaning  is  not  understood,  will  invariably
still  remain  a beautiful  genre  picture ; and  will
always  afford  a significant  meaning  of  more  general
kind,  a certain  peculiar  culture,  an  imprint  of  human
life  that  is  harmonious  with  itself,  although  not  to
be  transposed  into  any  definite  time  and  place.

§ 66.  Historiographic  painting,  which  (in  opposi-
tion to  the  strictly  historical)  treats  the  sacred
“stories  ” as  belonging  to  all  time,  contains  within  its
province  of  subjects  all  that  would  be  representable
in  the  strictly  historical  as  ^vell.  Above  all  things


SCRIPTURE  AND  PAINTING.


87


this  whole  domain  is  genuinely  picturesque,  in  so
far  as  the  entire  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  little
more  than  a constant  teaching  how  the  inner  man  is
to  adjust  himself  to  the  accidents  of  external  life,
discipline  himself  in  them,  and  turn  them  to  account
for  what  is  eternal.

It  was  precisely  in  the  recollection  of  this  struggle
that  what  is  peculiar  to  painting  lay ; and  we  do  not
find  it  in  the  ancient  mythological  figures  that,  with
all  the  great  beauty  of  form  with  which  antiquity
portrayed  them,  still  exhibited  an  intensive  and
peculiar  energy  of  life  rather  than  an  actual  spiritual
character.  On  the  contrary,  the  Bible  and  the
legends  offer  innumerable  characters  of  the  most
individual  kind  ; and  indeed  of  such  kind,  that  their
spiritual  stamp  is  so  generally  known  as  to  make
them  supply  completely  for  us  the  place  of  myth-
ology, though  with  the  further  advantage  that  the
world  in  which  they  lived  is  felt  by  us  to  be  united
with  our  own  in  what  is  most  essential.  All  the
situations  in  which  any  moral  law  whatever  is
applicable,  in  which  any  longing  or  any  passion
whatever  can  develope,  find  in  that  world  an  appro-
priate example.

Add  to  this  the  simple  and  easily  intelligible  forms
of  the  eastern  civilization,  so  picturesquely  beautiful,
in  drapery,  architecture,  and  manners ; and  besides,


88


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


finally,  the  possibility  of  putting  every  time  and
every  place  in  an  easily  recognizable  relation  to  this
world  of  the  past  and  to  its  spiritual  perpetuation
in  our  own  : so  that,  to  conclude,  scarcely  anything
human  of  general  interest  can  be  thought  of,  which
would  not  be  capable  of  perfect  representation  by
means  of  the  figures  of  the  sacred  history  as  well-
known  types  of  an  ideal  world  realized.

§ 67.  The  further  artistic  treatment  of  these
subjects  admits  of  less  general  rules,  and  must  be
left  for  the  special  criticism  of  art-works.

In  general,  painting  will  be  compelled  to  make  use
of  the  means  belonging  to  it.  Accordingly  since,  by
the  drawing  and  coloring  of  the  back-ground  and  of
the  surroundings,  it  is  enabled  to  produce  certain
momentary  moods  of  some  figure  in  its  dependence
upon  external  incitements,  it  will  not  succeed  best  if
it  Exhibits  only  the  stationary  character  of  the  shape
instead  of  its  mood  and  action,  and  so  falls  back  into
the  task  that  belongs  to  sculpture.  It  is  further
bound  to  give  shape  to  these  actions  at  best  as  richly
as  possible,  without  allowing  them  to  become  unin-
telligible. For  the  more  painting  is  really  capable
of  imitating  actual  life  in  its  fullness,  the  more  do  we
require  that  it  should  represent  not  merely  the
scanty  meaning  of  a single  action,  but  also  the


UNITY  OF  A PAINTING.


89


echoes  it  awakens  in  the  world,  the  way  in  which
it  is  experienced  by  others,  variously  judged,  and
everywhere  received  with  manifold  sympathy.

Painting,  therefore,  first  began  to  satisfy  its  prob-
lem, when  it  abandoned  those  isolated  images  on
a golden  background,  and  grouped  all  the  manifold
things  of  the  real  world  as  a participating  environ-
ment around  the  sacred  histories.  It  is  not  all
transactions  which  will  bear  such  numerous  sur-
roundings ; but  in  each  case  we  are  likely  in  the  end
to  wish  that  its  connection  with  the  real  world  were
indicated  in  some  more  modest  way,  and  that  the
persons  who  act  were  not  thrust  forth,  as  it  were,
into  an  empty  space.

It  would  not  be  right,  on  this  account,  to  demand
that  no  figure  be  seen  in  a painting  which  is  not
necessary  to  the  meaning  of  the  action.  On  the
contrary,  just  as  we  give  to  the  (necessary)  figures
themselves,  characteristic  features  that  are  not  nec-
essary for  the  action  ; so  are  even  these  apparently
superfluous  surroundings  indispensable  in  order  to
draw  the  action  into  the  world,  in  which  every  event
has  beside  itself  others  that  are  primarily  indifferent
to  it  but  perhaps  later  cooperate  with  it.

The  demands  for  ‘a  unity  of  the  picture’  can,
therefore,  hold  good  only  in  so  far  as  that  the  prin-
cipal interest  must  not  fall  in  equal  parts  upon


9o


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


different  disconnected  transactions.  It  would  not  be
simplicity  but  poverty,  however,  if,  besides  the  prin-
cipal transaction,  there  nowhere  offered  itself  any
view  which  supported  with  diminished  strength  the
excited  frame  of  mind,  or  rested  it  in  measured
fashion.

Finally,  the  formal  laws  of  grouping  the  objects
(pyramidal  grouping,  etc.)  will  have  to  be  absolutely
subordinate  to  the  meaning  of  the  action,  and  they
will  have  to  follow  the  same  points  of  view  as  in
landscape-painting.


CHAPTER  VII.


POETIC  ART.

§ 68.  Poetry  rules  alike  in  all  the  domains  which
stand  open  to  the  foregoing  arts.  To  it  alone,  how-
ever, belongs  the  perfect  rule  over  the  world  of
events,  some  of  whose  external  forms  painting  also
can  express ; while  only  poetry  is  able  exhaustively
to  express  the  inner  connection.

In  this,  therefore,  do  we  see  its  essential  problem.
All  else, — the  free  beauty  of  melodious  speech,  the
depicting  of  shapes  for  intuition, — is  only  an  accessory
problem  or  means  for  the  effect.  The  kernel  of  all
poetry  lies  in  the  representation  of  motion,  which
ceaselessly  combines  with  one  another  the  parts  of
the  world  according  to  general  laws,  and  according
to  a sacred  plan.

The  question  may  be  raised,  whether  in  this
matter  poetry  is  merely  to  imitate  nature  with
fidelity  or  to  idealize.  The  latter,  however,  is  its
necessity ; because  it  can  never  undertake  to  ex-
hibit the  whole  of  the  world,  but  only  the  meaning
and  spirit  of  the  whole,  in  one  small  fragment  of
the  same.  In  the  limited  field  of  view  which  it


92


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


thus  puts  in  relief,  many  threads  of  events,  how-
ever, are  crossed  for  the  individual  observer,  of
which  only  a few  come  to  any  conclusion,  while
most  run  into  the  rest  without  beginning  and  end,
and  without  manifest  relation ; so  that  the  chain
of  processes,  in  whose  coherency  and  consistent
development  one  of  the  highest  laws  of  the  world-
plan  is  in  fact  expressed,  is  kept  apart  by  a great
throng  of  uninfluential  secondary  processes.  Ideal-
izing here  consists  in  separating  out  what  is  indif-
ferent, imperfect,  and  devoid  of  relation,  and  in  the
concentration  of  the  actual  course  of  the  world  upon
single  great-circles  of  events,  in  which  an  inner  con-
nection is  manifest  even  for  the  observer’s  small  field
of  view.

§ 69.  All  universal  sciences,  — ethics,  philosophy
of  nature,  history, — if  they  pursue  their  subject-
matter  into  the  minute  details  in  which  its  full  sig-
nificance for  the  first  time  becomes  apparent,  issue
at  last  in  poetry ; — that  is  to  say,  they  can  only
exhibit  what  is  of  most  worth,  when  they  cease  to
proceed  in  accordance  with  universal  categories,  and
furnish  a portrayal  of  the  innumerable  tender  and
individual  relations,  on  which  the  significance  of
what  is  particular  depends.

In  this  sense  alone  does  poetry  have  teaching  for


NATURE  OF  THE  EPIC.


93


its  aim,  — that  is  to  say,  the  teaching  of  that  which
is  inexpressible  in  any  other  manner.  But  every
other  didactic  aim,  for  the  fulfilment  of  which  sci-
ence suffices,  always  carries  poetry  beyond  its  proper
limits.  It  has  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  furnish
motifs  for  reflection  and  feeling  by  a portrayal  of
the  actual  world,  such  that  every  one  may  draw  his
own  teaching  for  himself  from  them.  But  at  the
same  time  it  must  have  regard  to  this,  that  it  de-
pict in  fact  the  actual  world,  whose  sacredness  is
so  great  that  every  invention  which  capricious  think-
ing has  composed,  of  such  sort  that  it  would  have
no  rational  place  in  the  actual  world  and  no  coher-
ency with  it,  can  hold  good  only  as  an  unpoetic
exercise  of  ingenious  virtuosity.

§ 70.  The  first  species  of  poetry,  the  narrative ,
preserves  in  the  simplest  way  that  disposition  which,
without  any  special  tendency  in  the  portrayal  of  the
world’s  manifoldness,  seeks  only  for  an  elevating  and
refreshing  expansion  of  the  mind ; such  as,  for  ex-
ample, comes  over  us  on  a journey  when  we  rejoice
in  the  variety  and  inexhaustibleness  of  existence,
and  from  this  consideration  draw  a thousand  unut-
terable lessons  without  especially  hunting  after  a
single  one  of  them.

This  frame  of  mind,  the  joy  in  objectivity,  is  most


94


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


brilliantly  manifested  in  the  Greek  epic  poetry,
favored  by  a peculiarity  of  civilization  which  has
never  since  recurred.  The  Greek  mode  of  appre-
hending the  world  indicated  the  earth  as  the  sole
centre  and  abode  of  life  in  the  world.  For  its  ser-
vice and  adornment  even  the  world  of  the  gods  ex-
ists. And  neither  in  the  remoteness  of  space  did
there  lie  for  this  time  any  longings  after  the  im-
measurable, nor  did  life  extend  itself  in  time  between
a creation  and  a judgment  of  the  world.  Without
advance,  without  history,  without  grudging  and  long-
ing after  some  goal  or  other,  always  simply  enjoying
itself  and  satisfied  with  itself,  flowed  on  the  life
av&pcov  re  Oecov  re ; and  all  reflections  concerning  a
transcendent  vocation  of  the  whole  of  existence,
which  are  so  frequent  with  us,  were  wholly  lacking
to  the  general  consciousness  of  that  time.

To  this  disposition  the  favorable  condition  of  cul-
ture contributed  ; and  so  did  receptivity  for  fine  forms
of  life,  which,  as  well  in  public  as  in  private,  were  still
simple  enough  to  leave  to  the  actions  of  every  day  a
certain  religious  value  and  a sanctity  of  ceremonial.
On  this  account  the  most  ordinary  behavior  of  life
might  become  the  subject  of  a poetic  treatment.

All  these  circumstances  laid  the  foundations  of
that  character  of  cheerful  resignation  and  content-
ment with  human  lot,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  Greek
epic.


UNITY  OF  THE  EPIC.


95


§ 71.  From  all  the  foregoing  points  of  view,  and
from  the  essential  reason,  that  ingenuous  joy  in
human  nature  is  peculiar  /to  epic  poetry,  we  con-
clude first : the  tale  requires  only  an  external  unity,
— namely,  an  uninterrupted  continuity  of  the  rep-
resentation as  to  how  things  have  come  from  one
another,  — but  not  such  an  inner  dramatic  unity  as
to  secure  that  one  circle  of  events,  in  which  a des-
tiny is  developed  from  its  first  beginning  to  its
catastrophe,  should  be  carried  onward.

On  the  contrary,  it  is  unfavorable  to  epic  poetry
to  choose  as  its  subject  one  great  catastrophe ; be-
cause in  part  the  strain  of  attention  to  its  issue,  and
in  part  the  relaxation  after  its  fulfilment,  disturbs  the
quiet  frame  of  mind.  The  epic  has  rather  to  draw
from  the  fullness  of  human  life  one  such  fragment
as  is  not  essentially  different  from  other  fragments
that  are  suppressed.  As  the  epic  depicts  life,  so  must
it  always  have  been ; and  we  must  have  the  impres-
sion, that  so  it  is  going  on  even  to  infinity.

Precisely  on  this  account,  however,  the  tale  should
be  no  altogether  limited  idyl.  It  should  rather
always  be  some  heroic  history,  by  means  of  which
humanity  and  even  the  world  of  the  gods  is  set  astir
far  and  wide,  and  thereby  opportunity  for  expression
given  to  the  diversity  of  human  existence  — a sig-
nificant centre  to  what  is  in  itself  insignificant  and
small  and  yet  indispensable.


96


OUTLINES  OF  .ESTHETICS.


For  similar  reasons  the  characters  are  all  simple,
obvious,  and  perspicuous,  without  psychological  pro-
fundity, not  formed  by  .;the  destinies  of  life  nor  by
reflection  or  premeditated  culture,  but  wholly  natural
growths ; so  that  they  are  simply  brought  by  all  the
fates  they  suffer,  to  the  expression  of  their  perma-
nent character  and  not  to  a changeable  course  of
education.

The  characters  are,  further,  to  be  maintained  in
such  manner  that  they  permit  themselves  to  be  im-
pelled by  the  condition  of  circumstances  simply  to
those  expressions  which  are  founded  within  the  lim-
its of  natural  human  development.  All  depth  and
passionateness  of  the  feelings,  all  thoughtful  reflection
over  the  existing  situation,  is  freely  permitted  to  the
epic,  and  by  no  means  subordinated  to  mere  external
action.  Only  consideration  must  be  given  to  this
rule,  that  the  characters  do  not  let  themselves  be
drawn  aside  by  external  induce  ients  to  reflections
for  which  no  sufficient  reason  exists  in  the  characters
themselves.

In  externals,  the  representation  has  above  all  to
preserve  the  uniformity  of  a quiet  frame  of  mind,  by
shunning  surprising  effects,  by  complete  statement
of  the  motif  for  everything,  by  equally  great  circum-
stantiality, by  homogeneousness  of  meter,  by  shun-
ning all  lyric  outbursts.  It  must  of  itself  quench  all


POETRY  OF  THE  WEST.


97


excitement  of  the  mental  mood,  by  much  art  in  de-
laying, by  the  interpolation  of  comparisons,  by  the
quiet  way  with  which  it  abandons  itself  for  a time  to
manifold  episodes  before  proceeding  to  a main  devel-
opment of  the  history.  In  this  way  it  must  also
strengthen  the  impression  that  every  particular,  in
spite  of  the  natural  sympathy  which  it  awakens,  is
after  all  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  immeasur-
able life  that,  in  the  epic,  as  though  one  looked  down
from  a great  height,  is  surveyed  in  wide  stretches  at
one  time.

§ 72.  The  poetry  of  the  West  in  its  greater  narra-
tive poems  has  not  attained  the  preeminence  of  the
ancient  epic,  but  only  in  the  briefer  form  of  the
romance  has  fashioned  another  species  of  narrative,
in  which  the  attention  belonging  to  the  emphatic
event  is  no  longer  directed  to  ingenuous  enjoyment
of  the  whole  of  he  nan  life,  but  to  the  exhibition  of
one  particular  by  means  of  its  own  gravity  and  signi-
ficance. It  is  only  rarely,  therefore,  that  the  minia-
ture painting  of  the  epic,  with  its  motif  for  every-
thing, occurs  in  such  poetry.  The  rather  does  the
representation  hasten  from  one  principal  point  of  the
history  to  another — omitting  even  to  supply  the  fancy
with  the  essential  intermediate  members ; and  so
compresses  a catastrophe  together  with  its  prepara-
tory events  into  one  small  sharply-defined  picture.


98


OUTLINES  OF  /ESTHETICS.


From  the  collection  of  such  single  songs,  in  which
a coherent  larger  history  of  the  same  species  is
developed,  there  arises  a certain  equivalent  for  the
epic,  but  still  of  quite  another  spirit.  For  although
in  this  way  a general  picture  of  civilized  human  life
is  to  a certain  degree  attained  in  the  representation,
yet  after  all,  this  never  happens  with  such  uniform
circumstantiality  as  in  the  epic  ; on  the  contrary,  the
interest  in  the  peculiar  significance  of  the  tale  far
outweighs  that  in  the  permanent  form  of  the  world
in  which  it  proceeds.

§ 73.  While  the  epic  depicts  ready-made  charac-
ters, as  it  were,  the  peculiar  problem  of  romance  is
the  gradual  education  of  plastic  minds  by  means  of
the  intersecting  influences  of  a manifoldly  compli-
cated condition  of  life.

Accordingly,  modern  histories  necessarily  come
within  the  sphere  of  the  novel ; and  so  do  all  such
characters  as  do  not  deport  themselves  unnaturally
and  stiffly,  whether  with  respect  to  what  is  good  or
bad,  or  with  respect  merely  to  the  properties  belong-
ing to  them.  Only  the  comic  novel  would  make  use
of  these  characters,  in  order  to  show  how  every  in-
dividuality which  considers  itself  as  finished,  comes
short  of  it  ; while  the  problem  of  man  is  to  have
imagination  enough  to  recognize  the  worth  of  ex-


THE  SUBJECT  OF  THE  NOVEL.  99

ternal  influences,  and  to  accommodate  himself  to
them  in  his  mental  culture.

On  the  other  hand,  the  novel  constantly  needs  a
clear  historical  background,  in  order  that  the  devel-
opments which  are  to  fashion  character  may  appear
as  events  in  an  actual  course  of  the  world.  Yet  great
historical  figures  and  events  themselves  will  never
furnish  for  it  a happy  principal  subject.  They  appear
better  in  the  background,  and  leave  the  foreground
free  to  more  simple  human  characters,  in  whom  the
efficacy  and  significance  of  the  historical  ones  is
gathered  together,  as  it  were,  and  comes  to  view  in
its  after-effects  far  better  than  in  direct  form.

Instead  of  psychological  truthfulness  we  rather  de-
mand perspicuity  in  the  characters.  For  the  former
is  less  a subject  for  judgment ; and  a character  whose
fidelity  to  fact  admits  of  demonstration,  but  which,
nevertheless,  as  an  individual  caprice,  departs  widely
from  the  development  of  what  is  common  to  human-
ity, would  not  be  the  right  subject  either  for  this  or
for  any  other  kind  of  poetry.

The  external  form  of  the  novel  requires  prose  as
the  only  one  sufficiently  modifiable  for  the  represen-
tation of  situations  differing  greatly  in  value.

§ 74.  If  the  epic  is  a wide  and  grand  outlook  upon
human  life  from  a lofty  point  of  view,  thb  lyyqc  poqm


IOO


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


is  the  expression  of  a movement  of  the  fancy  by
means  of  which  the  spirit,  chained  at  first  to  a single
limited  stand-point  amidst  the  world’s  throng,  over-
looking only  a few  fragments  of  reality,  and  uncertain
concerning  the  situation  of  its  own  present  position
toward  the  world  at  large,  still  endeavors  to  lift  itself
upward  to  such  an  emancipating,  cheering,  and  re-
deeming point  of  view.

It  is,  therefore,  always  an  occasio7ial  poem,  and  is
an  effort  to  express  the  emotion  from  which  it  pro-
ceeds, not  merely  through  nature’s  voice  in  just  the
manner  in  which  it  is  felt ; but  so  to  interpret  this
mere  material  of  passion  that  its  connection  with  the
meaning  of  the  world,  its  relation  to  reality,  and  the
justification  of  its  existence,  are  apparent.  If  there-
fore the  mood  of  mind  itself  is  to  be  compared  to
some  impalpable  fragrance,  the  poetry  must  likewise
invent  the  form  for  the  blossom  which  yields  the
fragrance.

This  way  of  objectifying  what  belongs  to  the  sub-
jective experience  of  passion  is,  at  least,  the  height  of
lyric  achievement,  beside  which  all  else  appears  only
as  an  inferior  exercise  of  the  art.

§ 75.  Several  species  may  be  distinguished  ; first,
the  song  which  proceeds  only  from  a universal  mood,
arjd  seeks  tpt  find  for  this  merely  external  expression,


THE  POETIC  FORM.


IOI


— those  songs,  for  example,  which  are  designed  for
sociability  among  several  individuals.  Next  to  this
stands,  in  the  second  place,  the  song  which,  starting
from  some  single  circumstance,  then  depicts  a situ-
ation that  belongs  either  to  human  life  or  to  nature,
and  afterwards  pursues  this  single  fact  into  its  more
general  significance,  whether  it  be  for  the  purpose  of
comprehending  the  result  in  one  sentence,  or  of
making  it  appear  intelligible  to  the  mind  by  some
simile  or  in  some  other  perspicuous  form.

The  principal  problem  — as  we  already  alluded
to  the  fact  — will  always  consist  in  at  least  open-
ing a perspective  from  the  mind’s  immediate  mood
out  into  a general  view  of  the  world.  In  what
form  this  happens  is  generally  a matter  indifferent
and  indeterminate ; but  surely  it  is  an  error  to  look
for  any  essential  advantage  in  that  sort  of  elegance
and  formal  correctness,  as  it  was  elaborated  espe-
cially by  the  Romans  in  opposition  to  the  far  more
poetic  self-abandonment  of  the  Greeks.

On  the  contrary,  it  is  this  perfecting  of  form  for  all
representations  in  life,  which,  in  order  to  transcend
what  is  common-place,  seeks  in  poetic  modes  of  ex-
pression what  is  especially  suitable.  And,  doubtless,
we  must^ always  regard  this  kind  of  occasional  poetry
as  one  form  of  practising  the  art,  although  a subordi-
nate one  ; just  as  is  the  reflective  poetry,  at  present


102


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


not  less  often  strongly  blamed,  whose  subjects  are
really  very  frequently  not  to  be  treated  otherwise
than  in  poetic  form.

§ 76.  The  interest  in  dramatic  representation  cer-
tainly consists  quite  naturally  in  the  enjoyment  of
the  living  reality,  with  which  it  contributes  an  innu-
merable quantity ’of  delicate  and  significant  features,
that  necessarily  escape  narration,  for  the  exposition
of  what  is  said ; and,  further,  in  the  circumstantiality
with  which  it  comprehends  contemporaneous  recip-
rocal actions,  that  are  too  widely  separated  for  the
narration.

It  is  just  as  obvious  that  the  slow  shaping  d^f  char-
acter (the  problem  of  the  novel),  and  further  the
relations  of  man  to  nature  and  the  depicting  of  mere
situation,  are  not  adapted  to  this  form  of  poetry  ; and
that  it — quite  true  to  nature  — seeks  its  object  in
the  actions  which  one  individual  performs  towards
others.

It  is  in  this,  however,  that  all  conditions  of  the
drama  generally  consist ; and  every  subject-matter
which  can  be  skillfully  treated  in  this  form  has  also
a right  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  sharply
defined  demands  — sych  as  unity  .of.,  plan;
development,  catastrophy,  etc.  — which  it  is  now  fre-
quently supposed  must  be  made  from  reasons  of


UNITY  OF  DRAMATIC  ACTION.


103


dialectical  aesthetics,  do  not  hold  good  for  the  drama
in  general,  but  only  for  the  highest  form  of  it.

§ 77.  From  the  foregoing  point  of  view  the  drama,
strictly  speaking,  has  nothing  further  to  do  but  to
care  for  the  possibility  of  giving  its  subject-matter
a scenic  representation.  A unity  of  action  is  not  the
most  general  requirement ; even  by  a diversity  of
action  some  one  general  direction,  the  picture  of  a
time  or  situation,  might  very  well  be  dramatically
represented  in  an  effective  way.

Doubtless,  however,  the  special  forms  of  tragedy
and  comedy  take  shape  from  this  general  problem  ;
but  in  these  forms  it  is  no  longer  any  so  general
picture,  but  some  more  special  ethical  or  metaphysi-
cal idea  which  is  to  be  represented.  This  necessi-
tates the  suppressing  of  what  is  diverse,  in  order  not
to  distract  the  attention,  and  the  grouping  of  all
around  one  principal  circle  of  action,  in  whose  unin-
terrupted causal  nexus,  that  idea  is  plainly  involved.

Such  diversity  is,  nevertheless,  not  to  be  dispensed
with.  For  a satisfactory  vividness,  fidelity  to  nature,
and  depth  of  aesthetic  impression,  it  is  essential  that
any  destiny  fraught  with  meaning  should  not  unfold
itself  in  isolation,  as  though  in  an  empty  space.
Some  environment  must  be  in  existence,  which  forms
for  it  a kind  of  resonance  as  it  were;  and  which


104


OUTLINES  OF  ./ESTHETICS.


shows  from  what  motifs  of  the  spirit  of  the  age,  of
the  general  situation,  culture,  etc.,  the  event  itself
proceeds  ; and,  further,  how  it  reacts  upon  the  diverse
forms  of  human  character,  and  receives  from  them
a variety  of  critical  estimates,  by  means  of  which
its  own  entire  significance  is  first  made  obvious.
Finally,  we  need  a number  of  figures,  in  order  to
have  the  encouraging  certainty  that,  besides  the
one-sidedness  of  the  principal  characters  repre-
sented, human  nature  possesses  a yet  inexhaustible
capacity  for  forming  others.

In  all  the  foregoing  relations  the  ancient  drama
stands  decidedly  behind  the  modern ; and  as  much
so  in  respect  to  the  unity  of  space  and  time,  which  is
a partly  unnatural,  partly  unimportant,  and  partly
harmful,  condition  of  dramatic  representation.

§ 78.  Tragedy  and  comedy  have,  fundamentally
considered,  the  same  end;  — namely,  to  show  that  it
is  the  general  metaphysical  weakness  of  every  finite
nature  to  come  to  harm,  as  soon  as  it  deems  itself
capable  of  playing  the  part  of  Providence,  and  of
laying  hold  on  the  coherent  system  of  the  world’s
course,  as  a formative  and  guiding  principle.  Only
that  in  tragedy,  great  and  powerful  characters,  with
plans  of  much  moment,  are  shattered,  being  over-
thrown by  the  vast  forces  of  the  world’s  course  ;


TRAGEDY  AND  COMEDY.


105


while,  in  comedy,  insignificant  figures  with  their
petty  intrigues  are  overthrown  by  the  ordinary  ac-
cidents of  life.

A specially  moral  point  of  view,  unless  one  chooses
to  assume  it  for  the  purpose,  does  not  underlie
tragedy.  It  has  neither  to  reward  ideal  nor  to
punish  morally  bad  characters  ; but  is  primarily
interested  even  in  the  ,bad  only  through  the  force
with  which  it  is  active,  and  through  its  being  shat-
tered on  the  yet  greater  force  of  the  world’s  ongoing
movement.

Although,  therefore,  the  drama  should  not  con-
tradict our  moral  judgment,  yet  it  is  to  administer  a
somewhat  different,  and,  in  part,  a finer  justice.
Characters  which,  judged  in  respect  to  their  life,
appear  morally  praiseworthy,  and  only  perish  through
mistake,  are  here  made  answerable  for  the  mistake
(7 Tpwrov  yfrevBos).  For,  in  fact,  their  fault  lies  in  this
that  they,  forgetting  their  finiteness,  endeavor  with
all  their  force  to  realize  their  convictions.

§ 79.  It  is  on  this  account  always  required  of  the
principal  character  in  tragedy,  that  it  perish  through
some  fault  of  its  own  ; while  it  is  not  necessary  that
we  should  be  able  to  give  a similar  account  also  of
the  fate  of  each  subordinate  figure.  Poetry  should,
even  in  the  drama,  represent  the  destruction  of  fair


io6


OUTLINES  OF  AESTHETICS.


spirits  in  the  same  elegiac  fashion  as  that  which  our
lamenting  follows  also  in  real  life.

The  aforesaid  ‘ fault  ’ of  the  principal  character
does  not,  however,  need  for  the  same  reason  to  be
moral  in  the  narrower  sense.  The  rather  was  an-
tiquity right  in  imputing  to  the  finite  subject  the
simple  fatal  error  just  as  completely  as  the  crime
against  conscience.  Still  something  is  naturally
gained  in  tragic  effect,  if  an  action  that  is  free,  and
further  such  an  one  as  does  not  appear  absolutely
objectionable  but  as  a duty  in  collision  with  other
duties,  — if  finally,  a mighty  force  directed  toward
a noble  end,  is  shattered  against  what  is  less  right-
eous and  yet  paramount.  On  this  account  all
reformatory  spirits  are  favorite  subjects  of  tragedy;
for  in  all  of  them  that  yfipcs  is  prominent,  which
even  antiquity  quite  correctly  designated  as  the
tragic  fault  that  comprises  all  other  faults.

§ 80.  A more  extended  analysis  would  show  us  the
presence  of  the  comic  wherever  an  intention,  that
appears  to  itself  of  a lofty  character  and  is  fulfilled
with  the  false  consciousness  of  its  value,  is  suddenly
and  obviously  thwarted  and  brought  to  nothing  in
a way  to  do  the  subject  no  harm,  through  the  petty
and  insignificant  circumstances  of  life,  which  the
observer  easily  foresees,  and  the  foreseeing  of  which


THE  CHARACTERS  OF  COMEDY.


107

he  would  on  this  account  have  required  of  the
wisdom  that  estimates  itself  so  highly.

# Accordingly,  even  great  characters  appear  laugh-
able at  the  particular  moments  when  their  limitations
plainly  come  to  view.  But  most  examples  of  the
comic  are  furnished  by  all  those  cases  of  interrupted
decorum,  in  which  an  activity  that  has  clothed  itself
in  the  forms  of  what  is  elevated,  solemn,  premedi-
tated, and  calculated,  is  suddenly  brought  to  nothing
by  such  petty  circumstances.  In  this  aspect,  there-
fore, the  comic  invariably  stands  in  special  opposition
to  what  is  elevated  ; but  above  all  to  what  is  pathetic.

Matters  are  not  so  arranged  in  comedy  that  single
sudden  effects  form  its  principal  affair.  Here,  what
is  to  be  reached  is  not  the  sudden  dissolving  into
nothing  of  an  intense  expectation,  but  the  defeat-
ing, constantly  and  everywhere,  by  external  circum-
stances, of  the  petty  intriguing  activity  of  a single
character  {passive  figures  are  never  the  principal
dramatis  personae  in  a comic  way).  Here  a major
part  of  the  impression  lies  in  the  clearness  with
which  we  are  able  uninterruptedly  to  follow  the
conflict  between  the  intention  (of  the  character)  and
the  condition  of  circumstances.

As  for  the  rest,  comedy  does  not  require  characters
so  strongly  individualized  as  does  tragedy,  but  can
attain  its  impression  — whose  movement  is  in  general


io8


OUTLINES  OF  ^ESTHETICS.


not  so  grave — far  better  than  the  latter  in  figures  of
a common  type.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  to  have
a refreshing  effect,  it  must  make  good  the  insignifi-
cance of  its  subjects  by  forms  of  special  elegance
and  fineness  of  execution.


INDEX,


INDEX.


A.

Agreeable,  the,  nature  of,  i f.

Architecture,  domain  of,  47 ; laws  of,  47  f. ; the  Greek,  48 ; the  Roman,
55  f. ; the  Gothic,  58  f. ; the  Moorish,  65  f. ; private,  66.

Art,  beginnings  of,  27 ; laws  of,  28  fi ; the  plastic,  68.

B.

Basilica,  the  ancient,  62 ; the  Christian,  63  f.

Beautiful,  the,  nature  of,  1 f. ; distinguished  from  the  useful,  5 ; as  related
to  pleasure,  12,  15 ; distinguished  from  the  true  and  good,  13 ; actual-
ization of,  22,  24.

Beauty,  standard  of,  2 ; as  a moral  idea,  5 f. ; not  mere  means,  6 f. ; as
a universal,  7 f. ; as  objective.  8,  9 ; as  idea,  9 f.,  12 ; defined,  11 ; of  the
Soul,  14,  18;  of  Things,  18  f. ; as  involving  Space,  Time,  and  Motion,
22 ; of  symmetry,  23,  83 ; of  grace,  25  f. ; of  sublimity,  26 ; cqpditions  of,
28  f.,  30.

Bible,  influence  of,  on  painting,  87.

Byzantine  Style,  the,  56.

C.


Church,  the  Christian,  derivation  of,  62 ; development  of,  from  basilica,  62  f.
Columns,  the,  in  Greek  architecture,  48  f.,  52  f. ; in  Gothic,  38.fi
Comedy,  meaning  of,  104  fi  ; character  in,  106  f.


D.

Drama,  the  problem  of,  102  fi ; unity  of  action  in,  103  f. ; tragic  and  dra-
matic, 104  fi


E.


Epic,  the  Greek,  93  fi ; sources  of  the,  95 ; simplicity  of,  95  fi


I 12


INDEX.


F.

Fancy,  as  distinguished  from  imagination,  20 ; as  creative,  20  f.

Feeling,  as  expressed  in  music,  43.

Figure,  the  human,  in  sculpture,  71  f. ; pose  of,  74.

G.

Genre-Painting,  sources  of,  84.

Gothic  Style,  aesthetic  character  of,  58 ; columns  of,  85  f. ; vault  and  roof
of,  59 ; ornamentation  in,  60,  61  f. ; the  cathedral  in,  62  f.

Grace,  a form  of  beauty,  25.

Greek  Architecture,  48  f.,  50  f.,  52  f.

Greek  Sculpture,  76  f.,  78.


H.

Happiness,  necessary  to  beauty,  15  f.
History,  not  representable  in  painting,  85  f.


Idyl,  the,  95  f.


I.


L.


Landscape-Painting,  81  f. ; arrangement  in,  83.
Law,  as  reJfled  to  beauty,  10,  29  f.

Lyric,  the,  99  f.


M.

Melody,  aesthetic  character  of,  38  f. ; relation  to  fundamental  tone,  39,  40  f.
Moorish  Architecture,  derivation  of,  65  f.

Motion,  an  element  of  beauty,  13  f.,  22,  88.

Music,  nature  of,  33;  aesthetic  laws  of,  35  f.,  39 ; time  in,  37;  key  of,  41  f. ;
problems  of,  42;  power  to  express  feeling,  43,  44  f. ; spiritual  value
of,  45  f- ;

Mythology,  as  furnishing  themes  for  sculpture,  78 ; and  for  painting,  87.


N.


Nature,  imitation  of,  in  art,  84 f.


O.

Ornamentation  in  architecture,  51,  60  f.


INDEX.


II  3


P.

Painting,  aesthetic  character  of,  80  f.,  87  f.;  landscape,  81  f.,  83;  genre,  84;

historical,  85  f. ; limitations  of,  89  f.

Plan,  as  related  to  beauty,  10 ; in  architecture,  48.

Poetry,  problem  of,  91  f. ; as  didactic,  93 ; species  of,  93  f. ; the  Greek,  94  f. ;
of  the  West,  97.


R.

Reality,  three  realms  of,  10.

Roman  Architecture,  55  f.

Romance,  the,  97  f. ; problem  of,  98  f.

Romanesque  Style,  the,  57  f.,  60  f.

Roof,  in  architecture,  54.

S.

Sculpture,  problem  of,  68  f. ; material  of,  68  f. ; the  figure  in,  70,  72  f. ; laws
of,  70  f.,  72  f.,  74  f. ; the  Greek,  76  f. ; Christian,  78  f.

Senses,  as  conditioning  beauty,  28  f.

Songs,  varieties  of,  100  f.

Soul,  the,  as  beautiful,  14,  18 ; as  furnishing  conditions  of  beauty,  30.
Space,  as  a factor  in  the  beautiful.

Style,  in  architecture,  48.

Sublimity,  a form  of  beauty,  26.

Symmetry,  an  element  of  beauty,  23 ; landscape  should  lack,  83.


T.

Time,  as  a form  of  reality,  22.

Tones,  aesthetic  quality  of,  33  f. ; series  of,  35.
Tragedy,  meaning  of,  104 ; character  in,  105  f.


U.


Unity,  of  a painting,  89  f. ; of  the  drama,  103.


Philosophy


Empirical  Psychology ; or,  Tfw  Hjmiw  Mind  as

Given  in  Consciousness.  By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.

Revised  with  the  cooperation  of  Julius  H.  Seelye,  D.D.,  LL.D.,

President  of  Amherst  College.  i2mo.  300  pages.  Mailing  Price,

#1.25  ; Introduction,  $1.12;  Allowance,  40  cts.

Hickok’s  “ Science  of  the  Mind,1’  which  has  been  in  the  hands
of  teachers  and  students  for  more  than  a quarter  of  a century,  has
been  here  wholly  revised,  and  almost  wholly  re-written,  making  it
not  only  a new  text-book  but  a new  contribution  to  the  important
science  of  which  it  treats.  The  precision  of  statement  and  thorough-
ness of  treatment  which  so  remarkably  characterized  the  original
work,  and  made  it  so  highly  prized  by  so  many  teachers,  are  no  less
conspicuous  in  the  present  work ; but  a different  method  in  the  gen-
eral discussion  has  been  adopted,  though  the  end  originally  sought
is  the  same.

The  publishers  believe  that  the  book  will  be  found  to  be  remark-
ably comprehensive,  and  at  the  same  time  compact  and  clear.  It
gives  a complete  outline  of  the  Science,  concisely  presented,  and  in
precise  and  plain  terms.


John  Bascom,  Pres,  of  Univ.  of
Wisconsin,  Madison  : It  is  an  excellent
book.  It  has  done  much  good  service,
and,  as  revised  by  President  Seelye,  is
prepared  to  do  much  more.  {Feb.  3/82.)


delineation  of  the  mental  faculties  so
clear  and  accurate  that  the  careful  stu-
dent will  hardly  fail  to  recognize  its
truth  in  his  own  experience.

{April  6,  1882.)


I.  W.  Andrews,  Pres.  Marietta
Coll.,  Ohio  : I am  glad  to  see  that  this
work  holds  its  place  among  our  text-
books on  that  most  important  subject.
Dr.  Hickok  I regard  as  one  of  the  ablest
of  our  philosophical  writers,  and  few
teachers  have  had  so  large  and  success-
ful an  experience  as  President  Seelye.
This  new  edition,  carefully  revised  by
these  two  gentlemen,  may  be  confi-
dently recommended  as  presenting  a


M.  Valentine,  Pres,  and  Prof,  of
Intellectual  and  Moral  Science,  Pennsyl-
vania Coll.,  Gettysburg : I take  pleasure
in  saying  that  the  new  edition  impresses
me  very  favorably.  This  work  of  Dr.
Hickok  is  unquestionably  one  of  high
ability  and  much  merit,  and,  by  its  close
analysis  and  compact,  orderly  classifical
of  the  mind’s  powers,  admirably  suited
for  use  as  a text-book.  Its  value  is  in-
creased in  this  edition.  {Jan.  28,  ’82.)


242


PHILOSOPHY.


Hichoh’s  Moral  Science.

By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.  Revised  with  the  cooperation
of  Julius  H.  Seelye,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  President  of  Amherst  College.
i2mo.  Cloth.  288  pages.  Mailing  price,  $1.25;  Introduction,  $1.12;
Allowance,  40  cents.

This  work  is  an  entire  and  careful  revision  of  Hickok’s  original
text-book  of  Moral  Science.  The  remarkable  excellences  of  that
book,  unsurpassed  as  it  is  in  systematic  rigor  and  scientific  precision,
are  carefully  retained  in  the  present  edition.  Many  parts  of  the
book  have,  however,  been  rewritten  entirely,  modifying  the  original
statements  where  this  was  necessary  for  clearness,  and  adding  new
discussions  where  this  was  required  for  fulness.  To  the  many
teachers  who  have  used  the  original  text-book  with  such  signal
profit,  the  publishers  confidently  commend  this  new  and  revised  edi-
tion ; and  with  equal  confidence  they  offer  it  to  others  who  would
like  a manual  in  which  the  principles  of  morality  are  expounded  in
a manner  as  truly  simple  as  it  is  thoroughly  scientific.


A.  P.  Peabody,  Prof,  of  Christian
Morals , Harvard  Coll.:  Permit  me  to
express  my  very  high  appreciation  of
the  value  of  the  work.  I read  it  when
it  first  appeared  with  the  greatest  in-
terest and  satisfaction,  and  in  its  pres-
ent form  it  possesses  whatever  added
claims  the  most  skilful  and  careful
editorship  can  give.  Had  it  appeared
a month  earlier,  should  more  probably
than  not  have  adopted  it.

G.  P.  Fisher,  Prof,  of  Church  His-
tory, Yale  Coll. : I have  long  wanted  to
see  just  such  a book, — one  in  which
practical  ethics  should  be  clearly  and
systematically  and  philosophically  pre-
sented. I am  very  much  pleased  with
the  chapters  relating  to  duties,  and  not
less  so  with  the  more  theoretical  por-
tion of  the  work.  The  style  is  so  per-
spicuous, and  at  the  same  time  so
concise,  that  the  work  is  eminently
adapted  to  serve  as  a text-book  in  col-
leges and  higher  schools.  In  matter
and  manner  it  is  a capital  book,  and  I
wish  it  God  speed.


C.  B.  Hulbert,  Pres.  Middlebury
Coll.,  Vt.,  and  Prof,  of  Moral  Science  :
In  its  present  form  it  is  the  best  of
recently  issued  text-books  on  Moral
Science.

A.  A.  E.  Taylor,  Pres,  of  Univ.
of  Wooster , Ohio,  and  Prof,  of  Biblical
Instruction  : It  is  a capital  text-book
for  the  class-room,  fully  abreast  of  the
ethical  controversies  of  the  day.

I.  W.  Andrews,  Pres.  Marietta
Coll.,  O.,  and  Prof,  of  Intellectual  Phi-
losophy : It  is  sound,  strong,  and  clear.
I doubt  whether  any  work  on  Moral
Science  surpasses  this  in  the  depth  and
permanence  of  the  impression  made
upon  the  student.  It  requires  study,
of  course,  but  it  will  repay  the  student ,
whether  teacher  or  pupil.  The  part
on  duties  to  the  State  is  admirable  for
its  fulness  and  precision.

Wm.  F.  Swahlen,  Pres.  McKen-
dree  Coll.,  Lebanon,  III . : I am  more
and  more  pleased  with  it.


PHILOSOPHY.


243


The  N.  E.  Journal  of  Educa-
tion : Taken  altogether,  it  is  an  ad-
mirable text-book,  and  we  can  cor-
dially recommend  it  for  use  wherever
pupils  are  old  enough  to  consider  mor-
ality in  a scientific  way,  or  to  discuss


intelligently  the  fundamental  principles
of  civil  government.  No  subjects  are
more  vitally  necessary  in  public  educa-
tion, and  this  volume  presents  them
in  a clear,  compact,  and  forcible  man-
ner.


Rational  Psychology;  or,  The  Subjectiue  Idea

and  Objective  Law  of  all  Intelligence.  By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,
LL.D.  543  pages.  8vo.  Mailing  Price,  $1.95.  Introduction,  $1. 80'.

Creator  and  Creation ; or,  The  Knowledge  in  the


Reason  of  God  and  His  Work.  By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.
360  pages.  8vo.  Mailing  Price,  $1.75.  Introduction,  $1.60.

The  Logic  of_  Reason , Umuersa[  and_  Eternal .

By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.  192  pages.  8vo.  Mailing
Price,  $ 1.60 . Introduction,  $1.44.

Humanity  Immortal ; or,  Man  Tried,  Fallen,  and

Redeemed.  By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.  362  pages.  8vo.
Mailing  Price,  #1.75.  Introduction,  $1.60.

These  books  discuss  the  most  difficult  and  important  problems
of  human  thought.  Though  each  is  complete  in  itself,  they  pursue
the  following  order : —

The  Empirical  Psychology  gives  the  basis  of  all  physical  and
logical  science.

The  Rational  Psychology  connects  all  science  with  philosophy.
The  Creator  and  Creation  gives  the  philosophy  of  all  mechan-
ical and  vital  forces.

The  Moral  Science  is  already  in  the  field  of  philosophy,  and
gives  the  basis  of  ^Esthetics,  Politics,  Ethics,  and  Theology.

The  Logic  of  Reason  frees  empiricism  from  all  scepticism  in
the  attainment  of  a Being  absolutely  Universal  and  Eternal.

The  Humanity  Immortal  gives  the  Divine  history  of  human
experience  from  its  origination  to  its  consummation.


244


PHILOSOPHY.


Lotze’s  Philosophical  Outlines.

Dictated  Portions  of  the  Latest  Lectures  (at  Gottingen  and  Berlin)  of
Hermann  Lotze.  Translated  and  edited  by  George  T.  Ladd,  Pro-
fessor of  Philosophy  in  Yale  College.  i2mo.  Cloth.  About  180  pages
in  each  volume.  Mailing  price  per  vol.,  $1.00;  Introd.  price,  80  cents.

The  German  from  which  the  translations  are  made  consists  of  the
dictated  portions  of  his  latest  lectures  (at  Gottingen,  and  for  a few
months  at  Berlin)  as  formulated  by  Lotze  himself,  recorded  in  the
notes  of  his  hearers,  and  subjected  to  the  most  competent  and  thor-
ough revision  of  Professor  Rehnisch  of  Gottingen.  The  “ Outlines  ”
give,  therefore,  a mature  and  trustworthy  statement,  in  language
selected  by  this  teacher  of  philosophy  himself,  of  what  may  be  con-
sidered as  his  final  opinions  upon  a wide  range  of  subjects.  They
have  met  with  no  little  favor  in  Germany.

There  is  scarcely  any  other  recent  writer  on  philosophical  sub-
jects whose  thoughts  are  so  stimulating  for  their  breadth,  penetra-
tion, and  candor ; or  with  whom  an  acquaintance  is  so  desirable  for
purposes  of  general  culture  through  the  philosophic  way  of  consid-
ering life,  with  its  interests  in  not  merely  pure  thought,  but  also  in
morals,  religion,  and  art.

It  is  also  hoped  that  the  use  of  these  translations  will  further  the
work  of  teaching  philosophy.  Such  condensed,  orderly,  and  mature
statements  of  conclusions  on  a wide  range  of  philosophical  questions
will  be  found  exceedingly  valuable  for  both  teacher  and  pupil.  They
furnish  a scheme  for  all  the  instruction  which  the  teacher  is  able  to
give  in  presenting  and  answering  these  questions.  When  skilfully
used,  they  may  be  made  to  introduce  the  pupil  to  the  widest  fields
of  philosophy  under  the  guidance  of  a great  master,  and  in  an  inter-
esting way.  They  present  the  applications  of  Metaphysic  to  art,
religion,  nature,  and  human  conduct;  — and  they  thus  open  regions
of  reflection  into  which  the  instruction  of  our  colleges  and  universi-
ties scarcely  takes  their  students  at  all,  — regions,  however,  which  arc
precisely  the  ones  where  such  students  both  desire  and  need  to  go.

These  translations  have  been  undertaken  with  the  kind  permission
of  the  German  publisher,  Herr  S.  Hirzel,  of  Leipsic.

Outlines  of  Metaphysic.

The  Outlines  of  Metaphysic  contains  the  scientific  treatment  of


PHILOSOPHY.


245


those  assumptions  which  enter  into  all  our  cognition  of  Reality.  It
consists  of  three  parts,  — Ontology,  Cosmology,  Phenomenology.
The  first  part  contains  chapters  on  the  Conception  of  Being,  the
Content  of  the  Existent,  Reality,  Change,  and  Causation ; the  second
treats  of  Space,  Time,  Motion,  Matter,  and  the  Coherency  of  Natural
Events  ; the  third,  of  the  Subjectivity  and  Objectivity  of  Cognition.
The  Metaphysic  of  Lotze  gives  the  key  to  his  entire  philosophical
system.  It  should  therefore  be  studied  at  the  very  entrance  upon
examination  of  that  system.

Outlines  of  the  Philosophy  of  Religion.

In  the  Outlines  of  the  Philosophy  of  Religion  Lotze  seeks  “ to
ascertain  how  much  of  the  Content  of  Religion  may  be  discovered,
proved,  or  at  least  confirmed,  agreeably  to  reason.”  In  successive
chapters  he  discusses  the  Proof  for  the  Existence  of  God,  the  Attri-
butes and  Personality  of  the  Absolute,  the  Conceptions  of  the  Crea-
tion, the  Preservation,  and  the  Government,  of  the  World,  and  of
the  World-time.  The  book  closes  with  brief  discussions  of  Religion
and  Morality,  and  Dogmas  and  Confessions.

Outlines  of  Practical  Philosophy.

This  one  of  the  “Outlines”  contains  a discussion  of  Ethical
Principles,  Moral  Ideals,  and  the  Freedom  of  the  Will,  and  then  an
application  of  the  theory  to  the  Individual,  to  Marriage,  to  Society,
and  to  the  State.  Many  interesting  remarks  on  Divorce,  Socialism,
Representative  Government,  etc.,  abound  throughout  the  volume.
Its  style  is  more  popular  than  that  of  the  other  works  of  Lotze,  and
it  will  doubtless  be  widely  read.

Outlines  of  Psychology.

The  Outlines  of  Psychology  treats  of  Simple  Sensations,  the
Course  of  Representative  Ideas,  of  Attention  and  Inference,  of
Intuitions  of  Objects  as  in  Space,  of  the  Apprehension  of  the  Exter-
nal World  by  the  Senses,  of  Errors  of  the  Senses,  of  Feelings,  and  of
Bodily  Motions.  Its  second  part  is  “ theoretical,”  and  discusses  the
nature,  position,  and  changeable  states  of  the  Soul,  its  relations  to
time,  and  the  reciprocal  action  of  Soul  and  Body.  It  closes  with  a
chapter  on  the  “ Kingdom  of  Souls.”  Lotze  is  peculiarly  rich  and
suggestive  in  the  discussion  of  Psychology.


246


PHILOSOPHY.


Outlines  of  /Esthetics.

The  Outlines  of  Esthetics  treats  of  the  theory  of  the  Beautiful
and  of  Phantasy,  and  of  the  Realization  and  different  Species  of  the
Beautiful.  Then  follow  brief  chapters  on  Music,  Architecture,
Plastic  Art,  Painting,  and  Poetry.  An  appendix  to  this  volume
contains  a brief  biography  of  Lotze.  This  volume  will  be  of  the
same  size  as  those  issued  already.  [ Ready  in  1886.


Outlines  of  Logic.

The  Outlines  of  Logic  discusses  both  pure  and  applied  Logic.
Under  the  first  head  come  the  formation  of  Concepts,  the  theory  of
Judgment,  a system  of  the  forms  of  Judgment,  the  doctrine  of  argu-
ment or  the  drawing  of  conclusions,  the  figures  of  Aristotle,  etc.
The  applied  Logic  presents  the  application  of  the  forms  of  Concep-
tion, the  adducing  of  Proof,  and  the  Process  of  Thought  in  Dis-
covery. The  Logic  is  followed  by  a brief  treatise  on  the  Encyclo-
paedia of  Philosophy,  in  which  are  set  forth  the  definition  and
method  of  Theoretical  Philosophy,  of  Practical  Philosophy,  and  of
the  Philosophy  of  Religion.  This  volume  will  be  about  one-fifth
larger  than  the  others,  and  will  make  an  admirable  brief  text-book
in  Logic.  [ Ready  in  1886.


W.  T.  Harris,  Concord , Mass. : The
project  of  Prof.  Ladd  strikes  me  as  by
all  means  a practical  one.  I think  this
likely  to  be  the  most  successful  venture
in  philosophical  publication  that  I have
heard  of  lately.

John  Bascom,  Pres,  of  Univ.  of
l Vis. : The  publication  of  this  book,
and  of  the  promised  series,  is  very
desirable.

Wm.  P.  Warren,  Pres.  Boston
University , in  the  “ Western  Christian
Advocate  Prof.  Ladd  is  rendering  the
English-reading  public  a great  service
by  bringing  out  in  neat  and  correct
form  translations  of  the  dictated  por-
tions of  the  late  Professor  Hermann
Lotze’s  lectures.

Noah  K.  Davis,  Prof,  of  Moral
Phil.,  Univ.  of  Vir.  : I have  desired


very  much  for  the  use  of  my  pupils,
who  do  not  read  German,  a good  trans-
lation of  Lotze’s  " Dictate  ” ever  since
they  began  to  appear.  The  piesent
translation  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired,
except  the  completion  of  the  series.

D.  S.  Gregory,  Pres.  Lake  Forest
(///.)  Univ. : Lotze’s  Outlines  of  Psy-
chology will  give  the  young  men  a
comprehensive  grasp  of  all  the  capital
questions  at  the  basis  of  the  current  psy-
chological discussions,  and  help  them
to  estimate  for  themselves  the  real  sci-
entific standing  of  the  prevalent  sensa-
tional psychology.  The  work  of  the
translator  is  admirably  done,  in  conse-
quence of  his  being  able  to  enter  into
the  thought  of  the  author.

W.  D. Wilson,  Cornell  Univ.,  N.  Y.:
I have  for  a long  time  regarded  Lotze


PHILOSOPHY :


247


as  the  soundest,  as  well  as  the  pro-
foundest,  of  all  the  German  metaphy-
sicians.

H.  N.  Gardner,  Prof,  of  Philosophy,
Smith  College  : I have  decided  to  use
the  Philosophy  of  Religion  next  term
in  the  College.

John  Watson,  Prof  Philosophy,
Univ.  of  Kingston , Can.  : I think  that
judiciously  used,  it  would  form  a very
good  transition  from  the  study  of  Kant
to  the  study  of  Fichte,  Schelling,  and
Hegel,  especially  the  last.

The  Critic,  New  York:  The  in-
fluence of  Lotze  would  be  most  salu-
tary in  this  country  at  the  present  time,
and  many  would  find  in  him  the  phil-
osophic guide  they  need.  His  recon-
ciliation between  science  and  phil-
osophy, or  between  materialism  and
idealism,  is  of  great  importance.  To
many  it  will  commend  itself  as  the  only
way  out  of  the  philosophic  confusion  of
the  present  time.  The  student  will  find
much  crowded  into  a few  pages,  but
Lotze  has  the  merit  of  clearness.

New  Englander  : The  translation
of  the  volume  before  us  is  marked  by
that  carefulness,  accuracy,  and  thor-
oughness that  characterize  all  of  Prof.
Ladd’s  work.  The  task  he  has  accom-
plished was  by  no  means  a slight  one,
as  those  familiar  with  the  German  of
Lotze  will  recognize ; and  if  the  Eng-
lish reader  still  finds  difficulties  in  the
way  of  a clear  apprehension  of  the
teaching  of  Lotze,  we  must  remind  him
that  these  difficulties  cannot  be  re-
moved by  a translation,  however  excel-
lent it  may  be.

Literary  W orld,  Boston : Pro-
fessor Ladd  has  done  a great  service
to  all  those  persons  who  are  interested
in  the  vital  questions  of  the  present  day,
but  who  are  not  sufficiently  familiar  with


German  to  make  it  easy  to  read,  in  the
original  tongue,  one  of  the  freshest  and
most  profound  of  modern  thinkers.
We  have  not  found  ourselves  able  to
agree  with  Lotze  in  all  his  doctrines ;
but  have  so  greatly  admired  both  the
candor  and  the  acute  profundity  of  his
thought,  that  we  disagree  with  him
modestly,  with  the  concession  that  he
is  possibly  right  when  we  think  him
wrong.  In  the  great  main  trend  of  his
thought  we  hold  him  to  be  certainly
right.

Mind,  London , Eng.  .-No  words  are
needed  to  commend  such  an  enter-
prise, now  that  Lotze’s  importance  as  a
thinker  is  so  well  understood.  The
translation  is  careful  and  painstaking.

Unitarian  Review,  Boston : We
have  already  called  attention  to  the
admirable  service  Prof.  Ladd  is  ren-
dering students  of  philosophy  by  editing
these  dictated  portions  of  the  lectures
of  Hermann  Lotze.  This  volume  of
Outlines  is  of  great  interest  and  sug-
gestiveness. It  is  clear  in  vision  and
strong.

Congregationalist,  Boston , Mass.:
While  we  have  not  accepted  the  au-
thor’s reasoning  as  a whole,  we  have
found  it  remarkably  suggestive  and
stimulating.

University,  Chicago:  It  is  this
union  in  Lotze  of  scientific  spirit,  on
the  one  hand,  and  of  deep  regard  for
the  fundamental  interests  of  man,  on
the  other,  that  makes  Lotze  so  signifi-
cant a figure  in  philosophy  at  present,
and  the  study  of  him  so  hopeful  a
sign.

We  know  of  no  book  of  150  pages
that  contains  more  condensed  food  for
thought,  or  more  pregnant  statement  of
informing  truth  on  the  higher  themes
of  man’s  life  than  these  Outlines  of  the
Philosophy  of  Religion.


Higher  English


Mintons  Manual  °f  ^n9>'\sh  Prose  Literature

Biographical  and  Critical.  Designed  mainly  to  show  characteristics
of  style.  By  William  Minto,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Logic  and  English
Literature  in  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  Scotland.  i2mo.  Cloth.
566  pages.  Mailing  price,  $ 2.15;  Introduction,  $ 2.00.


London  Standard : A masterly
manual.

London  Observer : It  is  not  rash
to  say  that  this  work  is  the  first  scien-
tific treatment  of  the  subject  by  an
English  writer. . . . Probably  this  book
is  one  of  the  first  attempts  to  apply  to
literature  pondus , numerus , et  men  sura.
About  the  ability  as  well  as  the  origi-
nality of  the  work  there  cannot  be  two
opinions.  The  views  pronounced  are
expressed  in  terse,  weighty,  incisive
dicta  — sentences  to  be  carried  away
as  a geologist  carries  away  a sample.
. . . There  can  be  little  danger  in  saying
that  it  is  the  best  English  book  on  the
subject.

London  School  Board  Chroni-
cle : Here  we  do  not  find  the  crambe
repitita  of  old  critical  formulae,  the


simple  echoes  of  superannuated  rhe-
torical dicta,  but  a close  and  careful
analysis  of  the  main  attributes  of  style,
as  developed  in  the  work  of  its  greatest
masters,  stated  with  remarkable  clear-
ness of  expression,  and  arranged  upon
a plan  of  most  exact  method.  The  ele-
ments and  qualities  of  style  are  handled
with  striking  subtility  of  touch  and  dis-
criminating tact.  It  is  almost  an  ex-
haustive solution  of  the  whole  question.

London  Educational  Times :
It  is  not  often,  among  the  innumerable
manuals  on  the  same  subjet,  that  it  is
our  good  fortune  to  come  across  so  ex-
cellent a book  as  that  before  us.  Care-
fully and  thoughtfully  written,  it  indeed
offers  a very  marked  contrast  to  the
shallow  and  hastily-compiled  produc-
tions that  crowd  our  book  market.


M info’s  Characteristics  of  the  English  Poets,

from  Chaucer  to  Shirley.  By  William  Minto,  M.A.,  Professor  of
Logic  and  English  Literature  in  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  Scotland.
i2mo.  Cloth,  xi  + 483  pages.  Mailing  price, $2.15 ; for  Introduction,
$2.00.

The  chief  objects  of  the  author  are  : (1)  To  bring  into  clear  light
the  characteristics  of  the  several  poets ; and,  (2)  to  trace  how  far
each  was  influenced  by  his  literary  predecessors  and  his  contem-
poraries.


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


37


Arnold's  English  Literature.

Historical  and  Critical : With  an  Appendix  on  English  Metres,  and
Summaries  of  the  Different  Literary  Periods.  By  Thomas  Arnold,  M.A.,
of  University  College,  Oxford.  American  edition.  Revised.  i2mo.
Cloth.  558  pages.  Mailing  price,  $1.65;  Introduction  (with  or  without
the  following  pamphlet),  $1.50;  , Allowance  for  old  book,  40  cts.

The  Anglo-Saxon  and  Norman  Periods  have  been  republished,
from  the  fourth  revised  English  edition,  and  can  be  furnished  in  paper
binding.  Mailing  price,  30  cts.;  Introduction,  25  cts.

A distinguished  English  educator  says:  “ In  the  Historical  por-
tion of  the  book  I know  not  which  to  admire  most,  the  happy  art
with  which  the  dry  facts  of  dates  and  names  are  woven  into  .lucid,
readable  paragraphs,  full  of  instruction,  or  the  easy  intelligence  with
which  the  leading  characteristics  of  the  more  important  writers  are
brought  before  the  reader.  In  the  Critical  section  the  author  is  still
more  at  home.  The  various  styles  of  prose  and  verse  are  fully
described ; and  this  section,  as  well  as  the  Historical,  is  illustrated
by  hundreds  of  well-chosen  quotations.  In  the  Appendix  is  a very
useful  account  of  English  Metres,  a subject  I do  not  remember  see-
ing treated  with  the  same  fulness  in  any  other  book  of  the  kind.”
The  student  of  this  manual  will  receive  just  impressions  of  the
relative  value  of  names  and  books,  as  well  as  political  and  religious
influences.  Indeed,  the  adjustment  and  arrangement  of  material  is
managed  with  wonderful  dexterity  and  analytic  clearness.


E.  H.  Griffin,  Prof,  of  Eng.  Lit.,
Williams  Coll.:  I introduced  it  here
several  years  ago,  thinking,  after  a care-
ful examination  of  the  various  text-
books, that  it  was,  on  the  whole,  the
best.  This  is  still  my  opinion.

J.  Isham  Bliss,  Prof  of  Ret.,
Univ.  of  Vermont:  I know  of  no
Manual  of  English  Literature  so  useful
as  a text-book  for  College  classes.

E.  L.  Hurd,  Pres,  of  Blackburn
Univ.  : After  testing  it  in  this  Univer-
sity for  two  years,  I know  no  other
book  which  so  nearly  meets  the  want.

John  M.  Ellis,  Prof,  of  Eng.  Lit.,
Oberlin  Coll.,  Ohio  : An  excellent  trea-


tise, and  well  adapted  for  the  use  of
classes  in  high  schools  and  colleges.
I believe  the  book  is  doing,  and  will
do,  much  to  promote  this  important
study.

D.  S.  Stephens,  Prof,  of  Eng.  Lit.,
Adrian  Coll.,  Mich.:  It  is  still  in  use
here,  and  gives  good  satisfaction.
{March  7,  1882.)

H.  H.  Morgan,  Prin.  of  High
Sch .,  St.  Louis:  I should  most  fully
recommend  it  to  any  one  whose  interest
in  literature  was  that  of  the  student;
for  he  would  find  much  which  could
otherwise  be  obtained  only  by  extern
I sive  reading.


38


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


Hudson’s  Expurgated  Shakespeare,  for  Schools ,

Clubs j and  Families.  Revised  and  enlarged  Editions  of  twenty-three
Plays.  Carefully  expurgated,  with  Explanatory  Notes  at  the  bottom  of
the  page,  and  Critical  Notes  at  the  end  of  each  volume.  By  H.  N.  Hud-
son, LL.D.,  late  Professor  of  English  Literature  in  Boston  University;
editor  of  i he  Harvard  Shakespeare , and,  for  more  than  thirty  years,
a Teacher  of  Shakespeare  in  the  Schools.  One  play  in  each  volume.
Square  i6mo.  Varying  in  size  from  128-253  pages.  Mailing  price  of
each:  Cloth,  50  cts. ; Paper,  35  cts.  Introduction  price:  Cloth,  45
cts.;  Paper,  30  cts.  Per  set  (in  box),  $12.00.  (To  teachers,
$10.00.)

That  Dr.  Hudson  has  unusual  qualifications  for  annotating  a
School  Shakespeare  will  appear  from  the  opinions  of  Shakespeari-
ans,  Professors,  and  Editors,  from  which  we  quote : —

“ He  is  a fir st-r ate  teacher ."

“ His  style  is  fresh , original,  and  pungent."

“ His  notes  are  free  from  pedantry  and  dulness ."

“ He  has  nobility  of  purpose  and  purity  of  heart"

“ He  keeps  his  readers  on  the  qui  vive  from  first  to  last."

‘ * He  eliminates  gross  language  without  marring  the  plot."

‘ * He  gives  results  without  annoying  students  with  processes."

“ He  never  forgets  that  he  is  the  Editor  and  not  the  Author."

“ His  insight  is  fully  equal  to  the  best  English  or  German  critics."
“ He  justifies  the  saying  that  it  requires  genius  to  appreciate  and
interpret  genius."

“ He  has  so  caught  the  very  spirit  of  his  master  that  he  intuitively
makes  the  best  choice  of  disputed  texts  and  throws  clearest  light  on
obscure  passages."

H3P  See  Editor's  Essays  on  Education  ( described  on  page  47)
for  a full  account  of  his  methods  of  teaching  Shakespeare  and  other
English  Classics."

Each  Play  is  introduced  by  a discussion  of  its  history,  the  source
of  the  plot,  the  political  situation,  a critical  estimate  of  the  char-
acters and  general  characteristics,  with  much  other  matter  invalu-
able to  the  student.  These  introductory  essays  are  transcripts
from  the  Editor’s  “ Life , Art , and  Characters  of  Shakespeare,"  and
contain  much  valuable  matter  not  found  in  any  other  school
edition.


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


39


The  notes  are  the  same  as  in  “ The  Harvard  Edition" ; also  the
text,  except  that  it  is  scrupulously  and  cleanly  expurgated.

The  expurgations  consist  in  the  bare  omission  of  such  lines  and
expressions  as  the  Editor  has  always  deemed  it  necessary  to  omit  in
class.  The  expurgations  do  not  in  any  case  reach  so  far  as  to
impair  in  the  least  either  the  delineation  of  character  or  the  dramatic
action.  On  the  other  hand,  no  matter  is  retained  not  fairly  pro-
nounceable in  any  class,  however  composed.

In  speaking  of  Mr.  Hudson's  fitness  for  expurgating  Shakespeare,
and  of  the  result  of  his  work  in  this  direction,  the  keen  critic,  Mr.
Edwin  P.  Whipple,  says  : “We  believe  that  only  he  who  is  competent
to  comprehend  the  wonderful  genius  of  the  world's  greatest  mind , is
a fit  person  to  remove  from  Shakespeare's  plays  those  passages  and
scenes  which  offend  modern  notions  of  propriety.  Mr.  Hudson  has
do?ie  this  delicate  task  with  incomparable  tact  and  felicity.  The  beauty ,
grandeur , sublimity , wit , humor,  and  pathos  of  Shakespeare  are
Preserved , and  nothing  is  omitted  that  is  really  essential  to  the  com-
prehension of  Shakespeare's  genius  as  the  greatest  poet  and  dramatist
of  the  world."

The  Editor  uses  the  plan  of  foot-notes  instead  of  massing  the
annotation  all  together  at  the  end  of  the  play,  because  ample  experi-
ence has  assured  him,  beyond  all  peradventure,  that  whatever  of
explanation  young  students  need  of  Shakespeare’s  text  — and  they
certainly  need  a good  deal  — is  much  better  every  way  when  placed
directly  under  the  eye,  so  that  they  can  hardly  miss  it ; and  because
at  least  nineteen  in  twenty  of  such  pupils  will  pass  over  an  obscure
word  or  phrase  without  understanding  it,  rather  than  stay  to  lookup
the  explanation  in  another  part  of  the  volume.

Recent  editors  of  Greek  and  Latin  Classics  are  putting  their
annotations  on  the  same  page  with  the  text.  The  strong  reasons
given  for  thus  placing  their  notes  are  much  stronger  reasons  when
applied  to  similar  annotations  of  any  classic  in  the  vernacular.

In  the  amount  of  annotation,  the  Editor  has  been  mainly  guided
by  the  results  of  his  own  experience  in  teaching ; aiming  to  give  so
many  nnd  such  notes  as  he  has  found  needful  or  conducive  to  a full
and  clear  understanding  of  the  Poet’s  thought.  He  has  wished  to
avoid  distracting  or  diverting  the  student’s  attention  overmuch  from
the  special  subject-matter  of  the  Poet’s  scenes.


40


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


The  series  consists  of  the  twenty-three  plays  enumerated  below,
two  of  which  have  never  before  been  included  in  our  school  series.

We  furnish  of  the  Old  Edition , in  paper  covers,  the  plays  starred
in  the  following  list  (Mailing  Price,  25  cts. ; Introduction,
20  cts.)  : —


*A  Midsummer-Night’s  Dream.
*The  Merchant  of  Venice.
*Much  Ado  About  Nothing.
*As  You  Like  It.

Twelfth  Night.

*The  Tempest.

The  Winter’s  Tale.

King  John.

Richard  Second.

Richard  Third.

* Henry  Fourth,  Part  First.

Henry  Fourth,  Part  Second.

H.  H.  Furness,  in  his  Variorum
edition  of  King  Lear , page  438  : I can-
not refrain  from  here  recording  my
thorough  admiration  for  Mr.  Hudson’s
aesthetic  criticisms.  No  Shakespeare
student  can  afford  to  overlook  them.

Joseph  Crosby,  the  Shakespearian ,
T^anesville , Ohio  : They  give  results ,
without  annoying  or  vexing  students
with  processes.  They  are  the  best  edi-
tions for  classes  and  clubs  that  I know
of ; and  I have  read  all.  The  explan-
atory notes  are,  where  of  course  they
ought  always  to  be,  at  the  foot  of  the
page ; they  give  what  -.he  editor  under-
stands to  be  the  correct  explanations
at  once;  and  do  not  puzzle  readers
with  a lot  of  variorum  explanations,
and  leave  them,  unaided,  to  select  for
themselves  which  are  the  true  ones.
And  I like  his  style  too.  It  is  fresh,
original,  and  pungent.  He  is  deter-
mined that  none  of  his  readers  shall  go
to  sleep  over  his  notes  and  monographs.


* Henry  the  Fifth.

* Henry  the  Eighth.

* Romeo  and  Juliet.

* Julius  Caesar.

*Hamlet.

*King  Lear.

* Macbeth.

Antony  and  Cleopatra.

*Othello.

Cymbeline.

♦Coriolanus.

F.  J.  Child,  Prof,  of  Eng.  Lit .•
Harvard  Coll.  : Any  such  books  from
Mr.  Hudson’s  hand  must  command
attention.

Cyrus  Northrop,  Prof,  of  Eng.
Lit.,  Yale  Coll.  : They  are  convenient
in  form  and  edited  by  Hudson,  — two
good  things  which  I can  see  at  a glance.

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes:  An
edition  of  any  play  of  Shakespeare’s  to
which  Mr.  Hudson’s  name  is  affixed
does  not  need  a line  from  anybody  to
commend  it.

E.  P.  Whipple : That  Hudson
has  made  a school-book  out  of  some
of  the  greatest  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,
should  be  received  with  the  same  glad
recognition  with  which  all  teachers
would  welcome  the  announcement  that
Agassiz  had  condensed  in  a school-
book the  results  of  his  studies  in  nat-
ural history.  None  but  a master  in


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


41


the  matter  he  treats  can  prepare  a
really  good  and  inspiring  educational
book  for  the  young.  The  notes  are
models  of  brevity  and  intelligence.  In-
deed, for  the  education  of  the  youthful
mind,  as  far  as  regards  its  initiation
into  the  knowledge  of  the  great  genius
of  the  English  and  the  human  race,
nothing  could  be  better.

N.Y.  Tribune  : Not  even  the  great
masters  in  Shakespearian  criticism  have
evinced  a more  subtle  comprehension
of  the  finer  sense  of  the  many-sided
bard,  or  have  given  a more  vigorous
and  pregnant  utterance  to  their  con-
ceptions of  his  meaning.  His  com-
mentary is  a study  of  profound  and
delicate  thought.  The  foot-notes  are
admirable  and  especially  judicious,
where  ambiguity  occurs  by  design,  in
luring  the  mind  to  the  better  meaning.

London  Tablet : It  would  be  dif-
ficult to  speak  too  highly  of  the  Intro-
ductions and  Notes,  and  of  the  judg-
ment with  which  the  gross  language
has  been  eliminated  without  marring
the  plot  of  the  piece  or  the  poetry.
The  whole  forms  the  best  family  Shake-
speare by  far  that  we  have  ever  seen.

E.  H.  Griffin,  Prof,  of  Eng.  Lit.,
Williams  Coll. : Mr.  Hudson’s  text-
books need  no  commendation.

W.  R.  Shipman,  Prof,  of  Eng.
Lit.,  Tufts  Coll. : I make  more  use  of
it  than  of  any  other  edition.

Louise  M.  Hodgkins : Prof,  of
Eng.  Lit.,  Wellesley  Coll.,  Mass.  : To
both  pupil  and  teacher  the  notes  and
suggestions  never  fail  to  be  pleasing,
interesting,  instructive,  and  profitable.
Through  no  source  do  I gain  more
helpful  suggestions  in  my  Shakespeare
ttudies  than  by  the  clear  notes  and
txcellent  criticisms  of  Mr.  Hudson.


Geo.  C.  Chase,  Prof,  of  Eng.
Lit.,  Bates  Coll.,  Me.  : The  preface,  in-
troduction, and  notes  are  admirable.

I am  much  pleased  with  the  amount
and  kind  of  help  that  his  notes  are  de^
signed  to  give.

H.  L.  Chapman,  Prof,  of  Eng,
Lit.,  Bowdoin,  Coll.,  Me. : The  editing
of  these  books  is,  of  course,  admirable.

D.  S.  Gregory,  Pres.  Lake  Forest
Univ.,111.:  I have  been  using  them
and  have  found  them  exceedingly
valuable  in  class  work.  In  my  estima-
tion Hudson  stands  alone  in  this  coun-
try in  Shakespearian  criticism.

J.  O.  Halliwell- Phillips,  Brigh-
ton, England:  The  Antony  and  Cleo-
patra, and  Othello  just  to  hand,  are
the  neatest,  ablest,  and  nicest  books  of
the  kind  ever  seen.  {Sept.  8,  1881.)

T.  J.  Todd,  Prof,  of  Eng.  Lit.,  Van-
derbilt Univ.,  Tenn. : I consider  Hud-
son’s school  plays,  in  all  regards,  the
best  I have  seen.  I use  them  in  my
class,  and  generally  in  my  own  readings.

H.  M.  Whitney,  Prof,  of  Eng.
Lit.,  Beloit  Coll.,  Wis. : I have  long
esteemed  Prof.  Hudson  very  highly  as
a Shakespearian  scholar,  and  use  his
“ School  Shakespeare  ” with  my  classes.

David  E.  Beach,  Prof,  of  Rheto-
ric, etc..  Marietta  Coll.,  Ohio  : They
give  criticisms  which  are  at  once  pro-
found and  original,  yet  adapted  to  the
capacities  of  ordinary  students,  and
abstaining  from  matters  of  merely  an-
tiquarian research.

J.  B.  Unthank,  Pres.  Wilming-
ton Coll.,  Ohio : I think  them  better
adapted  to  the  use  of  students  than
any  other  edition  with  which  I am  ac*
quainted.


42


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


The  Haruard  Edition  of  Shakespeare’s  Complete

Works.  By  Henry  N.  Hudson,  LL.D.,  Author  of  the  Life , Art , and

Characters  of  Shaklspeare , Editor  of  School  Shakespeare , etc.  In  Twenty

Volumes  ; duodecimo ; two  plays  in  each  volume ; also  in  Ten  Volumes

of  four  plays  each.

Retail  Prices.

*o-vol.  edition,  cloth . . . $25.00  I io-vol.  edition,  cloth . . . $20  00

half-calf 55-00  I half-calf 40.00

Hudson’s  “Life,  Art,  and  Characters  of  Shakespeare”
(2  vols.)  are  uniform  in  size  and  binding  with  The  Harvard  Edi-
tion, and  are  included  with  it  at  the  following  retail  prices.  Cloth,
$4  .00  per  set;  Half-calf,  $8.00  per  set.

|3P  Buyers  should  be  careful  in  ordering  not  to  confound  the  Har-
vard Shakespeare  with  an  Old  Edition  made  in  1851,  and  sold
under  another  name.

The  Harvard  Edition  has  been  undertaken  and  the  plan  of  it
shaped  with  a special  view  to  making  the  Poet’s  pages  pleasant  and
attractive  to  general  readers.

Within  the  last  thirty  years  great  advances  and  additions  have
been  made  in  the  way  of  preparation  for  such  a work,  and  these
volumes  bring  the  whole  matter  of  Shakespeare  up  abreast  with  the
latest  researches.

“ The  Edition  includes  ‘ The  Two  Noble  Kinsmen,’  which  will
be  new  to  most  readers  of  Shakespeare.  It  was  first  published  in
1634,  and  has  not  generally  been  included  in  editions  of  his  works.
That  it  was  his  work,  jointly  with  Fletcher,  as  was  also  ‘ Henry
VIII.,’  it  was  reserved  for  our  own  time  to  establish,  and  mainly  by
internal  evidence,  and  it  is  difficult  to  read  the  first  scene  of  the  first
act  without  saying,  with  Sidney  Walker,  ‘ Aut  Shakespearius  aut
diabolus,'  and  we  are  glad  that  Mr.  Hudson  gave  it  place  and  has
marked  the  lines  of  Fletcher  by  asterisks.” — The  Churchman,  N.Y.

The  first  volume  contains  “ the  Burbage  portrait,”  and  a life  of
the  Poet.  A history  of  each  play  is  given  in  its  appropriate  volume.

The  plays  are  arranged  in  three  distinct  series : Comedies,  His-
tories, and  Tragedies ; and  the  plays  of  each  series  presented,  as
nearly  as  may  be,  in  the  chronological  order  of  the  writing.


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


43


An  obvious  merit  of  this  edition  is,  that  each  volume  has  two
sets  of  notes  ; one  mainly  devoted  to  explaining  the  text,  and  placed
at  the  foot  of  the  page ; the  other  mostly  occupied  with  matters  of
textual  comment  and  criticism,  and  printed  at  the  end  of  each  play.
The  edition  is  thus  admirably  suited  to  the  uses  both  of  the  general
reader  and  of  the  special  student.  General  readers  prefer  to  have
explanations  directly  before  them  ; and  in  at  least  nine  cases  out  of
ten  they  will  pass  over  an  obscure  word  or  phrase  or  allusion  with-
out understanding  it,  rather  than  look  up  the  explanation  in  another
volume  or  another  part  of  the  same  volume.  Often,  too,  in  case  the
explanation  be  not  directly  at  hand,  they  will  go  elsewhere  in  quest
of  it,  and  then  find,  after  all,  that  the  editor  has  left  the  matter
unexplained;  whereas,  with  foot-notes  they  will  see  at  once  how
the  matter  stands,  and  will  be  spared  the  labour  and  vexation  of  a
fruitless  search.

The  foot-notes  supply  such  and  so  much  of  explanatory  comment
as  may  be  required  by  people  who  read  Shakespeare,  not  to  learn
philology  or  the  technicalities  of  the  scholiast,  but  to  learn  Shake-
speare himself ; to  take  in  his  thought,  to  taste  his  wisdom,  and  to
feel  his  beauty.

A Special  Circular  giving  fuller  information  will  be  sent
free  on  application.

How  this  edition  is  regarded  by  Our  Most  Eminent  Shake-
spearians,  may  be  judged  from  the  following , which  we  are  permitted
to  publish.  These  reviews  seem  to  afford  evidence  that  this  is  to  be

‘‘The  Standard  American  Edition  of  Shakespeare ? ”


J.  O.  Halliwell-Phillips,  the

Shakespearian,  Hollingbury  Copse,
Brighton , England:  Your  kind  trans-
mission of  Mr.  Hudson’s  edition  of
Shakespeare  has  given  me  the  great-
est treat  that  I have  had  for  many
a day,  and  I can  hardly  express  how
much  pleasure  it  affords  me  to  possess
so  admirable  a work.  The  prefaces
are  written  with  such  exceptional  abil-
ity and  knowledge,  while  the  division
of  the  excellent  notes  into  two  sets  is  a


splendid  arrangement  that  alone  would
give  a character  to  the  work.  There
are  of  course  numerous  critical  points
on  which  other  writers  (including  my-
self) may  differ  from  Mr.  Hudson,  as
well  as  editions  more  adapted  for
specialists,  but  I cannot  imagine  one
more  suitable  for  the  public  at  large,
and  I trust  that  you  will  allow  me  to
congratulate  you  heartily  on  its  pro-
duction. (Feb.  7, 1882.)


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


45


Hudson's  Life,  Art , and  Characters  of  Shake -

spear e (Revised  Edition,  1882).  By  Henry  N Hudson,  LL.D.,  Editor
of  “ The  Harvard  Shakespeare ,”  “ Expurgated  School  Shakespeare ,”  etc.
In  2 vols.  i2mo.  969  pages.  The  chapters  on  King  Henry  VIII ,
Hamlet , Julius  Ceesar , and  Macbeth  have  also  been  re-written,  and  a
full  index  of  subjects  added.  Uniform  in  size  with  “ The  Harvard
Shakespeare,”  and  matches  it  in  the  following  bindings : —


Cloth Retail  Price,  $4.00  per  set.

Half-calf . “ “ 8.00  “


These  two  volumes  contaki : —

1 . The  Life  of  Shakespeare.

2.  An  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  the  Drama

in  England,  discussing  under  this  head  Miracle-Plays,
Moral-Plays,  and  Comedy  and  Tragedy.

3.  Shakespeare's  Contemporaries .

4.  Shakespeare's  Art,  discussing  under  this  head,  Nature  and

Use  of  Art,  Principles  of  Art,  Dramatic  Composition,
Characterization,  Humour,  Style,  Moral  Spirit.

5.  Shakespeare's  Characters , containing  critical  discourses  on

twenty-five  of  the  Plays.


E.  P.  Whipple,  Boston : In  the
analysis  of  Shakespeare’s  characters
Mr.  Hudson  puts  forth  all  his  force  and
subtlety  of  thought.  He  almost  forgets
that  they  are  not  actual  beings,  how-
ever much  they  may  be  “ real  ” beings.
Shakespeare’s  characters  have  so  taken
real  existence  in  his  mind,  that  he
unconsciously  speaks  of  them  as  one
speaks  of  persons  he  daily  meets.  This
is  the  charm  of  his  criticisms.  His
great  object  is  to  educate  people  into  a
solid  knowledge  of  Shakepeare  as  well
as  to  quicken  their  love  for  him ; and,
in  this  educational  purpose,  he  aims  to
delight  the  readers  he  instructs.

H.  H.  Furness,  the  Shakespearian:
I cannot  refrain  from  recording  my
thorough  admiration  for  Mr.  Hudson’s


aesthetic  criticisms.  No  Shakespeare
student  can  afford  to  overlook  them.

London  Athenaeum:  They  de-
serve to  find  a place  in  every  library
devoted  to  Shakespeare,  to  editions
of  his  works,  to  his  biography,  or  to
the  works  of  commentators.

Hon.  G.  S.  Hillard  : When  any
one  differs  from  Mr.  Hudson’s  conclu-
sions, it  behooves  him  to  examine  well
the  grounds  of  his  dissent.  We  can-
not read  anywhere  a dozen  pages  of
these  volumes  without  admitting  that
we  are  conversing  with  a thinker,  and
not  merely  a scholar.  His  views,  be
they  deemed  right  or  wrong,  sound  or
unsound,  are  unborrowed.  They  are
coined  in  his  own  mint,  and  bear  hi*
image  and  superscription.


52


HIGHER  ENGLISH.


A Handbook  of  Poetics.

For  Students  of  English  Verse.  By  Francis  B.  Gummere,  Ph.D.

Head  Master  of  the  Swain  Free  School,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  and  for-
merly Instructor  in  English  in  Harvard  College.  i2mo.  Cloth.

vi  + 250  pages.  Mailing  price,  $1.10  ; for  Introduction,  $1.00.

The  increased  attention  paid  in  schools  and  colleges  to  the  criti-
cal study  of  our  own  literature  demands  that  poetry,  in  which  a
great  part  of  this  literature  is  written,  should  be  taught  as  a science.
Knowledge  of  the  science  of  poetry  should  precede  or  accompany
the  study  of  poems.  A text-book  on  the  subject  ought  to  simplify,
not  complicate,  the  work  of  both  teacher  and  scholar ; and  that  it
does  have  this  effect  is  proved  by  the  wide  use  of  manuals  of  Poetik
in  German  schools.

The  book  has  three  divisions,  — Subject-Matter,  Style,  Metre.
Each  is  treated  from  two  points  of  view,  — the  historical,  tracing
the  growth  of  different  kinds  of  subject,  of  expression,  or  of  rhythm  ;
and  the  theoretical,  stating  clearly  the  principles  and  laws  of  the
matter  discussed.  Controversy  is  avoided;  the  main  object  of  the
book  is  to  state  facts  generally  admitted  by  the  best  scholars,  form-
ing a foundation  on  which  the  intelligent  teacher  may  base  his  own
work  and  his  own  views.


Prof.  J.  Schipper,  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Vienna : Zusammenfassende
Bucher  dieser  Art  sind,  wenn  sie  mit
der  Umsicht  und  Einsicht,  wie  das
Ihrige,  ausgearbeitet  werden,  die  besten
Forderer  niitzlicher  Kenntnisse.  Ieh
wiinsche  daher  von  Herzem  Ihrem
Buche  die  weiteste  Verbreitung,  und
zweifele  nicht  dass  sie  demselben  zu
Theil  werden  wird.

F.  J.  Child,  Prof  of  Eng.,  Harvard
College  : I think  you  have  an  exceed-
ingly fine  book  in  Mr.  Gummere’s
Poetics.

James  W.  Bright,  Dept,  of  Eng-
lish, Johns  Hopkins  University : The
comprehensive  view  of  the  develop-
ment of  poetic  forms  here  laid  down  is


in  accord  with  the  highest  scholarship,
and  will  therefore  be  a new  message
to  many  quarters.  The  book,  more-
over, is  admirably  adapted  to  the  in-
culcation of  a true  historic  sense  of  the
long  and  remarkable  career  of  English
verse,  from  Wtdsid  to  Whittier.

F.  A.  March,  Prof,  of  Eng.  Lit.,
Lafayette  College  : An  excellent  book ;
a work  of  good  sense  and  good  taste,
and  much  learning  in  small  compass.

J.  M.  Garnett,  Prof  of  Eng.  Lit .,
Univ.  of  Virginia  : It  has  fulfilled  my
anticipations,  and  it  supplies  a real  de-
ficiency in  text-books.  I do  not  know,
anywhere  in  English,  of  a better  treat-
ment of  the  subject.


History.


Outlines  of  Mecliceuctl  and_  Modern  History

By  P.  V.  N.  Myers,  A.M.,  President  of  Belmont  Coll.,  O.;  Author  of
“ Outlines  of  Ancient  History,”  and  “ Remains  of  Lost  Empires.”
i2mo.  Half  Morocco,  xii  + 740  pages.  With  colored  maps,  repro-
duced, by  permission,  from  Freeman’s  Historical  Atlas.  Mailing  price,
$1.65;  for  Introduction,  $1.50.

This  work  aims  to  blend  in  a single  narrative  accounts  of  the
social,  political,  literary,  intellectual,  and  religious  develop-
ments of  the  peoples  of  mediaeval  and  modern  times,  — to

give  in  simple  outline  the  story  of  civilization  since  the  meeting,  in
the  5th  century  of  our  era,  of  Latin  and  Teuton  upon  the  soil  of  the
Roman  Empire  in  the  West.  The  author’s  conception  of  History,
based  on  the  definitions  of  Ueberweg,  that  it  is  the  unfolding  of  the
essence  of  spirit,  affords  the  key-note  to  the  work.  Its  aim  is  to
deal  with  the  essential  elements,  not  the  accidental  features,  of  the
life  of  the  race.

This  guiding  idea  has  determined  the  character  of  the  analysis  of
the  subject-matter.  The  principles  of  grouping  are  the  laws  of  his-
toric development.  The  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  the  subject
being  thus  philosophical  and  natural,  with  cause  and  effect  as  the
associating  principle,  the  whole  has  unity  and  cohesion,  and  readily
impressing  itself  upon  the  memory  of  the  reader,  forms  a permanent
outline  for  his  guidance  in  all  further  historical  work.

The  analysis  completed,  the  author’s  aim  has  been  the  expansion
of  this  into  a clear,  continuous,  and  attractive  narrative,  — into  a
story  that  should  at  every  point  hold  the  attention  and  throughout
sustain  the  interest  of  the  reader,  without  sacrifice  of  the  condensed
and  suggestive  style  suited  to  the  needs  of  the  student  and  the
teacher.

W.  P.  Allen,  Professor  of  History , I excellence,  and  to  give  a remarkably
University  of  Wisconsin : Mr.  Myers'  clear  and  vivid  picture  of  mediaeval
book  seems  to  me  to  be  a work  of  high  I history.


HISTORY.


237


Geo.  W.  Knight,  Prof  of  History
and  English.  Literature , Ohio  State
Univ .,  Columbus.  The  author  seems
to  have  gotten  hold  of  the  active  prin-
ciple, the  leading  motives  and  tend-
encies of  each  age;  to  have  taken  a
comprehensive  view  of  the  development
of  man’s  ideas,  of  nations,  and  of  gov-
ernments. Then  he  has  grouped  the
various  events  in  such  a way  as  will
bring  clearly  to  view  these  different
phases  of  the  world-development  with-
out ignoring  what  may  be  called  the
collateral  events.

E.  R.  Rug-gles,  Prof  Mod.  Lang.,
Chandler  Scientific  Dept.,  Dartmouth
Coll. : The  work  impresses  me  very
favorably,  and  I think  we  shall  introduce
it.  ( March  8,  1886.)

Arthur  Latham  Perry,  Prof,  of
Hist,  and  Political  Economy,  Williams


I Coll. : I find  proofs  of  unusual  dili-
gence and  studious  investigation,  and  a
happy  skill  in  narration.  (Feb.  27,  ’86.)

Alexander  Johnston,  Prof  of
Jurisprudence,  and  Political  Economy,
Princeton  College : I can  only  say,  for
the  period  covered  by  the  specimen
pages  received,  that  I lik§  the  spirit  of
the  author  and  his  success  in  putting
it  into  shape,  and  shall  be  very  well
satisfied  to  make  the  work  the  starting
point  of  my  son’s  reading  on  this  sub-
ject, when  he  arrives  at  that  stage  of
development.  (Sept.  29,  1885.)

A.  Rittenhonse,  Prof,  of  History,
Dickinson  Coll.,  Pa.:  I am  much  pleased
with  the  work.  If  present  plans  are  car-
ried out  with  reference  to  the  history
course,  it  will  be  introduced  next  fall
term.  This  is  my  best  endorsement.
(Marty  3,  1886.)


The  Reader’s  Guide  to  English  History.

A classified  list  of  works  in  English  History,  including  poems,  dramas,
and  works  of  fiction,  arranged  by  periods,  for  convenience  of  reference.
With  a Supplement,  extending  the  plan  over  other  departments  of
history,  — ancient,  modern,  European,  and  American.  By  William
Francis  Allen,  A.M.,  Professor  in  the  University  of  Wisconsin.  Long
8vo.  Paper.  50  pages.  Mailing  price,  30  cts. ; Introduction,  25  cts.
The  Supplement  can  be  had  separately;  Mailing  price,  10  cts.

The  arrangement  is  that  of  four  parallel  columns  upon  two  oppo-
site pages : the  first  column  containing  the  English  sovereigns,  in
the  several  houses,  in  the  form  of  genealogical  tables ; the  second,
good  historical  reading,  whether  histories,  biographies,  or  essays ;
the  third,  novels,  poems,  and  dramas  illustrating  that  period  of  Eng-
lish history,  — also,  so  far  as  possible,  arranged  chronologically;  the
fourth,  the  same  class  of  works,  illustrating  contemporary  history.


F.  A.  March,  Prof,  of  the  Eng-
lish Language  and  Comp.  Philology,
Lafayette  Coll. : It  is  a good  idea,  and
will  be  a useful  book.  We  are  all
novel-readers.

H.  B.  Adams,  Associate  Prof,  of


History,  Johns  Hopkins  Univ. : I know
something  of  Professor  Allen’s  histori-
cal scholarship,  and  it  is  sufficient  praise
of  this  little  book  for  handy  reference
to  say  that  it  sustains  the  author’s  repu-
tation for  accuracy,  sound  judgment,
and  nice  discrimination.  (Nov.  6,  ’82.)


238


HISTORY.


The  Leading  Facts  of  English  History.

By  D.  H.  Montgomery.  i2mo.  Cloth,  xxxiv+254  pages,  with

a colored  map.  Mailing  price,  $1.10;  for  Introduction,  $1.00.

This  work  aims  to  present  very  briefly,  yet  clearly  and  accurately,
the  broad  vital  facts  of  English  History  in  their  connection  with
the  great  laws  of  national  growth.

It  opens  with  an  account  of  prehistoric  Britain,  and  of  the  Roman
attempt  to  force  the  framework  of  a high  civilization  on  an  unwilling
people.  The  work  then  proceeds  through  the  English  and  Norman
invasions  with  their  results,  the  struggle  between  the  barons  and
the  crown,  the  rise  of  Parliament,  the  gradual  destruction  of  feudal-
ism, and  the  final  establishment,  through  revolution,  of  the  right  of
the  people  to  self-government.  Free  use  is  made  of  the  researches
of  specialists,  of  ancient  records,  and  of  archaeological  collections,
while  the  color,  life,  and  movement  essential  to  the  best  history  have
been  studiously  preserved.

The  full  Tables  of  chronology,  statistics,  and  authorities  will  be
found,  it  is  believed,  of  special  value.


P.  V.  N.  Myers,  President  Belmont
College , O. : The  author  knows  how  to
seize  upon  the  salient  points  of  his  sub-
ject and  how  to  throw  the  best  light
upon  the  features  he  selects  to  exhibit.
The  work  is  concise,  clear,  and  accu-
rate. It  forms  an  admirable  framework
about  which  to  construct  the  complete
edifice  of  English  history,  {Feb.20,1886.)

W.  P.  Atkinson,  Prof.  Eng.  and
Hist.,  Mass.  Inst.  Tech.,  Boston  : I have
read  it  with  much  pleasure.  It  is  that
uncommon  kind  of  book,  a readable
short  sketch.  It  is  fresh  and  vigorous,
and  the  references  seem  to  me  very
well  selected.  I cordially  recommend
it  to  all  students  and  teachers  of  Eng-
lish history.  {Jan.  3,  1886.)

Herbert  Tuttle,  Associate  Prof.
Hist,  and  Theory  of  Politics , and  of
Intern ational  Law,  Cornell  University ,
Ithaca,  N.Y. : It  is  an  excellent  little


volume.  The  “leading  facts”  are  ju-
diciously chosen,  and  related  in  a viva-
cious and  entertaining  manner.  The
tabular  material  is  very  convenient  for
reference.  {Feb.  2,  1886.)

Geo.  W.  Knight,  Prof  of  Hist,
and  Eng.  Lit.,  Ohio  State  University,
Columbus : I have  examined  it  with
considerable  care,  and  find  much  in  it
that  pleases  me.  The  conception  is
good,  and  the  execution  generally  so.
It  seems  freer  from  actual  errors  of
statement  than  most  books  of  the  text-
book order.  {Feb.  20,  1886.)

Alfred  S.  Roe,  Prin.  High  School,
Worcester , Mass. : I have  looked  it
through  with  some  care,  and  think  it  a
very  valuable  handbook.  I shall  cer-
tainly recommend  my  pupils  to  supply
themselves  with  it  as  an  invaluable
accessory  to  their  historical  data.

{Feb.  20,  1886.)


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY


1197  21079  8663
