This  volume  is  a  translation  of  the  second  Ger-
man edition  of  Lotze's  "  Outlines  of  Logic  and  En-
cyclopaedia of  Philosophy,"  which  appeared  in  1885.
The  second  edition  differed  from  the  earlier  one
chiefly  in  the  abbreviation  of  certain  parts  of  the
Encyclopaedia  of  Philosophy.  The  matter  thus
omitted  consisted  largely  either  of  opinions  ex-
pressed elsewhere  in  the  Philosophical  Outlines,  or
of  a  somewhat  special  criticism  of  certain  views  of
Schelling,  Fichte,  and  Herbart.  It  has  therefore
been  thought  best  to  take  for  translation  the  more
recent  but  somewhat  less  voluminous  German  text.

Although  Lotze  dealt  with  the  subject  of  Logic
in  a  large  and  technical  treatise,  which  constituted
one  of  the  two  volumes  of  his  System  of  Philosophy,
completed  by  him  before  his  death,  it  must  be  said
that  his  contributions  to  it  are  perhaps  less  distinc-
tive and  valuable  than  those  to  any  other  of  the
several  branches  of  philosophy  upon  which  he  wrote
and  lectured.  Notwithstanding  this,  his  views  upon
some  important  topics  under  the  general  subject  will
be  found  very  suggestive  and  valuable. This  seems


VI  EDITOR  S PREFACE.

to  me  particularly  true  of  the  chapter  on  the  "  For-
mation of  Concepts/'  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
the  distinction  between  the  association  of  mental
images  and  the  definitely  logical  processes  of  the
mind  is  far  too  little  drawn  and  too  loosely  held  by
certain  English  writers  on  Logic.

Part  Second,  which  treats  of  the  "  Encyclopaedia
of  Philosophy,"  so-called,  will  be  found  to  contain  a
number  of  articles  which  throw  considerable  addi-
tional light  upon  the  author's  general  philosophical
position.  His  peculiar  doctrine  of  "Values,"  as  dis-
tinguished from  a  knowledge  of  what  is  necessitated
or  real,  his  view  of  the  general  method  of  philosophy-,
and  of  the  relation  in  which  the  Theory  of  Cognition
stands  to  the  whole  of  Metaphysics,  and  his  attitude
toward  philosophical  Scepticism  and  Criticism,  will
doubtless  receive  some  elucidation  from  the  careful
study  of  these  sections.

A  first  draught  of  the  translation  of  §§  6-38  of  the

Pure  Logic  was  made  by  John  F.  Crowell,  graduate

student  of  Philosophy  in  Yale  University, 1885-86.

The  rest of the  work upon  the  volume is by  my

own  hand. With this sixth number  of the series

of  Lotze's  Philosophical  Outlines,  I  regard  my  task

as  completed.

GEORGE  T.  LADD.

New  Haven,  March,  1887.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


PAGE

I.  LOGIC.

Introduction i

FIRST PRINCIPAL DIVISION. PURE LOGIC.
Chapter I. The  Formation  of  Concepts .  9

Chapter II. Of  Judgments  ....

A.  Preliminary Remarks and the Customary

Division  of  Judgments ....  24

B.  System  of  the  Forms  of  Judgment . .  31

C.  Immediate  Inferences  from  Judgments .  48
Chapter  III. Of  Syllogisms ....  56

A.  The  Aristotelian  Figures ....  56

B.  The  Forms  of  Calculation .... 75

C.  Systematic  Forms .....  84
SECOND PRINCIPAL  DIVISION. APPLIED  LOGIC.

Chapter I. Application of the Forms of the

Concept 97

Chapter II. Concerning  the  Adducing  of  Proof, 106
Chapter  III. The  Process  of  Thought  in  Discovery,  120

II.  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

Introduction 145

Section I. Theoretical  Philosophy . . .155
Section II. Practical  Philosophy . . .  179

Section  III. Philosophy  of  Religion . . .182


I. LOGIC


INTRODUCTION.

§  l.  According  to  the  combination  in  which  the
external  stimuli  happen  to  act  upon  us,  there  arise
within  us  manifold  ideas,  simultaneous  or  succes-
sive, which  do  not  always  have  an  interior  coherence
that  agrees  with  the  nature  of  their  Content.  And,
further,  since  memory  and  recollection  retain  and
reproduce  these  ideas  in  the  same  connections  which
they  had  at  their  origin,  certain  ideas  that  are  quite
foreign  to  each  other  and  without  any  interior  cohe-
rence, very  often  appear  in  our  mental  train  in  a
connection  which,  although  it  is  matter  of  fact,  is
without  any  real  reason.

§  2.  Besides,  perception  by  the  senses  affords  us
the  impressions  of  at  least  one  sense,  —  namely,  that
of  sight,  —  in  an  arrangement  with  reference  to  each
other  which  has  space-form  ;  and  this  arrangement  is
not,  like  the  connection  referred  to  above,  a  merely
accidental  coexistence  of  the  single  colored  points,


OUTLINES OF LOGIC,


but  undoubtedly  depends  upon  the  peculiar  nature
of  what  is  perceived.  Nevertheless,  we  do  not  call
this  '  thought '  but  '  intuition/  —  and  for  the  very
reason  that,  while  we  discover  the  arrangement  of
the  single  points  to  be  unalterable,  we  yet  perceive
it  as  a  bare  matter  of  fact  without  understanding
the  reasons  on  account  of  which  each  point  has  its
position  toward  others.

§  3.  We  are  accustomed  to  distinguish  thought
both  from  the  aforesaid  train  of  ideas  and  also  from
such  process  of  intuition,  as  a  higher  and  self-coher-
ing activity,  which  elaborates,  shapes,  and  connects
the  material  of  ideas  furnished  by  both  of  the  others.
Its  essential  tendency  can  be  expressed  as  follows  ;  —
that  the  thinking  spirit  is  not  satisfied  to  receive
the  ideas  simply  in  those  combinations  in  which
what  is  accidental  to  the  physical  mechanism  has
brought  them  to  it.  Thought  is  rather  of  the  nature
of  a  continuous  '  critique,'  which  the  spirit  practises
upon  the  material  of  the  train  of  ideas,  when  it  sep-
arates the  ideas  whose  connection  is  not  founded
upon  some  such  justification  for  the  combination  as
lies  in  the  very  nature  of  their  content ;  while  it  not
only  combines  those  ideas  whose  content  permits  or
requires  some  connection,  but  likewise  reconstructs
their combination  in  some  new  form of apprehen-


THE TRAIN OF IDEAS.


sion  and  expression,  from  which  the  justification  of
this  connection  admits  of  being  discerned.

§  4.  If  we  assume  (not  as  a  positive  assertion,  but
only  as  an  aid  to  the  exposition  of  the  subject)  that
the  animals,  although  possessing  the  train  of  ideas
alluded  to,  do  not  possess  thought  specifically ;  then
the  distinction  between  these  two  achievements  would
lie  in  what  follows.

In  the  animal,  with  the  idea  of  the  stick  when
swung,  the  idea  of  the  pain  that  follows  thereupon
is  connected ;  and  the  renewal  of  the  first  alone  is
sufficient  to  reproduce  in  anticipation  the  second
also,  and  to  determine  the  behavfor  of  the  animal
in  some  purposeful  way.

Practically,  therefore,  the  animal  obtains  fairly  well
from  the  mere  association  of  ideas  the  same  service
as  though  it  had,  by  thinking  in  the  strict  meaning
of  the  word,  expressed  its  experience  in  the  form  of
judgments  and  conclusions,  as  follows:  'The  stick
strikes  —  the  stroke  smarts  —  therefore,  etc/  Still
in  each  of  these  logical  judgments  there  would  be
involved  an  apprehension  of  the  state  of  the  case
quite  other  and  more  profound  than  is  involved  in
such  mere  association.  That  is  to  say,  when  we
apprehend  the  stick  as  the  subject  or  cause  from
which  the  stroke  proceeds,  we  do  not  merely  repeat


OUTLINES OF LOGIC.


the  psychological  fact  that  the  ideas  of  the  two
occur  in  connection,  but  likewise  express  the  adjunct
thought  that  both  belong  together  by  an  inner  bond
uniting  their  content,  —  in  this  case,  by  a  causal
relation.  The  same  thing  is  true  in  all  cases,  as  will
subsequently  be  shown  in  particular.

Thought,  therefore,  carries  the  merely  subjective
association  of  ideas  —  that  is,  their  mere  occurrence
together  in  consciousness  as  a  matter  of  fact  —  back
to  principles  that  govern  the  objective  synthesis  of
their  content.

§  5.  In  order  that  the  process  of  thinking  may
be  able  to  accomplish  such  an  achievement,  it  must
have  in  its  possession  the  principles  for  it,  —  that
is  to  say,  certain  universal  rules  or  grounds  of  right,
according  to  which,  in  general,  the  content  of  differ-
ent ideas  may,  or  may  not,  be  capable  of  connection.
Or,  to  express  the  same  thing  in  another  way  :  if  we
are  to  be  able  to  distinguish  truth  and  untruth,  then
there  must  exist  within  us  some  absolutely  valid  and
universal  standard  determining  what  is  permissible,
and  what  is  not  permissible,  as  to  the  connections
of  ideas.  Moreover,  the  general  principles  contained
in  it  must  stand  in  a  very  close  connection  with  the
presuppositions  which  we  are  compelled  to  make
concerning  the  nature  and  the  reciprocal  relations
of  all  'Things.'


THOUGHT AND "THINGS."


These  latter  we  are  accustomed  to  style  metaphys-
ical principles.  And,  accordingly,  a  near  relation-
ship would  exist  between  logical  and  metaphysical
truths.  This  Introduction  is  not  the  place  to  treat
this  relationship  exhaustively;  the  following  remark
is  sufficient  at  this  point.

We  assume  that  the  process  of  thinking  is  deter-
mined so  as  to  lead  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true
nature  of  '  Things.'  Now  every  means  must  be
directed,  on  the  one  hand  toward  the  object  which
it  is  to  work  out,  and  on  the  other  hand  toward
the  nature  of  that  which  is  to  employ  it.  On  this
account,  the  forms  and  the  laws  also,  in  which  and
according  to  which  thought  connects  the  ideas,  must
be  such  that  by  means  of  them  the  knowledge  of
truth  can  be  conclusively  attained ;  but  they  need
not  be  such  that  the  ideas  shall  directly  copy  the
essence  of  the  ' Things'  themselves.  The  rather,
since  it  is  man  who,  by  means  of  them,  is  to  arrive
at  the  truth,  must  they  attach  themselves  to  the
nature  and  stand-point  of  man  ;  and  accordingly  they
must  have  peculiarities  which  are  comprehensible
only  from  this  fact,  and  not  from  the  nature  of  the
'  Things '  which  are  to  be  known.

In  other  words  (to  answer,  at  least  in  a  prelimi-
nary way,  a  question  which  is  not  to  be  exhaustively
treated  in  this  place) :  The  forms  and  laws  of  thought,


OUTLINES OF LOGIC.


with  which  we  are  to  become  acquainted,  have  neither
a  '  merely  formal '  nor  a  '  perfectly  real '  significance.
They  are  neither  mere  results  of  the  organization  of
our  subjective  spirit,  without  respect  to  the  nature
of  the  objects  to  be  known,  nor  are  they  direct  copies
of  the  nature  and  reciprocal  relations  of  these  objects.
They  are  rather  '  formal '  and  '  real '  at  the  same  time.
That  is  to  say,  they  are  those  subjective  modes  of
the  connection  of  our  thoughts  which  are  necessary
to  us,  if  we  are  by  thinking  to  know  the  objective
truth.


First Principal Division.


PURE LOGIC


First Principal Division.


PURE LOGIC.


CHAPTER I.

THE FORMATION OF CONCEPTS.

§  6.  It  is  well  known  that  most  of  the  operations
of  thought  consist  in  acts  connecting  together  differ-
ent simple  ideas.  Wherever,  then,  some  such  *  con-
nection '  is  spoken  of,  the  question  at  once  arises,
How  must  the  simple  elements  themselves  be  formed
in  order  to  be  able  to  enter  at  all  into  the  connection
designated  ?  Out  of  purely  spherical  elements  it  is
impossible  to  make  a  coherent  structure.  That  can
be  done  only  by  means  of  prismatic  elements  which
present  to  each  other  surfaces  that  are  definitely  laid
out.  Just  so,  from  mere  impressions,  in  so  far  as
they  are  nothing  more  than  our  affections  (moods,
that  is,  of  our  feeling),  no  logical  connection  is  to
be  established ;  but  each  individual impression, in


IO  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

order  to  be  capable,  in  the  logical  sense,  of  being
combined  with  another  into  a  thought,  must  be  already
apprehended  by  the  spirit  in  such  a  quite  definite
form  as  renders  this  combination  possible.

§  7.  This,  the  first  work  of  logical  thought,  be-
comes most  distinctly  apparent  to  us  in  the  circum-
stance, that  almost  all  languages  divide  the  whole
stock  of  the  content  of  ideas  into  definite,  formally
different  classes ;  and  that  even  those  languages
which  do  not  distinguish  externally  this  difference
between  substantives,  adjectives,  verbs,  etc.,  still
cherish,  in  forming  each  one  of  their  words,  the
adjunct  thought,  that  its  content  must  be  conceived
of  either  substantively,  as  something  in  itself  valid,
permanent,  independent  of  every  other;  or  adjec-
tively,  as  quality  dependent  and  presupposing  some
other  to  which  it  adheres  ;  or  verbally,  as  a  move-
ment or  relation  passing  between  different  contents.
In  the  first  place,  by  means  of  these  forms  in
which  they  are  cast  by  the  act  of  thinking,  ideas
become  elements  of  a  thought ;  and,  like  the  pris-
matic stones  in  the  comparison  made  above,  they
turn  toward  one  another  definite  surfaces  which
allow  a  connection  in  the  logical  sense.  So  long,
on  the  other  hand,  as  ideas  are  only  different  modes
of  being  apprehended  in  our  consciousness,  although


LOGICAL ACT OF THOUGHT.  II

they  can,  of  course,  like  tones  in  music,  be  signifi-
cantly connected  with  one  another  in  other  ways
(in  this  case,  cesthetically),  yet  as  such  no  thought
arises  from  them.

§  8.  The  next  question  seems  necessarily  to  be,
How  must  thought  always  proceed  in  order  to  ac-
complish this  arrangement  of  any  content  whatever
in  one  of  these  forms  taken  by  the  parts  of  speech  ?
Since  the  question  relates  quite  generally  to  every
content,  simple  as  well  as  composite,  this  second
logical  act  of  thought  must  consist  in  a  very  sim-
ple process  which  can  occur  in  both  cases.

Now  it  does  consist  in  the  following :  —  As  often
as  language  forms  a  word  for  some  content,  which
is  to  be  ascribed  to  this  particular  content  and  to  it
alone,  it  necessarily  expresses  therewith  the  presup-
position that  this  content  is  something  which  holds
good  of  itself,  is  identical  with  itself,  and  different
from  others  ;  that,  on  this  very  account,  it  is  able
to  bear  a  name  of  its  own.  That  is,  when  the  sec-
ondary thought,  which  occurs  along  with  the  act
of  thinking,  forms  in  speech  a  word  for  a  thing
(that  is,  apart  from  speech,  when  it  fixes  some  con-
tent, and  distinguishes  it  from  others),  it  consists
particularly  in  this,  that  it  conceives  of  it  as  a  whole
which  in  itself  belongs  together,  and  as  thus  belong-
ing together  is  marked  off  from  every  other.


12  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

Expression  in  speech  permits  this  act  to  be  man-
ifest in  different  classes  of  words  with  different
degrees  of  distinctness.  An  adjective,  as  'blue/
expresses  least  of  this  logical  import.  Verbs  sig-
nify by  means  of  their  ending,  that  the  content
indicated  by  them  is  thought  of  as  a  unity  in  a  def-
inite sense,  —  namely,  in  that  of  the  verbal  relation.
In  the  case  of  substantives,  certain  languages  make
it  most  palpable  that  the  content  designated  should
be  thought  of  as  something  identical  with  itself,
exclusive,  one  and  entire,  by  means  of  the  prefixed
article.

§  9.  This  logical  form  of  the  *  idea '  (so  we  will
call  this  second  act  of  thought)  accordingly  appre-
hends its  content,  be  it  simple  or  composite,  only  in
such  a  way  that  it  comes  in  general  to  be  regarded
as  unity  or  as  totality.

In  reference  to  simple  content,  that  which  admits
of  being  realized  at  all  stands  highest.  For  exam-
ple;  the  impressions,  'blue/  'sweet/  'warm/  cannot
undergo  any  other  logical  elaboration  than  that  of
being  apprehended  as  having  a  content  which  is
identical  with  itself,  different  from  others,  and  of
course  adjective  in  its  nature.

For  the  composite  content,  on  the  other  hand,  this
form  of the idea  which asserts in a  general  way


GENERAL IDEA AND CONCEPT.  1 3

nothing  more  than  that  its  parts  belong  together,
without  rendering  cognizable  the  kind,  the  ground,
and  the  rule  of  the  same,  is  an  unsatisfactory  mode
of  apprehension ;  although  we  very  frequently  cannot
get  beyond  this  in  the  ordinary  course  of  thought.1
The  words  ' nature,'  'life,'  'state,'  'government,'
indicate  for  the  majority  of  men  nothing  but  the
consciousness  that  in  every  case  a  manifold  of  phe-
nomena and  events  is  united  into  a  totality ;  without
their  being  able  to  specify  the  definite  plan,  the  laws
and  the  forces,  according  to  which  and  through
which  this  totality  is  produced.  These  same  words,
however,  will  indicate  a  higher  apprehension  of  their
content,  a  'concept'  of  the  same,  in  case,  besides  the
bare  fact  that  the  parts  of  the  content  belong  to-
gether, some  reason  for  the  latter  is  also  thought.

§10.  Now  it  is  this  principle  of  'belonging  to-
gether' which  thought  seeks  to  discover;  since  it
has  regard  either  to  that  which,  in  several  ideas
that  differ  from  each  other,  appears  as  common
and  homogeneous  (the  universal) ;  or  to  that  which,
throughout all changes of one  and the  same  con-


1  Especially  useful  kinds  of  expression  for  anything  thought  of  merely
in  the  form  of  idea,  are  such  as  these :  in  the  Greek  the  neuter  plural,  —
ra  (pva-LKa,  r  a  T)9iKa,  ra  iro\ir  lkol)  in  the  German,  compounds
with  . . . '  wesenl  —  Munzwesen,  Zollwesen,  Heerwesen,  etc.


14  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

tent,  continually  remains  homogeneous  (the  constant).
For  there  naturally  seems  to  lie  in  both,  somewhat
which  coheres  together  more  firmly  and  legitimately
than  the  other  changing  and  heterogeneous  marks,
and  which,  just  for  these  marks,  composes  the  prin-
ciple of  their  coexistence  and  determines  the  kind
of  their  combination.

Should  a  composite  content  be  thought,  however,
in  such  a  way  that  somewhat  universal  or  constant,
but  distinct  from  the  sum-total  of  its  'marks/  be
thought  along  with  it  as  the  determining  law  on
which  that  whole  circle  of  marks  is  dependent ;  then
is  that  content  thought  in  the  form  of  a  concept.

The  name  'linden/  'oak/  and  the  like,  moreover,
designates  for  the  ordinary  course  of  thought  a  con-
tent apprehended  in  accordance  with  a  concept.  For
every  one  conceives  of  the  general  image  of  '  tree/
or  the  still  more  general  image  of  'plant/  as  the
outline,  the  schema,  or  the  norm,  according  to
which  all  parts  of  the  afore-mentioned  individual
ideas  are  bound  together  into  a  whole.  So,  too,
all  nomina  propria  of  persons  are  real  concepts.
'  Alcibiades/  or  '  Napoleon/  never  means  merely
a  totality  of  parts ;  but  both  are  explained  and
conceived  of  under  the  accompanying  universal  men-
tal image  of  '  man/


CONCEPT AS UNIVERSAL.  1 5

§  11.  Very  rarely  will  such  a  general  image  admit
of  being  produced  from  several  comparable  individual
ideas  through  the  retention  of  their  marks  that
are  completely  alike,  and  the  simple  omission  of  those
unlike.  For  the  marks  of  ideas  are  not  wont  to  be
alike  and  unlike,  but  similar  and  dissimilar.  If
indeed  we  should  merely  retain  what  little  is  pre-
cisely alike,  we  should  arrive  at  a  meaningless  uni-
versal which  would  sustain  a  relation  of  complete
indifference  toward  the  omitted  constituents,  and
not  that  of  a  principle  regulating  them.

But  in  fact  we  do  not  so  proceed.  The  compari-
son of  several  bodies  does  not  result  in  the  general
image  of  body,  —  because  one  is  blue,  hard,  elastic,
light,  and  the  other  is  yellow,  soft,  ductile,  and
heavy,  —  by  omitting  all  of  these  properties ;  as
though  the  idea  of  '  body '  would  have  any  meaning
at  all  regardless  of  'color,'  'cohesion,'  and  'weight.'
Of  these  dissimilar  marks  the  comparison  omits
merely  what  is  different,  but  retains  what  is  common
to  them  (for  example,  in  this  case,  '  color  in  general,'
'  weight  in  general ')  ;  and  it  combines  these  general
marks  themselves  into  the  desired  general  image  of
a  body,  to  which  it  is  therefore  quite  essential  that  it
should  have  some  color,  some  cohesion,  some  weight,
or  other.


l6  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

§  12.  The  ordinary  theory  of  logic  is  accustomed
simply  to  teach  that,  from  comparable  individual
ideas  (iiotiones  speciales)  we  ascend  to  the  more  uni-
versal one  (notio  generalis)  by  'abstracting'  from
the  unlike  marks  (notae)  of  the  former,  and  retain-
ing only  the  like  ones.  This  theory  adds  the
statement,  therefore,  that  the  content  {materia  com-
plexus)  of  a  general  idea  is  '  poorer/  that  is,  can
count  fewer  marks  than  that  of  the  particular  ones
out  of  comparison  of  which  it  arose.

The  foregoing  remark  must  at  all  events  be  im-
proved upon  to  this  extent,  that  each  universal  has
exactly  so  many  marks,  which  it  is  indispensable
should  be  thought  together,  as  belong  to  the  indi-
viduals corresponding  to  it.  Nevertheless,  while  all
these  marks  are  perfectly  defined  in  the  particular  or
in  the  individual,  as  respects  both  kind  and  quantity ;
in  the  universal,  certain  general  or  undefined  marks
have  taken  the  place  of  many  of  them.  The  universal,
as  compared  with  the  particular,  is  therefore  poorer
in  defined  marks,  but  not  poorer  in  marks  in  general.

§  13.  We  distinguish,  therefore,  two  different  kinds
of  universals.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  the  afore-
said general  image,  through  the  entrance  of  which
into  the  group  of  marks  belonging  to  an  idea,  this
idea  is  itself  raised  to  a  concept ;  and,  besides  this,


FORMATION OF THE CONCEPT.  1 7

those  universal  marks  out  of  whose  connection  to-
gether the  general  image  itself  arises.

These  latter,  the  universal  marks,  in  the  simplest
case  require  no  special  logical  work  of  thought  for
their  origin,  but  arise  out  of  the  immediate  impres-
sion without  our  logical  assistance.  That  'green/
'blue/  'red/  for  example,  have  something  in  common,
is  a  matter  of  immediate  experience ;  and  although
this  common  possession  may  not  admit  of  being  sep-
arated by  a  logical  operation  from  that  by  which
these  impressions  are  distinguished;  still  the  name
'  color '  points  to  this  as  to  the  something  experienced
as  common.  So,  too,  differences  of  magnitude  are
immediately  perceived  as  true ;  and  the  general  name
of  magnitude  expresses,  side  by  side  with  these  dis-
tinctions, the  common  characteristic.

In  this  manner  there  arise  from  the  consideration
of  the  different  marks,  which  are  presented  in  the
individual  ideas,  the  general  marks  as  the  elements
out  of  which  the  aforesaid  general  image  is  then
composed  ;  and  the  latter  holds  good  for  those
individual  ideas  as  a  common  type  comprising
them  all.

§  14.  For  the  formation  of  a  'concept'  it  is  not
sufficient  that  its  general  marks,  nor  indeed  for  the
formation  of  the  'idea/  is  it  enough  that its indi-


1 8  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

victual  marks,  be  merely  present  in  general ;  but  the
essential  thing  is  their  mode  of  combination.  No
idea,  and  no  concept,  consists  of  a  mere  summation
of  marks  in  such  a  way  that  every  first  one  should
enter  into  combination  with  every  second  one  just  as
the  second  with  every  third ;  but  in  the  universal
the  marks  limit,  define,  or  determine  one  another  in
such  manifold  and  characteristic  ways,  that  a  first
one  is  connected  with  the  second  otherwise  than  the
second  is  connected  with  the  third,  or  the  third  with
the  fourth.

In  the  case  of  mere  ideas  which  only  combine
marks  in  general  into  a  totality,  without  logically
characterizing  the  way  in  which  they  belong  to-
gether, the  intuitions  of  time  and  space  take  the
place  of  such  strictly  logical  work.  Through
these  intuitions  we  then  know  in  what  way,  for  in-
stance, the  distinctive  marks  of  an  animal  —  color,
skin,  head,  swiftness,  etc.  —  are  to  be  brought  to-
gether and  combined.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we
form  an  abstract  concept  of  '  motion/  for  example,
and  designate  it  as  '  constant  change  of  place/  then
it  is  seen  that  no  one  of  these  three  marks  is  thought
as  of  like  species  with  the  other ;  but,  strictly  speak-
ing, simply  the  general  idea  of  '  change/  in  so  far  as
it  is  restricted  by  reference  to  the  idea  of  'place/
and  through  the mark belonging to it is defined


THE CONCEPT AND ITS NAME.  I9

as  'constant/  forms  the  content  of  the  concept  of
motion.

The  general  image  which  arises  out  of  the  com-
parison of  several  individual  ideas  is  formed,  not
simply  when  the  general  marks  are  put  in  the  place
of  the  particular,  but  also  when  a  general  mode  of
connection  corresponding  to  them  is  put  in  the  place
of  the  particular  modes  of  connection  among  the
marks.

The  general  mental  image  '  metal '  —  for  instance
—  connects  together  the  general  marks  of  '  color/
'weight/  etc.,  in  a  form,  or  according  to  a  scheme,
of  which  the  modes  of  combination  are  only  par-
ticular examples,  wherein  gold  combines  the  color
yellow,  its  specific  gravity,  etc.,  copper  the  color  red,
and  its  specific  gravity,  etc.

§  15.  To  recapitulate  the  foregoing ;  we  give  the
name  of  l concept'  to  an  idea  whenever,  in  addition
to  its  group  of  marks,  a  universal  is  thought  along
with  it  as  an  explanatory  law.  'Gold'  or  'Caitis'
is  thus  thought  as  concept,  in  so  far  as  the  marks
of  both  are  regulated  by  the  general  schemata,
'metal'  and  'man/  respectively.

The  universal  itself,  by  whose  entrance  into  it  the
idea  becomes  the  concept,  is  not  necessarily  hor
always  itself  thought  as  concept,  but  frequently  only


20  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

as  idea.  It  is  then,  indeed,  concept  only  when  its
own  marks  also  are  not  merely  thought  in  general
as  a  whole  belonging  together,  but  as  combined  by
means  of  a  new  universal  in  accordance  with  some
definite  scheme.

There  are  accordingly  just  as  much  individual,
singular  concepts  (notiones  singulares)  —  like  all
names  of  persons,  for  instance  —  as  there  are  uni-
versal concepts  (notiones  generates)  in  manifold  gra-
dations.

The  name  of  higher  general  concept  is  given  to
that  one,  which  is  thought  as  an  explanatory  schema
in  addition  to  the  marks  of  another  concept,  which
latter  is  then  the  lower  of  the  two.

It  is  then  said  that  the  content  {materia)  of  the
higher  general  concept  (genus)  is  '  contained '  in  the
content  of  the  lower  (species)  ;  that  is,  that  all  the
marks  which  are  essential  to  the  genus  occur  also
in  the  species.  But,  conversely,  the  content  of  the
species  is  not  entirely  contained  in  that  of  the  genus ;
but  the  former  possesses,  besides  the  particular
marks  of  the  latter,  certain  ones  peculiar  to  it  as
species.  On  this  matter  a  corrective  remark  is  made
above  (§  12).

It  is  further  said  —  and  rightly,  too  —  that  each
higher  general  concept  occurs  in  a  greater  number
of kinds  or  individual  concepts (or  holds good of


RELATION OF EXTENT AND INTENT.  21

them)  than  the  lower  concept.  The  name  of  '  extent '
(ambitus)  is  given  to  the  number  of  these  lower
concepts,  of  which  the  higher  holds  good.  And
since  to  the  latter  there  is  ascribed,  as  previously
remarked,  a  smaller  number  of  marks  or  smaller
content  (materia  complexus) ;  therefore  it  is  said  that
"the  extent  and  the  content  of  two  concepts  are
in  inverse  ratio  to  each  other "  :  the  one  poorer  in
content  —  that  is,  the  more  general  —  commands  a
greater  aggregate  of  individual  cases  ;  the  one  richer
in  content  occurs  in  fewer  kinds,  perhaps  only  in  a
single  individual.

According  to  the  foregoing,  this  proposition  would
correctly  run  thus  :  A  concept  with  clearly  defined
marks  is  always  individual.  In  case  it  has  undefined
or  general  marks  besides  the  defined  ones,  then  with
the  number  of  the  undefined  marks  (or,  conversely,
with  the  number  of  the  defined  ones),  the  number
of  cases  increases  in  which  it  is  valid, —  that  is,  its
extent.

§  16.  Two  relations  of  subordination,  since  they
are  essentially  different  logically,  are  to  be  held  as
excluding  each  other.  That  is  to  say,  every  concept
can  be  ranked  in  respect  to  one  part  of  it,  under  its
higher  concept  of  species,  —  for  example,  '  gold  '  (G)
under  '  metal '  (M) ;  in  respect  to  another  part,  under


22  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

any one of its marks at pleasure, — for example,
'gold'  (G)  under  < fusible'  (F).


Fig.  I.  Fig.  2.

The  first  of  the  foregoing  relations  (Fig.  i.)  is
called  subordination.  In  this  case  the  whole  nature
of  G  is  included  in  the  universal  M,  in  such  a  man-
ner that  there  is  in  G  no  part,  no  mark  and  no  com-
bination of  marks,  which  may  not  be  essentially
comprehended  by  means  of  the  universal  principle
M ;  for  example,  the  '  yellow '  of  gold  is  a  certain
lustrous  yellow  peculiar  to  the  metal,  which  does
not  occur  otherwise.  Within  this  M,  finally,  G-  is
found  *  co-ordinated '  with  its  natural  kindred  (copper,
lead,  silver,  —  C,  Ii,  —  etc.) ;  that  is,  it  stands  in  the
same  logical  relation  to  M  with  all  the  rest  of  them.

The  other  species  of  arrangement  of  one  concept
under  another  (Fig.  2)  is  called  subsumption.  Here
G  touches  upon  the  universal  concept  F  with  only
one  part  of  its  content;  the  remaining  parts  of  its
content  lie  outside  F  and  are  not  defined  by  F.  Be-
sides, G  (gold)  is  found  in  this  case  to  be  co-ordi-


SUBORDINATION AND SUBSCRIPTION.  23

nated,  in  reference  to  F  (fusible),  not  merely  with
its  own  related  species,  but  also  with  other  con-
cepts of  content  altogether  heterogeneous  (sugar,
pitch,  sulphur,  —  S,  P,  —  etc.).

§  17.  If  we  ascend  by  continued  abstraction  to
more  and  more  general  concepts,  we  shall,  accord-
ing to  a  frequent  assertion,  reach  one  single  highest
general  concept, — that  of  the  'thinkable.'  Such
an  abstraction,  however,  would  only  be  performed
through  subsiimption  (Fig.  2),  if  the  concept  should
have  entirely  let  go  of  the  characteristic  content  of
the  concepts,  and  confined  itself  simply  to  a  common
mark  through  which  its  content  is  not  defined.

If  we  proceed  by  way  of  subordination,  then  it
is  found  that  our  system  of  concepts  does  not  ter-
minate in  one  point,  but  in  several  independent
points.  The  substantive  concepts  lead  to  one
highest  concept  of  Being ;  the  verbal  to  that  of
Becoming;  the  adjective  to  that  of  Property,  etc.;
and  there  is  absolutely  no  concept  still  higher,  to
which  these  fundamental  concepts  may  be  referred
as  to  a  common  principle  of  their  content.  As  for
the  rest,  it  is  obvious,  —  and  the  reason  why  it
must  be  so  needs  no  explanation,  —  that  these
fundamental  concepts  are  nothing  more  than  the
meanings  belonging  to  the  different  parts  of  speech.


CHAPTER II.


OF JUDGMENTS.


A, Preliminary  Remarks  and  the  Customary  Division
of  Judgments,

§  18.  The  consideration  of  the  subject  up  to  this
point  leads  to  a  new  problem.  In  the  concept  we
have  distinguished  the  universal  and  the  special
circle  of  marks.  Concerning  the  reciprocal  rela-
tions of  these  two  members  we  had,  however,  only
expressions  characteristic  of  like  species.  The  uni-
versal served  us  only  as  a  nucleus,  as  a  normative
principle,  as  a  rule  for  the  disposition  and  combi-
nation of  the  marks.  The  question  now  arises ;
what  this  means,  when  taken  strictly,  and  what
power  the  universal  can  exercise  over  the  marks,
and  in  what  way.

We  consequently  seek  for  an  explanation  of  the
relation  of  the  two  members  to  each  other.  Every
assertion  which  thought  can  utter  on  this  question,
and  by  means  of  which  it  can  answer  the  same,
must  consequently  take  this  form  ;  that  it  connects
two  members  S  and  P  through  the  affirmation  of  a
definite mode of relation X. This is essentially


NATURE OF THE  JUDGMENT.  25

the  form  of  a  proposition  or  a  judgment,  in  which
S  is  subject,  P  is  predicate,  and  X  copula  between
the  two.

§  19.  The  ground  of  the  fact  that  different  im-
pressions belong  together,  however,  we  have  sought,
not  merely  in  somewhat  universal  which  is  common
to  the  different  impressions,  but  likewise  in  some-
what constant  which  appertains  to  one  and  the
same  content  of  the  idea,  while  it  experiences
changes  in  other  respects  by  accession  or  diminution
of  its  marks.  This  relation,  too,  of  an  unchanging
nucleus,  which  is  at  once  the  ground  of  the  possi-
bility of  the  changing  marks  and  the  law  of  their
connection,  requires  a  similar  investigation.  We
must  know  how  any  P  can  '  adhere '  to  an  S,  and
how  it  is  possible  that  it  disappears  again  and
another  mark,  P',  occupies  its  place,  —  and  every
assertion  on  this  matter  must  bear  the  form  of
the  judgment,

§  20.  Apart  from  such  systematic  coherency,  the
doctrine  of  judgment  may  be  introduced  as  fol-
lows :  —  In  the  train  of  ideas  it  must  frequently
occur  that,  in  the  first  place,  two  impressions  a
and  b,  which  have  for  us  become  united  in  part
(as,  for  example,  the  shape  of  a  tree  and  its  green


26  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

■ — — — ^ — ■  .  >

color),  are  apprehended  as  a  whole  whose  distinguish-
able parts  are  not  actually  distinguished,  because
all  reason  for  it  is  wanting.  If  now,  by  a  second
experience,  the  tree  is  shown  without  leaves,  then,
in  a  third  instance  in  which  it  is  again  seen  to  be
green,  the  two  ideas  of  its  shape  and  color  will
no  longer  form  an  undivided  whole  in  the  same
naiVe  way;  on  the  contrary,  the  recollection  of
their  being  separable  will  keep  them  apart  from
each  other;  and  therewith  arises  the  idea  of  two
impressions  which  are  combined,  instead  of  that  of
one  impression,  in  which  there  is  no  inner  difference.
This  process  of  the  simultaneous  association  and
separation  of  two  ideas  without  doubt  takes  place
in  animals  also.  It  supplies  for  them  the  place  of
the  logical  judgment  of  human  thought ;  yet  it  is
not  such  itself,  but  only  the  occasion  of  a  judgment.
If  we,  for  instance,  affirm  in  judgment,  'the  tree  is
green'  or  'is  not  green/  then  we  interpret  the  co-
existence of  separable  ideas  and  do  not  simply
express  over  again  the  fact  of  such  coexistence.
When  we  conceive  of  the  tree  as  subject  (or  in  this
case  as  substance)  and  the  predicate  green  as  attri-
bute or  accident,  we  point  to  that  inner  connection
in  which,  according  to  our  view,  the  property  stands
related  to  the  i  Thing'  or  the  accident  to  its  subject,
as  in  each  case  constituting  the  legitimate  ground


CLASSIFICATION OF JUDGMENTS.  2/

according  to  which  both  of  the  ideas  '  tree '  and
'green'  do  not  merely  exist  together,  but  belong
together  precisely  as  they  are  together,  —  to  wit,
as  separable  yet  conjoined.

§  21.  The  essential  part  of  a  judgment  is,  then,
precisely  this  secondary  thought  which  the  process
of  thinking  has,  when  it  connects  subject  and  predi-
cate in  definite  form.  As  many  as  are  the  essentially
different  points  of  view,  grounds,  or  models,  to  which
this  process  of  thought  rightly  refers  the  combina-
tion of  S  and  P,  —  that  is,  as  many  as  the  essentially
different  meanings  of  the  copula  actually  are ;  so
many  are  the  essentially  different  logical  forms  of
the  judgment  which  are  to  be  systematically  devel-
oped later  on.

We  previously  made  mention  of  a  classification  of
the  judgment  usually  given,  —  namely  that  by  Kant.
According  to  him,  every  judgment  must  at  the  same
time  be  determined  in  four  different  respects,  and
must  in  each  of  these  have  one  of  the  three  mutually
exclusive  forms  ;  namely,  is  —

i)  According  to  quantity  either  universal  or  par-
ticular or  singular.

2)  According  to  quality  it  is  either  affirmative  or
negative  or  limitative.

3)  According  to  relation,  —  that  is,  the  meaning  of


28  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

the  connection  between  S  and  P  —  either  categorical
or  hypothetical  or  disjunctive,

4)  According  to  modality,  —  that  is,  the  relation  of
the  whole  content  to  actuality  —  either  problematic
or  assertory  or  apodictic.

§  22. These  differences  are  not  of  equal  value :

1)  To  begin  with,  in  the  three  quantitative  forms :

This  S is  P,

Some  S  are  P,

All  SareP,—
the  kind  of  combination  between  S  and  P  is  entirely
the  same ;  and  they  differ  simply  in  respect  to  the
number  of  the  subjects,  and  consequently  in  respect
to  the  material,  to  which  this  entirely  identical  con-
nection is  extended.  Accordingly,  although  the  quan-
titative differences  remain  of  great  importance  for
other  purposes,  —  for  example,  the  drawing  of  con-
clusions from  judgments,  —  they  are  nevertheless  not
essentially  different  steps  in  the  development  of  the
judgment  as  such.

2)  As to what further concerns the  qualitative

forms, it is obvious that the  affirmative and the

negative  judgment,

S  is  P,

S  iS  not  P,

must  understand  the  kind  of  combination  that  takes


QUALITY OF JUDGMENTS.  29

place  between  S  and  P,  in  the  same  manner.
For  the  negative  judgment  could  not  be  the  exact
opposite  of  the  affirmative,  if  it  did  not  deny  pre-
cisely what  the  latter  asserts.  This  judgment  is  there-
fore fitly  presented  in  such  a  way  that,  to  one  entirely
identical  thought  of  a  combination  of  S  and  P,  there
is  added  the  two  secondary  judgments;  —  it  is  true,
or  it  is  not  true.  They  differ  then  in  their  content
very  essentially,  but  not  in  their  form. — The  limita-
tive judgment  should  attach  a  negative  predicate  to
S  by  means  of  a  positive  copula,  and  so  have  the  form

S  is  non-P.
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that
non-P  is  a  definite  idea  and  not  of  any  use  at  all  to  the
predicate,  only  in  those  cases  where  it  does  not  merely
indicate  that  which  is  in  general  not  P,  but  that
which  is  co-ordinated  with  P  under  a  higher  general
concept,  and  therefore  has  a  meaning  of  its  own,  —
as  for  instance,  '  not-round '  in  so  far  as  it  must  still
always  have  some  form,  either  straight  or  angular
and  the  like.  If,  on  the  contrary,  non-P  is  intended
to  comprehend  everything  that  is  simply  not  P  in
general,  —  for  example,  the  '  not-round '  is  to  include,
besides  the  angular,  things  like  the  '  bitter/  the
' future/  the  ' cheap/  etc.;  then  non-P  is  no  longer
an  idea  at  all,  such  as  could  be  apprehended  and
given to some subject S as its predicate. The


30  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

attempt  to  do  this  invariably  has  in  time  this  issue,
that  S  is  excluded  from  the  circle  of  the  predicate
P,  and  the  judgment  consequently,  according  to  its
meaning,  is  negative.

3)  The  third  distinction,  that  according  to  rela-
tion, is  of  such  essential  significance  that  it  is  passed
by  here  in  order  to  be  thoroughly  examined  later.

4)  The  differences  of  modality,  likewise,  have  no
essentially  logical  value ;  since  the  possibility  of  the
combination  of  S  and  P  in  the  problematical  judg-
ment, and  its  necessity  in  the  apodictic  judgment,  is
expressed  only  by  means  of  the  auxiliary  verbs,

S  may  be  P,

S  must  be  P.
They  are  both  therefore,  after  all,  properly  speaking,
only  assertory  judgments  ;  that  is,  they  affirm,  exactly
as  does  the  strictly  assertory  judgment,

S  is  P,
an  actuality  —  in  the  former  case,  that  of  possibility ;
in  the  latter,  that  of  necessity.

But  neither  of  the  two  admits  of  being  brought
forward  immediately  as  a  consequence  of  the  pecu-
liar mode  of  relation  of  S  and  P.  This  kind  of
modality,  therefore,  belongs  to  the  content,  but  not
to  the  logical  form  of  the  judgment;  and  there  may
be  set  beside  it  yet  many  other  forms  of  precisely
equal  rank ;  as,  for  instance,  S  should  be  P,  S  ought


SIMPLEST FORM OF JUDGMENT.  3 1

to  be  P,  S  will  be  P,  etc.  Now,  in  what  way  the
judgments  are  capable  of  expressing,  by  means  of
their  form,  at  the  same  time  a  claim  to  the  possi-
bility, actuality,  or  necessity  of  their  content,  will  be
shown  by  what  follows.

B. System  of  the  Forms  of  Judgment.

§  23.  In  the  classification  of  the  forms  of  judg-
ment, we  start  from  the  point  of  view  that  thought
should  declare  itself  as  to  how  it  conceives  of  the
coherency  of  that  previously  so-called  'nucleus'  of  an
idea  with  its  own  circle  of  marks ;  or,  in  other  words,
of  an  S  with  P.  Every  such  declaration  will  be  ex-
pressed by  a  separate  form  of  judgment ;  and  the
series  of  the  forms  of  judgment  must  therefore  form
a  series  of  increasingly  better  attempts  at  the  com-
plete and  adequate  expression  of  the  aforesaid  rela-
tion between  S  and  P.

§  24.  The  simplest  form  of  judgment  is  the
impersonal.  In  the  propositions,  'It  lightens,'  'It
thunders/  etc.,  the  whole  content  of  the  judgment
is  completely  contained  in  the  predicate.  The  indefi-
nite pronoun  i  it '  adds  nothing  thereto,  but  formally
marks  the  place  of  the  concept  of  the  subject,  which
is  missing.  But  just  this  alone  —  that  the  process  of
thinking  is  not  satisfied  with  the  bare  reproduction


32  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

of  the  simple  content  which  stands  in  the  predicate,
that  it  consequently  does  not  employ  for  its  expres-
sion the  infinitive  'to  thunder/  but  inflects  the  word
and  joins  it  as  predicate  to  the  'it'  —  proves  most
evidently  this  fundamental  necessity  of  analyzing
every  content  of  an  idea  into  two  component  parts,
the  one  of  which  is  the  regulative  principle,  and  the
other  the  phenomenon  dependent  on  it.  Of  course,
this  requirement  is  here  only  formally  satisfied.  For
the  case  does  not  admit  of  specifying  any  subject,
with  complete  content,  to  which  the  phenomenon  is
attached.  We  are,  therefore,  under  the  necessity
of  joining  the  phenomenon  taken  as  predicate  to
itself  taken  as  subject.1

§  25.  The  next  advance  must  consist  in  this,  that
the  separation  of  the  ideated  content  in  S  and  P,
which  is  here  only  indicated,  is  brought  to  comple-


1  According  to  their  modality,  the  impersonal  judgments  are  naturally
assertory;  that  is,  affirmations  of  actuality.  In  the  natural  process  of
thinking,  they  uniformly  express  perceptions.  The  '  it '  in  the  subject  is,
according  to  its  content,  either  nothing  more  than  the  predicate,  or,  if  it  is
to  be  distinguished  from  it,  is  only  the  thought  of  the  universal  Being,  which
in  the  different  phenomena  is  defined  now  in  one  way  and  now  in  another.
One  might  therefore  say,  instead  of  '  it  lightens,'  '  the  Being  is  [now]  light-
ening,' or  conversely,  'the  lightning  is.'  That  is  to  say,  it  is  possible  to
convert  the  impersonal  judgments  into  existential  propositions,  in  which
*  to  be '  is  the  predicate.  Such  conversion  is,  however,  an  artificial  work  of
the  schools.  The  natural  process  of  thought  never  apprehends  the  indi-
vidual phenomenon  as  subject  and  the  Being  as  predicate,  but  only  univer-
sal Being  as  subject  and  the  phenomenon  as  a  single  predicate  of  the  same.


THE CATEGORICAL JUDGMENT.  33

tion  by  the  rise  of  a  special  conception  of  the  subject
as  different  from  the  predicate.

This  gives  the  so-called  categorical  form  of  judg-
ment, S  is  P,  in  which  P  is  unconditionally  and
without  further  justification  asserted  of  S  (Kai]«yop€iT<H,
Aristotle).  The  only  available  justification  of  this
connection,  —  namely,  that  it  takes  place  according
to  the  type  of  the  relation  between  '  Thing''  and
property,  Substance  and  attribute  (Kant)  —  does
not  suffice ;  since,  metaphysically  considered,  this
relation  itself  is  not  a  perfectly  clear  truth  but  an
enigma.

We  can  then  distinguish  two  kinds  of  this  judg-
ment. One,  the  so-called  analytic,  connects  with  S
a  P  which  is  itself  included  in  the  very  concept  of
S;  as,  for  example,  'Gold  is  heavy/  For  the  con-
cept of  'gold'  is  not  a  completed  product  of  thought
until  it  includes  the  mark  'heavy.'  Accordingly,  this
judgment,  strictly  speaking,  simply  asserts  that,  when
we  think  the  concept  S,  we  think  along  with  it  that
of  P  as  a  constituent  part  of  it.  But  how  the  con-
tent of  the  P  as  a  matter  of  fact  adheres  to  the  con-
tent of  the  S,  in  such  a  way  that,  just  in  order  to
think  S,  we  must  think  P  along  with  it,  —  this  the
form  of  judgment  does  not  explain,  but  merely  asserts
as  a  fact.

The  second  kind,  the  so-called  synthetic  or  histor-


34  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

ical  judgment,  connects  S  with  a  P  that  does  not
lie  thus  within  the  concept,  and  consequently  is  a
changeable  mark  of  it ;  for  example,  '  Caesar  fled/
'The  dog  is  mad/  Here  it  is  far  less  clear  through
the  form  of  the  judgment,  by  what  right  two  concep-
tions which  stand  in  no  constant  relation  are  brought
into  such  a  relation.  But  here  also  the  combination
is  expressed  unconditionally  as  a  fact  to  be  taken  for
granted.

§  26.  On  occasion  of  this  doubt  arising  and  as  the
ground  of  it,  the  first  universal  law  of  thought  comes
to  consciousness  :  The  law  of  identity  and  of  con-
tradiction  (Principium  identitatis  et  contradictionis).

Its  simplest  logical  expression  is  this  :  In  a  cate-
gorical judgment  of  the  form  S  is  P  it  is  absolutely
forbidden  to  combine  unconditionally,  as  subject  and
predicate,  two  different  concepts  S  and  P,  whatever
they  may  be.  The  rather  can  only  the  two  propo-
sitions i  S  is  S '  and  (P  is  P'  always  hold  good ;  but
never  <S  is  P'  or  <P  is  S/

The  usual  form  of  the  proposition  'A  =  A',  (Propo-
sition of  identity),  and  the  negative  'A  not  =  non-A'
(Proposition  of  contradiction)  both  express  this  sim-
ple truth,  that  every  thinkable  content  is  equal  to
itself  and  different  from  every  other  one.

This simple  logical meaning of the proposition


PROPOSITION OF IDENTITY.  35

must  without  fail  be  distinguished  from  other  theo-
rems, partly  true  and  partly  doubtful,  which,  although
they  spring  from  the  application  of  the  universal  logi-
cal proposition  of  identity,  still  do  so  only  from  its
application  to  a  definite  real  content,  and  are  not  on
a  par  with  the  proposition  itself.  For  example,  that
every  *  Thing '  is  like  itself,  or  that  it  is  unchange-
ably like  itself,  is  a  metaphysical  proposition  which
arises  from  an  application  of  the  logical  proposition
of  identity  to  the  concept  of  the  'Existent/  The
logical  proposition  itself  says  nothing  at  all  of
*  Things/  It  is  also  valid  of  events  that  happen,
of  conditions  that  take  place,  of  the  real  as  truly  as
of  the  unreal.  And  of  all  of  them  it  merely  says,
that  to  be  is  to  be,  the  changeable  is  changeable,
the  contradictory  is  contradictory,  the  impossible  is
impossible.

§  27.  Briefly  expressed,  then,  the  proposition  of
identity  asserts,  that  all  categorical  judgments  of
the  form  'S  is  P'  are  false  and  inadmissible.  Now
since  such  judgments  nevertheless  very  frequently
occur,  and  we  are  sufficiently  convinced  of  their
admissibility,  their  defect  can  only  consist  in  the
fact,  that  they  express  a  correct  sentiment  with
formal  imperfection.  And  an  interpretation  of  them
must  be  given  by  which  they  can  be  justified  before
the  law  of  identity.


36  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

Attempts  were  first  made  at  this  in  such  a  way
that  a  distinction  was  made  between  predicates  com-
patible, and  those  incompatible  with  the  subject.
And  as  no  one  is  capable  of  knowing  from  purely-
logical  laws,  what  P  is  compatible  with  what  S,
therefore  the  general  meaning  was  given  to  the
proposition  of  identity :  Of  two  incompatible  predi-
cates only  one  can  belong  to  one  subject.  This
proposition,  correct  in  itself,  nevertheless  does  not
justify  the  categorical  judgment  at  all.  For  it  in
turn  always  presupposes  that  an  S  can  be  a  P.
And  it  is  just  this  which  the  proposition  of  identity
forbids  without  exception,  no  matter  in  what  the
P  may  consist.

Another  attempt  at  justification  makes  prominent
the  fact,  that  in  the  proposition  (S  is  P'  (gold  is
yellow),  S  and  P  are  by  no  means  interpreted  as
identical  in  such  a  way  that  the  one  could  be  sub-
stituted for  the  other,  and  consequently  the  judg-
ment be  inverted  and  read,  [ yellow  is  gold.'  Between
both,  the  rather,  another  relation  is  maintained  which
is  fitly  expressed  by  'S  has  P.'  Against  this  rela-
tion, that  a  mark  is  'had'  by  its  subject,  or  a
property  by  the  '  Thing,'  the  proposition  of  identity
raises  no  protest.  This  view,  also,  although  it
alludes  to  something  that  is  quite  true,  does  not
reach  the  end  desired. It  indeed  removes  the  diffi-


PROPOSITION OF IDENTITY.  37

culty  of  combining  with  S  the  content  of  P  which
differs  from  S.  But  it  does  not  explain  how  it  is
possible  to  combine  with  S  the  conception  of  '  hav-
ing' (although  it  does  explain  what  is  had).  For
since  S  is  obviously  able  to  '  have '  as  well  as  '  not
have/  ' having'  is  itself  in  turn  a  predicate  deter-
mination differing  from  that  of  the  mere  Being  of
S;  and  the  question  recurs  concerning  this  predicate,
how  it  is  compatible  with  S.  The  proposition  of
identity  simply  says,  S  is  S.  Every  proposition,
S  has  something  or  other,  therefore  declares  some-
thing different  of  the  S,  from  the  mere  proposition
that  it  is  S ;  and,  consequently,  is  itself  defective
as  respects  the  proposition  of  identity.

§  28.  The  solution  of  the  above-mentioned  diffi-
culty lies  approximately  in  this,  that  all  categorical
judgments  are  according  to  their  intent  and  meaning
identical  but  express  this  intent  in  a  formally  im-
perfect way  ;  since  they  allude  to  only  single  parts,
sometimes  of  the  true  subject  and  sometimes  of
the  true  predicate.

For  example  ;  '  Gold  is  yellow '  means  (as  in  Latin
the  neuter  of  the  adjective  shows)  the  same  as
'gold  is  yellow  gold,' — an  observation  which  has
been  for  a  very  long  time  expressed  in  such  a  way
that, in  the judgment, the subject is not merely


38  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

defined  or  determined  by  the  predicate,  but  likewise
the  predicate  by  the  subject.  '  Yellow,'  for  instance,
means  here  not  simply  'yellow  in  general/  but  in
particular  '  gold-yellow/

The  proposition  '  Some  men  are  black '  is  ambig-
uous in  German.  The  Latin  '  Nonnulli  homines
sunt  nigrV  shows  that  in  the  predicate  homines  is
to  be  supplied.  Now  ■  nonnulli  homines '  and  ■  nigri
homines'  undoubtedly  seem  to  be  two  entirely  dif-
ferent conceptions.  But  still  it  is  not  meant,  that
every  'some'  men  you  please,  taken  out  of  the
totality,  so  far  as  they  are  'some/  would  be  'black' ;
but  we  understand  a  perfectly  definite  'some/  —
namely,  the  negroes.  Therefore  S  and  P  are  wholly
identical  as  respects  content,  and  only  indicate  in
different  ways,  that  in  P  one  instance  (S)  is  char-
acterized as  part  of  a  more  general  concept  by
means  of  its  properties.

Finally,  the  historical  judgments  —  for  example,
'  the  dog  drinks/  '  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon '  —
that  is,  all  which  express  particular  facts  but  not
uniformly  valid  relations,  have  for  their  true  subject,
not  the  concept  simplieiter,  which  appears  at  this
place,  but  always  such  concept  together  with  a  multi-
tude of  secondary  ideas,  sometimes  suppressed  and
sometimes  indicated,  which  we  will  call  X ;  so  that
they  properly  have  the  form  'S  +  X  =  P.' Thus  in


THE HYPOTHETICAL JUDGMENT.  39

the  foregoing  examples,  it  is  not  the  universal  dog
which  is  drinking,  but  some  specific  one  whose  dif-
ferences from  other  dogs  are  not  pointed  out ;  but
which,  when  we  add  in  thought  all  its  peculiarities,
—  for  instance,  its  temperament,  the  nourishment
it  has  previously  had,  its  thirst,  and  the  tempera-
ture in  which  it  lives  —  is  then  exactly  the  same
dog  which  in  the  predicate  cannot  be  thought  of  as
any  other  than  the  dog  which  is  drinking.

These  secondary  ideas  X,  in  the  customary  expres-
sion of  categorical  judgments,  are  wont  to  be  desig-
nated mostly  through  the  particular  quantity  of  the
subject :  for  example,  'this  S  is  P' ;  'some  S  are  P' ;
or  by  particular  denotation  of  the  predicate,  as  '  S  is
sometimes  P ' ;  '  S  was  P  ' ;  and  the  like.  On  this
account  we  give  to  this  entire  grade  the  form  of  the
'particular  judgments'

§  29.  What  these  particular  judgments  indicate,  is
more  expressly  alluded  to  in  the  more  developed  form
of  the  hypothetical  judgments.  Here  the  accessory
circumstances,  which  are  in  the  previous  form  sup-
pressed or  only  indicated,  are  designated  in  some  an-
tecedent proposition  as  the  condition  which  must  be
fulfilled,  if  P  as  predicate  is  to  be  capable  of  being
adjoined  to  the  concept  of  the  subject  S.

The  simplest  form  will  be  this : If  to  S  an  X  be


40  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

added,  then  S  has  the  predicate  P ;  that  is,  antece-
dent and  consequent  propositions  have  the  same  con-
cept of  the  subject,  which  in  the  antecedent  is
completed  by  means  of  X  so  as  to  become  the  real
subject  to  which  in  the  consequent  P  must  be
attached.  In  the  usage  of  thought,  other  forms  may
arise  by  suppression  of  the  middle  terms ;  for  exam-
ple, '  If  R  is  an  X,  then  S  is  a  P/  Nevertheless  they
always  depend  upon  the  foregoing  original  form.

In  this  form,  the  antecedent  proposition  being
according  to  its  nature  problematic,  the  consequent
is  in  a  conditional  way  apodictic :  it  is  necessarily
true  if  the  antecedent,  which  is  in  itself  only  possible,
is  true.  If  we  wish  to  express  therewith  the  truth  of
the  antecedent,  then  the  assertory  form  comes  into
use:  'Since  $  is  an  X,  S  is  a  P.'  If  we  wish  to
designate  that  the  antecedent  is  not  the  condition  of
the  consequent,  the  negative  form  arises  :  Although
S  is  an  X,  still  S  is  not  therefore  a  P.

§  30.  If  now  we  make  prominent  the  fundamental
thought  which  the  process  of  thinking  has  betrayed
through  the  elaboration  of  the  hypothetical  form  of
judgment,  we  discover  in  it  the  second  fundamental
law  of  logic  :  The  principle  of  sufficient  reason  (Prin-
cipium  rationis  snfficie7ttis) .

The  process  of  thought,  as  it  were,  says :  You  uni-


PRINCIPLE OF SUFFICIENT REASON.  41

formly  express  a  necessary  truth  when  you  put  S  =
S  and  P  =  P,  in  an  identical  judgment.  You  are
uniformly  in  error,  when  you  put  S  =  P,  in  a  cate-
gorical judgment;  that  is,  if  you  suppose  it  were
ever  possible  for  an  S  to  assume  for  itself  alone  a
property  which  does  not  belong  to  its  concept,  or
which  it  did  not  have  previously ;  or  that,  out  of  a
single  principle,  a  single  substance,  a  single  power,  a
single  thought,  it  were  ever  possible  for  a  multiplicity
of  substances,  developments,  or  ideas  to  emerge,  —
in  general  anything  manifold  out  of  a  unity.  It
is,  on  the  contrary,  uniformly  necessary,  if,  out  of
one  subject  diverse  new  existences  are  to  proceed,
that  as  many  conditions  differing  from  one  another
should  have  to  be  brought  to  bear  upon  this  sub-
ject as  there  are  different  results  to  be  derived
from it.

The  principle  of  sufficient  reason  therefore  asserts
negatively  (and  in  this  respect  is  in  agreement  with
the  law  of  identity)  the  impossibility  of  an  immediate
connection  of  the  two  different  contents  of  the  idea,
$  and  P  ;  affirmatively,  on  the  other  hand,  it  asserts
the  possibility  that,  to  a  combination  of  two  ideas,  S
and  X,  which  somehow  determine  each  other,  there
should  be  given  a  predicate  P  which  is  not  given
either  to  the  S  alone,  or  to  the  X  alone.  The  exist-
ing relation  between  S  and  X,  whereby  this  becomes


42  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

possible,  is  the  ratio  sufficients  of  the  connection  of  S
and  P.

The  universal  logical  meaning  of  this  concept  of
sufficient  i  reason '  (Grund)  consists  simply  in  the
supposition,  that  the  manifold  content  of  everything
thinkable  is  not  a  relationless  and  dispersed  multi-
plicity;  but  that  there  is  a  truth —  that  is,  a  sum  of
such  valid  relations  —  through  which  a  definite  form
of  uniting  the  single  elements  of  the  thinkable  be-
comes of  itself  the  equivalent  of  other  elements.  In
what,  on  the  other  hand,  those  relations  consist,  in
the  particular  instance  or  in  single  large  domains  of
the  thinkable ;  in  what,  therefore,  the  definite  reason
for  a  definite  combination  of  a  certain  S,  or  of  a  cer-
tain class  of  S,  with  a  certain  P,  or  a  certain  class
of  P,  —  is  not  a  matter  of  logic.

On  this  account,  the  principle  of  the  'ratio  suffi-
cients' should  not  be  confounded  with  that  of  the
causa  efficients,  the  law  of  causation  ;  or  with  such
other  general  rules  as  relate  to  what  is  actual  or  to
particular  classes  of  what  is  actual.  A  'Cause'  (Ur-
sache),  for  instance,  is  the  power  that  produces  some-
thing actual,  which  previously  did  not  exist.  A
'reason'  {Grund)  is  always  simply  some  valid  truth
by  virtue  of  which  it  happens,  on  the  one  hand,  that
a  definite  effect  is  attributed  to  a  certain  cause ;  and
by  which  also,  on  the  other  hand,  in  those  provinces


PRINCIPLE OF COHERENCE.  43

of  thought,  in  which  there  is  no  'happening/ — for
example,  in  mathematics  —  the  combination  of  the
two  contents  of  the  concept  depends,  in  respect  to
its  validity,  upon  the  combination  of  two  others,
regardless  of  time.  How  this  comes  to  pass,  and
what  is,  strictly  speaking,  involved  in  the  fact,  that
a  condition  can  be  the  condition  of  that  which  is  con-
ditioned by  it,  —  of  this  no  general  logical  explana-
tion is  possible; — with  the  exception  of  a  single
meaning  of  this  question,  in  which  meaning  the
question  is  now  indeed  to  be  answered.

§  31.  Although  we  do  not  ask  in  Logic  to  know
what  consequences  follow  on  what  grounds,  and  by
what  means  the  two  cohere  together,  still,  if  the
process  of  thought  is  to  be  able  to  develop  new
truths  from  given  ones,  we  must  possess  some  uni-
versal and  purely  logical  principle,  independent  of
our  knowledge  of  the  thing  to  which  it  has  merely  to
be  applied ;  and  according  to  this  principle  we  must
be  able  to  judge  whether  one  proposition  may  be
rightly  considered  as  the  consequence  of  another.

Such  a  principle  we  do  in  fact  possess.  It  con-
sists in  this,  that  everything  special  must  conform
to  its  general  concept ;  every  individual  case  to  the
rule  of  the  general  case.  Had  we  not  this  formal
logical principle,  then  all  special  knowledge  of  in-


44  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

dividual  conditionating  relations  which  actually  exist
between  any  of  the  elements  of  existence,  would  be
of  no  help  to  us.  We  should  not  be  able  to  apply
them,  and  deduce  any  new  truth  from  them.

§  32.  This  ^thought  gains  expression  in  the  form
of  the  general  judgment.  Such  form  is  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  that  of  the  universal  judgment.
The  latter,  of  the  form

All  S  are  P,

only  asserts  that,  in  fact,  all  instances  of  S  have  P,
—  for  example,  'All  men  are  mortal/  —  but  does
not  tell  why.  Perhaps  it  may  be  on  account  of  a
combination  of  unfortunate  accidents  which  have
no  real  connection  with  each  other.

The  general  judgment  substitutes  the  general  con-
cept alone  for  the  subject :  i  Man  is  mortal ' ;  or  it
indicates  by  the  other  form,  *  Every  man  is  mortal/
that  the  predicate  is  to  be  considered  valid,  not
merely  of  all  actual  but  also  of  all  thinkable  exam-
ples of  S ;  and  therefore  is  so  by  virtue  of  this
same  general  concept  S,  and  not  on  other  accidental
grounds.

More  accurately  considered,  the  general  judgment
must  besides  be  included  in  the  hypothetical  form.
For  it  is  not  the  general  concept  S  (the  universal
man) which is to be considered as P  (mortal) ;


THE DISJUNCTIVE JUDGMENT.  45

but  every  individual,  because  he  is  man.  Therefore,
the  general  form,  strictly  speaking,  is :  'If  any  A
whatever  is  an  example  of  the  universal  S,  then
such  A  is  necessarily  P.*

§  33.  The  form  of  the  general  judgment  is,  never-
theless, still  inexact  in  another  way,  —  namely,  in
this,  that  it  attributes  to  the  subject  the  predicate
of  the  general  concept,  although  this  subject  is  not
the  general  concept  itself,  but  only  the  example  sub-
ordinated to  it  ;  for  instance,  the  proposition,  '  Every
material  body  has  some  color,'  is  untrue  in  so  far  as
the  particular  body  never  has  color  in  general,  but
is  either  red  or  green  or  blue,  etc.

That  is,  the  general  judgment  passes  over  into
the  disjunctive  or  divisive,  of  the  form,  — '  Every  S,
which  is  an  example  of  the  general  concept  M,  re-
ceives from  every  general  predicate  P  which  is
attributed  to  M,  one  of  its  kinds,  q,  r,  t, . . .,  to  the
exclusion  of  all  others,  as  its  own  predicate.  The
disjunctive  judgment,  therefore,  furnishes  S  with  no
definite  predicate  whatever,  but  only  dictates  to  it,
as  it  were,  the  necessary  choice  between  different
predicates ;  and  these,  taken  together,  are  individual
modifications  of  a  general  predicate  P  that  is  re-
quired by  the  higher  concept  of  the  genus  M,  to
which  S  is  subordinated.


46  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

The  next  step  forward  would  have  to  consist  in
concluding  this  choice  and  making  an  actual  selec-
tion between  q,  r,  t,  etc.  But  this  cannot  occur,  in
so  far  as  $  is  a  species  of  M,  because  this  reason
leaves  such  choice  wholly  indeterminate ;  but  must
take  place  on  account  of  the  fact  that  S  is  S,  —  that
is  to  say,  because  it  is  such  definite  species  of  M
and  none  other.  For  making  a  decision,  therefore,
two  propositions  will  be  employed  ;  the  first  of  which
states  what  is  true  of  S,  so  far  as  it  is  in  general
one  species  of  M,  the  second  what  is  true  of  S,  so
far  as  it  is  this  species  of  M.  These  two  proposi-
tions are  obviously  the  so-called  premises  of  a  con-
clusion, to  which  new  logical  form  we  now  pass
over.  The  series  of  judgments  ends  herewith,  and
is  not  to  be  extended  farther.

Remark.  The  ordinary  abbreviated  form  of  the  disjunctive
judgment  is  as  follows  :

a)  Affirmative :  S  is  either  q  or  r  or  t  or  .  .  .

b)  Negative  : S  is  neither  q  nor  r  nor  t  nor  .  .  .

§  34.  The  interpretation  of  the  disjunctive  judg-
ment just  adduced  expresses  two  laws  of  thought
combined,  wThich  have  commonly  been  brought  for-
ward as  separate  formulae  :  —

i. The  'Dictum  de  omni  et  nullo'1  makes  promi-

1  On  the  history  of  this,  compare  the  Zeitschrift  fur  Philosophie  u,
philos.  Kritik,  edited  by  Fichte,  Ulrici,  and  Wirth,  vol.  lxxvi  (Halle,  1880),
pp.  48  ff.


PRINCIPLE OF EXCLUDED MIDDLE.  47

nent  positively  the  dependence  of  the  particular  upon
its  universal.  The  expressions  which  we  frequently
hear,  "  What  is  true  of  the  universal  (or  of  the  whole)
is  also  true  of  the  particular  (or  of  the  part)/'  are
evidently  false.  The  scholastic  formula,  "  Quidquid
de  omnibus  valet  [negatur],  valet  [negatur]  etiam  de
quibusdam  et  de  singulis,"  is  indeed  quite  correct ;
yet  it  no  longer  expresses  the  relation  as  one  of
dependence  of  the  particular  upon  the  universal  to
which  it  belongs,  but  only  as  one  of  subordination  of
the  unity  under  the  totality  with  which  it  is  numeri-
cally included  in  the  same  conception ;  in  this  way
the  proposition  becomes,  fundamentally  considered,  a
tautology.

2.  The  second  formula,  the  'Principium  exclusi
medii  inter  duo  contradictoria,'  is  a  special  case  of
the  more  general  one  which  is  expressed  in  the  pre-
vious section.

That  is  to  say ;  if  we  presuppose,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  general  predicate  P  has  three  or  more  spe-
cies q,  r,  t  .  .  .,  and  that  one  subject  S  must,  so  far
as  it  is  a  species  of  M,  make  a  choice  among  these
species  of  P,  then  the  choice  of  one  predicate  q  will
exclude  all  the  rest,  r,  t  .  .  .  ;  whereas  the  negation
of  q  does  not  involve  the  affirmation  of  a  definite
one  of  the  remaining  r,  t,  etc.  Of  these  predicates
q,  r,  t  .  .  .  it  is  said,  that  they  stand  in  contrary  oppo-


48  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

sition  for  an  S,  which  is  an  M,  to  which  M  again  P
belongs.

But  furthermore,  if  P  (gender)  is  separable  into
only  two  species  q  and  r  (masculine  and  feminine),
then  these  two  predicates  stand  in  *  contradictory-
opposition  '  for  every  S  which  has  any  necessary  re-
lation to  P  (for  every  living  being)  ;  that  is,  not  only
does  the  affirmation  of  the  one  deny  the  other,  but
also  the  negation  of  the  one  affirms  the  other.

Finally,  if  we  wish  to  avoid  the  condition,  that  the
S  have  a  necessary  relation  to  P  dependent  upon
its  peculiar  nature ;  and  if  we  therefore  wish  to
establish  two  predicates  which  are  contradictory  for
every  S  whatever ;  then  such  relation  can  only  con-
sist in  some  Q  and  non-Q,  —  whereby  the  latter  com-
prehends all  that  is  not  Q.  But  'precisely  for  that
reason  non-Q  is  not  an  independent  concept,  which
can  be  attached  as  predicate  to  any  S  whatever;
and,  strictly  speaking,  we  no  longer  have  a  case  of
an  opposition  between  two  concepts,  but  of  an  oppo-
sition between  two  judgments,  one  of  which  ascribes
a  predicate  Q  to  S,  while  the  other  totally  denies
the  same  Q  to  it.

C.  Immediate  Inferences  from  Judgments.

§  35. According to  an ancient mnemonic  coup-
let, — Asserit  A,  negat  E,  verum  generaliter  ambo,
Asserit  I,  negat  O,  sed  particulariter  ambo,  —


SUBALTERNATION AND OPPOSITION.  49

we  designate  the  universal  affirmative  judgment  by
A,  the  universal  negative  by  E,  the  particular  affirm-
ative by  I,  and  the  particular  negative  by  O.  If  we
conceive  of  these  four  forms  as  applied  to  one  and
the  same  content  S-P,  the  following  relations  occur
among  them :  —

A Oppositio  Contraria E

* X X 1

I ^ X 1

I Oppositio  Subcontraria O

I.  Between  A  and  I  (All  &  are  P  —  .sw^  S  are
P),  as  well  as  between  E  and  O  (no  S  is  P  —  some  S
are  not  P)  Subaltematio  —  that  is,  subordination  of
the  individual  to  the  universal  —  takes  place.  The
validity  of  the  general  case  always  includes  that  of
the  particular  instance,  the  validity  of  the  particular
not  that  of  the  general  case.  The  invalidity  of  the
general  case  does  not  carry  with  it  that  of  the  par-
ticular ;  the  invalidity  of  the  particular  (which  is
always  understood  as  meaning  that  there  is  no  partic-
ular instance  whatever  in  which  the  content  of  the
judgment is valid) involves, on the contrary, the


5<D  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

invalidity  of  the  general  case.  Consequently,  we
conclude  '  ad  subalternatam  ' *  from  +  A  to  + 1,  from
+  E  to  +  O  ;  but  not  from  —  A  to  —  I,  not  from  —  E
to  —  O.  Further,  we  conclude  'ad  subalternantem/
from  —  I  to  —  A,  from  —  O  to  —  E  ;  but  not  from
+  1  to  +  A,  or  from  +  O  to  +  E.

Both  of  these  prohibited  conclusions  —  namely,
from  the  particular  instance  to  the  general  case,  and
from  the  invalidity  of  the  general  case  to  the  like
invalidity  of  the  particular  —  belong  to  the  most
frequently  occurring  fallacies  in  logic.

2.  From  the  contrary  opposition  between  A  and
E  it  follows,  that  the  validity  of  the  one  excludes
that  of  the  other ;  the  invalidity  of  the  one,  on  the
contrary,  does  not  involve  the  validity  of  the  other.
We  conclude  therefore  '  ad  contrariam  '  from  +  A  to
—  E,  and  from  +  E  to  —  A ;  but  not  from  —  A  to
+  E,  or  from  —  E  to  +  A.

3.  Between  A  and  O  and  E  and  I  there  is  contra-
dictory opposition.  For  if  A  is  not  valid,  it  is  obvious
that  there  necessarily  occur  some  cases,  in  which  the
opposite  is  valid.  So  then  the  invalidity  of  a  general
j  udgment  involves  the  validity  of  the  opposite  particu-
lar judgment ;  and  we  conclude  'ad  contradictoriam '
from  —A  to  +G,  from  —  E  to  +1. In the same

1  The  sign  -f-  stands  for  the  validity,  and  —  for  the  invalidity,  of  a  judg-
ment.


SUBCONTRARY OPPOSITION.  5  I

way  it  is  self-evident,  that  when  a  particular  judg-
ment is  not  valid,  —  that  is,  when  there  are  no
individual  instances  in  which  it  is  valid,  —  then  its
opposite  is  universally  valid.  We  therefore  likewise
conclude  '  ad  contradictoriam '  from  —  O  to  +  A,
from  —  I  to  +  E.  Finally,  it  also  is  self-evident
that  the  validity  of  a  universal  proposition  involves
the  invalidity  of  opposite  particular  ones  ;  as  well  as
that  the  validity  of  a  particular  judgment  involves
the  invalidity  of  the  opposite  general  judgment.
Therefore  we  also  conclude  'ad  contradictoriam '
from  + 1  to  —  E  and  conversely,  and  from  +0  to
—  A  and  conversely.

4.  The  subcontrary  opposition  between  I  and  O,
if  one  of  the  two  is  valid,  allows  no  conclusion  to  be
drawn.  For  if  one  particular  judgment  is  correct,
it  is  possible  that  the  opposite  particular  is  also
valid  ;  but  it  is  likewise  possible  that  it  is  not  valid,
and  that  the  original  proposition  is  only  expressed
in  particular  form  but  is  really  universally  valid.  If,
on  the  contrary,  a  particular  judgment  is  denied,  then
the  opposite  general  judgment  is  hereby  affirmed  'ad
contradictoriam,'  and  as  a  consequence  we  have  'ad
subalternatam '  the  validity  of  the  subordinated  (of
the  previous  opposite)  particular  judgment.  We  there-
fore conclude  'ad  subcontrariam '  from  —I  to  +O
and  conversely,  but  not  from  + 1  to  —  O  or  conversely.


52  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

§  36.  A  judgment  undergoes  conversion  (conversio)
when  subject  and  predicate  are  exchanged.  The  natu-
ral interest  of  thought  in  this  operation  consists  in  this :
If  a  proposition  'S  is  P'  gives  to  the  S  a  predicate,
then  we  may  desire  to  know  whether  this  is  an  essen-
tial mark  of  S,  whether  therefore  everywhere,  where
P  occurs,  the  subject  with  which  it  occurs  is  an  S  or
a  species  of  S.  That  is,  we  wish  essentially  to  know
whether  the  converted  judgment,  'P  is  $,'  is  univer-
sally valid,  or  not.

Pure  conversion  {conversio  purd)  is  the  name  given
to  that  in  which  the  original  and  the  converted  prop-
osition have  the  same  quantity.  Impure  (impura  or
per  accidens)  conversion  is  that  in  which  this  is  not
the  case.

§  37. We  may  therefore  have  —
a)  A  universal  affirmative  judgment: 'All  S  are
P.' Three  cases  are  here  possible  :


Fig.  I.  Fig.  2.  Fig.  3.


CONVERSION OF JUDGMENTS.  53

In  Fig.  i,  S  is  subordinated  to  P:  '  All  metals  are
bodies';  in  Fig.  2,  S  is  subsumed  under  P:  'All
gold  is  yellow/  In  both  cases  it  is  self-evident  that
the  whole  extension  of  P  is  not  covered  by  S ;  that
there  are  consequently  many  Ps  which  are  not  S ;
and  that,  accordingly,  the  conversion  can  only  be
imperfect  (impiird)  and  give  nothing  but  the  particu-
lar judgment :  '  Some  P  are  S  '  ('  Some  bodies  are
metals,'  '  Some  yellow  bodies  are  gold ').  —  Fig.  3  is
therefore  to  be  conceived  of  in  such  way,  that  two
equal  circles  $  and  P  completely  cover  each  other ;
from  which  it  follows  that  the  conversion  is  pure
and  gives  the  universal  proposition :  '  All  P  are  S/
Such  judgments  are  called  '  reciprocable/  But  what
judgments  belong  to  this  class  cannot  be  known  on
logical  grounds,  but  only  from  knowledge  of  actual
facts.  To  it,  for  example,  belong  all  accurate  defini-
tions, all  correct  equations,  and  many  propositions
like  this  :  '  All  equilateral  triangles  are  equiangular/

The  violation  of  this  rule  of  conversion  is  one  of
the  most  frequent  of  logical  errors.


Fig.  4.


54  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

b)  The  universal  negative  judgment,  *  No  S  is  P,'
obviously  (Fig.  4)  separates  S  and  P  completely,  so
that  it  is  self-evident  that  no  P  is  an  S ;  that  is,  uni-
versal negative  judgments  by  pure  conversion  give
universal  negative  judgments  again.

c)  The  particular  affirmative  judgment,  'Some  S
are  P,'  if  S  is  subsumed  under  P,  —  for  example,
i  Some  flowers  are  yellow '  (still  more,  like  the  analo-
gous universal  judgment,  according  to  Fig.  2)  admits
only  of  the  particular  conversion,  '  Some  yellow  ob-
jects are  flowers '  ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  P  is  subor-
dinated to  S,  and  $  is  therefore  the  higher  generic
notion,  —  as  for  instance,  'Some  dogs  are  pugs/  —
then  conversion  gives  the  universal  judgment,  'All
P  are  S/  This  case  also  we  can  know  only  from
knowledge  of  real  things.

d)  The  particular  negative  judgment,  'Some  S  are
not  P,'  can  in  no  rational  way  whatever  be  converted
into  the  negative  '  Some  P  are  not  S ' ;  for  example,
from  the  statement  that  some  monkeys  have  no  tails
it  does  not  follow  that  some  things  without  tails  are
not  monkeys.  For  the  tail  might  possibly  occur  only
in  the  case  of  monkeys,  although  they  might  not
all  have  it.  Or  in  more  general  terms  ;  the  negation
of  a  predicate  to  any  subject  does  not  justify  any
affirmation  as  to  what  of  such  predicate  otherwise
occurs  or  does  not  occur. All  that  can  be  done  here


CONTRAPOSITION OF JUDGMENTS.  55

is  to  join  the  negation  to  the  predicate  and  convert  it
into  the  particular  affirmative.  Therefore,  '  Some  S
are  not  P,'  gives  '  Some  non-P  are  S.'

§  38.  Furthermore,  inquiry  may  be  made  as  to  the
relations  which  take  place  between  a  subject  S  which
has  a  predicate  P,  and  another  subject  which  has  not
this  P,  —  that  is,  a  non-P.  This  leads  to  what  is
called  contraposition.  According  to  this  form,  the
affirmative  judgment  is  changed  into  a  negative,  in
which  at  the  same  time  non-P  is  substituted  for  P,
the  negative  attaches  its  negation  to  the  predicate,
and  thereby  becomes  affirmative.  Both  then  become
converted  according  to  the  customary  rules.  The
'  contraposited '  judgment  has  the  opposite  quality
from  the  original  judgment.  The  quantity  in  the
particular  judgment  remains  the  same;  the  universal
affirmative  becomes  universal  negative,  and  the  uni-
versal negative  becomes  particular  affirmative.

Examples  :


All  $  are  P.

No  S  is  non-P.
No  non-P  is  S.


No  S  is  P.

All  S  are  non-P.
Some  non-P  are  S.


The  conclusions  arrived  at  in  this  way  are  not
worthless ;  but  they  can  all  be  reached  more  con-
veniently and  clearly  without  this  apparatus  of  logi-
cal formalities.


CHAPTER III.

OF SYLLOGISMS.
A. The  Aristotelian  Figures.

§  39.  Before  we  further  prosecute  the  problem
which  the  disjunctive  judgment  propounded  as  that
of  the  form  of  the  conclusion,  we  have  first  to  allude
to  certain  other  forms  of  conclusion,  which  do  not
indeed  solve  this  problem,  but  only  express  as  devel-
oped what  was  already  contained  in  the  form  of  the
general  judgment.

In  the  former  case  a  P  was  attributed  to  an  S,  in
so  far  as  this  S  falls  under  the  concept  M.  Such  a
content  is  separable  into  two  judgments,  one  of
which  expresses  a  relation  pf  M  to  P,  and  the  other
a  relation  of  S  to  M ;  whereupon  the  proposition  it-
self asserts  as  a  consequence  a  relation  of  S  and  P.
These  are  the  elements  of  the  ordinary  conclusion  :
M  is  the  medius  terminus,  or  '  middle  concept/  by
means  of  which  a  relation  is  established  between  S
and  P ;  the  propositions  which  express  the  relation,
in  part  of  M  to  S,  and  in  part  of  M  to  P,  are  the
premises ;  the  third  proposition,  which  always  com-
bines S  and  P,  and  in  which  M  does  not  appear,  is


THE ARISTOTELIAN FIGURES.  57

the  conclusion  (Conclusio).  According  to  the  differ-
ent possible  combinations  of  the  three  concepts  in
the  premises,  the  three  so-called  Aristotelian  figures
of  the  conclusion  are  distinguished  :  —

I.  Figure:  M  — P II.  Figure:  P  — M III.  Figure:  M  — P
S  -  31  S  -M  M  -  S

S  -P  S  -P  S  -P

It  is  only  a  matter  of  agreement,  and  yet  one
universally  accepted,  that  in  the  concluding  proposi-
tion the  concept  shall  always  be  the  subject  which
is  combined  with  M  in  the  second  premise ;  and  the
other  one,  which  stands  in  the  first  premise,  the
predicate.  Accordingly,  the  first  premise  may  be
in  general  designated  as  the  l major'  premise  (Propo-
siti major),  the  second  as  the  ' minor'  premise  (Pro-
positi minor) ;  although,  according  to  the  nature  of
the  thing,  no  inducement  to  this  is  found  in  the
second  and  third  figures,  since  their  premises  are
constructed  in  a  manner  quite  homogeneous.

For  all  three  figures  the  universally  valid  condition
of  the  cogency  of  the  conclusion  consists  in  the  com-
plete identity  of  the  middle  term  in  both  premises.  For
S  and  P  would  obviously  not  be  connected  together
through  M,  if  the  M  with  which  P  is  connected  were
another  M  from  that  with  which  S  is  connected.

§  40. If  we  consider  the  position  of  the  premises


58  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

in  the  '  First  Figure/  we  discover  that,  according  to
the  very  nature  of  the  case,  the  same  concept  M  can
be  at  one  time  subject  and  at  another  predicate,  only
when  it  is  a  generic  concept  for  which  the  major
premise  furnishes  a  predicate,  and  under  which  the
minor  premise  subordinates  some  subject  as  a  special
instance  or  example.

The  force  of  the  conclusion,  therefore,  depends
upon  the  subsumption  of  the  particular  under  the  uni-
versal. It  will,  accordingly,  take  place  only  when  —

i)  the  major  premise  is  universal  (for  the  S  in
the  minor  premise,  which  is  an  M,  is  with  perfect
certainty  subsumed  under  the  M  of  the  major  pre-
mise, only  in  case  this  latter  includes  all  M)  ;  and
when  —

2)  the  minor  premise  is  affirmative  (for  since  the
conclusion  depends  upon  subsumption,  a  negative
minor  premise,  which  would  deny  any  such  subsump-
tion, would  cut  the  nerve  of  the  sequence).  —  On  the
contrary  —

3)  the  quality  of  the  major  premise  is  not  essential
(for  the  same  relation  which  it  expresses  between  M
and  P,  whether  it  be  affirmation  or  negation,  should
and  can  be  carried  over  in  the  conclusion  to  S  and  P).
Also  —

4)  the  quantity  of  the  minor  premise  is  not  essen-
tial (for  it  is  just  this  relation  of  M  and  P  that  is  not


THE SECOND FIGURE.  59

altered  by  the  number  of  the  subjects  to  which  it
applies). From  this  it  follows,  finally, —

5)  that  the  conclusion  always  has  the  quality  of
the  major  premise  and  the  quantity  of  the  minor
premise  (for  it  borrows  from  the  first  the  positive  or
negative  relation  which  it  carries  over ;  and  from  the
second,  the  particular  or  universal  subject  to  which
it  carries  the  relation  over).

If  the  vowels  of  the  following  words  of  three
syllables  (following  the  mnemonic  couplet  of  §  35)
designate,  respectively,  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the
propositio  major,  of  the  propositio  minor,  and  of  the
conclusion  of  the  syllogism,  then  there  are  four  valid
so-called  '  Modi '  of  the  first  figure :  Barbara,  Cela-
rent,  Darii,  Ferio.

§  41.  In  the  Second  Figure,  the  premises  estab-
lish a  relation  between  two  subjects  P  and  S,  and  the
same  predicate  M.

If  now,  in  the  first  place,  we  conceive  of  both  as
1  possessing '  the  M,  then  obviously  nothing  whatever
follows  with  reference  to  their  reciprocal  relation.
And  the  case  would  be  exactly  the  same  as  if  they
both  did  not  have  the  M.  Both  premises,  therefore,
should  not  be  affirmative,  nor  both  negative.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  the  one  subject  A  —  particular  or
universal  —  either  does  or  does  not  have  the  M,  and


60  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

the  other,  B,  is  in  the  opposite  relation  with  reference
to  M,  —  not  particular  but  universal,  —  and  therefore
uniformly  has  not  or  has  M ;  then  A  cannot  be  a
species  of  B.

From  this  it  would  follow  that  one  premise  must
be  affirmative,  the  other  negative ;  and  that  one  must
be  universal,  and  the  other  may  be  particular  as  well.
Still,  since  the  A,  which  is  to  be  the  subject  in
the  conclusion,  is  always,  according  to  conventional
usage,  the  subject  of  the  minor  premise  (S),  the
universal  premise  must  be  the  first  or  major ;  and  its
rules  are,  accordingly,  the  following  :  —

i)  The  major  premise  in  the  second  figure  is  uni-
formly universal,  but  its  quality  is  either  affirmative
or  negative.

2)  The  minor  premise  is  in  quality  uniformly  the
opposite  of  the  major  premise ;  but  its  quantity,  on
the  contrary,  may  be  either  universal  or  particular.

3)  The  conclusion  is  uniformly  negative,  and  fol-
lows in  quantity  that  of  the  minor  premise.

The  four  modes  (Modi)  are  :  Camestres,  BanSco,
Cesare,  Festino.

§  42.  In  the  Third  Figure,  the  premises  establish
a  relation  between  one  and  the  same  subject  and  two
predicates.

Now  if  the  subject  has  both  predicates, — that  is,


THE THIRD FIGURE.  6l

if  both  predicates  are  affirmative,  —  then  there  fol-
lows, from  this  given  example  of  an  actual  combina-
tion of  S  and  P,  the  possibility  of  such  combination
(the  fact  that  S  and  P  are  'unitable');  and,  therefore,
the  conclusion  is  :  '  What  is  S  may  be  P.''  This  con-
clusion is  customarily  (and  yet,  strictly  speaking,  not
perfectly  correctly)  expressed  in  the  particular  form  :
'Some  S  are  P.'  In  order  that  the  medius  terminus
may  both  times  signify  exactly  the  same  thing,  and
therefore  the  M  of  the  one  premise  may  be  certainly
contained  in  the  M  of  the  other  also,  one  premise  —
it  makes  no  difference  which  —  must  be  universal.
This  gives  three  modes  :  Darapti,  Datisi,  Disamis.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  M  has  one  predicate,  but
not  the  other,  —  that  is,  if  one  premise  is  affirmative
and  the  other  negative,  —  then  it  follows  from  this
that  the  two  predicates  are  separable.  Or  (to  express
the  same  thing  more  accurately)  the  predicate  which
occurs  is  separable  from  that  which  does  not  occur
in  this  example  (that  is,  is  denied).  But  it  does  not
follow  that  the  predicate  here  denied  could  occur
separate  from  that  affirmed. From

All  animals  are  living,

Some  animals  are  not  rational,

it  does  not  follow  that  being  rational  could  occur
without  being  alive  (although  the  latter  could  very


62  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

well  occur  without  the  former).  Now,  since  (§  39,
last  paragraph  but  one)  the  subject  of  the  conclu-
sion must  appear  in  the  minor  premise,  it  must  be
affirmed  ;  and,  besides,  as  in  the  previous  figure,  in
case  of  two  affirmative  premises,  one  must  be  uni-
versal. Strictly  speaking,  the  conclusion  merely
asserts  :  '  What  S  is,  P  need  not  be ' ;  but  this  again,
expressed  as  a  particular  judgment  (though  strictly
speaking,  not  with  accuracy)  becomes  :  '  Some  S  are
not  P.'  This  gives  us  the  following  three  modes  :
Felapton,  Ferison,  Bocardo.

Finally,  if  both  premises  are  negative,  then  it  is
customary  to  assert  in  treatises  on  logic  that  no  con-
clusion is  possible  —  '  ex  mere  negativis  nihil  sequi-
tur.'  This  is  absolutely  groundless  and  false.  If
the  same  M  is  neither  P  nor  S,  then  it  follows  from
this  that  P  and  S  are  not  contradictorily  opposed  to
each  other ;  and  that,  consequently,  what  is  not  S
need  not,  on  that  account,  be  P.  For  example  :  The
just  man  is  not  recognized  —  The  just  man  is  not
unhappy  ;  —  conclusion  :  Whoever  is  not  recognized
is  not  on  that  account  unhappy.  Conclusions  of  this
kind  are  by  no  means  to  be  esteemed  as  of  small
value  and  importance ;  since  they  assert,  from  affirm-
ative or  mixed  premises,  the  unitability  or  (respec-
tively) the  separability  of  $  and  P.  And  they,  in
fact,  are  occurring  every  day,  in  order  to  refute  some


THE FIGURE OF GALEN.  63

false  conclusion  which  has  been  drawn  from  the  de-
ficiency of  one  predicate  :  "  Because  thou  art  not
that,  thou  needest  not  to  be  the  other  also.''

§  43.  A  Fourth  Figure,  that  of  Galen,  in  which
the  position  of  the  premises  is  P  — M,  M  — S,  and
from  which  the  conclusion  S  — P  should  follow,  is
superfluous  and  faulty  ;  for  example,  —

All  roses  are  plants.
All  plants  need  air.


Some  things  needing  air  are  roses.


The  natural  process  of  thought  always  draws  from
the  foregoing  premises,  when  it  converts  them,  the
following  conclusion  in  accordance  with  the  first
figure:  'AH  P  are  $'  —  "All  roses  need  air/  The
conclusion  of  Galen,  —  '  Some  S  are  P  '  —  on  the
contrary  is  not  merely  unnatural,  but  expresses  less
than  the  other.  For  if  it  is  converted,  then  we  have
only  the  particular  proposition  :  '  Some  P  are  S '  —
'Some  roses  are  things  that  need  air.'  But  undoubt-
edly it  is  a  logical  fault,  from  given  premises  to  con-
clude less  than  really  follows  from  them.

And  in  similar  manner,  the  conclusions  possible
according  to  the  fourth  figure  always  admit  of  being
obtained  more  naturally  and  better  by  transposition
and  transformation  of  the  premises  in  accordance
with  one  of  the  first  three,  or  Aristotelian  figures.


64  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

The  modes  of  the  fourth  figure  are  as  follows  :
Bamalip,  Calemes,  Dimatis,  Fesapo,  Fresiso.

§  44.  Only  the  first  figure  appeared  to  the  older
logic  to  be  evidently  conclusive  and  perfect.  The
conclusions  drawn  according  to  the  other  figures,  on
the  contrary,  were  considered  to  be  completely  justi-
fied only  when  they  could  be  referred  ('  reduced  ')  by
transformation,  conversion,  transposition,  of  the  pre-
mises, etc.,  to  the  first  figure  ;  and  then  the  previous
conclusion  drawn  from  them  in  accordance  with  this
figure.  The  operations  necessary  for  this  are  signi-
fied by  the  consonants  s  p  m  c  in  the  names  of  the
modes  of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  figures,  in
accordance  with  the  couplet,  —

s  vult  simpliciter  verti,  p  verti  per  accid.  [accidens],
m  vult  transponi,  c  per  impossibile  duci.

That  is  to  say,  if  m  (metathesis)  requires  transposi-
tion of  the  premises  (that  the  major  premise  be
made  the  minor  premise,  the  minor  premise  the
major)  ;  s  and  p  call  for  Conversio  (more  particularly,
s  for  pure  conversion,  simpliciter,  p  for  impure,  per
accidens)  of  that  proposition  behind  whose  character-
istic vowel  they  stand  in  the  name  of  the  modes.
For  example ;  in  order  to  ' reduce '  Disamis  to  the  first
figure,  the  major  premise  (on  account  of  the  s  which
follows  its  vowel)  must  undergo  pure  conversion,  —


TRANSFORMATION  OF  PREMISES. 6$

that  is,  in  this  case,  conversion  into  a  particular  prop-
osition ;  it  is  then  to  have  its  position  exchanged  (on
account  of  the  ni  after  the  a)  with  the  minor  pre-
mise. Now  from  these  transformed  premises  a  con-
clusion is  drawn  according  to  the  first  figure,  which
is  then  in  turn  converted  (on  account  of  the  last  s)  ;
and  in  that  way,  finally,  the  previous  conclusion  ac-
cording to  Disamis  is  derived  again.
Example  :

Original  in  Disamis :

Some  metals  are  magnetic.
All  metals  are  fusible.


Some  things  fusible  are  magnetic.

Reduction  to  Darii  of  the  first  figure :

All  metals  are  fusible.

Some  magnetic  substances  are  metals.

Some  magnetic  substances  are  fusible.

This  conclusion  converted :

Some  things  fusible  are  magnetic.

Finally,  the  letter  c  indicates  a  more  circumstan-
tial operation  (the  Ductio  per  impossibile  s  per  con-
tradictoriam  propositionem),  which  amounts  to  the  same
thing  as  that,  for  example,  in  Bocardo  the  conclusion
StfP1  denies ;  accordingly  the  proposition  S#P  affirms

1S«P,  SeP,  S^P  S<?P,  are  meant  to  designate,  respectively,  a  universal
affirmative,  particular  affirmative,  universal  negative  and  particular  nega-
tive judgment,  with  the  subject  S  and  the  predicate  P.  Corresponding  to
these,  on  the  other  hand,  PaS  would  be  a  universal  affirmative  judgment
with  the  subject  P  and  the  predicate  S,  etc.


66  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

'ad  contradictoriam,'  and  (the  c  stands  in  the  name
of  the  modus  behind  the  vowel  which  designates
the  major  premise)  this  contradictory  opposite  of
the  conclusion  is  put  in  the  place  of  the  major  pre-
mise of  Bocardo.  From  it  as  major  premise,  and
from  the  second  premise  of  Bocardo  as  minor  pre-
mise, a  conclusion  then  follows  according  to  Barbara,
which  is  the  contradictory  opposite  of  the  premise
given  in  fact  as  the  first  of  Bocardo  (and  accordingly
is  just  as  certainly  false  as  that  is  correct) ;  from
all  of  which  it  is  clear  that  the  negation  of  the
original  conclusion  in  Bocardo  is  not  permissible,
and  that  this  other  is  therefore  correct.

§  45.  The  distinguishing  peculiarities  of  the  three
Aristotelian  figures  are  therefore  the  following :

i)  Only  the  second  figure  can  draw  a  conclusion
from  a  negative  minor  premise ;  only  the  third
figure  from  a  particular  major  premise.

2)  Only  the  first  figure  can  lead  to  a  universal
affirmative  conclusion.  Only  it  has  concluding
propositions  of  every  kind :  A,  E,  I,  O ;  on  the
contrary,  the  second  is  only  negative :  E,  O ;  the
third  is  only  particular : I,  O.

This  law  holds  good  in  the  case  of  connected
series  of  syllogisms  (syllogismi  concatenati,  catenae
syllogismorum)  which originate from the  fact  that


NATURE OF THE SORITES.  67

the  conclusion  of  one  syllogism  —  which  is  then
called  '  prosyllogismus '  —  is  employed  as  a  premise
for  another,  which  then  receives  the  name  of  'epi-
syllogismus.'  If  the  conclusion  of  the  last  epi-
syllogism,  and  therefore  of  the  entire  chain  of
reasoning,  is  to  be  universal  affirmative,  then  the
entire  chain  must  be  constructed  according  to  the
mode  Barbara  of  the  first  figure.  If  a  particular
proposition  at  any  place  enters  into  it,  then  the
final  conclusion  can  be  only  particular ;  and  only
negative,  as  soon  as  a  negative  conclusion  has  any-
where entered  into  it.

Finally,  ' Sorites'  (Kettenschluss)  is  the  name  for
certain  chains  of  conclusions  that  are  abbreviated
and  simplified  in  expression  (abbreviated  and  simpli-
fied by  suppressing  the  concluding  propositions  of  all
the  prosyllogisms).  It  is  customary  to  distinguish
the  sorites  of  Aristotle  and  the  sorites  of  Goclenius.1
The  structure  and  difference  of  the  two  are  as  follows :

Sorites  of  Aristotle.  Sorites  of  Goclenius.

S-MO)  MO)  -P

MOO-M(J)  MQO-MO)

M(£)  -  M(0  M(V)  -  M(y)

•  •  •  •

•  •  •  •

MO) -MOO  MO)- MO)

M {y)  -MO)  M (a)  -  M (/)

MO)  -P  S-M(V)

S-P  S-P

1  So  called  from  Rudolph  Goclenius  (1547-1628),  professor  in  Marburg,


68  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

§  46.  Strictly  speaking,  all  syllogisms  simply  carry
over  unchanged  (as  their  form  of  expression  makes
perfectly  clear  in  case  we  conceive  of  those  which
follow  the  other  figures  as  '  reduced '  to  the  first
figure,  §  44)  that  relation  which  the  major  premise
states  as  between  P  and  M,  and  apply  it  to  the
subject  S,  which  the  minor  premise  somehow  obvi-
ously includes  in  the  conception  of  M.  Accordingly,
the  nature  of  the  judgment  which  forms  the  major
premise,  as  well  as  of  that  which  forms  the  minor  pre-
mise, is  unimportant  for  the  form  of  the  conclusion.

If  the  premises,  therefore,  are  not  categorical
judgments  (as  we  have  hitherto  exclusively  assumed
them  to  be),  but  if  they  are  furnished  to  us  in
hypothetical  or  disjunctive  form,  then  these  differ-
ences (which  are,  of  course,  important  for  the
judgments  as  such)  require  consideration ;  but  they
do  not  require  any  alteration  of  the  rules  for  draw-
ing conclusions  which  are  primarily  established  for
categorical  premises.  Nevertheless,  in  some  sorts
of  conclusions  with  hypothetical  or  disjunctive  pre-
mises, the  matter-of-fact  interest  has  led  to  certain
artificial  expressions  to  which  allusion  may  be  made.


author  of  the  'Lexicon  philosophicum,'  Francof.  1613,  who  in  his  '  Isagoge
in  Organum  Aristotelis,'  Francof.  1598,  was  the  first  to  require  for  the
sorites  this  (in  the  series  of  the  traditional  syllogistic-norms,  comp.  supra,
p.  57)  transformation  of  the  schema  of  the  schools,  which  is,  of  course,
perfectly  correct.


NATURE OF THE SORITES.  69

In  the  first  place,  there  is  a  series  of  cases  in
which  a  hypothetical  major  premise,  as  a  general
rule,  attaches  a  sequence  F  in  the  following  prop-
osition to  a  reason  G  that  forms  the  content  of
its  preceding  proposition ;  but  a  categorical  minor
premise  either  affirms  or  denies  the  validity  either  of
G  or  of  F.

a)  Now  if  the  major  premise  asserts  positively:
*  If  G  is  true,  then  F  also  is  always  true ' ;  and  the
minor  premise  just  as  positively:  'In  all  or  some
cases  of  S,  G  is  true ' ;  then  the  conclusion  is  :  'In
all  or  some  cases  of  S,  F  is  also  true.'  This  is  called
the  'Modus  ponendo  ponens,'  because  by  positing
the  reason  the  consequent  is  established ;  and  it
corresponds  to  the  modes  Barbara  and  Darii.

b)  If  the  major  premise  were  the  same,  and  the
minor  premise,  on  the  other  hand,  negative  and  also
assertory  :  '  F  does  not  exist ' ;  then  the  conclusion
would  be:  'Consequently,  G  also  does  not  exist.'
This  is  a  'modus  tollendo  tollens'  that,  by  abolishing
the  result,  abolishes  the  reason  which  it  would  have
necessarily  established  in  case  it  had  been  valid;  as
for  the  rest,  it  is  in  appearance  a  type  of  Camestres
and  Baroco.

c)  If  the  major  premise  were  negative  :  '  In  case  G
is  true,  F  is  never  true ' ;  and  the  minor  premise
asserted  positively :  '  Now,  however,  F  is  true ;  then


yO  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

the  conclusion  would  be :  Therefore  G  is  not  true,
which  would  make  F  impossible,  if  it  were/  etc.
This  is  a  '  Modus  ponendo  tollens'  (corresponding  to
Cesare  and  Festino),  which  by  positing  a  result
denies  the  reason  which  would  have  made  it  im-
possible.

And  so  forth  :  —  we  see  that  these  consequences
admit  of  being  referred  without  difficulty  to  the
course  of  thought  in  the  Aristotelian  figures.

Finally,  'Dilemma,'  'Trilemma'  .  .  .  'Polylemma,'
are  the  names  given  to  those  conclusions  with  a
disjunctive  major  premise  (having  two,  three  ...  or
many  members,  respectively)  and  with  several  minor
premises,  whose  number  is  the  same  as  the  number
of  the  disjoined  members  in  the  major  premise ;  and
which  assert  conjointly  for  each  of  these  members
one  and  the  same  result  T,  or  one  and  the  same  predi-
cate T.  The  name  '  dilemma '  (and  corresponding  to
it,  trilemma,  etc.)  is  by  preference  originally  given  to
a  conclusion  of  the  form :

If  Z  is  to  be  true,  either  U  or  W  must  be  true,
Now  neither  U  nor  W  is  true,


Therefore  Z  is  not  true.


§  47.  The  Aristotelian  figures  admit  of  being
apprehended  in  yet  another  way.  If  we  conclude
according  to  the  first  figure  in  Darii  :


DESIGN OF THE CONCLUSION.  J I

All  men  are  mortal,
Caius  is  a  man,

Therefore  Caius  is  mortal;  —

it  is  indeed  the  design  of  the  conclusion  to  deduce
the  truth  of  the  final  proposition  as  something  in
itself  still  questionable,  from  the  truth  of  premises
regarded  as  already  established.  But  our  attention
is  soon  called  to  the  fact,  that  i  alV  men  are  mortal
only  in  case  Caius  is,  too  ;  and  that  Caius  also  is  a
'  man '  only  in  case  he  has  all  the  essential  properties
of  a  man,  and  consequently  that  of  being  mortal.
That  is  to  say,  the  conclusion  suffers  from  a  so-called
*  double  circle':  major  as  well  as  minor  premise,  in
order  themselves  to  be  valid,  presuppose  the  validity
of  the  conclusion  which  they  ought  to  demonstrate.

Such  a  mode  of  drawing  conclusions,  therefore,
cannot  be  of  direct  service  for  the  expansion  of  our
knowledge,  but  only  for  the  purpose  of  bringing
truths  already  established  into  a  relation  of  subordi-
nation that  corresponds  to  the  actual  way  things  go.

i)  It  can  expand  knowledge  only  in  case  we  are
warranted  in  asserting  universal  judgments,  in  order
to  have  independent  major  premises,  before  the
validity  of  every  special  instance  subordinated  to
them  is  proved  ;  —  and  in  case  we  —

2)  are  warranted  in  subordinating  a  subject  to  a
general  concept  on  account  of  certain  marks,  in  order


J2  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

to  have  independent  minor  premises,  before  we  know
whether  it  has  all  of  its  predicates.

§  48.  Now  the  major  premises  can  be  constructed
in  the  second  figure,  if  we  expand  them  somewhat.
Its  premises  are  formed  quite  alike:  P  — M,  S— M.
In  experience  it  often  happens  that  several  of  them :
Q  —  M,  R  —  M,  T  —  M...  are  given.  But  from  the
premises  given  just  as  many  conclusions  must  be
drawn  as  follow  from  them.

If,  therefore,  the  premises  P  —  M,  S  —  M,  Q  —  M,
R  —  M  .  .  .  are  given,  —  that  is  to  say,  if  many  other-
wise different  subjects  have  the  same  predicate, —
then  we  conclude  that  not  every  single  one  of  them
has  M  through  some  special  accident,  but  that  one
and  the  same  common  reason  makes  it  necessary  for
them  all  at  the  same  time.

This  reason  is  put  forward  in  the  form  of  a  generic
concept,  of  which  all  the  aforesaid  subjects  are
species ;  and  now  the  assertion  is  made  that  the  M
belongs  to  this  concept  2  as  a  rule,  and  that  those
subjects  possess  the  M  only  by  means  of  their  sub-
ordination under  2.  The  concluding  proposition
therefore  is  :  '  Every  2  is  M,'  —  and  this  is  the
simple  conclusion  of  Induction,  which  has  its  position
in  the  system  of  thought  at  this  place.


KINDS OF INDUCTION.  ^

i  Perfect '  and  '  imperfect '  induction  are  distin-
guished. The  first  takes  place  if  it  is  known  that
the  subjects  enumerated  in  the  premises,  taken
together,  exhaust  all  the  species  of  2.  But  then,
although  the  universal  proposition,  —  '  All  2  are  M/
—  taken  strictly,  can  be  asserted,  since  the  same  has
already  been  asserted  in  the  premises  of  every  single
species  of  2,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  this  concluding
proposition  is  a  bare  summing-up,  and  not  a  real
expansion  of  our  previous  knowledge.  For  its
change  into  a  general  judgment  —  *  Every  2  is  M '  — ■
is  not,  fundamentally  considered,  permissible ;  since
from  the  mere  fact  that  all  species  of  2  have  one
predicate,  it  neither  follows  that  they  have  it  as
species  of  2,  nor  that  all  species  of  2  which  are
perhaps  still  to  be  discovered  will  have  it.

This  last  conclusion,  if  it  is  made,  is  nothing  more
than  the  '  imperfect '  induction,  which  concludes  from
the  fact,  that  some  species  of  2  have  a  predicate,
to  the  appearance  of  the  same  predicate  in  all
species ;  and  which  does  this,  indeed,  in  consequence
of  its  common  generic  concept.  But  such  induction,
although  not  strictly  conclusive  as  a  consequence  ad
subalternantem,  does  expand  our  knowledge ;  in
applied  logic,  however,  it  requires  certain  rules  to
restrict  it.


74  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

§  49.  In  a  similar  way,  the  third  figure  can  lead
to  the  formation  of  the  minor  premises  required  above.

If  its  premises  that  have  a  like  construction  are
increased,  —  M  —  S,  M  —  P,  M  -  Q,  M  —  R  .  .  .,  they
present  the  frequently  recurring  case  of  manifold
properties  being  attached  to  the  same  subject.  Here
also  the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  each  one  is  not
present  through  some  special  accident,  but  that  all
come  from  one  and  the  same  reason, — and  this  on
account  of  the  fact  that  M  is  a  species  of  the  genus
2,  in  which  the  combination  of  the  marks  SPQR
.  .  .  is  prescribed.  The  conclusion  therefore  is:  'M
is  a  55/ —  which  is  the  simplest  form  of  conclusion
by  Analogy.

This,  too,  would  be  '  perfect '  only  in  case  it  could
be  shown  that  SPQR...  are,  taken  together,  the
entire  collection  of  predicates  which  2  requires.  For,
of  course,  whatever  has  all  the  properties  of  a  2,
appears  itself  necessarily  to  be  a  2.  And  yet  this
consequence  also  is  not  quite  strictly  drawn.  In
reality,,  we  can  only  sum  up  the  premises,  and  say
in  the  concluding  proposition,  that  in  fact  all  the
predicates  are  found  in  M  which  belong  to  a  2.
That  they  are  so,  however,  not  merely  in  fact,  but
by  virtue  of  the  truth  that  M  is  a  2,  is  never  in  per-
fect strictness  a  matter  of  demonstration;  but  such
a  conclusion  stands  on  an  equality  with  the  so-called


FORMS OF CALCULATION.  75

'  imperfect  analogy/  which  draws  a  conclusion  from
certain  observed  marks  in  M  to  the  assumption  that
M  will  also  have  the  other  marks  which,  together
with  the  foregoing,  make  out  a  2 ;  and  that  M  will
therefore  be  a  2.

B. The  Forms  of  Calculation.

§  50.  The  doctrine  of  judgment  concluded  with
the  disjunctive  form,  which  asserted  that  the  one
or  the  other  special  modification  of  the  general  pred-
icate P  must  belong  to  the  S, — which  predicate
belongs  to  the  higher  generic  concept  of  S,  namely,
to  the  M.  In  order  that  this  choice  may  be  decided,
it  was  necessary  that  S  be  taken  into  consideration,
not  merely  as  a  species  of  M  in  general,  but  also  with
reference  to  its  specific  nature,  by  which  it  is  distin-
guished from  other  species  of  M.

The  first  Aristotelian  figure,  which  depends  upon
this  relation  of  subsumption,  does  not  do  this.  In
the  minor  premise  it  only  subordinates  the  S  in  gen-
eral, as  a  species  of  M ;  and  can,  therefore,  also  only
ascribe  to  it,  in  the  conclusion,  the  universal  P  with-
out closer  definition.  This  result  is,  in  part,  not  cor-
rect, since  the  P  in  such  indefiniteness  cannot  be  a
predicate  of  S  ;  and,  in  part,  it  does  not  satisfy  our
necessities.  For  in  real  life  it  is  seldom  enough  to
conclude  :  '  All  metals  are  fusible '  — '  iron  is  a  metal '


j6  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

—  ' therefore  iron  is  fusible' ;  but  we  wish  to  know
how  iron  as  iron,  in  distinction,  for  example,  from
lead  as  lead  (that  is,  perhaps,  at  what  degree  of  tem-
perature), is  fusible.

§  51.  Still  another  consideration  leads  to  the  same
demand.  Fixed  and  changeable  (historical)  predi-
cates of  a  subject  may  be  distinguished.  The  man-
ner of  drawing  conclusions  hitherto  described  referred
only  to  the  former.  For  such  properties  as  belong
to  a  subject  by  virtue  of  its  subordination  under  its
higher  genus,  of  course  belong  to  it  always  and  are
fixed  predicates.

But  in  real  life  constantly,  and  very  often  in  sci-
ence, we  are  far  more  interested  in  the  changeable
predicates ;  that  is  to  say,  in  those  which  designate
some  affection,  some  activity,  some  state,  in  brief,
something  or  other  which  happens  to  the  S  only  so
far  as  certain  conditions  act  on  S,  but  which  would
never  flow  from  the  mere  fact  that  S  is  a  species  of
M  (only  so  much  is  self-evident,  however,  that  sub-
ordination of  S  under  M  must  establish  such  a  pred-
icate).

This  necessity,  too,  which  occurs  —  for  example  —
in  the  calculation  of  all  future  events,  and  in  the
employment  of  means  for  our  conduct,  requires  that
we  should  discover  for  S  some  quite  definite  predi-


ARGUMENT FROM ANALOGY.  JJ

cate  which  does  not  originate  from  the  subsumption
of  S  under  a  general  concept,  but  from  one  way  of
regarding  the  special  nature  of  the  S  and  of  all  the
conditions  acting  upon  it.

§  52.  The  conclusion  of  analogy,  too,  in  case  it  is
to  be  of  any  use,  requires  that,  from  certain  marks
which  we  observe  in  a  subject,  we  should  draw  a  con-
clusion directly  to  the  presence  of  other  marks  also ;
and  then  from  the  sum  of  these  marks  form  a  con-
clusion secundo  loco  to  the  fact  that  the  subject  is  one
species  of  a  genus.  The  previous  mode  of  procedure
was  the  reverse  of  this  :  in  the  first  place,  a  subject
was  subsumed  as  a  species  of  a  genus,  and  then  se-
cundo loco  a  conclusion  drawn  from  this  to  its  pred-
icate.

The  question  now  arises  whether  that  which  such
analogy  could  not  strictly  accomplish  admits  of  being
thus  strictly  accomplished  at  all ;  that  is  to  say,
whether  we  can  draw  a  conclusion  from  the  pres-
ence of  certain  marks  or  conditions  in  a  subject  S,
directly  and  without  taking  our  way  around  through
any  general  generic  concept,  to  the  necessary  pres-
ence or  absence,  and  to  the  definite  value  of  other
marks  of  the  S.


?8  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

§  53.  The  foregoing  necessities  would  be  satisfied
by  any  mode  of  conclusion,  the  major  premise  of  which
breaks  up  a  general  concept,  M,  into  the  collective
number  of  its  parts ;  and  substitutes  for  it,  as  hold-
ing equally  valid,  the  developed  combination  of  these
parts  ;  such  a  form,  therefore,  is

M  =  a  +  for +<^2 +••••,

in  which  all  the  mathematical  signs  are  supposed
merely  to  represent  the  variety  of  the  possible  ways
of  combining  the  marks.  The  minor  premise  would
assert  of  S,  not  merely  that  it  is  a  species  of  M  in
general,  but  that  it  is  the  definite  species  of  M  which
we  get  in  case  we  let  some  further  determining  con-
dition act  upon  the  universal  M.  This  gives  to  the
minor  premise  (designated  again  by  a  mathematical
symbol)  the  form,  —

S  =  <|>  (M).

And  now  the  concluding  proposition  has  to  ex-
press with  complete  definiteness  what  predicate  must
belong  to  S  ;  because  the  combination  of  marks  sub-
stituted for  M  in  the  major  premise  has,  in  the  con-
clusion, experienced  the  special  influence  of  the
conditions  designated  by  +  in  the  minor  premise.

One  needs  no  reminder  to  comprehend  that  this
way  of  drawing  a  conclusion  is  directly  and  strictly
applicable  only  in  mathematics.  In  the  case  of  other
objects  of  thought, — for  example,  concepts  of  nat-


MATHEMATICAL ARGUMENT.  79

ural  species  and  genera,  —  we  cannot  carry  out  the
substitution  in  the  major  premise  ;  because  we  never
perfectly  know  all  the  marks  of  any  genus,  and  still
less  accurately  all  its  modes  of  combination.  Fur-
ther :  we  can  never  perfectly  show  in  the  minor  prem-
ise by  what  determination,  <)>,  the  genus  M  passes
over  into  the  species  S.  If  we  should  be  satisfied,
however,  with  making  prominent  some  single  mark
(as  x)  by  which  S  is  distinguished  from  other  spe-
cies of  M  (without  positively  learning  from  x  the
entire  nature  of  $),  then  we  should  not  be  able  in
the  conclusion  to  demonstrate  what  transforming
influence  this  x  must  exercise  upon  all,  or  upon  any
one,  of  the  marks  qualitatively  different  from  it  (to
which  allusion  is  made  in  the  major  premise)  or
upon  the  combination  of  such  marks.

All  this  is  possible  only  in  the  domain  of  mathe-
matics. Since  every  magnitude  is  comparable  with
the  rest,  and  all  are  resolvable  into  the  same  units,
and  producible  from  them  by  different  combinations  ;
and,  finally,  since  they  are  perfectly  defined  in  their
content,  —  that  is,  in  their  value,  and  since  there
are  rules  of  calculation  which  determine  accurately
the  '  Facit '  that  results  in  case  a  definite  operation
is  applied  to  a  definite  combination  of  magnitudes  ;
it  is,  therefore,  possible  in  this  domain  actually  to
carry  out  the  concluding  proposition,  and  to  fill  out


80  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

in  it  the schema  <|>  (M)  by  assigning  it  a  definite
value. For  example :

S =  M2


S =  a2  +  2at>+P.


This  limitation  to  mathematics,  nevertheless,  does
not  rob  such  a  conclusion  of  its  place  in  Logic.
For  calculation,  too,  is  a  process  of  thought,  —  and
that  not  the  most  unimportant.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  to  be  considered  that  we  succeed  in  an  abso-
lutely certain  expansion  of  knowledge  only  in  so
far  as  we  can  refer  the  objects  of  our  reflection  to
relations  of  magnitude,  and  can  make  calculations
with  them.

§  54.  But  if  such  an  application  of  calculation  to
concepts  of  qualitatively  different  content  is  to  take
place,  and  if  we  are  to  be  able  to  conclude  from  the
existence  and  value  of  one  mark  to  the  existence
and  value  of  another,  then  the  connection  of  the
two  and  the  dependence  of  one  on  the  other,  al-
though it  does  not  admit  of  being  placed  upon  a
strictly  logical  basis,  must  be  presupposed  as  a  mat-
ter of  fact ;  and  nothing  further  can  be  done  than  by
calculating  according  to  a  general  law  which  holds
good  for  such  a  condition  of  dependency,  to  assign
to  every  given  value  of  the  one  mark  the  value  of


EXPRESSION Of A PROPORTION.  8 1

the  other  belonging  to  it. This  is  done  in  the  form
of  a  proportion :

The  proportion  does  not  refer  the  content  of  the
one  mark  back  to  the  qualitatively  different  con-
tent of  the  other  mark,  but  allows  both  to  be  what
they  are.  It  also  makes,  in  general,  no  comparison
whatever  between  the  absolute  magnitudes  of  the
changes  which  the  two  correspondingly  experience.
For  these  two,  —  since  they  are  measured  by  quite
different  standards,  —  are  frequently  not  comparable.
Strictly  speaking,  it  only  compares  the  number  of
the  units  of  change  which  both  marks  undergo  (the
change  in  each  one  as  measured  according  to  its
own  standard),  and  from  the  given  number  for  the
one  mark  determines  the  corresponding  number  for
the  other.

It  is  self-evident  that  almost  all  application  of
mathematics  to  real  objects  depends  upon  this  man-
ner of  drawing  conclusions ;  further,  that  propor-
tions are  possible  exactly  only  where  the  marks  of
the  real  object  are  determinable  quantitatively;  but
that  they  run  into  inexact  comparisons  with  refer-
ence to  other  objects  of  thought.

§  55.  The  above-mentioned  expression  for  a  pro-
portion contains  one  further  inaccuracy. If E  be


82  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.


the  expansion  and  T  the  temperature,  then  the  afore-
said expression  leads  to  the  idea  that  there  are  two
marks  which,  absolutely  and  without  reference  to
the  subject  in  which  they  occur,  stand  in  an  unalter-
able relation  to  each  other.  But  how  much  the  ex-
pansion increases  for  every  additional  degree  of
temperature,  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  body
heated,  and  is  different  in  the  case  of  different
bodies.  Indeed,  the  necessity  that  one  mark  should
exercise  any  influence  on  the  other  depends  simply
on  the  fact  that  they  are  marks  of  one  and  the  same
subject.  This  is  true  for  every  pair  of  marks.  And
we  are  on  this  account  obliged  to  apprehend  the
nature  of  the  subject  as  a  law  such  that  from  it
flow  the  proportions  of  all  its  single  pairs  of  marks.

Mathematics,  and  that  in  Analytical  Geometry,
has,  indeed,  approximately  discovered  a  formal  ex-
pression for  this  logical  demand  in  the  comparison,
for  example,  of  the  different  curves,  in  which  it
defines  the  entire  nature  of  a  curved  line,  its  shape
and  its  direction,  etc.,  by  means  of  a  proportion
between  the  corresponding  increments  of  the  ab-
scissas and  ordinates.

Such  comparison  also  depends,  of  course,  on  the
fact  that  all  the  properties  which  can  belong  to  a
spatial  figure  —  for  example,  its  curvature  and  the
like  —  after  all  depend  simply  upon  different  mag-


CONCEPTS AND IDEAS.  83

nitudes  of  the  same  species ;  and  no  qualitatively
incomparable  properties  occur.  An  extension  of
this  logical  form  to  the  treatment  of  real  objects  —
for  example,  the  attempt  to  discover  a  formula  for
the  nature  of  man  similar  to  that  which  we  possess
for  the  nature  of  the  ellipse  —  is  a  problem  of  in-
finite complexity  and  quite  impracticable  with  any
exactness.  But  approximately  the  attempt  has  al-
ways been  made  to  solve  it,  since  there  has  been
an  effort  to  discover  a  so-called  i  constitutive  con-
cept' for  every  object.

That  is  to  say  :  —  a  merely  '  distinguishing '  con-
cept, such  as  barely  suffices  to  render  its  object  dis-
tinct from  other  objects  but  does  not  positively  and
exhaustively  tell  in  what  it  consists,  is  held  to  be
different  from  a  'descriptive'  concept,  which  as  far  as
possible  specifies  completely  the  content  of  its  object,
but  makes  no  essential  distinction  in  order  of  rank
between  marks  that  are  more  original  and  Maw-
giving'  (as  it  were)  and  such  as  are  derived  and
dependent.  Finally,  there  are  distinguished  those
'  constitutive '  or  'speculative '  concepts  (or  the  '  Ideas ')
which  are  limited  to  designating  a  certain  primitive
content  (Ur-Inhalt)  of  the  object,  from  which  all  its
individual  marks  and  their  combinations  are  then
derived  as  its  necessary  consequences.


84  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

C. The  Systematic  Forms.

§  56.  For  the  discovery  of  such  a  '  constitutive
concept,'  we  remind  ourselves  —  as  we  have  already
done  in  the  doctrine  of  the  concept,  —  of  the  fact,
that  the  isolated  consideration  of  an  object  in  itself
does  not  teach  us  how  to  distinguish  the  essential
and  i  law-giving '  marks  in  it  from  the  unessential
and  dependent.  That  in  it  which  gives  it  its  law
we  find  in  the  ' universal'  which  is  common  to  it  with
others  of  its  species.  By  this  means  we  are  con-
ducted to  the  path  of  Classiftcatio7i ;  and  we  suppose
that  we  know  the  ' essence'  of  an  object  just  as  soon
as  we  are  able  to  assign  to  it  its  position  in  a  *  Sys-
tem,' which  begins  with  some  most  general  concept,
subordinates  to.this  many  general  concepts  as  spe-
cies, —  and  finally,  to  the  latter  a  variety  of  partic-
ular concepts.

§  57.  It  is  not  quite  this  problem,  but  a  more
superficial  one,  which  is  fulfilled  by  the  so-called
'  artificial  classification ' ;  such  as  either  develops  all
its  species  or  single  instances  from  one  general  con-
cept M,  or  one  general  case  M,  —  or  else  subordi-
nates these  particulars  to  M  as  though  they  were
already  well  recognized.  The  following  operations
are  distinguished :


MODES OF CLASSIFICATION.  85

1)  The  Partition  of  M  into  its  different  marks,
a,  b,  c  .  .  .

2)  The  Disjunction  of  each  of  these  marks  into
its  species ;  of  a  into  %  a2  .  .  .  ,  of  b  into  &  /32  .  .  .
etc.

3)  The  Combination  of  every  single  species  of
each  predicate  with  every  species  of  every  other
predicate ; hence %&Yi, ai/?iy2  ...» ^iAyi  •  •  •  $

«2/8i7i  ■  •  •

4)  The  Arrangement  of  the  species of  M thus

deduced,  either  according  to  well-known  lexical  prin-
ciples, or  according  to  some  other  that  answers  the
ends  of  use.

5)  A  Correction  by  which  the  non-valid  or  impos-
sible species  are  again  removed  ;  —  species  which,
accordingly,  originated  from  the  fact  that  we  have
had  regard  only  to  the  presence  and  not  to  the  mode
of  the  combination  of  the  marks  a  b  c  in  M.  It  is
possible  that  some  modifications  of  these  marks, — for
instance,  <z3/32y2,  —  do  not  admit  of  being  combined
in  this  way  at  all  (example  :  M  —  triangle,  a  =  angle,
b  =  side,  aY  =  right,  a2  =  obtuse,  angle,  &  =  equal,
/32  =  unequal,  sides. Hence  a1/31  is  impossible).

This  whole  mode  of  procedure  is  seldom  used  for
deducing  its  species  from  a  concept  M ;  for  the  most
part,  the  species  are  previously  known,  and  are  only
arranged  under  the  M. Much  oftener  it  is  of  service


86  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

in  developing,  from  a  general  case  M  (some  judg-
ment), the  special  instances  conceivable ;  and,  here*
just  that  which  excites  our  interest  is  to  know,  which
of  them  are  possible  or  impossible,  and  what  standard
—  for  instance  —  is  of  real  use,  what  absurd.

§  58.  Artificial  classifications,  strictly  speaking,
systematize  the  way  which  we  must  take  for  a  survey
of  the  content,  rather  than  this  content  itself.  The
single  species  stand  side  by  side,  excluding  each
other,  —  without  any  knowledge  of  their  nature  origi-
nating from  such  knowledge  of  their  arrangement.
This  particular  problem  of  classification,  —  to  wit,
the  determining  of  the  '  essence '  of  each  species  by
its  position  in  the  system,  —  accordingly  leads  to  the
fresh  attempt  to  arrange  the  species  of  a  concept  M
in  the  so-called  '  natural  classification/  in  a  single
series  or  in  series  of  series,  in  such  manner  that
they  form  a  steady  advance  from  the  most  imperfect
to  the  most  perfect.

That  two  species  may  more  or  less  adequately  cor-
respond to  their  general  concept,  the  marks  of  which
they  must  both  possess  collectively,  is  possible  on
account  of  the  fact  that  the  marks  combine  in  very
different  magnitudes,  and  the  relations  between  them
may  be  thought  of  in  a  variety  of  special  forms  and
different  degrees  of  strictness. For  example ;  from


MEANING OF THE UNIVERSAL.  87

general  logical  pre-judgments,  that  species  is  held  to
be  perfect  which  has  all  the  marks  uniformly  elab-
orated ;  and  that  to  be  imperfect  in  which  some
marks  disappear  and  others  occur  in  excess.  But
such  pre-judgment  constantly  needs  correction  or
supplementing  from  a  knowledge  of  the  real  thing ;
and  only  in  the  particular  case  does  it  admit  of  being
determined  from  this  knowledge  of  the  thing,  whether
the  aforesaid  uniformity,  rather  than  a  definite  ine-
quality of  the  marks,  agrees  more  adequately  with
the  meaning  of  the  universal.

But  in  order  to  be  able  to  speak  of  any  such  '  mean-
ing,' it  is  further  presupposed  that  the  general  con-
cept M  is  itself  also  a  member  of  a  higher  series,  and
has  its  position  in  this  series  side  by  side  with  N,  O,
P,  ...  as  other  species  of  a  yet  higher  universal ;  so
that,  by  virtue  of  this  position,  a  definite  problem  is
proposed  to  it,  according  to  which  it  may  be  esti-
mated, which  of  its  own  species  is  the  more  perfect,
since  it  best  answers  this  problem.

And  so  the  series  of  these  presuppositions  pro-
ceeds. For  a  place  in  a  series  that  is  still  higher,
and,  finally,  in  the  comprehensive  series  of  the  entire
coherent  system  of  the  universe,  must  be  discovered
for  the  series  M  N  O  P,  —  a  place  which  it  assumes,
and  from  which  some  light  is  thrown  upon  the  direc-
tion of  that  forward  movement  from  the  lower  to  the


88  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

higher  which  goes  on  in  itself.  Without  such  a  com-
plete demonstration  as  matter  of  fact  for  the  basis
of  these  valuations,  all  natural  classifications,  which
are  limited  to  a  single  domain  of  objects,  events,  or
even  concepts,  remain  incapable  of  logical  proof.
Since  they  only  lay  at  the  foundation  some  general
concept,  the  direction  of  whose  development  they
suppose  to  be  known,  they  are  productive  of  asser-
tions that,  although  suggestive  and  not  untrue,  are
not  so  exclusively  true  as  would  be  demanded  in  such
a  case  as  this,  where  that  '  constitutive  concept '  is
required  for  every  single  concept,  from  which  its
entire  mode  of  behavior  shall  be  deducible.

§  59.  Besides  these  avoidable  deficiencies,  the  nat-
ural classification  has  yet  one  other  that  is  universal
and  unavoidable.  The  'constitutive  concept,'  for
which  we  are  in  search,  ought  above  all  to  explain  to
us,  how  its  content  must  behave,  react,  or  alter,  in
case  certain  conditions  act  upon  it.  Of  all  this,  clas-
sification teaches  us  nothing  whatever.  It  simply
furnishes  an  indication  of  the  'meaning'  which  the
content  of  the  concept  —  thought  of  as  unchangeable
—  has  in  the  series  of  species,  in  connection  with
which  it  expresses  the  nature  of  a  general  concept.
But  it  does  not  explain  how  it  can  originate,  exist,
maintain  itself,  alter,  or  perish.


EXPLANATORY SCIENCE.  89

It  may  be  left  undecided,  which  of  two  logical
forms  satisfies  a  higher  necessity.  Certain  it  is  that
the  aforesaid  '  indication '  alone  is  not  enough  ;  that
it  absolutely  cannot  be  substituted  in  the  place  of
1  explanation ' ;  and,  finally,  that  the  latter  belongs  to
those  problems  of  life  which  are  practically  most
urgent.

§  60.  Explanatory  science,  which  undertakes  the
latter  problem,  is  distinguished  from  classification,
by  its  form,  as  follows :

It  does  not,  like  the  latter,  take  its  point  of  depart-
ure from  a  single  concept ;  and  it  does  not  develop
its  conceivable  species  as  though  it  were  self-evident
that  all  which  such  concept  postulates  for  its  complete
manifestation  is,  on  this  account  alone,  also  possible
or  already  actual.  But  rather  since,  as  concerns  this
latter  point,  —  and  as  concerns  the  manner  in  which
the  content  of  the  concept  behaves  under  any  given
conditions,  —  it  is  of  course,  not  the  concept  alone,
but  only  some  rule  which  holds  good  for  it  and  like-
wise for  such  external  condition  that  can  decide ;
explanatory  science  begins  with  one  or  more  judg-
ments which  are  propounded  as  general  laws.  They
are  therefore  of  such  a  kind  that  both  their  subject
and  their  predicate  (or  their  major  premise  and  their
minor premise) are universal and comprise under


90  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

them  many  particular  instances;  but  it  is  the  con-
tent of  the  judgment  which  determines  the  rule,  ac-
cording to  which  one  of  the  instances  of  the  minor
premise  depends  on  one  of  the  instances  of  the  major
premise.

Now  since  nothing  results  from  general  laws  in
themselves,  the  second  necessary,  element  is  a  series
of  facts,  expressed  either  singly  or  collectively,  which
themselves  then  take  the  place  of  general  cases,  and
by  which  in  each  single  case  that  definite  modification
of  the  content  contained  in  the  major  premise  or  in
the  subject  of  the  general  law  is  designated,  in
reference  to  which  a  determination  of  its  minor  prem-
ise or  its  consequent  is  sought.

Now  new  knowledge  originates  from  the  subordi-
nation of  the  fact  under  the  law,  on  account  of  the
fact  needing  to  be  known  only  partially,  —  perhaps
on  one  of  its  sides,  —  in  order  to  be  capable  of  sub-
sumption  under  the  law ;  but,  in  consequence  of  such
subsumption,  some  one  of  its  sides,  previously  not
recognized,  becomes  defined  and  recognized.  The
most  essential  problem  of  explanatory  theory,  never-
theless, does  not  consist  in  this  simple  sequence  of
the  conclusion,  but  in  demonstrating  the  reciprocal
influence  which  very  many  conditions,  that  are  inde-
pendent of  each  other,  exercise  upon  each  other  in
case  they  act  on  one  and  the  same  subject ;  and  in


EXPLANATORY SCIENCE.  91

setting  forth  the  entire  nature  of  the  subject  as  the
collective  resultant  of  the  complete  circle  of  its  con-
ditions (comp.  the  '  Applied  Logic ').

§  61.  The  spirit  of  explanatory  theory  is  at  vari-
ance with  that  of  classifications.

The  latter  think  not  merely  to  explain  the  indi-
vidual by  the  general  concept,  as  a  species  of  which
they  apprehend  it,  or  by  its  position  in  the  series  of
other  species  ;  but  also  to  legitimate  it.  That  is  to
say,  only  by  means  of  the  fact  that  it  is  a  species  of
a  general  concept  which  has  its  well-known  place  in
the  total  order  of  the  world,  does  a  justifiable  exist-
ence, as  it  were,  belong  to  the  individual.  It  would
be  untrue  or  obscure,  if  we  could  not  answer  the
question,  —  What  is  it  ?  —  by  pointing  out  its  gen-
eral notion.

Explanatory  science  surrenders  the  thought  above-
mentioned.  It  attaches  no  value,  for  example,  to  the
statement  whether  any  particular  object  lying  before
us  is  a  ' plant'  or  an  ' animal/  It  bids  us  inves-
tigate, out  of  what  elements,  in  what  proportion  and
form  of  combination,  the  object  consists;  and  what
forces,  according  to  what  laws,  are  active  between
these  elements,  and  between  them  and  the  outside
world.  If  we  are  certain  of  this,  then  we  know  the
whole  object  and  its  whole  present  and  future  mode


92  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

of  behavior.  But  the  answer  to  the  question,  whether
it  is  an  'animal '  or  a  'plant/  adds  nothing  whatever
to  such  knowledge.  Complete  cognition  consists
therefore  in  this;  —  in  apprehending  every  object  as
the  final  resultant  which  proceeds  from  the  action
and  reaction  of  different  conditions  or  forces  ;  which
forces  not  only  act  collectively  for  laying  the  basis
of  this  individual  object,  but  also  everywhere  else  act
according  to  general  laws,  and  only  produced  this
object  because  they  found  themselves  in  this  rather
than  in  some  other  one  of  many  forms  of  combination
possible  to  them.

§  62.  It  is  evident  that  explanatory  science  does
not  furnish  perfect  satisfaction  to  our  desires  for
knowledge.  It  treats  every  phenomenon,  every  event,
only  as  an  unimportant  example  of  general  laws,
and  as  a  result  of  many  conditions  co-operative  in
fact,  but  which  it  was  not  necessary  should  co-operate
at  all,  or  in  precisely  such  a  manner.  The  objects
are,  accordingly,  deprived,  by  the  very  manner  of
considering  them,  as  well  of  their  inner  unity  as  of
the  necessary  character  of  their  existence.  It  can
only  be  said  hypothetically  that,  in  case  such  or  such
conditions  prevail,  then  the  object  must  be  so  or
otherwise.  But  it  remains  undecided  what  conditions
actually  do  prevail.


THE IDEAL OF COGNITION.  93

Against  the  foregoing  mode  of  apprehending  the
truth,  the  fundamental  thought  of  classification  cer-
tainly presents  a  just  consideration.  It  is  necessary
to  suppose  that  not  merely  do  general  laws  hold  good
in  the  world,  while  the  arrangement  of  the  facts  on
account  of  which  a  definite  form  of  actuality  flows
from  the  laws  is,  on  the  contrary,  given  over  to
chance,  uncontrolled  by  any  principle ;  but  rather
that  in  the  arrangement  of  the  aforesaid  facts  also,
a  principle  (that  is  to  say,  an  '  Idea ')  is  effective,  and
that  this  principle  fixes  beforehand  the  whole  ar-
rangement of  the  final  result,  the  whole  system  of
the  future  phenomena  which  are  to  be  actualized  by
means  of  the  aforesaid  facts  in  conformity  to  the
laws.

The  Ideal  of  Cognition  would  therefore  consist  in
finding  for  the  '  Things  '  such  i  constitutive  concepts  '
or  i  Ideas '  as  not  only  determine  their  meaning  and
significance,  but  also  show  how  this  meaning  itself
reaches  its  own  actualization,  by  bringing  together
the  necessary  conditions  and  forces.  This  problem
leads  us  wholly  beyond  the  limits  of  Logic,  and  can
only  be  taken  up  again  in  so-called  real  Philosophy
(comp.  the  '  Encyclopaedia  of  Philosophy ').


Second  Principal  Division,


APPLIED  LOGIC.


Second  Principal  Division.


APPLIED LOGIC,


CHAPTER I.

APPLICATION  OF  THE  FORMS  OF  THE  CONCEPT.

§  63.  All  communication  of  an  inner  state,  whether
it  be  feeling  or  thought,  is  an  attempt  so  to  direct
the  inner  activities  peculiar  to  another  as  that  this
other  must  himself  have  a  vital  experience  of  the
very  content  which  is  to  be  communicated.  No
content  can  ever  be  carried  over  ready-made,  as  it
were,  from  one  mind  to  another.

Now,  much  admits  of  being  communicated  only  by
physically  transposing  the  other  person  into  the
state  in  which  he  must  experience  the  matter  in
question.  We  turn  him  toward  the  light  or  strike
him,  in  order  that  he  may  know  what  '  brightness '
or  c  suffering '  is.  In  other  cases,  as  in  art,  we  pro-
duce a  mental  mood,  since  we  indirectly,  by  means
of  a  series  of  changing  ideas,  conduct  the  mind
through  a  series  of  individual  feelings.


98  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

Thoughts,  on  the  contrary,  are  assumed  to  be  capa-
ble of  a  logical  communication,  which  consists  in
this,  that  an  accurately  defined  series  of  combina-
tions and  separations  of  individual  ideas,  supposed
to  be  well  known,  is  prescribed  to  the  other  person  ;
and  then  exactly  the  conception  which  is  to  be  com-
municated remains  with  him  as  their  logical  result-
ant. There  are  two  opposite  methods  of  doing  this  :
the  explanation  of  a  concept  by  abstraction,  and  its
explanation  by  construction.

§  64.  We  explain  by  '  abstraction '  in  case  we  ab-
stract from  single  examples  of  the  concept  to  be
explained  that  are  better  known  to  us  than  is  the
concept  itself,  everything  which  is  so  special  as  not
to  belong  to  it ;  so  that  it  alone  remains  for  us  to
contemplate.  Necessarily,  however,  this  occurs  only
in  the  case  of  all  such  simple  concepts  as,  for  ex-
ample, *  Being,'  '  Becoming,'  '  Unity,'  etc.,  whose
content  does  not  consist  of  a  conjunction  of  other
ideas.

The  second  way,  that  of  'construction,'  which  en-
deavors to  build  up  the  concept  from  its  constituent
parts,  must,  at  least,  be  attempted  in  the  case  of  all
composite  concepts.  For  '  abstraction '  makes  the
content  of  the  concept  intuitable  only  as  a  whole ;
but  teaches  us  nothing  concerning  its  interior  struc-


CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITION.  99

ture.  '  Construction  '  is  perfectly  practicable  only  in
affairs  of  mathematics  ;  because  here  the  meaning  of
the  individual  ideas  which  are  to  be  combined,  and
of  the  forms  in  which  they  are  to  be  combined,  can
be  fixed  unequivocally.  In  the  case  of  other  con-
cepts, which  combine  marks  qualitatively  different
in  manifold  relations,  neither  of  these  things  is  pos-
sible. And  on  this  account,  wherever  it  is  possible,
the  intuitive  image  is  included  in  the  explanation.

Now,  Definition  is  that  kind  of  construction  which
endeavors  to  build  a  concept  up  by  means  of  merely
logical  operations.  Fundamentally  considered,  it
uniformly  regards  the  greatest  part  of  the  work  as
already  achieved  since  it  itself  refers  to  some
higher  general  concept  which  is  known,  and  which
already  contains  that  entire  mode  of  combining  all  the
marks  which  is  so  difficult  of  elucidation.  To  this,
definition  adds  a  specific  mark,  which  suffices  to  dis-
tinguish the  concept  in  question  from  other  species
of  the  same  universal ;  but  it  entrusts  to  the  imagi-
nation, along  with  this,  the  task  of  conceiving  the
other  corresponding  specific  marks,  which  here  take
the  place  of  what  is  universal  in  the  general  concept,
and  in  connection  with  it  form  the  entire  nature  of
the  thing  to  be  defined.  Nevertheless,  where  the
attempt  is  made  to  enumerate  them  all,  the  defini-
tion becomes  a  description  which,  on  account  of  its


IOO  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

imperfectibility, is not valid as a proper logical
form.

§  65.  It  is  essential  for  definition  that  the  con-
cept of  genus  applied  by  it  should  be  the  one  next
higher  —  the  '  Genus  proximum.'

Definitions  that  are  too  wide,  and  adapted  not
merely  to  what  is  to  be  defined,  but  also  to  some-
thing else  which  we  wish  to  distinguish  from  it,  arise
in  case  we  choose  instead  of  this  genus  proximum>
some  far  higher  general  notion  as  our  point  of  depar-
ture ;  for  in  that  case  the  '  Nota  specifica '  does  not
always  admit  of  being  included  in  such  a  way  that
nothing  else,  too,  falls  under  this  definition.  This
mistake  is  frequently  met  with  in  the  practical
domain,  in  that  it  is  customary  to  use  a  very  high
and  pre-eminent  general  concept  for  better  recom-
mending some  proposition.

Too  narrow  definitions  adduce  marks  that  are  not
necessary  to  what  is  to  be  defined,  and  therefore
exclude  some  of  its  kinds.  They  easily  originate
from  the  limited  nature  of  our  circle  of  experience,
which  accustoms  us  to  only  a  few  of  the  more  nearly
allied  species  of  the  universal.

Definition  perpetrates  a  '  Circle,'  in  case  it  assumes
in  the  explanation  that  which  is  to  be  explained,
although  under  another  form. This  mistake  always


TASK OF DEFINITION.  IOI

originates,  in  case  we  aim  to  define  constructively
simple  concepts  —  like  '  Being/  '  Becoming/  and
others  similar  —  which  are  to  be  made  clear  only
by  means  of  abstraction.

Finally,  the  custom  of  apprehending  substantively
all  things  that  are  to  be  defined,  even  when  they  are
by  nature  verbal  or  adjective,  although  not  itself  a
mistake,  is  one  inducement  to  mistakes.  It  is  more
natural  and  conformable  to  our  purposes  to  define
thus:  "A  body  is  elastic,  in  case  it,  etc/';  or,  "An
organism  is  alive  (or  is  diseased),  in  case  it,  etc.,"  than
to  define  thus:  "Elasticity  is"  .  .  .  or,  "Life  (disease)
is,  etc."  The  latter  modes  of  expression  are  indeed
often  quite  harmless  ;  but  they  are  also  often  produc-
tive of  the  habit  of  treating  states,  properties,  and
events  as  though  they  were  substantial  and  inde-
pendent beings.

§  66.  The  task  of  definition,  which  is  not  merely
to  specify  the  content  of  the  concept,  but  also  to
limit  it  with  respect  to  other  concepts,  can  often  be
accomplished  only  by  arbitrarily  fixing  the  usage  of
speech.

In  the  first  place,  there  are  certain  concepts  which
have  no  secure  point  of  departure  for  their  validity,
like  the  collective  ones,  i throng/  'heap/  'bald-
headed  ' ; then there are others contradictory to


102  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

each  other,  between  which  a  point  of  indifference
exists,  such  as  'cold'  and  ( warm,'  and  the  like.
In  all  the  former  cases  a  limit  is  wanting,  at  which
the  concept  begins  to  be  valid  ;  in  the  latter,  the
limit  is  also  wanting  at  which  they  pass  over  into
the  contradictory  concept.  We  do  not  know  where
'warm'  ceases  and  'cold'  begins;  we  only  know  in
what  direction  of  the  series  the  cold  diminishes  and
the  warmth  increases,  and  the  reverse.

Another  great  multitude  of  concepts  has  originated
in  the  living  formation  of  speech,  in  such  manner
that,  when  comparing  what  is  particular,  we,  at  one
and  the  same  time  hold  to  several  points  of  view  that
are  independent  of  each  other.  Accordingly,  those
species  which  fall  under  the  concept  attained,  agree-
ably to  all  these  points  of  view  at  once,  indubitably
belong  there  ;  on  the  contrary,  other  species,  although
they  appear  to  fall  under  it  as  judged  in  one  respect,
in  other  respects,  on  the  other  hand,  appear  to  be
excluded  from  it.  In  such  a  case  nothing  remains
to  be  done  but  to  fix,  for  the  exact  use  of  science,
the  extent  of  the  concept,  and  accordingly  the  sig-
nificance of  its  name,  in  a  way  that  agrees  with
our  purpose  but  is  somewhat  arbitrary  ;  and  not  to
take  too  much  pains  simply  to  remain  in  accord
with  the  usage  of  speech.  The  concept  of  'dis-
ease,' for  example,  comprehends,  on the one  hand,


LIMITATION OF CONCEPTS.  IO3

every  deviation  from  the  normal  condition ;  on  the
other,  it  signifies  a  condition  which  has  a  variable
course;  in  the  third  place,  it  signifies  such  an  one
as  is  fraught  with  danger.  Just  so  the  conception
of  ' crime'  has  respect,  simultaneously,  to  the  bad
will,  to  the  execution  of  the  deed,  to  the  magnitude
of  the  harm  done,  etc.

§  67.  With  reference  to  the  value  which  we  ascribe
to  the  fixed  limitation  of  concepts  as  set  over  against
each  other,  our  ordinary  process  of  thought  controls,
sometimes  by  means  of  a  principle  of  logical  pedantry,
and  sometimes  by  means  of  one  of  logical  frivolity.

The  former  holds  every  distinction  in  concepts
insurmountable  (the  well-known  mode  of  speaking :
"  that  is  something  quite  different ")  ;  the  other
regards  every  distinction  as  fluid,  and  teaches  how
to  change  every  concept  by  intermediate  stages  into
any  other  that  is  in  any  degree  allied  to  it.  This
change  is  accomplished  by  altering  at  pleasure  the
magnitude  of  individual  marks,  —  many  (such  as  are
necessary  to  the  new  general  concept,  but  wanting
in  the  given  concept)  being  considered  as  present
but  of  no  value,  and  others  (such  as  are  present  but
do  not  belong  to  the  new  general  concept)  being
regarded  as  such  that  they  must  be  inserted  in  these
examples  also,  and  that  they  are  wont  to  occur  only
in  certain  of  its  kinds  without  being  of  any  value.


104  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

All  these  logical  transformations  have  their  correct
use  in  art,  where  they  are  the  servants  of  wit ;  and  in
ordinary  life  they  are  most  frequently  employed  in
excuses,  in  cases  where  the  intent  is  to  deceive  con-
cerning the  real  worth  of  some  action  by  means  of
approximating  its  content,  piecemeal,  as  it  were,  as
much  as  possible  toward  something  innocent.  Even
in  science  they  are  of  the  greatest  value  in  the  right
place.  But  proof  is  always  to  be  demanded  that  in
the  nature  of  the  realities  with  whose  concepts  we
are  dealing,  there  lies  the  possibility  or  the  actual
custom  and  the  effort,  of  making  such  transitions.

§  68.  Of  every  object  a  variety  of  concepts  is  pos-
sible, since  it  can  be  subordinated  to  each  of  its  own
marks  and  to  every  possible  combination  of  them.
Among  these  concepts  one  may  be  preferred,  —
namely,  that  constitutive  concept,  which  we  previously
sought  for,  but  found  only  approximately  and  in  a
few  domains,  such  as  in  the  concepts  of  species  be-
longing to  the  creations  of  nature.

Nevertheless,  the  interests  of  our  thinking  seldom
require  this  concept ;  and  every  process  of  investiga-
tion is  accustomed  only  to  consider  certain  single
sides  of  an  object  from  which  it  deduces  conse-
quences in  accordance  with  general  laws.  Accord-
ingly, it  is  for  the most  part  only  a  prolixity,  and


SOURCES OF SOPHISTRY.  105


often  a  source  of  inaccuracy  as  well,  when  we  forci-
bly aim  to  have  an  exhaustive  speculative  conception
for  an  object  which  we  are  treating  ;  and  then,  when
after  all  we  cannot  for  the  most  part  attain  it,  pursue
an  inaccurate  approximation  thereto.  It  is  more  use-
ful to  take  our  point  of  departure  from  '  partial  defi-
nition,' which  unites  into  one  general  concept  only
the  properties  important  for  the  shifting  investigation ;
and  then,  of  course,  modifies  the  consequences  that
flow  from  the  subordination  of  the  object  under  this
general  concept,  by  having  regard  to  the  other  peculi-
arities of  the  object.  Thus,  for  example,  medicine  has
to  bring  'man'  under  the  concept  of  a  mechanism
consisting  of  physical  elements  ;  while  national  econ-
omy has  to  bring  him  under  the  concept  of  capital  to
be  produced.  But  both  must  limit  the  consequences
drawn  therefrom  by  the  reflection,  that  this  '  mechan-
ism' and  this  ' capital'  possesses  likewise  reason  and
will.

One  of  the  principal  sources  of  sophistry  will  be
such  partial  definitions,  in  cases  where  we  draw  con-
sequences from  them  but  neglect  to  introduce  into
them  the  modifications  which  are  requisite  on  ac-
count of  the  rest  of  the  nature  of  the  object,  although
this  is  not  included  in  the  definition.  Little  as  this
mode  of  procedure  is  scientifically  permissible,  yet
its  application  is  justified  in  poetry  and  rhetoric.


CHAPTER  II.

CONCERNING  THE  ADDUCING  OF  PROOF.

§  69.  In  a  judgment,  what  interests  us  practically
is  its  truth.  Now  the  simpler  case  is  this,  that  a
proposition  with  a  definite  content  is  given  and  its
proof  is  required ;  the  more  difficult  case  is  this,  that
the  discovery  of  a  proposition  still  unknown  is  de-
manded.

All  adducing  of  proof  —  to  which  we  now  turn  our
attention  —  must  begin  with  the  demonstration  of
the  validity  in  fact  of  the  given  proposition.  That  is
to  say,  if  it  is  discovered  by  means  of  a  test  which  is
made  of  it  either  by  experience  or  by  single  examples,
that  it  has  no  such  validity  whatever,  then  all  pains
taken  with  adducing  proof  is  wasted.  This  rule  is
not  always  sufficiently  observed,  and  numberless  pro-
lixities arise  in  science  as  well  as  in  ordinary  life  from
the  attempt  to  explain  facts  —  that  is,  to  demonstrate
them  as  necessary  —  which  have  no  existence  at  all.

Only  after  the  validity  of  the  proposition  is  estab-
lished, does  the  adducing  of  proof  for  its  justification
begin, — that  is,  the  demonstration  that  it  has  a  right
to  be  held  valid  as  a  consequence  of  other  truths  and
facts.


NATURE OF AXIOMS.  IO7

§  70.  The  fact  needs  no  explanation,  that  all  ad-
ducing of  proof  whatever  presupposes  a  number  of
propositions  which  are  not,  in  their  turn,  in  need  of
proof,  and  which  are  also  not  capable  of  such  proof.

These  propositions  are  ordinarily  comprehended
under  the  name  of  axioms.  Fundamentally  consid-
ered, they  fall  into  two  classes :  the  one  comprehends
' assertory  judgments'  which  express  certain  actual
facts,  and  which,  taken  collectively,  are  derived  from
experience  and  admit  only  of  the  above-mentioned
proof  of  their  validity.  The  other  comprehends  the
just  as  undemonstrable  ' principles  of  reason  and  con-
sequent,' in  accordance  with  which  alone,  from  any
fact  or  truth  a  conclusion  can  be  drawn  to  some
other.  The  latter,  strictly  speaking,  are  hypothetical
general  judgments,  which  do  not  tell  what  is,  but
merely  what  must  be  if  something  else  is.

A  criterion  for  affirming  that  any  proposition  is  an
axiom  of  the  latter  kind  lies  only  in  the  unconditioned
nature  of  the  evidence  with  which  it  announces  itself
in  consciousness  as  necessarily  valid.  Nevertheless,
since  erroneous  prejudgments  also  can,  from  a  variety
of  reasons,  unlawfully  attain  in  our  mind  such  evi-
dence, it  is  necessary  to  test  the  truth  of  any  propo-
sition in  question,  not  merely  on  its  own  evidence
but  also  on  that  of  the  impossibility  of  its  contradic-
tory opposite. If  the  latter  is  not  demonstrable,  then


I08  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

the  axiomatic  and  unconditional  validity  of  the  propo-
sition in  question  does  not  stand  beyond  doubt.

§  71.  Proofs  are  distinguished,  in  accordance  with
their  proximate  aim,  as  direct,  which  demonstrate
the  given  proposition  immediately,  and  indirect  ('apa-
gogic '),  which  primarily  demonstrate  the  impossibil-
ity of  its  opposite.  Only  the  first  kind  are  able  to
specify,  in  explanatory  fashion,  the  grounds  in  right
for  the  truth  of  the  proposition ;  the  second  always
prove  only  its  validity  in  fact.  In  convincing  force,
however,  the  first  is  not  always  unqualifiedly  to  be
ranked  as  superior  to  the  second.

The  direct,  as  well  as  the  apagogic,  proof  is  uni-
formly either  *  a  principio  ad  principiatum,'  from  rea-
sons to  consequents  (progressive,  forward-moving) ;
or  else  it  proceeds  'a  principiato  ad  principium,'  from
consequents  to  reasons  (regressive,  backward-moving).

The  different  forms  of  proof  that  spring  out  of  the
foregoing  fact  have  a  very  different  value  ;  —  partly
in  general,  and  partly  different  according  to  the  do-
mains of  the  content  to  which  they  are  applied.

§  72.  The  '  direct '  proof  can  be  progressively  (and
therefore  in  such  a  manner  that  the  process  of  think-
ing takes  the  same  course,  from  reasons  to  conse-
quents, as  the  nature  of  the  thing)  carried  on  in  two
forms.


THE DIRECT PROOFS.  IO9

1)  The  proposition  in  question  is  considered  as  the
terminal  point  of  a  conclusion  ;  we  therefore  take  our
start  from  truths  that  are  more  general  and  already
established,  and  from  them,  by  subordinating  other
general  or  special  sub-propositions,  deduce  the  re-
quired thesis  as  a  necessary  conclusion.  This  form
is  of  all  most  to  be  preferred ;  because  it  contains,
or  may  contain,  the  complete  exposition  of  the  thesis.

2)  The  thesis  may  be  regarded  as  a  point  of  start-
ing, and  since  it  is  considered  valid,  its  consequences
developed.  If  these  are  at  variance  neither  with
general  truths  nor  with  established  facts,  then  the
validity  of  the  thesis  is  —  not  indeed  certain,  but
probable.  For  since  all  the  consequences  can  never
be  developed,  it  remains  possible  that,  in  case  we
were  to  proceed  yet  further,  some  contradiction
would  still  be  revealed.  As  proof  of  the  truth,  ac-
cordingly, this  form  is  not  perfectly  stringent.  On
the  other  hand,  it  occurs  in  practical  life,  for  recom-
mending certain  proposals,  as  a  proof  of  their  con-
formity to  an  end.

Regressively  also,  ascending  from  consequents  to
reasons,  the  direct  proof  may  run  its  course  in  two
forms. That  is  to  say  —

1)  The  thesis  in  question  serves  as  a  point  of  starting,
and  is,  therefore,  here  regarded  as  a  consequent  from
which  we  ascend  to  its  reasons. Now  if  the  reasons


IIO  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

which  must  hold  good,  in  case  the  thesis  is  to  hold
good,  are  in  thorough  accord  with  general  truths,
then  primarily  only  the  conceivability  or  possibility
of  the  thesis  is  demonstrated  thereby ;  and  only  in
domains  where  (as  in  mathematics)  all  that  is  con-
ceivable has  eo  ipso  the  truth  which  appears  in  the
particular  case,  does  such  proof  include  the  truth  of
the  thesis.  In  relation  to  everything  actual,  acces-
sory proof  would  be  necessary,  to  the  effect  that  the
causes  are  in  existence  which  must  actualize  the
thesis,  as  yet  in  itself  only  possible.  In  practical
life,  on  the  other  hand,  this  form  of  proof  is  perfectly
sufficient  —  for  example  —  to  found  or  defend  a  legit-
imate claim. Finally  —

2)  The  thesis  can  in  turn  be  regarded  as  the  ter-
minal point ;  and  therefore  in  this  case  as  a  reason.
We  then  take  our  start  from  certain  other  proposi-
tions or  facts  that  are  known  to  be  valid,  and  show
that  the  sole  ground  of  their  possibility  is  to  be  found
in  the  validity  of  the  thesis,  which  thereby  is  made
necessary.  This  proof  is  therefore  conclusive,  but
is  difficult  to  adduce;  and  it  often  stands  in  need
of  accessory  proofs,  in  order  to  show  that  the  thesis
is  not  merely  an  adequate  reason  for  the  aforesaid
facts,  but  is  the  exclusively  possible  and  sole  reason
for  them.


THE INDIRECT PROOFS.  Ill

§  73.  i  Indirect '  proof  cannot,  strictly  speaking,
immediately  demonstrate  that  the  opposite  of  the
given  thesis  —  that  is,  the  antithesis  —  is  not  valid
in  fact ;  or,  in  more  general  terms,  the  refutation  of
a  proposition  can  never  be  the  immediate  conclusion
of  a  proof.  For  never  do  anything  but  merely  posi-
tive— that  is  to  say — valid  consequences  (such  as,  for
the  rest,  can  consist  in  affirmative  and  negative  judg-
ments) follow  from  all  such  principles  as  could  be
chosen  for  grounds  of  proof ;  and  only  on  account
of  the  fact  that  these  consequences  exclude  the  an-
tithesis, is  the  latter  explained  as  not  valid.

The  first  progressive  form,  which  sets  out  from
general  truths  and  shows  the  antithesis  to  be  im-
possible, accordingly  cannot  occur.  What  appears
as  this,  is  invariably  a  direct  progressive  proof,  which
exhibits  the  necessity  of  some  proposition  by  which
the  antithesis  is  excluded.

On  the  contrary,  the  second  progressive  form,  that
proceeds  from  the  antithesis,  which  is  assumed  as
true,  to  its  consequences,  and  the  first  regressive ',  that
proceeds  from  the  same  to  its  presuppositions,  are
both  of  great  value  as  apagogic  proofs  ('  Deductiones
ad  absurdum  ').  They  demonstrate  the  invalid  nature
of  the  assumed  proposition  by  showing  that,  either
the  consequences  which  would  flow  from  it,  or  the
reasons  which  must  validate  it  if  it  is  to  be  valid,  are


112  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

not  compatible  with  general  truths  or  existing  facts.
Now  although  they  do  not  contain  the  grounds  for
the  validity  of  the  thesis  whose  antithesis  they  dem-
onstrate to  be  impossible,  still  they  are  often  to  be
preferred  to  the  tedious  and  involved  direct  proofs,
on  account  of  the  pictorial  way  in  which  they  show
the  absurdity  of  every  proposition  contradictory  of
the  thesis.

The  second  regressive  form  would  draw  a  conclu-
sion from  facts  to  the  impossibility  of  explaining
them  by  the  antithesis  as  their  ground  ;  and  this
obviously  is  practicable  only  in  case  the  necessary
properties  of  such  a  ground  are  first  positively  de-
fined, and  it  is  then  shown  that  the  antithesis  is
thereby  excluded.

§  74.  Besides  the  distinctions  already  alluded  to,
a  further  one  is  made  which  has  to  do  with  whether
a  universal  proposition  (for  example,  one  concerning
the  triangle)  is  directly  proved  in  its  universality,  or
in  such  manner  that  the  demonstration  first  applies  to
all  individual  instances  (first  for  the  right-angled  tri-
angle, then  for  the  acute-angled,  and  finally  for  the
obtuse-angled)  and  then  the  proofs  are  summarized.
Such  collective  proof  requires  that  we  should  be  in
a  condition  to  enumerate  all  possible  individual  in-
stances which  the general case  can contain ; and


PROOF BY EXCLUSION.  II3

even  when  this  is  done,  it  always  has  the  disadvan-
tage of  simply  establishing  the  validity  in  fact  of  the
proposition  demonstrated  for  all  examples  of  the
universal;  but  it  neither  proves  nor  explains  how  this
validity  follows  from  the  proper  nature  of  the  univer-
sal. Although  it  is  often  quite  indispensable,  since
the  nature  of  a  concept  or  of  some  general  case  is
often  not  so  widely  known,  that  we  should  be  able
to  recognize  the  grounds  which  it  contains  for  the
universal  validity  of  some  assertion  concerning  it.

Related  to  the  foregoing  is  the  proof  by  exclusion.
This  form,  likewise,  in  case  of  a  complete  disjunc-
tion, enumerates  all  the  conceivable  individual  in-
stances of  a  general  case,  and  proves  of  all  the  rest,
except  one,  that  they  are  impossible ;  so  that  in  case
it  is  established  at  all  that  some  one  species  of  the
universal  must  occur,  then  this  one  left  remaining  is
necessarily  valid.

Finally,  the  limitation  of  a  given  value  between
two  limits  —  for  example,  the  proof  that  a  is  neither
greater  nor  less  than  b,  and  accordingly  equals  b
—  belongs  in  this  connection.

§  75.  In  all  the  forms  of  proof  alluded  to,  we
have  assumed  that  the  conclusion  follows  as  to  the
whole,  according  to  the  first  figure,  —  that  is,  by  sub-
sumption of one proposition under others. We


114  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

speak  of  the  proofs  by  analogy  and  induction  fur-
ther on.

This  being  presupposed,  the  question  may  arise,
how  proofs  are  discovered,  —  by  which  we  mean,
the  superior  propositions  on  which  the  validity  of
the  proposition  in  question  depends ;  as  well  as
how  the  inferior  propositions  or  auxiliary  construc-
tions are  divined  by  whose  mediation  the  latter
flow  from  the  former.

On  the  whole,  Logic  cannot  teach  how  to  'dis-
cover '  such  proof ;  but  it  can  only  admonish  us
that  in  every  science  stereotyped  methods  of  proof
for  the  single  groups  of  related  problems  are  de-
veloped, which  put  every  one,  who  understands  how
to  bring  a  problem  under  its  own  group,  upon  the
right  way.  Besides  this  only  one  indication  is
possible,  —  namely,  that  the  ground  for  the  truth  of
a  proposition,  which  expresses  not  merely  a  fact,  but
some  mode  of  procedure  that  is  dependent  on  other
truths,  must  invariably  be  contained  in  the  content
of  the  proposition  itself,  when  the  latter  is  perfectly
thought  out.  Synthetic  judgments  cannot  be  given
in  such  a  way  as  to  add  to  the  subject  S  a  predicate
P,  which  is  neither  contained,  nor  has  its  ground,
in  the  complete  concept  of  S.  Such  a  predicate
would  be  false.  All  correct  judgments  are  as  re-
spects  their content,  analytic ; or  rather  they  are


SERIES OF PROPOSITIONS.  II5

'identical'  and  merely  appear  synthetic  in  form,
since  one  and  the  same  content  can  be  designated
in  both  subject  and  predicate,  from  points  of  view
that  are  very  different  and  arbitrarily  chosen.  Ac-
cordingly, in  order  to  find  the  proof  on  which  the
correctness  of  a  proposition  is  founded,  one  must
analyze  subject  and  predicate  and  the  combination
between  the  two,  and  add  all  the  latent  accessory
thoughts  which  are  meant  thereby ;  in  this  way  one
will  see  in  this  complete  content  of  the  proposition,
for  the  most  part,  its  own  proof  of  itself.

It  frequently  proves  of  advantage  to  consider  as
not  yet  valid  the  subject  of  the  thesis,  or  the  prem-
ise to  which  this  is  attached  as  a  consequent ;  and
to  let  it  originate  from  another  subject  or  another
premise  whose  predicate  or  conclusion  has  already
been  established.  In  this  way  it  is  more  easily
shown  how,  by  the  changes  of  this  other  subject
into  the  one  in  question,  the  predicate  in  question
also  originates  from  this  other.  If  the  different
instances  of  a  universal  proposition  constitute  a
series, — as  often  happens  in  mathematics,  —  this
proof  takes  the  form  of  a  f  proof  from  n  to  (n  +  1) ' ;
in  such  manner  that  the  given  thesis  is  first  verified
for  some  special '  case  or  value  of  n,  and  then  it  is
shown  that,  in  the  formation  of  each  next  case
(n  +  1) from  the  case  n,  the  conditions,  by  virtue


Il6  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

of  which  the  proposition  of  n  holds  good  either  are
maintained  unchanged  or  are  reproduced,  or  else
equivalent  conditions  take  their  place.

§  76.  The  Fallacies  in  proof,  which  logic,  alas!
can  only  mention  and  not  teach  us  to  shun,  are  the
following :

'Petitio  principii/  or  'the  circle  in  proof'  (Diallele)
is  committed,  in  case  what  is  only  some  other  expres-
sion for  it,  or  some  consequence  of  the  conclusion
which  is  first  to  be  demonstrated,  is  employed  as  an
argument.

'  Fallacia  falsi  medii '  (Quaternio  terminorum)  con-
sists in  the  fallacy  of  taking,  in  one  of  the  conclusions
that  constitute  the  proof,  the  medius  terminus  in
both  premises,  in  a  different  signification.  The
inducement  to  this  is  not  far  to  seek  in  the  case
of  abstract  conceptions,  whose  signification  has
equivocal  elements  ;  and  also  in  the  case  of  such
empirical  concepts  (to  which  allusion  has  already
been  made)  as  are  likewise  formed  by  abstraction
in  accordance  with  different  points  of  view.

In  this  connection  the  '  Fallacia  de  dicto  simplici-
ter  ad  dictum  secundum  quid '  may  be  referred  to ;
that  is  to  say,  the  fallacy  of  applying  a  proposition,
which  in  itself  holds  true  universally  and  absolutely,
to  definite  circumstances,  without  limiting  and  modi-


KINDS OF FALLACY.  117

fying  it  in  such  a  manner  as  these  circumstances
require.  This  fallacy  is  in  ordinary  life  the  princi-
ple of  Doctrinairism  and  unpractical  Idealism,  —  of
i  riding  principles  horseback/  Conversely,  the  'Fal-
lacia  de  dicto  secundum  quid  ad  dictum  simpliciter'
extends  a  principle,  valid  in  a  single  instance,  to
all  instances,  —  even  to  such  as  are  lacking  in  those
conditions  that  give  grounds  to  or  recommend  its
validity.  In  practical  life  this  is  the  principle  of
pedantry  and  'philistrosity/

'Nimium  probare,'  and  therefore  i  nihil  probare/
is  the  fallacy  of  demonstrating  the  validity  of  a
proposition,  not  merely  for  the  subjects  and  cases
for  which  it  holds  good,  but  also  for  others  for  which
it  does  not  in  fact  hold  good,  or  should  not  hold
good.  The  fallacy  comes  from  the  choice  of  a  false
argument,  or  from  an  otherwise  correct  argument
not  being  limited  to  those  of  its  sub-species  which
alone  perfectly  contain  the  ground  for  the  validity
of  the  proposition.  '  Parum  probare  '  is  in  itself  only
a  fallacy  of  method,  because  that  which  is  proved
is  correct.  It  becomes  a  logical  fallacy  only  when
the  validity  of  the  proposition  which  is  demonstrated
for  a  number  of  cases,  is  at  the  same  time  appre-
hended as  a  negation  of  its  validity  in  the  other
cases,  in  which  it  in  fact  also  holds  good.

'Hysteron-proteron ' (varepov irporepov), in dis-


Il8  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

tin  ct ion  from  petitio  principii,  is  the  awkwardness
in  method  which  from  two  propositions  A  and  B,
that  may  be  in  turn  deduced  from  each  other,  makes
that  one  the  ground  of  the  proof  which  would  be
more  fitly  exhibited  as  the  result  of  the  other.

Finally,  '  Heterozetesis '  (erepov  Zqrrio-is),  or  '  Ig-
noratio  elenchi,'  is  the  complete  aberration  of  the
proof,  —  arriving  at  a  conclusion  which  was  not  to
be  demonstrated  at  all.

§  77.  Finally,  we  distinguish  '  Paralogisms '  ('  erro-
neous conclusions ')  as  undesigned  fallacies  in  proof,
from  '  Sophisms  '  ('  fraudulent  conclusions'),  —  that
is  to  say,  thoughts  designedly  so  combined  that  from
them,  in  a  way  formally  correct,  either  something
wholly  absurd  and  false  originates,  or  contradictory
assertions  flow  from  them  with  equal  correctness.
The  first  case,  again,  always  depends  upon  designedly
committing  some  one  of  the  customary  fallacies  in
argument.  The  others,  the  so-called  'Dilemmas'
that  were  specially  celebrated  under  that  title  in
antiquity  (the  'liar/  the  i crocodile,'  etc.,  —  comp.
§  46  at  the  end)  originate  in  this  way ;  the  content
of  a  judgment  A,  which  taken  logically  by  itself
must  be  either  correct  or  incorrect  (without  any
regard  to  the  circumstances  under  which it is  ut-


KINDS OF FALLACY.  119

tered,  or  to  facts  not  as  yet  established)  is  never-
theless apprehended  as  though  it  were  conditioned
in  its  meaning  or  in  its  validity,  by  just  those  cir-
cumstances ('the  liar')  or  by  these  not  yet  estab-
lished facts  ('the  crocodile').


CHAPTER III.

THE PROCESS OF THOUGHT IN DISCOVERY.

§  78.  The  second  problem,  to  which  allusion  was
previously  made  (§  69),- — namely,  to  discover  some
general  proposition  —  divides  again  into  several,  the
first  of  which  is  the  discovery  of  a  universal  judg-
ment, that  comprises  a  number  of  particular  facts.
This  may  take  place  either  in  such  manner  that  the
same  content  which  a  single  fact  expresses  is  demon-
strated as  valid  in  general  for  all  instances  of  its  re-
currence ;  or  in  such  manner  that  a  more  general
proposition  is  sought  for,  which  embraces  within
itself  as  classes  all  the  given  facts.

§  79.  The  first  case  only  furnishes  us  the  occa-
sion to  observe  that  the  assertions  —  "  Experience
teaches  nothing  universal"  ;  and  "What  is  correct
in  one  case  need  not  be  so  in  another/'  —  are  not
rightly  made.  Quite  the  contrary,  it  follows  from
the  law  of  Identity,  that  a  truth  which  is  valid  once
cannot  fail  to  be  valid  a  second  time ;  accordingly,
that  every  individual  experience  is  once  for  all  valid,
—  that  is  to  say,  the  same  predicate  is  again  valid
at  all  times  for  all  cases  of  the  recurrence  of  the
same  subject.


THE IMPERFECT INDUCTION.  121

The  difficult  thing  is  simply  to  determine  in  praxi
whether  a  second  instance  does  actually  repeat  pre-
cisely the  subject  observed  in  the  first  case.  For  this
the  probabilities  are  different  in  different  domains  of
research.  For  example,  it  is  enough  for  the  chem-
ist, if  he  once  knows  that  he  has  some  element  be-
fore him  in  a  pure  state,  to  observe  its  reaction
toward  some  other  element  a  single  time,  in  order
to  establish  it  forever.  The  zoologist,  on  the  con-
trary, will  hold  some  peculiarity  of  a  new  animal,
only  one  example  of  which  has  been  discovered,  to
be  'normal/  that  is,  to  be  valid  in  general  (since
disease  and  malformation  are  possible  in  such  a
case),  only  when  the  analogies  of  other  classes  of
animals  justify  him  in  this  assumption.

§  80.  The  second  problem  would  be  to  deduce  a
general  judgment  of  the  form  —  "All  S  are  M" —
from  individual  perceptions,  which  (as  previously
alluded  to)  bear  the  form :  P  is  M,  Q  is  M,  R  is  M,
etc.  This  is  the  simple  conclusion  by  imperfect  In-
duction, to  which  allusion  was  previously  made.

It  was  shown  in  the  Pure  Logic  that  this  induc-
tive conclusion  serves  for  the  widening  of  our  knowl-
edge only  in  case  it  is  imperfect,  —  that  is  to  say,
it  follows,  without  strict  conclusive  force,  from  the
fact  that some  kinds of  S have  the  predicate  M,


122  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

that  all  kinds  of  S  possess  it.  The  precautionary
rules,  which  would  be  required  to  make  the  con-
clusion at  least  as  probable  as  possible,  are  simply
as  follows.

With  the  rising  number  of  cases  in  which  M  oc-
curs among  the  species  of  S,  the  probability  that  it
belongs  to  all  S  increases  of  itself.  Nevertheless,
every  circle  of  human  experience  is  limited,  and  we
can  at  least  never  be  sure  from  that  which  we  learn
to  know  only  by  experience,  whether  we  are  not
merely  getting  a  view  of  certain  particular  species,
nearly  allied,  which  do  indeed  all  possess  the  predi-
cate M,  and  yet  do  not  possess  it  by  virtue  of  their
general  concept,  but  on  account  of  their  other  con-
cordant special  marks.  For  this  reason  it  is  neces-
sary to  show  that  the  M,  which  we  wish  to  ascribe
as  universal  to  the  concept  S,  occurs  not  merely
in  the  case  of  very  manifold  and  very  diverse  species
of  the  S,  but  also  occurs  specifically  in  the  case  of
such  pairs  of  them  as  are  related  to  each  other,
with  reference  to  some  mark  which  can  be  depended
on  for  having  some  influence  on  the  establishment
of  M,  in  the  most  contrary  fashion  possible.  It  can
then  be  concluded  that  the  reason  for  M,  or  for  the
subject  to  which  M  belongs,  can  only  be  some  ge-
neric concept  like  S,  which  is  common  to  all  the
species.


MORE COMPLEX PROBLEMS.  123

§  81.  This  same  problem  is  much  more  important
for  us  in  another  form.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  only
rarely  of  much  use  to  us  to  show  that  a  P  is  united
with  a  general  generic  concept  S,  and  belongs  to  all
species  of  S.  As  a  rule,  we  desire  still  further  to
know  on  what  ground  P  belongs  to  S.  This,  ex-
pressed in  general  form,  leads  to  the  problem  of
searching  for  the  conditions  on  which  the  occur-
rence of  an  event  depends  in  all  the  otherwise  di-
verse instances  of  its  repetition.

In  experience  we  almost  uniformly  meet  with  a
complex  of  diverse  facts,  a  +  J>  +  c  +  •  •  •  =  U,  with
which  another  just  as  composite  complex,  a  +  ft  +  7
+  •  •  •  =  W,  stands  in  combination.  The  problem  is
to  ascertain  whether  in  general  U  is  the  condition  of
W,  and  what  particular  part  of  U  forms  the  condi-
tion of  what  particular  part  of  W.

The  means  for  such  investigation  are,  either  the
facts  which  observation  yields  spontaneously,  or  like-
wise such  others  as  we  add  by  experimentation.

Observation,  for  the  most  part,  shows  us  effects
which  depend  on  a  large  number  of  conditions  at
the  same  time ;  many  of  which,  moreover,  are  wholly
withdrawn  from  observation.  The  main  end  of  ex-
periment does  not  consist  simply  in  multiplying  facts,
but  in  permitting  only  a  fixed  and  accurately  known
number  of conditions  to  be  in  every  trial. Experi-


124  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

ment  further  consists  in  separating  these  conditions,
whenever  it  is  possible,  so  that  in  every  trial  only  one
is  active,  and  yields  an  unmixed  result,  or,  at  least,  so
that  in  every  trial  only  a  small  number  of  conditions
co-operate,  and,  accordingly,  the  part  of  each  single
condition  in  the  collective  result  admits  of  being
determined  by  comparison  of  the  different  trials,  in
the  way  of  elimination.  Finally  (a  matter  concerning
which  we  shall  speak  later),  experiment  especially
seeks  to  secure  the  measureableness  of  the  magni-
tudes of  the  conditions  and  of  the  results.

§  82.  The  following  general  cases  serve  simply  as
examples  of  investigation :

i)  If  "W  (the  effect)  uniformly  follows  upon  U  (the
cause),  then  it  is  possible  that  the  reason  for  W  lies
in  U ;  and  it  remains  a  matter  for  inquiry  whether
the  whole  of  U  furnishes  the  reason  for  W,  and
whether  some  other  condition  besides  U,  that  is
uniformly  connected  with  it  but  unobserved,  is  not
necessary  in  addition.  But  it  is  just  as  possible
that  U  and  "W  are  ^-effects  of  a  common  cause,  Z ;
and  also  possible,  finally,  that  U  and  W  occur  to-
gether by  a  merely  fictitious  coincidence,  without
any  causal  connection  whatever.

2)  After  U  has  occurred,  W  is  sometimes  wanting.
Then  U  either  is  not  the  cause  of  W,  or  U  and  W


CAUSES AND EFFECTS.  1 25

are  £<?-effects  of  (Z  ±  Y) ;  so  that  W  occurs  if  Y  is
positive,  and  not  if  it  is  negative ;  or  U  is  certainly
the  adequate,  and  perhaps  the  only  reason  which  can
produce  W ;  but  there  is  in  the  cases  that  occur
some  hindrance  which  prevents  U  from  producing
its  uniform  result.

3)  Suppose  that  W  occurs  before,  or  without,  IT.
Then  there  is  either  no  connection  between  the  two,
or  the  two  are  again  co-effects  of  (Z  ±  Y)  ;  or,  finally,
U  is  not  the  only,  although  the  quite  sufficient,
reason  for  W,  but  there  are  other  equivalent  rea-
sons.

4)  Suppose  that  U  falls  out  or  is  experimentally
removed,  and  then  W  does  not  follow.  In  this  case
it  is  either  a  mere  coincidence,  without  real  connec-
tion (which  is,  however,  extremely  improbable,  and
is  only  to  be  assumed  in  observation,  and  not  in
experimental  treatment) ;  or  U  is,  or  contains,  the
condition  of  W  (which  is  most  probable) ;  or,  finally,
U  and  W  are  ^-effects  of  Z,  and  the  same  interfer-
ence which  hindered  Z  from  producing  U,  hinders
also  the  production  of  W.

5)  If  U  vanishes  or  is  removed  (experimentally),
but  W  remains,  then  there  is  either  no  nexus  be-
tween them,  or  they  are  again  ^-effects  of  Z ;  but
this  time  in  such  manner  that  the  interference  with
Z,  which  hinders  U,  permits  W  to  exist ;  or  else  U  is


126  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

the  cause  of  the  origin  of  W,  although  not  the  cause
of  its  continuance.

The  proposition  "  Cessante  causa  cessat  effectus  "
is  false  in  this  general  form  (indeed,  if  it  were  not
so,  all  our  labor  and  action  in  the  world  would  be
illusory).  In  general  only  those  effects  vanish  with
the  vanishing  of  the  cause,  which  the  cause  would
further  have  had  in  case  it  had  not  vanished.  Effects
already  produced,  on  the  contrary,  continue  after  the
cessation  of  the  cause,  in  so  far  as  they  consist  in
states  of  things  which  are  not  in  contradiction  with
the  proper  nature  of  things  and  with  the  external
conditions  in  which  they  stand.  Only  in  the  opposite
case  would  they  need  a  maintaining  cause ;  and  this
is  then,  besides,  not  always  the  same  as  the  produ-
cing cause.

6)  Further,  in  case  the  part  a  disappears  from  U  =
(a  +  h  +  c)  and  W  is  not  altered,  then  one  condition
of  the  continuance  of  W  does  not  lie  in  a,  although
perhaps  the  condition  of  its  origin  may.  Conse-
quently, we  have  to  investigate,  where  it  is  possible,
whether  1>  +  c  alone  produces  W ;  in  which  case  a
would  be  a  superfluous  part  of  XJ.

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  whole  of  W  disappears
with  the  vanishing  of  a,  then  a  alone  may  be  the
sufficing  condition  of  W.  Such  condition,  however,
may  just  as  well  lie  in  the entire  sum  (a  +  b  +  c),


CAUSES AND EFFECTS.  \2J

so  that  W  always  vanishes  whatever  part  of  U  is
removed,  but  does  not  depend  on  any  one  of  them
alone.  This  is  often  overlooked  ;  —  for  example,
when  some  one  part  of  the  brain,  a,  after  the  de-
struction of  which  a  function  W  ceases,  is  physio-
logically considered  as  the  sole  organ  of  W.

7)  If  two  different  complexes  of  causes  —  U  =  (a
+  b  +  c)  and  V  =  (m  +  n  +  c)  —  produce  the  same
effect  W,  then  W  will  for  the  most  part  undoubtedly
depend  on  the  c  common  to  both.  Still  it  is  possible
that  c  is  quite  without  any  direct  significance ;  and
that,  on  the  contrary,  (a  +  b)  and  (m  +  n)  furnish  two
equivalent  pairs  of  causes,  in  which  one  and  the  same
condition  for  W  is  only  differently  distributed  to  the
single  elements.

8)  Finally  :  if  again  (compare  what  is  said  under  6)
U  =  (a  +  b  +  c),  and  W  also  vanishes  with  the  re-
moval of  a,  then  a  may  be  the  sole  cause  of  W ;  but
it  is  also  possible  that  such  cause  lies  only  in  c,  but
b  is  a  hindrance  to  the  efficiency  of  c,  which  was,  on
its  side,  balanced  by  a.

The  foregoing  possibilities  might  be  indefinitely
multiplied.

§  83.  Now  tne  ascertainment  of  the  fact  that  any
particular  a  is  the  condition  of  some  a  or  other,  does
not  give  us  satisfying  knowledge,  as  long  as  we  are


128  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

unable  to  subsume  under  such  a  proposition  certain
others,  not  wholly  like  it  but  only  of  similar  kind ;  —
that  is  to  say,  as  long  as  we  do  not  know  according
to  what  general  law  a  is  changed  by  a  fixed  difference,
in  case  a  is  also  changed  by  another  fixed  difference.
Now  since  determinations  of  number  merely,  and
not  marks  of  quality,  are  deducible  from  each  other
in  thought  according  to  general  laws,  the  problem  is
as  follows  ;  —  to  seek  for  the  law  according  to  which
the  values  of  the  magnitude  of  the  results  depend
upon  the  magnitudes  of  the  conditions  belonging  to
them.  This  is  a  problem  which  must  be  solved  for
the  most  part  experimentally.

§  84.  If  it  is  found  that,  when  the  magnitude  of  the
condition  remains  uniformly  the  same,  or  increases
uniformly  or  diminishes  uniformly,  the  results  de-
pendent on  it  do  not  alter  their  values  in  a  perfectly
parallel  way ;  but  —  for  example  —  when  the  value  of
a  increases,  that  of  a  for  some  time  increases,  and
then  while  a  keeps  on  always  increasing,  assumes  a
diminishing  value :  then  this  is  a  proof  that  a  alone
does  not  contain  the  complete  reason  of  a,  but  that
still  other  conditions  co-operate ;  and  that  these  either
consist  in  accessory  conditions  which  are  independ-
ent of  a,  or  in  alterations  which  the  object  affected
by  a  experiences  through  the  earlier  influence  of  a,


USE OF HYPOTHESES.  1 29

and  which  oppose  resistance,  sometimes  uniformly
and  sometimes  periodically,  to  the  further  influence
of  a.

In  all  such  cases  as  the  foregoing,  there  is  a  de-
mand for  a  further  preliminary  investigation.  For
although  we  can  often  discover  very  simple  general
laws  for  the  course  of  such  a  composite  effect,  —  as,
for  example,  the  laws  of  Kepler  show ;  yet  after  all
we  can  only  grasp  perfectly  the  whole  of  it,  in  case
it  can  be  demonstrated  as  the  resultant  of  a  combina-
tion of  single  effects,  whose  laws  are  such  that  a
constant  increase  in  the  result  belonging  to  it  always
corresponds  to  the  constant  increase  of  each  single
condition.  The  place  of  such  a  preliminary  investi-
gation is  in  part  supplied  by  a  further  employment
of  the  previous  artifices,  and  in  part  by  hypotheses.

§  85.  If  we  have  discovered  experimentally  a  series
of  corresponding  values  for  the  conditions  and  the
results,  then  the  intricate  nature  of  the  thing  some-
times compels  us  (for  example,  in  many  problems  of
statistics),  inasmuch  as  many  conditions  that  are
changing  independently  of  each  other  always  co-
operate, to  confine  ourselves  to  the  collection  in  tab-
ular form  of  the  appropriate  material.

On  the  contrary,  where  it  is  possible  to  make  the
transition  to  a  general  law  which  expresses  the  de-


130  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

pendence  of  every  member  in  the  series  of  results
upon  the  corresponding  member  in  the  series  of  con-
ditions, this  transition  always  remains  a  kind  of  logi-
cal saltus.  For  no  measuring,  since  it  all  invariably
depends  upon  nothing  but  the  sharpness  of  our  per-
ception by  the  senses,  gives  us  absolutely  accurate
numbers.  Accordingly,  if  the  series  of  values  dis-
covered for  the  results  accords  accurately  with  that
calculated  by  a  general  formula  from  the  values  of
the  conditions,  it  is  only  extremely  probable  but  not
certain  that  such  formula  is  the  correct  law.  If  it
does  not  agree  with  them,  but  must  be  corrected  in
order  to  agree,  then  it  is  possible  that  another  cor-
rection would  make  it  explicable  with  equal  facility
by  another  law.  Nevertheless,  if  perfect  certainty  is
wanting,  still  a  probability,  which  is  to  be  estimated
as  quite  equal  to  it,  may  be  attained  for  the  correct-
ness of  a  law.  This  is  principally  done  by  measuring
the  discovered  series  of  values  according  to  different
standards  of  measurement,  and  arranging  the  experi-
ments so  that  the  dependence  of  the  results  on  the
conditions  is  subject  to  observation  from  different
points  of  view.  If  the  same  formula  fits  in  all  such
altered  expressions  of  the  thing,  then  it  will  be  the
correct  one.

§  86. On  this  account,  the  discovery  of  a  general
law  is  frequently  called  an  '  Hypothesis.'


CRITERION OF SIMPLICITY.  I3I

We  employ  this  word  in  a  more  limited  meaning.
Hypotheses  are  conjectures  by  which  we  endeavor
to  divine  something  real  that  is  not  given  in  percep-
tion, but  of  which  we  make  the  supposition  that  it
must  be  existent  in  actuality,  in  order  that  what  is
given  in  perception  may  be  possible  ;  —  that  is,  may
be  comprehensible  in  the  light  of  those  laws  of  the
connection  of  ' Things'  which  are  recognized  as
supreme.

Among  the  rules,  by  following  which  we  endeavor
to  give  the  greatest  possible  certainty  to  hypotheses,
it  is  incorrect  to  lay  down  the  general  one,  that  sim-
plicity is  a  criterion  of  truth.  We  must  rather  dis-
tinguish the  nature  of  the  cases.  If  we  have  to  do
with  establishing  by  hypothesis  a  relation  which  is
very  general  and  which  unites  almost  all  that  is
actual,  then  '  simplicity '  is  most  probably  the  correct
thing.  On  the  other  hand,  to  explain  a  fact  which
manifestly  depends  on  very  many  co-operating  con-
ditions, a  very  simple  hypothesis  about  it  only  awak-
ens the  suspicion  that  all  the  difficulties  of  the  matter
are  not  observed,  and  therefore  not  explained.

As  for  the  rest,  no  rules  can  be  given  which  assist
the  intelligent  process  of  discovery  in  the  formation
of  hypotheses,  but  only  certain  ones  which  limit  it.

It  is  of  use  in  the  first  place,  to  make  it  perfectly
obvious,  what  are  the  demands  which  some  matter  of


132  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

reality,  when  hypothetically  assumed,  must  necessarily
fulfil,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  phenomenon  that  is  to  be
explained.  This  admits  of  being  established  with
a  perfect  cogency  by  concluding  backwards  from  the
phenomenon  itself.  From  these  abstract  but  unques-
tionable parts  of  the  hypothesis,  a  further  special  elab-
oration of  it  is  to  be  distinguished,  which  endeavors
to  divine  the  concrete  matter  of  fact  in  which  the
aforesaid  demands  are  found  to  be  actually  fulfilled.
Very  often  several  such  matters  of  fact  are  possible.
The  hypothesis  should  not  blindly  choose  the  one
which  first  falls  in  our  way ;  but  it  must  previously
survey  the  entire  domain  of  related  phenomena,  in
order  to  ascertain  what  kind  of  matter  of  fact  is  wont
to  occur  therein.

Now  if  a  hypothesis  has  been  framed  with  this  ref-
erence to  a  rather  large  number  of  related  phenom-
ena, then  it  very  often  happens  that  the  progress  of
experience  contains  new  facts,  for  whose  explanation
the  previous  hypothesis  does  not  suffice.  It  must,
accordingly,  be  altered  by  new  additions.  This  •  build-
ing of  hypothesis  on  hypothesis '  is  not  to  be  avoided
in  the  course  of  our  scientific  labors ;  and,  on  this
account,  it  is  incorrect  to  forbid  it.  Only  it  is  cer-
tain that  the  investigation  is  not  to  be  regarded  as
ended  until  these  hypotheses,  composed  piecemeal,
at  last  admit  of  being  gathered  together  again  into


FICTIONS IN ARGUMENT.  1 33

one simple assumption corresponding to the sim-
plicity of  the  thing  itself.

Finally,  the  rule  —  "  not  to  frame  any  hypothesis
whose  content  lies  beyond  the  borders  of  a  possible
counter-proof"  —  is  indeed  an  excellent  one;  but  in
many  domains  of  investigation,  exactly  where  we  are
most  in  need  of  hypotheses,  it  is  not  practicable.

§  87.  Hypotheses  are  conjectures  by  means  of
which  we  suppose  that  we  are  divining  an  actual
matter  of  fact.  Fictions  are  assumptions  which  we
make  with  the  consciousness  of  their  incorrectness.

We  are  compelled  to  resort  to  fictions,  when  —  for
example,  in  practical  life  —  judgment  must  be  passed
upon  a  case  which  does  not  exactly  fall  under  any
single  known  rule  ;  we  are  then  compelled  to  indicate
it  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  be  subsumed  under  that
rule  which  is  recognized  as  over  some  content  most
nearly  related  to  its  own.

We  are  further  compelled  to  adopt  fictions,  when
in  science  there  are  no  modes  of  experience  which
admit  of  a  direct  application  to  the  data  of  some  prob-
lem before  us.  In  this  way,  for  example,  curved  lines
are  regarded  as  interrupted  straight  lines  (which  they
never  are),  and  reckoned  accordingly.

In  both  cases  it  is,  of  course,  necessary  to  correct
the  consequences  which  flow  from  the  general  ground


134  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

of  judgment  assumed  by  the  fiction,  with  reference
to  the  fact,  that  the  case  in  hand  is  not  exactly  sub-
ordinated thereto.  And  on  this  supposition,  fictions
lead  —  for  example,  in  mathematics  —  back  again  to
exact  results  and  not  merely  to  approximations.

Finally,  fictions  are  very  frequently,  besides,  em-
ployed as  means  of  illustration,  with  the  purpose  of
bringing  intricate  relations,  that  obviously,  as  frequent
perception  shows,  belong  to  some  case  a,  to  apply  to
a  case  h  which  possesses  relations  that,  although  not
wholly  the  same,  are  essentially  similar.

§  88.  Fictions  of  themselves  lead  to  the  procedure
called  ' Analogy /  which,  although  it  does  not  propose
to  extend  a  proposition  to  a  subject  that  is  certainly
not  to  be  subsumed  under  it,  still  does  transfer  a
proposition  from  one  subject  to  another,  on  account
of  the  similarity  of  the  two.

This  procedure  depends  upon  the  perfectly  cogent
principle,  that  what  is  like  must  under  like  conditions
assume  like  predicates,  and  under  unlike  conditions
unlike  predicates ;  just  as  what  is  unlike  must  under
like  conditions  assume  unlike  predicates.

But  the  first  half  of  this  proposition  avails  nothing
for  the  extension  of  our  knowledge;  and  the  other
only  slightly,  because  it  yields  no  positive  result,  but
only  teaches  us  that  the  predicates  are  not  like.


REASONING BY ANALOGY.  1 35

Accordingly,  such  principles,  strictly  speaking,  are
productive  only  in  mathematics,  where  it  is  possi-
ble to  determine  the  degree  of  the  unlikeness  of  the
subjects  and  that  of  the  conditions,  and  consequently
also  to  reduce  the  unlikeness  of  the  predicates  to  a
definite  measure,  and  to  give  them  a  positive  content.

Outside  of  mathematics,  the  principle  that  what
is  similar  assumes  similar  predicates  under  like  con-
ditions, although  always  correct  in  abstractor  is  still
a  very  difficult  one  to  apply ;  and  after  all,  every-
thing comes  to  this,  that  we  gather  from  it  what
group  of  marks  (x+y)  is  present  in  A  as  a  cause  of
the  predicate  P  being  attributed  to  the  A.  For  if
P  is  to  be  transferred  from  A  to  some  B,  on  account
of  the  similarity  of  the  two  subjects,  then  B  must
be  like  or  similar  to  A  in  relation  to  (x  +  y)  ;  —  that
is  to  say,  must  have  this  group  of  marks  in  common
with  A;  in  which  case,  on  the  contrary,  all  other
similarity  of  A  and  B  is  of  no  avail  whatever.

Now  that  (x  +  y)  is  the  condition  of  P  can  be
demonstrated  partially  on  other  grounds ;  and,  in
case  P  is  ascribed  to  the  subject  B,  is  no  longer
a  conclusion  from  analogy,  but  a  direct  sequence.
If  such  proof  can  not  be  adduced,  then  different
subjects  must  be  compared  as  far  as  possible  :  and
it  must  be  shown  that  all  their  other  similarities
cannot produce the common predicate P, unless


I36  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

(x  +  y)  is  a  common  constituent  of  all  the  subjects;
and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  difference  of  the  marks,
otherwise,  does  not  destroy  the  common  character
of  P,  as  long  as  (x  +  y)  remains  common  to  all  the
subjects.  From  this,  finally,  the  conclusion  is  drawn
with  a  satisfactory  degree  of  probability,  that  the
predicate  P  will  belong  to  all  subjects  in  which
(x  +  y)  is  found.

§  89.  The  other  kind  of  problem  (§  78)  is  this,  —
to  demonstrate  the  reality  of  a  single  fact.

Three  different  points  of  starting  may  be  discov-
ered for  this  purpose.  That  is  to  say,  we  have  be-
fore us  given  facts  which  we  can  apprehend  either
as  causes,  or  as  results,  or  as  accompanying  signs
of  the  fact  in  question.

In  none  of  these  ways  is  a  strict  demonstration
possible.  For  even  if  what  is  given  always  contains
the  complete  cause  of  what  is  to  be  proved,  yet  this
cause  after  all  —  since  we  are  here  not  dealing  with
valid  truths,  but  with  actual  occurrences  —  may  be
hindered  by  counter-forces  from  the  production  of
its  effect.  But  if  what  is  given  can  be  explained
from  what  is  to  be  proved,  as  its  result,  still  it  is
never  demonstrable  with  such  perfect  cogency  that
other  equivalent  causes  could  not  also  be  assigned
for the same given  fact. Finally, that the mere


PROOF BY INDICIAE.  137

reciprocal  companionship  of  two  facts,  because  it
ordinarily  occurs,  does  not  establish  any  certain  con-
clusion from  one  to  the  other,  is  self-evident.

§  90.  The  general  principles,  in  pursuance  of  which
we  try  to  give  as  much  of  probability  as  possible  to
this  'proof  from  indiciaej  depend  upon  the  follow-
ing general  views.

In  reality  a  multitude  of  different  causal  nexuses,
which  do  not  issue  from  one  principle,  constantly
run  on  side  by  side.  Now  it  is  not  probable  that
any  one  of  them  will,  escaping  all  disturbance  from
the  others,  produce  the  effect,  abstractly  belonging
to  it,  in  its  entirety  and  without  abatement.  On
this  account,  finely  spun  plans,  which  do  not  have
regard  to  'accidents,'  appear  to  us  in  practical  life
convicted  of  folly ;  and  in  art  and  history  all  repre-
sentations appear  improbable  which  make  an  intrigue
succeed  in  all  its  results,  or  an  important  factor  ac-
complish all  its  theoretically  correct  results  for  hun-
dreds of  years  together.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  just  as  improbable
that  an  extraordinarily  great  multitude  of  causal
nexuses,  independent  of  each  other,  should  have  in-
tersected each  other  in  such  a  manner  as  to  pro-
duce exactly  one  special  matter  of  fact  that,  in  the
form  in  which  it  exists,  is  comprehensible  from  some


I38  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

single  other  cause.  Accordingly,  we  do  not  believe
in  the  efficiency  of  a  thousand  minute  causes  for  the
production  —  for  example,  in  history  —  of  a  result
which  flows  of  itself  from  some  one  '  direction  of
the  Zeitgeist/  so-called.  Nor  in  medicine  do  we
credit  the  view,  that  every  symptom  of  a  patient
has  its  separate  harmless  cause,  as  soon  as  the  sum
of  all  the  symptoms  exhibit  the  unity  of  a  ( disease/
as  arising  from  which  they  are  all  comprehensible.
Just  so  in  jurisprudence  we  do  believe  in  such  a
diabolical  concatenation  of  a  thousand  minutiae  that
from  them  the  appearance  of  single  coherent  '  crime '
originated.

§  91.  The  importance  of  the  single  indicise  is
estimated  according  to  the  same  rules  as  in  cases
of  inductive  proof ;  consequently,  the  probability  of
the  instance  to  be  proved  is  referred  back  to  internal
grounds  of  actual  fact.

Now  there  are  instances  enough  where  the  proba-
bility of  the  occurrence  of  an  event  cannot  be  judged
at  all  from  grounds  of  mere  fact ;  either  because,  as
in  the  case  of  future  events,  we  do  not  by  any  means
know  them  all,  or  because  it  would  take  us  into
details  too  much  to  estimate  actually  even  the  part  of
them  that  is  known.  Here,  however,  it  may  not  be
necessary  to  have  an  opinion  about  the  occurrence


GROUNDS OF PROBABILITY.  1 39

or  non-occurrence  of  the  event,  in  order  to  base  upon
it  some  practical  procedure.  Nothing  remains  for
us  in  such  a  case  but  first  to  enumerate  together,
as  precisely  alike  possible,  all  the  possible  instances
for  the  occurrence  of  which  wholly  like  reasons  tes-
tify ;  and  then  to  ascribe  to  each  of  them  a  like
probability  of  its  occurrence,  or  else  (in  case  of  prob-
lems where  we  are  dealing  with  a  manifold  repeti-
tion of  analogous  events)  the  same  frequency  of  ap-
pearance. Its  probability  is  therefore  measured  by
a  magnitude  which  divides  the  certainty  that  some
one  case  must  occur  (which  is  here  put  at  unity)
by  the  number  of  all  the  cases  alike  possible  with  it.

This  probability  is  distinguished  from  that  pre-
viously discussed,  which  rested  on  grounds  lying  in
the  very  nature  of  the  single  case,  as  one  which
occurs  precisely  where  no  such  grounds  exist.  It  is
in  no  respect  a  theoretical  assertion  about  what  will
actually  occur  in  the  future.  For  nothing  prevents,
in  spite  of  the  calculation,  the  one  case  from  always
occurring,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  equally  possible
cases,  from  not  occurring.  Such  probability  is  rather,
in  reality,  a  practical  standard  by  which  we  endeavor
to  determine  the  measure  of  the  future  confidence
that  ought  still  to  be  cherished  in  the  occurrence  of
a  definite  single  event  among  many  that  are  alike
possible.


I4O  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

§  92.  The  purely  logical  interest  taken  in  choices,
votes,  etc.,  does  not  consist  merely  in  the  attaining
of  some  result,  but  also  in  this,  that  each  of  the
single  judgments  from  which  it  is  to  be  attained
(that  is,  in  this  case,  each  opinion)  should  find  oppor-
tunity for  a  complete  and  direct  expression.  Prac-
tical interests,  on  the  contrary,  and  the  considera-
tions which  are  had  besides  in  both  cases,  are
opposed  to  this  in  many  ways.

The  logical  interest  is  perfectly  satisfied  only  when
a  choice  is  direct,  —  that  is,  when  it  relates  only  to
one  object  of  choice,  is  followed  by  'aye'  and  'no/
and  accordingly  makes  it  possible  to  give  an  unmixed
expression  to  the  negation.  All  other  choices,  which
are  directed  to  several  objects  of  choice  at  the  same
time,  which  are  followed  merely  with  positive  votes,
and  therefore  permit  the  negation  of  the  one  ob-
ject to  be  made  only  by  affirmation  of  some  other,
are  logically  deficient.  They  do  indeed  furnish  a
result  by  means  of  the  majority.  But  it  remains  pos-
sible that  some  other  result  would  have  satisfied  in
like  manner  the  collective  will  of  those  voting  ;  since,
although  the  result  actually  reached  is  somewhat
preferable  to  the  majority,  it  is  on  the  contrary  de-
cidedly disagreeable  to  the  minority ;  while  the  other
result  would  have  been  scarcely  less  agreeable  to  the
majority  and  the  only  one  agreeable  to  the  minority.


THE LOGIC OF VOTES.  I4I

It  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  relation  which  the
choice  induces,  whether  the  more  decided  satisfaction
of  the  majority,  or  one  less  perfect  but  more  equal-
ized among  the  entire  collection  of  choices,  is  to  be
preferred.

As  a  purely  logical  question  it  is  taken  for  granted
that  the  constituency  of  voters  all  vote  together  on  a
certain  matter  (that  is,  as  united  into  one  collection),
and  form  only  a  single  decisive  majority.  On  prac-
tical grounds,  however,  they  are  frequently  divided
into  a  multitude  of  groups  to  be  treated  separately,
and  the  establishment  of  the  definite  result  of  the
choice  follows  on  the  ground  of  the  majorities  which
appear  in  the  single  groups ;  so  that,  if  the  vote  for
a  candidate  should  be  taken  by  aye  and  no,  he
would  be  chosen  as  soon  as  —  in  case  the  whole  were
divided  into  nine  groups  — he  had  for  him  five  of
these  groups  (each  one,  according  to  its  majority).
It  can  easily  be  understood  that  in  this  way  the
decision  may  be  reached  by  a  minority  of  those
entitled  to  vote  at  all  in  the  matter  on  hand.  If
we  divide  ioo  votes  into  10  groups  of  10  each,  or
into  20  groups  of  5  each ;  then  we  have,  in  the  first
case,  6  X  6  =  36,  in  the  other  11X3  =  33,  as  the
number  of  votes  necessary  for  a  decision,  —  instead
of  51,  which  without  this  partition  into  groups,  in
case  the  100  voters  gave  their  vote  together,  would


142  OUTLINES OF LOGIC.

be  required  for  a  majority.  It  can  be  calculated  that,
under  such  circumstances,  the  number  of  votes  nec-
essary to  a  decision  may  perhaps  fall  as  low  as  a
quarter  of  the  whole  number.  And  a  still  smaller
number  is  sufficient,  in  case  the  number  of  the  votes
is  not  placed  as  equal  (as  we  have  done  hitherto),
but  different,  in  the  single  groups.

§  93.  In  voting  on  proposals  for  laws,  which  seek
to  satisfy  one  and  the  same  necessity  by  formulating
it  in  ways  different  and  exclusive  of  each  other,  the
usage  employed  accords,  strictly  speaking,  at  only
one  point  with  the  logical  interest.  That  is  to  say,
if  the  voting  assembly  wishes  not  to  recognize  in
principle  the  general  thought  which  underlies  all
these  ways  of  formulating  it,  or  the  necessity  itself ;
then  this  cannot  be  satisfactorily  done  by  successive
negations  of  the  single  proposals,  but  only  by  a
'motion  to  fix  the  order  of  the  day,'  which  must
always  be  established  as  soon  as  such  a  vote  of  the
whole  body  is  expected.

From  this  point  on,  however,  the  logical  procedure
must  either  be  such  that  a  decision  must  be  reached
by  an  aye-and-no  vote  upon  every  proposal  of  the
kind,  and  that  one  of  them  all  retained  which  gets
the  majority  of  affirmative  votes ;  or  else,  at  least,
one  of  the  proposals  must  first  be  selected  by  merely


THE LOGIC OF VOTES.  I43

the  votes  in  favor  of  it,  without  any  further  issue,
so  as  to  make  obvious  what  is  the  condition  of  opin-
ion thereupon.

The  actual  procedure  is  frequently  much  more
speculative  as  to  its  want  of  obvious  significance,  or
at  least  admits  the  existence  of  such  speculation.
For  whatever  the  order  of  questions  may  be,  yet
custom  hinders,  by  the  affirmative  of  any  question
of  all  those  that  follow  being  excluded  from  the
vote,  as  well  the  free  expression  of  opinions  as  also
the  attainment  of  a  result  that  is  wholly  accommo-
dated to  them.  For  every  aye  or  no  has  in  this
case  a  double  significance ;  either  it  means  a  choice
(or  non-choice)  of  the  individual  proposal  in  itself
considered,  or  an  affirmative  (or  negative)  for  it  from
fear  (or  hope)  of  defeating  (or  carrying)  by  this
means  some  subsequent  less  (or  more)  agreeable
measure.  Accordingly,  the  procedure  passes  out  of
the  purely  logical  domain  into  that  of  practical  politi-
cal calculation  and  trickery.


II.
ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  PHILOSOPHY,


INTRODUCTION.

§  1.  '  Philosophy '  should  not  be  considered  as  an
employment  of  the  thinking  faculty,  which  attempts
to  solve  problems  of  its  own,  that  are  otherwise  wholly
unknown,  by  means  and  methods  just  as  peculiar  and
otherwise  unheard  of ;  and  which,  therefore,  makes
its  appearance  as  a  kind  of  luxury  superfluous  to
our  real  life.  The  rather  is  it  nothing  else  than  the
strenuous  effort  of  the  human  spirit,  by  a  coherent
investigation,  to  find  a  solution,  that  is  universally
valid  and  free  from  contradictions,  for  those  riddles
by  which  our  mind  is  oppressed  in  life,  and  about
which  we  are  perforce  compelled  to  hold  some  view
or  other,  in  order  to  be  able  really  to  live  at  all.

Life  itself  involves,  in  that  which  we  are  wont  to
call  'education/  numerous  attempts  at  such  a  solu-
tion. As  well  concerning  the  nature  of  things  and
their  connection  under  law,  as  concerning  the  grounds
of  beauty  in  phenomena,  and,  finally,  concerning  the


I46  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

rules  obligatory  for  human  conduct,  education  is
accustomed  to  establish  a  number  of  trains  of  thought
that  excite  a  great  interest  on  account  of  the  liveli-
ness and  warmth  which  they  possess  as  witnesses,
not  for  unprejudiced  reflection  but  for  life's  immedi-
ate experience.  Their  disadvantage,  however,  con-
sists in  this,  that  they  are  not  connected  systemati-
cally together,  are  often  contradictory  of  each  other,
and  are  as  a  rule  interrupted  before  they  have  at-
tained the  ultimate  ground  of  certainty.  Aroused
by  certain  events,  which  happen  to  one  man  in  one
way  and  to  another  in  a  different  way,  all  these  reflec-
tions retreat  in  a  lively  manner  some  steps  backward,
in  order  to  discover  the  reasons  that  will  explain  such
experiences.  They  then  ordinarily  come  to  a  halt,
and  regard  as  sufficiently  ultimate  principles  certain
points  of  view,  which  themselves  include  what  is  yet
more  of  a  riddle.  It  is  natural  that  many  such  trains
of  thought,  setting  out  as  they  do  from  different
points  of  view,  should  not  coincide  in  one  whole  but
leave  gaps  and  contradictions  between  them.

The  same  relation  maintains  itself  with  the  indi-
vidual sciences.  They  attach  themselves  to  single
domains  of  actuality,  and  are  satisfied  when  they
discover  principles  which  are  constantly  valid  within
such  a  domain,  but  which  at  once  become  doubtful
in  their  application  on  being  carried  over  to  any  other


EXISTENCE OF TRUTH.  I47

domain.  Thus  the  conception  of  a  cause  that  acts
according  to  law  is  undoubtedly  valid  in  physics.
But  the  consideration  of  organic  life,  as  well  as  ethi-
cal speculations,  frequently  oppose  to  it  the  concep-
tion of  a  cause  that  is  determined  only  by  its  ends
and  not  by  laws,  or  of  one  that  acts  with  a  complete
freedom.  It  is  the  problem  of  philosophy  to  deter-
mine the  claims  of  these  different  principles  and  the
circuit  within  which  they  are  valid.  Accordingly  it
admits,  for  the  present,  of  being  defined  as  the  en-
deavor, by  means  of  an  investigation  which  has  for
its  object  that  which  is  the  principle  of  investigation
in  education  and  in  the  particular  sciences,  to  estab-
lish a  view  of  the  world  that  is  certain,  coherent,  and
of  universal  validity.

§  2.  To  this  entire  undertaking  two  presupposi-
tions are  necessary.

The  first  is  this,  that  there  exists  in  the  world  at
large  a  'truth'  which  affords  a  sure  object  for  cog-
nition. This  assumption  has  seldom  been  called  in
doubt.  To  its  denial  there  stands  opposed,  princi-
pally, the  moral  conviction  that  without  such  truth
the  world  would  be  absurd ;  and  that  the  world  can-
not after  all  be  this.

The  other  presupposition  is,  that  we  are  in  a  con-
dition  to apprehend this truth,  —  although by  no


I48  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

means  necessarily  the  whole  of  it ;  and  yet  some
part  which  shall  serve  us  as  a  firm  basis  for  an  in-
vestigation that  is  not  perfectible  in  particulars.
In  opposition  to  this  assumption,  doubt  arises  in
three  forms  :

a)  A  Scepticism  that  is  without  motif  raises  the
question  whether,  at  last,  all  may  not  be  quite  dif-
ferent from  what  we  are  necessarily  compelled  to
think  it.  This  doubt  we  pass  by.  For  since  it  does
not  arise  out  of  the  content  of  what  is  necessary  to
thought,  but  only  demands  in  a  general  way  some
pledge  for  the  truth  of  our  thinking,  that  lies  out-
side of  all  our  thought,  no  satisfaction  can  ever -be
given  it,  but  it  can  only  be  overcome  by  a  conviction
of  the  absurdity  of  its  own  content.

b)  A  second  kind  of  Scepticism,  with  a  motif,
endeavors  to  show  that  the  thoughts  which  we  are
compelled  to  think  according  to  the  necessary  rules
of  our  cognition  are  frequently  impossible  according
to  rules  just  as  necessary;  and,  therefore,  that  what
is  a  necessity  to  our  thought  does  not  lead  us  to  any
true  knowledge.  Such  doubts  are  not  to  be  refuted
or  confirmed,  without  investigation.  We  derive  from
them  simply  the  rule  of  circumspection,  accurately
to  test  the  most  general  conceptions  and  principles
which  appear  to  us  as  necessities  of  thought ;  to  sep-
arate what  they  in truth  mean  and  prescribe  from


SCEPTICISM AND CRITICISM.  I49

the  more  special  and  not  necessary  adjunct  thoughts,
such  as  have  attached  themselves  to  the  former  dur-
ing their  application  to  limited  circles  of  objects  ;
and  then  to  see  whether,  in  this  way,  the  contradic-
tions are  made  to  vanish.

c)  As  related  to  scepticism  and  derived  from  it,
Criticism  endeavors  to  establish  cognition  more
securely,  since  it  premises  an  investigation  of  the
nature  of  the  faculty  of  cognition,  and  thereby  seeks
to  determine  the  limits  of  the  validity  of  our  forms
of  cognition,  previous  to  their  application  to  their
objects.  Nevertheless,  although  a  preliminary  ori-
entating of  ourselves  concerning  the  origin  and
connection  of  our  knowledge  may  guard  us  against
many  vain  undertakings,  yet  we  cannot  regard  the
undertaking  of  criticism  as  anything  more  than  a
petitio  principii.  That  is  to  say,  previous  to  the
application  of  knowledge  to  things,  we  cannot  do
anything  but  become  conscious  of  those  grounds
of  judgment  which  our  reason  contributes  to  the
consideration  of  things  as  necessities  of  its  thought.
Whether  these  principles  are  applicable  to  'things
themselves,'  does  not  .admit  of  being  decided  in  a
preliminary  way  from  the  history  of  the  genesis  of
our  cognition ;  because,  in  order  to  have  such  a  his-
tory at  all,  one  must  necessarily  already  have  taken
one's  point  of  departure  from  actual  presuppositions


I50  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

concerning  the  nature  of  things  cognizable,  concern-
ing the  nature  of  the  cognizing  spirit,  and  concern-
ing the  kind  of  reciprocal  action  that  takes  place
between  them.

§  3.  We  therefore  enter  upon  our  philosophizing
with  the  confidence  which  reason  has  toward  itself, —
that  is  to  say,  with  the  principle  that  all  propositions
which  remain,  after  the  correction  of  all  accidental
and  changeable  errors,  as  always  and  universally
necessary  to  thought,  are  put  by  us  at  the  founda-
tion of  everything  as  confessedly  true ;  and  that
according  to  them  must  our  views  concerning  the
nature  of  things  be  determined,  and  from  them  alone
must  a  theory  of  our  cognition  be  obtained.

But  as  concerns  the  way  which  we  are  to  take
in  our  philosophizing,  two  views  are  distinguished.
Both  are  at  one  so  far  as  this,  that  the  world  itself
must  be  a  unity ;  and  consequently  the  perfected
cognition  of  it  must  be,  as  it  were,  a  closed  system,
which  can  contain  no  parts  that  are  not  united,  or
that  stand  toward  each  other  without  any  ordering
whatever.

One  view,  however,  believes  that  it  is  both  able
and  obligated  to  divine  at  the  beginning  the  One
Real  Principle,  on  which  the  world  actually  depends,
and  from  it  to  deduce  or  construe  the  entire  actuality


INVESTIGATION OF TRUTH.  I  5  I

as  the  sum  of  its  consequences.  Such  a  beginning
for  cognition  would  be  the  best  if  we  were  gods.
On  the  contrary,  as  finite  beings,  we  do  not  ourselves
stand  in  the  creative  centre  of  the  world,  but  eccen-
trically in  the  hurly-burly  of  its  individual  sequences.
It  is  not  at  all  probable  and  is  never  certain,  that  we
should  perfectly  divine  the  one  true  Principle  of  the
world  in  any  one  fundamental  thought,  however
noble  and  important,  to  which  some  sudden  intui-
tion might  lead  us ;  still  more  uncertain  that  we
should  formally  apprehend  it  so  accurately  that  the
series  of  its  true  consequences  should  obviously  pro-
ceed from  it.  It  is  rather  altogether  probable  that
the  first  expression  of  the  principle  will  be  defective,
and  that  mistakes  will  always  multiply  in  the  course
of  the  deduction ;  since  one  has  regard  to  no  inde-
pendent point  of  view  from  which  they  might  be
corrected.

The  second  view  —  of  which  we  fully  approve  —
distinguishes  the  investigation  from  the  exhibition
of  truth.  The  mere  search  for  the  truth  is  by  no
means  under  the  necessity  of  taking  its  point  of
departure  from  one  principle,  but  is  justified  in  set-
ting forth  from  many  points  of  attachment  that  lie
near  each  other.  It  is  only  bound  to  the  laws  of
thought,  —  beyond  that,  to  no  so-called  '  method  '
whatever. All  direct  and  indirect  means  of  getting


152  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY/

behind  the  truth  must  be  applied  by  it  in  the  freest
manner  possible.  The.  latter,  however,  —  the  exhibi-
tion of  truths  already  gained — has  only  to  satisfy
the  need  for  unity  and  systematic  coherency.  But
for  it,  too,  this  is  a  problem  of  which  we  do  not
know  beforehand  in  how  far  it  is  solvable.

§  4.  A  preliminary  division  of  Philosophy  may  be
attempted  simply  with  the  design  of  separating  the
different  groups  of  the  problems,  each  one  of  which
appears  to  be  self-coherent  and  to  require  an  inves-
tigation of  a  specific  kind.  We  attribute  little  value
to  the  reciprocal  arrangement  of  these  single  groups
under  each  other.  In  the  history  of  science,  too,
names  for  these  single  groups  are  customary  before
any  definite  usage  as  to  their  systematic  arrange-
ment.

Two  domains  are  now,  in  the  first  place,  distin-
guished. We  require,  on  the  one  hand,  certain  in-
vestigations concerning  that  which  exists;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  concerning  the  value  which  we  attach
to  what  is  actual  or  to  what  ought  to  be.  We  now
see  that  nothing  in  relation  to  its  value  follows  im-
mediately from  insight  into  the  origin  and  continued
existence  of  anything  actual  whatever ;  and  nothing
in  relation  to  the  possibility  of  its  being  actual  fol-
lows from insight  into  its  value. Accordingly,  al-


DIVISIONS OF PHILOSOPHY.  I53

though  we  assume  that  at  the  end  of  the  investiga-
tion a  close  connection  will  be  shown  between  that
which  exists  and  that  which  is  of  some  value,  still,
at  the  beginning  we  separate  the  two  investigations,
—  the  one  concerning  the  actuality  and  the  one  con-
cerning the  value  of  things.

§  5.  Of  the  further  organization  of  the  subject,
what  follows  may  be  presupposed :

Inducements  to  questions  that  concern  the  expla-
nation of  actuality  come  to  us  in  part  from  external
nature  and  in  part  from  the  life  of  the  soul.  The  two
domains  do  not  immediately  exhibit  the  appearance
of  complete  similarity ;  but  the  consideration  of  both
leads  to  a  series  of  quite  similar  inquiries,  —  for  ex-
ample, concerning  the  possibility  of  the  alteration  of
one  and  the  same  Being,  concerning  the  possibility
of  the  influence  of  one  Thing  upon  another,  etc.
Such  inquiries  may  be  separated  from  others  and
combined  into  a  universal  preliminary  investigation,
Metaphysic,  upon  which  the  Philosophy  of  Nature
and  Psychology  should  then  follow,  as  applications  of
the  results  reached  in  it  to  special  cases.

The  second  main  division  finds  two  obviously  re-
lated subjects  in  the  kinds  of  value  which  we  ascribe
to  the  existent,  and  in  those  which  we  ascribe  to
such  actions  or  sentiments  as  ought  to  be ;  these  are,


1 54  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

however,  primarily  distinguished  by  the  fact  that
only  the  latter  directly  include  an  obligation.  On
this  account,  the  investigation  of  the  two  divides
into  ^Esthetics  and  Ethics ;  and  for  these  two  inves-
tigations a  third,  common  to  both,  may  be  conceived,
but  has  hitherto  never  been  carried  out,  —  namely,
an  investigation  concerning  the  nature  of  all  deter-
minations of  value  (corresponding  to  Metaphysic).


SECTION  FIRST.


THEORETICAL PHILOSOPHY.


§  6.  In  life  and  in  the  particular  sciences  we  are
constantly  employed  with  the  explanation  of  phenom-
ena which,  in  the  form  in  which  they  are  presented
to  us,  are  full  of  riddles  through  their  contradictions,
gaps,  and  lack  of  coherence,  —  a  fact  to  which  allu-
sion has  already  been  made.  In  doing  this  we  nec-
essarily start  from  certain  general  presuppositions
to  which  nature  and  the  coherency  of  things  must
correspond  in  order  to  be  true.  These  presupposi-
tions are  ordinarily  employed  only  in  an  uncritical
way  and  without  any  clear  consciousness  of  their
meaning ;  but  Metaphysic  endeavors  to  make  a  col-
lection of  them,  to  explain  their  true  meaning,  and
to  remove  the  prejudgments  which  have  become  at-
tached to  them  from  being  accustomed  to  a  limited
circle  of  experience.  Three  great  groups  of  inves-
tigations appear  at  this  point :

i)  one,  concerning  the  most  general  conceptions
and  propositions  which  we  apply  in  judging  of  every
actuality  ;

2)  a  second, concerning  the  most  general  forms


I56  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

in  which  this  actuality  appears  in  the  existences  of
nature  (Space,  Time,  Motion) ;

3)  a  third,  concerning  the  possibility  of  the  '  recip-
rocal being  (Fureinandersein)  of  things/  by  which  the
one  becomes  a  perceivable  object,  and  the  other  a
perceiving  subject.

These  three  groups  appear  under  different  titles,  with
somewhat  of  deviating  limitations  and,  of  course,  very
differently  treated,  in  most  systems  of  Metaphysic.

In  the  Metaphysic  of  the  older  school  the  first
part  appears  as  Ontology ;  the  second  as  Cosmology,
having  the  problem  of  showing  how  the  individual
things  are  connected  together  into  an  orderly  world-
whole,  —  a  problem  which,  although  it  is  related  to
the  second  of  those  mentioned  above,  is  still  not
identical  with  it.  Rational  Psychology  corresponds
to  the  third  group.  On  the  contrary,  the  fourth
part  of  such  Metaphysic,  rational  theology,  must  be
distinguished  as  a  constituent  of  a  foreign  kind  and
not  strictly  belonging  to  Metaphysic.

Just  so  in  Herbart's  Metaphysic,  if  we  count  out
the  first  part,  the  '  Methodology',  then  the  others
correspond  perfectly  to  the  above-mentioned  divis-
ion :  Ontology,  Synechology,  as  the  doctrine  of
what  is  permanent,  and  Eidolology,  or  the  doctrine
of  images  (el'SwXa),  which  arise  in  one  being  as  com-
ing from  the  others.


QUESTIONS OF ONTOLOGY.  1 57

In  the  same  way  does  Hegel's  '  Logic/  by  its  par-
tition into  the  doctrines  of  Being,  of  Phenomenon
(from  which,  of  course,  though  to  its  disadvantage,
space  and  time  remain  excluded),  and  of  Idea,  ex-
hibit the  plainest  analogies  to  the  foregoing  division
of  such  problems.

§  7.  Ontology,  from  its  being  employed  with  expe-
rience, is  led  to  the  following  principal  inquiries  :

i)  What,  exactly,  is  the  absolute  Subject,  which
is  not  a  predicate  of  another ;  that  is  to  say,  in  what
does  that  consist  which  is  the  truly  existent  in  all
'  Things/  whose  nature  we  ordinarily  believe  our-
selves able  to  specify  by  a  number  of  so-called  prop-
erties;  and  which  is  the  support  (Trager)  of  these
properties  and  not  itself  in  turn  a  property  of  any
other  ?

2)  How  is  the  possibility  of  a  variety  of  simulta-
neous and  successive  properties  belonging  to  one
and  the  same  subject  to  be  comprehended?

3)  How  can  such  a  unity  exist  among  a  variety  of
Things  that  the  states  of  one  become  causes  for  alter-
ations in  the  states  of  another  ?

§  8.  Before  we  consider  the  different  answers
which  have  been  given  to  these  inquiries,  we  make
prominent  some  very  general  kinds  of  error.


I58  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

The  first  is  the  confounding  of  the  logical  analysis
of  our  mental  representations  and  the  metaphysical
explanation  of  the  things  to  which  the  mental  repre-
sentations relate.  It  is  in  general  quite  obvious  that
there  cannot  be,  in  the  matter  of  fact  itself  and  as
developments  of  its  own  nature,  as  many  movements
and  turnings  as  would  correspond  to  the  various
steps,  the  separations  and  combinations,  and  in  gen-
eral to  all  the  turnings  which  we  must  make  in
thought,  in  order  from  our  point  of  view  to  appre-
hend the  nature  of  such  matters  of  fact.  This  is
perfectly  clear  to  every  one,  in  case  one  has  to  do,
for  example,  with  the  more  intricate  artifices  of  inves-
tigation through  which  we  endeavor  to  discover  any
secret  fact.  Here  the  whole  expenditure  of  the  oper-
ations of  thought  is  quite  obviously  nothing  but  our
subjective  exertion,  as  it  were,  to  get  behind  the  in
itself  simple  thing.  On  the  contrary,  all  this  be-
comes obscure,  in  case  one  has  to  do  with  the  simplest
logical  operations.  And  at  this  point  we  very  gen-
erally fall  into  the  error  of  regarding  our  logical  sep-
arations and  combinations  of  the  mental  images  and
their  parts  as  events  which  happen  also  in  the  nature
of  the  things  themselves.

For  example ;  in  definition  we  premise  for  the
individual  a  general  conception,  and  elaborate  this
by  added  modifications  up  to  the  point  of  likeness


JUDGMENT AND REALITY.  1 59

with  the  individual  in  question.  Hence  the  frequent
error,  as  though  in  reality  some  '  primitive  animal/
some  'primitive  matter,'  some  'primitive  substance/
must  precede  as  a  substratum  in  fact,  from  which,  as
something  secondary,  the  individual  subordinate  spe-
cies might  originate  through  the  influence  of  modify-
ing conditions.  The  logical  dependence  of  the  sepa-
rate members  of  a  classification  is,  therefore,  con-
founded with  a  real,  matter-of-fact  derivation  of  one
from  the  other.

In  judgment  we  divide  the  object  of  a  perception
into  a  subject,  from  which  we  as  yet  exclude  a  pred-
icate ;  then  into  such  predicate ;  and,  finally,  into  the
third  mental  representation,  that  of  the  copula  by
which  the  predicate  is  united  again  with  the  subject.
These  operations  are  necessary  in  order  to  secure
clearness  to  the  process  of  thinking.  But  it  is  an
error  to  assume  that,  in  general,  any  like  transaction
corresponds  to  them  as  a  matter  of  fact,  so  that
there  can  really  be,  in  the  last  analysis,  a  somewhat
that  is  without  all  predicates,  and  only  just  a  some-
what, but  not  any  definite  somewhat ;  and,  further,
that  there  can  be  predicates  which  were  somewhat
previous  to  their  being  actualized  in  some  subject ;
and,  finally,  that  there  is  in  rerum  natitra  some
'cement/  as  it  were,  similar  to  the  logical  copula
by  means of which the predicates  are  brought  to


l6o  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

'  inhere  '  —  as  the  customary  expression  goes  —  in
the  subject.

One  of  the  most  frequent  inducements  to  such
errors  as  the  foregoing  lies  in  the  comparisons
which  we  are  able  at  will  to  establish  in  the  pro-
cess of  thinking  between  the  contents  of  any
two  ideas  we  please.  We  are  very  much  inclined
to  regard  the  predicates  —  for  example,  'greater/
'smaller/  'different/  'opposed/  and  the  like  —  which
belong  '  to  the  content  compared,  only  after  the  com-
parison is  made,  as  essential,  integrating  properties
of  the  content  itself.

From  these  mistakes  there  originate,  in  part,  a
multitude  of  artificial  difficulties,  inasmuch  as  we
begin  to  seek  for  an  explanation  of  matter-of-fact
properties  of  things  which  we  have  previously  cre-
ated for  them  (as,  for  example,  when  the  question
is  raised,  how  an  x  can  be  at  the  same  time  '  greater '
and  'smaller/  —  that  is,  greater  than  y  and  smaller
than  z)  :  and,  in  part,  many  actual  difficulties  are
met  with  and  no  solution  for  them  found,  because
we  imagine  that  we  have  succeeded  in  exhibiting
the  development  of  a  matter  of  fact,  when  we  have
in  truth  merely  depicted  the  development  of  our
conceptions  of  the  matter  of  fact.  To  this  latter
case  belongs,  for  example,  the  application  of  the
conceptions  of  'potentia'  and  'actus/  or  of  'dynamis'


EXPLANATION OF PRINCIPLES.  l6l

and  'entelechy,'  or  of  'power'  and  'expression/  —
faults  of  a  kind  which  is  especially  frequent  in
ancient  philosophy  (compare  '  Microcosmus,'  vol.  II,
pp.  321  ff.).

§  9.  A  second  very  general  mistake,  the  exact
opposite  of  the  previous  one,  consists  in  the  effort  to
make  clear  the  supreme  principles  by  explanations
that  have  no  meaning  except  in  the  case  of  individual
phenomena  dependent  on  the  principles  ;  and  that
even  here  have  their  meaning  only  in  virtue  of  the
principles  themselves.  The  simplest  way  of  making
this  obvious  is,  in  brief,  the  following.

Our  cognition  is  accustomed  to  the  investigation
of  individual  events.  These  have  their  definite  con-
ditions, under  which  they  are  produced  and  main-
tained. On  this  account,  wre  can  often  show  step
by  step  in  a  pictorial  manner,  how  the  phenomenon
arises  from  the  co-operation  of  its  conditions  ;  that
is  to  say,  we  know  the  mechanism  of  its  coming
to  be,  the  way  in  which  it  is  produced.  Now  this
same  inquiry  may  also  very  easily  be  raised  with
reference  to  the  general  principles,  which  are  the
very  foundation  of  the  possibility  of  the  aforesaid
mechanism,  or  of  every  way  in  which  any  thing
whatever  can  be  produced.  For  example,  the  ques-
tion is asked, how does it happen that in all


1 62  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

'  becoming '  one  state  follows  upon  the  others ;  or
how  does  a  '  cause '  begin  to  produce  its  appropriate
effect.  This  is  as  though  one  should  wish  to  inves-
tigate some  internal  mechanism,  by  which  the  points
of  relation  existing  between  these  two  most  general
conceptions  were  held  together;  although  —  just  the
other  way  —  every  possible  mechanism  presupposes
the  validity  of  these  two  conceptions.

It  is  just  so  in  many  other  cases.  This  fault  is  the
opposite  of  the  foregoing,  inasmuch  as  in  the  case  of
objects  of  thought  that  are  absolutely  incomprehen-
sible except  in  the  form  of  abstract  concepts  and  are
definable  only  as  to  their  essential  meaning,  it  is  not
satisfied  with  such  apprehension  as  belongs  to  the
concept,  but  demands  for  them  a  kind  of  intuitive
knowledge  such  as  in  this  case  is  quite  impossible.

§  10.  The  difference  in  different  treatises  on  Met-
aphysic  admits  of  being  referred  to  two  antithetic
principles  which  are  dependent  on  fundamental  pre-
suppositions that  are  together  introduced  to  consid-
eration.

One  view,  which  is  realistic,  finds  the  inducement
to  investigation  exclusively  in  the  '  contradictions '
of  experience.  If  there  were  none  of  these,  then
Realism  would  take  no  offence  at  letting  the  world
pass  in  the  form  in  which  it  exists  as  bare  matter


METAPHYSIC OF REALISM.  163

of  fact ;  and  would  raise  no  further  inquiries.  Ac-
cordingly, if  it  succeeds  in  placing  underneath  this
world  of  experience,  a  world  of  what  is  existent  truly
and  devoid  of  contradictions,  out  of  which  the  former
becomes  comprehensible ;  then  it  regards  its  problems
as  solved.

The  other  and  idealistic  view  sees  in  every  fact,
even  although  it  include  no  contradiction,  some  rid-
dle ;  and  it  believes  that  we  ought  to  recognize  as
truly  existent  only  such  matter-of-fact  as,  by  virtue
of  its  meaning  and  significance,  admits  of  being
demonstrated  to  be  an  essential  member  of  the
rational  world-whole.

§  11.  The  Metaphysic  of  Realism  is  more  inclined
to  the  pursuit  of  special  investigations  which  are  at-
tached to  single  groups  of  problems  ;  and  it  is  only
afterward  that  it  endeavors  to  combine  the  results  it
has  attained  into  one  whole.  The  Metaphysic  of
Idealism,  on  the  contrary,  prefers  to  apprehend  as
its  single  main  problem  the  meaning  of  the  world
as  a  whole ;  and  it  believes  that  the  solution  of  this
problem  includes  that  of  all  the  special  problems,
and  that  thereby  a  coherent,  uninterrupted  develop-
ment can  best  be  obtained.  The  methods  of  both
partake  of  this  distinction.

Realism  takes  its  point  of  departure  from  the  abso-


164  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

lute  certainty  of  the  law  of  identity.  Accordingly,
it  sees  so-called  '  contradictions '  everywhere  that
ordinary  experience  shows  us  a  '  unity  of  the  one
and  the  many  '  (for  example,  the  '  many  properties '
of  .a  'Thing'  and  their  'alteration').  It  further
tries  to  find  a  general  solution  for  the  contradiction
in  the  assertion  that  the  unity  is  here  only  appar-
ent;  and  that  what  corresponds  as  subject  to  the
many  properties  (whether  simultaneous  or  succes-
sive) is  not  one  Being  that  remains  the  same  with
itself  and  yet  undergoes  change,  but  is  a  complex
of  many  beings  which,  in  themselves  always  simple
and  always  self-identical,  only  appear  to  us  as  one
i  Thing '  through  their  relations  to  each  other  and
through  their  changes  —  as  one  Thing  with  many
properties,  as  one  changeable  thing.

§  12.  The  Metaphysic  of  Idealism  sets  itself  a
single  main  problem,  which  is  as  follows ;  to  dis-
cover the  nature  of  the  truly  Existent,  against  the
recognition  of  which  as  absolute,  independent,  and
supreme  Ground  of  actuality,  none  of  those  presup-
positions which  our  reason  is  compelled  to  make
concerning  such  a  principle,  any  longer  protests.

Such  a  problem  leads  to  a  method  of  its  own.
That  is  to  say,  the  aforesaid  'truly  Existent,'  which
we  wish  to  discover,  hovers  before  us,  at  the  begin-


METAPHYSIC OF IDEALISM.  1 65

ning  of  philosophy,  in  the  form  of  a  very  obscure
although  very  lifelike  presentiment.  Positively,  we
are  not  able  exhaustively  to  express  what  we  mean
by  it.  But  yet,  in  case  some  thought  not  identical
with  it  is  mentioned  to  us,  we  are  able  very  definitely
to  deny  that  it  is  this  which  we  mean.  If  we  there-
fore assume  that  we  have  first  established  for  this
obscure  content  X  some  definition  a,  which  contains
those  features  of  X  that  are  relatively  most  clear  to
us  ;  then  we  can  next  compare  a  with  X,  and  there-
upon observe  not  merely  in  general  that  a  does  not
perfectly  represent  what  we  mean  by  X,  but  also
why  or  wherein  a  is  unlike  X,  and  consequently
stands  in  need  of  improvement.  Thus  there  origi-
nates a  second  definition  a  —  X,  with  which  the
same  procedure  is  instituted  as  with  a  :  and  so  on,
until  we  finally  discover  a  definition  A  =  X  in  which
we  see  all  that  we  obscurely  meant  under  X  trans-
formed into  clear  conceptions.

Thus  regarded,  this  method  is  nothing  but  a  series
of  subjective  operations  of  thought  by  which  we  in-
tend to  transform  a  knowledge  of  our  object  which
is  at  first  unsatisfactory  into  one  more  adequate  ;  —
that  is,  of  operations  executed,  with  an  altogether  defi-
nite purpose  in  view,  £y  us  as  interpreting  subjects.

If  the  object  X  still  remains  as  obscure  as  are  those
high-flying  thoughts  called  'the  truly  Existent/  'the


l66  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

Absolute/  etc.,  then,  as  a  rule,  it  becomes  very  diffi-
cult to  get  any  altogether  accurate  consciousness  of
the  precise  reasons  why  a  first  definition  a  is  not  sat-
isfactory. We  indeed  feel  its  unsatisfactoriness  in  a
general  way,  and  this  of  itself  urges  us  toward  a  sec-
ond definition  a  which  much  better  corresponds  to
the  X.  But  the  logical  motives  for  this  transition
remain  obscure.  It  merely  follows  with  a  certain
poetic  justice  ;  and  now  it  appears  to  us,  since  we
have  lost  hold  of  the  reins  that  are  to  guide  the
process  of  thought,  as  an  inner  development  pecu-
liar to  X  itself,  of  which  we  as  thinking  subjects
are  simply  spectators.

On  the  other  hand,  Idealism  took  its  point  of
departure  from  the  matter-of-fact  supposition  of  a
single  Ground  of  the  world,  of  an  '  Absolute/  which
'  develops '  into  the  variety  of  phenomena.  If  it
had  been  known  what  this  Absolute  is,  then  we
should  have  been  able  to  deduce  from  its  nature  a
mode  of  development  corresponding  to  it.  But  this
was  not  known ;  on  the  contrary,  the  name  '  Abso-
lute '  merely  designated  the  value  of  a  Supreme  Prin-
ciple to  which  a  content  as  yet  unknown  was,  so  to
speak,  to  be  elevated.  No  definite  mode  of  devel-
opment could  therefore  be  divined,  but  it  could  sim-
ply be  asserted  what  mode  may  possibly  be  attrib-
uted to  the  Absolute ;  and  so  in  any  case  it  must


BEING IN ITSELF.  167


at least correspond to the general conception of
'development.'

Now  the  following  thoughts  are  involved  in  the
foregoing  conception,  —  namely,  that  the  self-devel-
oping being  is  not  yet  that  which  it  is  to  become,
but  that  at  the  same  time  the  possibility  of  its  be-
coming this  lies  in  it  alone.  It  therefore  appears
as  a  '  germ '  which  is  not  yet  fully  unfolded,  but
which  is  '  in  itself '  what  it  will  later  become.  Fur-
ther, the  germ  must  not  remain  germ,  but  must
develop  into  a  variety  of  actual  phenomena ;  none
of  which,  although  they  all  correspond  perfectly  to
its  essence,  is  exclusively  correspondent  thereto,  with-
out having  others  beside  itself.  Therefore  that  which
is  'in  itself  {das  An  Sick)  is  at  the  same  time  realized
and  brought  to  an  end  in  this  development,  which  is
the  '  being  other  than  itself ' ;  since  it  assumes  a  defi-
nite form,  and  thus  excludes  other  possible  forms
which  it  might  have  assumed.  This  incongruity
between  that  which  the  Being  is  '  in  itself '  and  the
'  being  other  than  itself '  of  the  phenomenon  must
be  in  turn  removed  :  and  it  is  a  further  step  neces-
sary to  the  development,  by  which  the  one-sidedness
of  the  phenomenon  is  negated  and  the  Being  re-
turns into  its  own  infiniteness ;  although  since  it
has  this  definite  development  behind  it,  it  does
not return to the simplicity of Being '  in itself/


l68  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.


but to the higher state  of '  Being  for  self ' (Filr-
sichseiu).

These  three  steps  deduced  from  the  conception  of
development  in  abstracto  have  been  established,  be-
sides, by  many  significant  examples  taken  from  expe-
rience, —  as,  for  example,  from  vegetable,  animal,  and
spiritual  life ;  and  so  it  came  about  that  the  afore-
said primary  and  subjective  method  of  explaining
obscure  conceptions  blended  with  this  objective
'rhythmus'  of  development;  and  philosophy  came
to  believe  that  it  possesses  herein  a  method  at  once
subjective  and  objective,  according  to  which  things
have  unfolded  themselves  before  our  consciousness
(compare  '  Geschichte  der  Aesthetik  in  Deutschland]
Miinchen,  1868,  pp.  176-183).

§  13.  It  is  obvious  that,  from  the  foregoing  method,
there  is  to  be  expected  only  a  development  in  which
a  certain  poetic  justice  more  or  less  clearly  rules;
but  not  such  an  one  as  that  every  step  in  it  can
be  made  good  by  definite  proofs  as  necessary  or  as
alone  possible  to  the  exclusion  of  others.

In  fact,  the  use  of  the  same  method  by  different
philosophers  of  this  school  has  led  to  wholly  diver-
gent results.

Only  the  fundamental  thought  of  their  Ontology
remains;  and  it  is  this,  that  '  Being'  is  never  simple,


RESULTS OF REALISM.  169

unchangeable  '  Position,'  but  is  constant  movement
through  the  three  '  Moments '  above  alluded  to,  —
namely,  '  Being-in-itself/  i  Being-other-than-self,'  and
'  Being-for-self.'  It  is  further  agreed  that  there  is
only  one  i  Existent,'  whose  finite  and  limited  mani-
festation is  the  individual  things  ;  and,  finally  (a  fact
which  may  be  observed  here  in  a  preliminary  way),
that  this  one  Absolute  does  not  remain  a  wholly
empty  name  for  an  obscure  point,  but  has  essen-
tially the  nature  of  the  Spirit,  and  its  development
is  the  advance  from  the  'being-in-itself  of  uncon-
scious existence  to  the  '  being-f or-self '  of  self-con-
sciousness.

§  14.  The  results  of  Realism  are  different.  Di-
rected primarily  toward  the  explanation  of  the  pos-
sibility of  phenomena,  it  naturally  required,  in  oppo-
sition to  the  change  which  would  include  a  contra-
diction, that  Being  should  be  considered  as  a  simple,
irremovable  'position.'  It  further  required,  that  the
primary  elements,  from  whose  changeable  combina-
tion the  phenomena  proceed,  should  be  seen  in  a
variety  of  ultimate  subjects  or  real  beings.  The
original  nature  of  these  beings  it  believed  cannot
be  recognized ;  but  it  simply  concluded,  from  the
facts  that  'appear,  back  to  relations  which  must
take  place  between  them  in  order  to  make  this
appearance  possible.


I/O  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

Both  views,  Idealism  and  Realism,  come  from  dif-
ferent sides  on  one  and  the  same  difficulty.  The
former  can  perchance  develop,  in  a  general  way,
from  the  one  Idea  which  it  presupposes,  those  prob-
lems which  reality  must  solve  in  order  to  correspond
to  this  Idea.  Only  it  is  not  able  to  explain  the  spe-
cial actions  and  reactions  which  take  place  between
the  individual  examples  of  those  species  of  Being  that
are  derived  from  it ;  but  for  this  it  needs  the  '  plural-
istic '  assumption  that  the  aforesaid  Idea,  in  a  manner
that  requires  additional  demonstration,  has  previously
divided  into  a  variety  of  elements  which  are  in  the
future  to  act  independently.

Realism,  on  the  contrary,  in  order  to  comprehend
an  action  and  reaction  between  its  many  elements,
must  assume  a  unity  of  general  laws  to  which  they
are  all  subjected.  The  explanation  of  how  this  sub-
ordination of  the  many  under  this  unity  is  possible,
is  the  counterpart  of  the  before-mentioned  problem
of  Idealism.  We  may  therefore  consider  as  the  final
problem  of  Ontology  —  a  problem  not  yet  satisfac-
torily solved  —  this  inquiry  after  the  connection
between  the  necessary  unity  and  the  alike  neces-
sary manifoldness  of  the  Existent.

§  15.  After  Ontology  has  established  certain  gen-
eral conceptions  of  Being,  of  the  Existent,  of  Hap-


COSMOLOGICAL  PROBLEMS.  171

pening  and  Acting,  cosmological  investigations  raise
the  inquiry  after  the  relation  of  this  Being  and  Act-
ing to  Space  and  Time.  Under  this  head  the  prin-
cipal problems  are  the  following  three :

1)  The  problem  whether  'space'  exists  in  itself,
and  things  are  in  it,  so  that  the  latter  are  partially
distinguished  by  their  place  in  space ;  or  whether
space  is  in  things  only  as  a  form  of  intuiting  them,
and  the  latter  are  accordingly  distinguished  only
qualitatively,  and  appear  at  different  points  in  one
space  intuited  of  them,  in  consequence  of  their
qualitative  differences  toward  each  other.

Connected  with  this  inquiry  after  the  *  reality '  or
'  ideal  character '  of  space  stands  —

2)  The  inquiry  after  the  nature  of  ( matter/
although  the  two  do  not  coincide.  The  question
is  :  Should  the  spatial  volume  of  any  body  of  matter
be  held  to  be  a  continuous  volume  full  of  what  is
real  ?  Or  is  it  only  a  space-volume  within  which
many  active  elements  exist  that  are  distinguished  by
their  place  but  are  in  themselves  unextended  ?  This
is  the  question  in  dispute  between  the  dynamic  filling
of  space  and  Atomism,  —  the  meaning  of  which,  how-
ever, it  appears  must  be  apprehended  in  a  way  the
very  reverse  of  what  customarily  happens.  The
conception  of  matter  as  continuous  asserts  that  what
is  real  accomplishes  an  actual  achievement  by  filling


172  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

up  space  ;  and,  indeed,  by  filling  it  up  with  its  pres-
ence. The  other  view  allows  space  to  be  simply
controlled  and  not  '  crammed  '  full,  as  it  were,  by
real  existence.  It  alone,  besides,  would  be  compati-
ble with  the  correct  view  concerning  the  ideal  char-
acter of  space.

3)  A  third  question  in  dispute  arises  from  the
consideration  of  what  happens  in  the  physical  realm.
On  the  one  hand,  we  are  necessitated  to  recognize
the  origin  of  phenomena  from  the  co-operation  of
many  previously  unconnected  elements,  and  at  the
same  time  the  validity  of  general  laws  according
to  which  these  elements  act  in  every  case ;  so  that
they  are  dependent  for  their  effect  only  upon  these
laws,  upon  their  own  permanent  nature,  and  upon
the  momentary  disposition  of  circumstances,  and
not  at  all  upon  a  result  which,  according  to  hypoth-
esis, has  not  as  yet  been  attained.  Over  against  this
so-called  ' mechanical  view'  of  forces  working  blindly
according  to  general  laws,  there  stands  the  idealistic
view,  which  regards  only 'active  Ideas'  as  truly  effec-
tive in  the  world  of  things.  Such  Ideas  are  ever
striving  to  realize  themselves,  and  on  this  account
are  not  bound  to  constantly  uniform  laws  of  their
action,  but  modify  their  mode  of  behavior  at  every
moment  with  a  teleological  reference  to  the  result
for  which  they  strive. Now  it  needs  no  explanation


VALIDITY OF COGNITION.  1 73

to  see  that,  as  long  as  the  l Ideas'  use  means  for  their
actualization,  this  actualization  cannot  follow  without
certain  general  laws  being  valid,  in  accordance  with
which  these  means  act.  But  just  so,  on  the  other
hand,  would  the  world  be  absurd  if  there  existed  in
it  mere  i  mechanism '  without  any  power  of  Ideas  or
final  purposes.  The  ultimate  object  of  Cosmology
will  therefore  be  the  inquiry,  how  Ideas  and  final
purposes  can  be  effective  within  a  world  whose
events  are  subject  to  the  laws  of  a  mechanism.

§  16.  After  we  have,  in  Ontology  and  Cosmology,
formed  a  view  concerning  the  nature  of  Things  and
their  reciprocal  actions,  we  should  in  the  last  part  of
Metaphysic  investigate  Cognition  itself  as  a  single  but
important  case  of  the  reciprocal  action  between  two
elements,  —  to  wit,  the  case  in  which  the  one  being
is  capable  of  apprehending  as  conscious  ideas  the
impressions  which  it  receives  from  the  others.

In  the  first  place,  we  should  in  realistic  fashion
discover  from  the  consideration  of  this  reciprocal
action,  that  the  image  of  the  one  being  A  cannot
be  formed  like  A  within  the  other  being  B ;  be-
cause, although  it  always  on  the  one  side  depends
upon  the  impression  from  A,  it  likewise  on  the
other  side  depends  on  the  nature  of  B.  This,
therefore,  is  the  same  as saying  that,  by  virtue  of


174  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

this  unavoidable  '  subjectivity  of  all  ideation/  cog-
nition cannot  be  '  true '  in  the  sense  that  it  copies
the  essence  of  objects  in  form  similar  to  the  objects
themselves ;  but  at  most  in  the  sense  that  it  repeats
the  relations  between  things  in  the  form  of  relations
of  their  mental  images.

The  foregoing  result,  however,  causes  us  to  raise
the  inquiry  of  Idealism  after  the  significance  of  this
entire  mode  of  procedure.  The  Realism  of  common
opinion  is  wont  to  regard  the  world,  apart  from  cog-
nition, as  a  ready-made  matter-of-fact  that  subsists
entirely  complete  in  itself  ;  and  cognition  as  only  a
kind  of  appendage  by  means  of  which  this  subsist-
ing matter-of-fact  is  simply  recapitulated  for  the
best  good  of  the  cognizing  being,  but  without  in
this  way  experiencing  any  increment  of  reality.
Now  Idealism  establishes  the  truth  that  the  pro-
cess of  ideation  itself  is  one  of  the  most  essen-
tial constituents  of  the  world's  ongoing  course ;
that  objectivity  is  not  a  goal  the  attainment  and
further  shaping  of  which  is  a  task  set  before  idea-
tion ;  but  that  ideation  or,  rather,  the  whole  spir-
itual life  is  a  goal,  to  the  attainment  of  which  is
summoned  the  entire  world  of  objects  that  do  not
share  in  the  process,  and  the  entire  ordering  of
relations  between  them.


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE.  175

§  17.  The  design  in  dividing  theoretical  Philoso-
phy into  Metaphysic  and  its  applications,  the  Phi-
losophy of  Nature  and  Psychology,  is  that  the  first
shall  answer  the  question  :  How  must  all  that  be
which  is  really  to  be  at  all  ?  or,  If  anything  what-
ever really  is,  to  what  necessary  laws  of  all  thought
is  it  subjected?  Over  against  this  abstract  science
are  the  two  other  concrete  ones.  That  is  to  say,
they  must  consider  the  actuality  which,  although  it
obeys  the  laws  of  Metaphysic,  still  does  so  in  a  spe-
cial form  that  might  be  otherwise,  and  that  therefore
is  provisionally  regarded  as  only  an  example,  empi-
rically given,  of  the  aforesaid  necessary  laws  of
thought.  But  the  design  of  this  distinction  is  neither
accurately  carried  out,  nor  does  it  possess  any  great
value.

The  problem  of  the  Philosophy  of  Nature  would
accordingly  be  the  following;  not  so  much  to  describe
the  elements  which  are  in  existence,  as  rather  to
show  what  general  habitudes  of  action  and  reaction
occur  in  this  definite  '  Nature '  so-called ;  and,  there-
fore, what  ones  among  the  different  forces  conceivable
in  abstracto  actually  occur  and  what  ones  among  the
many  possible  dispositions  of  them  actually  subsist
from  the  beginning  and  maintain  themselves  amid
manifold  forms  of  change.  For  example,  that  the
mass  of  matter  in  the  world  is  separated  into  indi-


I76  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

vidual  material  bodies  ;  that  these  are  distinguished
among  themselves  into  cohering  and  -reciprocally
exclusive  systems ;  that  on  our  planet  the  three  dif-
ferent forms  of  inorganic,  vegetable,  and  animal
existence  occur ;  that  what  exists  in  these  three
kingdoms  is  —  or  how  far  it  is  —  divided  into  spe-
cies, kinds,  etc. ;  that  a  systematic  action  and  reac-
tion, which  is  necessary  for  their  continued  exist-
"  ence,  takes  place  between  everything  living  and  the
inorganic  material,  —  all  this  constitutes  the  prob-
lems of  the  concrete  Philosophy  of  Nature.  From
the  realistic  point  of  view,  we  take  an  interest  in
investigating  the  effective  conditions  upon  which
all  these  facts  concerning  the  ordering  of  nature  de-
pend ;  from  the  idealistic,  in  showing  that  it  is  an
ordering  in  which,  if  one  knows  it  once  for  all,  the
striving  after  the  fulfilment  of  those  universal  prob-
lems that  are  unavoidable  in  every  conceivable  rational
world  may  be  recognized  again  and  again.  But  Ideal-
ism claims  far  too  much  when  it,  as  in  Schilling's
philosophy  of  nature,  aims  to  '  deduce '  all  these  con-
crete forms  of  existence,  as  consequences  necessary
to  thought,  from  one  Supreme  Idea.

§  18.  In  Psychology,  too,  the  same  principal  views
stand  in  contrast  with  one  other.  The  realistic  aims
by  investigations  in  causality  to  discover  the  condi-


PROBLEMS OF PSYCHOLOGY.  1 77

tions  under  which  every  single  phenomenon  of  the
life  of  the  Soul  occurs,  endures,  or  changes,  and  by-
reciprocal  action  with  other  phenomena  lays  the
foundation  for  new  states.  Such  investigations
may  either  be  founded,  in  a  manner  quite  like  that
of  natural  science,  upon  experience  and  experiment,
or  philosophically  upon  metaphysical  presuppositions.
The  larger  gain  with  reference  to  the  explanation  of
the  individual  comes  in  the  former  way ;  but  a  more
secure  apprehension  for  the  whole  of  a  theory  is  only
to  be  gained  in  the  second  way.  But  the  entire  real-
istic investigation  is  indispensable,  because  it  is  only
the  knowledge  of  the  working  forces  in  the  life  of  the
Soul  which  admits  of  practical  applications,  — in  Paed-
agogics,  Psychiatry,  etc.

Idealism  also  upon  this  point  investigates,  in  the
first  place,  the  constitutive  conception  of  the  Soul,
—  that  is  to  say,  the  special  Idea  for  the  realization
of  which  the  Soul  is  summoned  to  a  definite  place
in  the  whole  coherent  system  of  the  world  ;  and  it
then  aims  at  demonstrating  the  individual  activities
of  the  Soul  as  a  cohering  series  of  steps  of  develop-
ment, which  gradually  construct  for  this  conception  an
ever  more  adequate  realization.  The  previous  attempts
(Schelling,  Hegel,  etc.)  suffer,  in  part,  from  inaccu-
racies to  which  the  previous  article  alludes,  and,  in
part,  from  an  over-estimate  (that  is  without  sufficient


I78  ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

motif)  of  mere  intelligence  in  comparison  with  the
whole  spiritual  life.  They  look  upon  mere  self-knowl-
edge, the  most  perfect  self-consciousness,  as  the  final
goal  of  the  Soul  and  of  the  World  ;  while  in  our  view
all  intelligence  is  only  the  conditio  sine  qua  nony  under
which  alone  the  final  purposes  that  are  really  supreme
—  personal  love  and  hate,  the  moral  culture  of  char-
acter —  and,  in  general,  the  whole  content  of  life  so
far  as  it  has  value  appears  possible  at  all.


SECTION SECOND.


PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY.


§  19.  Realism  takes  up  those  claims,  of  the  con-
science that  obligates  us  to  a  definite  form  of  con-
duct, which  urge  themselves  upon  our  interior  life,
as  though  they  were  mere  problems  of  fact,  —
problems  on  this  account  because,  in  spite  of  the
clearness  with  which  the  claims  of  conscience  fol-
low in  many  individual  cases,  still  in  other  cases
we  feel  ourselves  obligated  in  a  contradictory  fash-
ion to  irreconcilable  modes  of  conduct.

Investigation,  accordingly,  proceeds  in  the  first
place  to  the  confirming  of  the  matter  of  fact,  —
that  is  to  say,  to  establishing  certain  fundamental
moral  principles  in  which,  since  they  refer  to  the
most  simple  relations  of  several  personal  wills
toward  one  another,  a  uniformly  similar  and  un-
changeable judgment  of  approbation  or  disappro-
bation is  expressed  concerning  a  definite  mode  of
the  will's  behavior.  Whence  these  judgments  of
conscience  originate  within  us  ;  in  what  connection
they  stand  with  the  laws  that  govern  what  happens
in reality ;  whether,  finally,  they  admit  of  being  de-


l8o  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

duced  from  one  supreme  command  or  not,  —  all
these  are  allied  questions,  the  answer  to  which,
however  it  may  turn  out,  neither  heightens  nor
diminishes  the  obligatory  force  of  the  aforesaid
moral  principles.

Realism  pronounces  it  to  be  a  capital  fault  to  sur-
render this  independence  of  the  moral  principles,  and
to  be  willing  to  deduce  the  supreme  rules,  according
to  which  our  conduct  has  to  be  directed,  from  any
theoretical  insight  whatever  into  the  nature  of  real-
ity. In  *  Being '  alone  no  significance  with  respect
to  what  '  ought '  to  be  is  involved.  From  that  which
is  and  happens,  prudential  maxims  for  conduct
which  will  shun  the  dangers  of  this  reality  admit
of  being  developed  ;  but  not  the  obligations  which,
apart  from  any  consequences,  make  any  kind  of
conduct  appear  in  itself  valuable,  honorable,  and
praiseworthy.

The  investigations  of  Idealism  have,  for  the  most
part,  justified  these  observations.  Since  it  takes  its
point  of  starting  from  a  supreme  fact,  —  to  wit,  the
development  of  the  absolute  '  Ground '  of  the  world,
—  it  has  not  discovered,  strictly  speaking,  any  place
for  the  conception  of  such  an  obligatory  '  ought ' ;
but  it  substitutes  for  the  conceptions  of  the  morally
'Good/  and  the  morally  'Bad/  simply  certain  theo-
retical  conceptions of the harmonizing  or not-har-


ETHICS AND PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY.  l8l

monizing  of  any  mode  of  conduct  with  the  tendency
of  the  self-development  of  the  Absolute.

§  20.  The  formal  distinction  between  the  two
modes  of  treatment  consists  in  this,  that  the  realis-
tic proceeds  from  general  laws  of  conduct,  from
which  the  special  maxims  of  conduct  that  are
necessary  in  consideration  of  the  circumstances
can  be  deduced  for  each  particular  case  of  an  oc-
casion for  conduct  ;  and  from  which,  besides,  since
it  brings  into  consideration  the  empirical  nature  of
man  and  the  ever  recurring  social  relations,  science
is  also  able  to  develop  a  series  of  permanent  life-
aims  that  hold  good  both  for  the  individual  and  for
society.  This  last  problem  may  be  called  that  of
'Practical  Philosophy '  in  special;  while  the  doctrine
of  the  culture  of  character  according  to  general  ethi-
cal principles  is  called  '  Moral  Science  '  or  '  Ethics.'

Idealism,  as  a  rule,  does  not  reach  any  special  dis-
tinction in  these  two  forms  of  '  discipline/  To  it  the
'Good'  appears,  not  as  that  which  merely  ought  to
be,  but  likewise  as  that  which  eternally  is.  As  well
the  individual  man  as  society  and  the  history  of  soci-
ety are,  in  its  view,  '  factors  in  the  development  of
the  Absolute/  To  it  that  appears  as  'good/  which
adapts  itself  to  the  meaning  of  this  development.


SECTION  THIRD.


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.


§  21.  A  common  conclusion  for  both  theoretical
and  practical  investigations  in  philosophy  is  sought
for  in  the  Philosophy  of  Religion.

We  designate  this  part  of  philosophy  by  this  name,
because  the  human  mind  has  uniformly  sought  in
religion  for  such  a  conclusion  to  its  view  of  the  world ;
that  is  to  say,  for  certainty  concerning  the  final  and
supreme  Cause  of  that  reality,  of  which  every  indi-
vidual investigation,  since  it  proceeds  from  limited
points  of  view,  gives  only  a  one-sided  explanation.
More  particularly,  however,  this  certainty  has  refer-
ence to  the  inquiry,  how  it  is  that  what  appears  in
our  conscience  as  the  only  thing  that  has  real  value,
—  how  the  Good  and  the  Beautiful  possess  a  validity
corresponding  to  their  value  in  the  totality  of  the
world.  Finally,  we  employ  the  term,  because  the
human  mind  has  sought  for  a  supplement  to  our
experience  of  the  world,  that  shall  follow  from  the
results  of  such  painstaking  endeavors,  by  means  of
some  intuition  of  a  supersensible  extension  of  the
world  into  realms  withdrawn  from  experience.


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.  1 83

It  is  in  '  Religion '  that  the  human  mind  has  either
solved  all  these  problems  by  a  lively  phantasy,  or
some  revelation  has  furnished  the  solution.  In  the
first  case,  philosophy  has  to  explain,  to  test,  and  to
correct,  the  impulses  by  which  the  phantasy  would
be  directed.  In  the  second  case,  it  has  to  demon-
strate, to  what  demands  of  the  mind,  that  are  in
themselves  justifiable,  the  revelation  vouchsafes  a
satisfaction  which  is  not  discoverable  by  the  reason,
but  which  is  intelligible  as  soon  as  it  exists.

But  even  apart  from  this  relation  to  religion  as  a
fact  actually  met  with,  philosophy  carries  within
itself  the  very  greatest  demand  for  reflection  upon
the  connection  between  its  theoretical  and  its  ethi-
cal view  of  the  world.

§  22.  Should  the  before-mentioned  problem  be
completely  solved,  then  the  '  Philosophy  of  Relig-
ion '  would  be  in  a  position  to  make  the  transition
from  the  way  of  investigation  to  the  way  of  a  con-
tinuous, systematic  exhibition  of  philosophical  truth ;
since  it  would  indeed  have  fused  all  the  results  of
investigation  into  a  single  unity.

But  at  this  point  philosophy  concludes  with  an
unattainable  ideal  :  —  that  is  to  say,  with  the  con-
viction that  the  universal  and  necessary  laws  of
thought,  in  accordance  with  which  we  judge  of  all


184  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY.

reality ;  second,  that  the  primitive  facts  of  this
reality;  third,  that  the  supreme  Ideas  of  the  Good
and  the  Beautiful,  which  hover  before  us  as  the
final  purposes  of  the  world,  —  are  all  perfectly
coherent  factors  of  one  and  the  same  Supreme
Principle,  of  the  nature  of  God,  although  we  are
unable  strictly  to  demonstrate  this  fact  of  their
coherency.  From  the  fact  that  such  general  laws
hold  good  in  mathematics,  it  does  not  follow  that
this  system  of  nature  which  is  empirically  given
is  necessary,  and  any  other  is  impossible.  Both
the  laws  and  the  facts  appear  to  us  possible  and
valid,  even  although  no  Idea  of  the  Good  were
ruling  the  world.  In  brief,  laws,  facts,  and  final
purposes  (Ideas)  are  for  its  three  principles,  dis-
tinct from  each  other,  and  not  deducible  from  each
other.

For  this  reason  Philosophy  can  never  be  such  an
unchanging  science,  as  to  be  able  to  deduce  from
one  Supreme  Principle  all  its  results  in  uniform
sequence ;  but  its  investigations  will  always  be  sep-
arated into  (1)  those  of  Metaphysic,  which  con-
cern the  possibility  of  the  world's  course  ;  (2)  into
those  of  the  Philosophy  of  Nature,  which  concern
the  connection,  in  fact,  of  its  reality ;  and  (3)  into
those  of  the  Philosophy  of  Religion,  which  concern
its  ideal  significance  and  final  purposes.


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process.
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  Sept.  2004

PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066
(724)  779-21 1 1


&K4am£¥


wr


JEW


PSbb


■  li  i  rift  *¥5y&<?Y»-iLt  TO

1  '•>»■',  ■*'"*•  VV«.  »■''"' ''^•''■',


ISIlSif3


"'■'  »••' £ PH&J3 ^ -- iv-">-  SOT


HRHP


"•» R .  :r


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS


0  013  123  967  1


Mm


.M


JWfl


K3M


^^


jj  3jj

iffiS?

**:'

Si

KK

m

'  "v

v^*«?

iuy

£a$

.'-'/^

3JB

IS

sH

■'i*'

■'■'•*

P*v

il'i>;

$K

*  A*

#

aril

SSI

1
