it  also  applies  the  theory  to  the  Individual,  to  Marriage,  and  to  Society.

IV.  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY. The first part treats of Simple

Sensations,  the  Course  of  Ideas,  Intuitions  of  Objects  as  in  Space,  Errors
of  the  Senses,  etc.  The  second  part  discusses  the  nature,  place,  and
changeable  states  of  the  Soul,  and  the  reciprocal  action  of  Soul  and  Body.

*.  OUTLINES  OF  ESTHETICS.  This  volume  gives  Lotze's  theory  of
the  Beautiful  and  of  Phantasy.  Then  follow  brief  chapters  on  Music,
Architecture,  Plastic  Art,  Painting,  and  Poetry.

VI.  OUTLINES  OF  LOGIC.  The  Outlines  of  Logic  comprehends  both  the
pure  and  the  applied  science.  The  same  volume  contains  a  brief  treatise
on  the  Encyclopaedia  of  Philosophy.


OUTLINES


OF


PSYCHOLOGY


DICTATED PORTIONS


LFXTURES  OF  HERMANN  LOTZE


/SSI  8

TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY

GEORGE T. LADD

PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY  IN  YALE  COLLEGE


BOSTON, U.S.A.:
PUBLISHED BY GINN & COMPANY.


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1886.  by

GEORGE  T.  LADD,
in  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington.


TVPOGRAI'HY BY  J. S. CuSHING & Co., BOSTON, U.S.A.

Presswork  by  Ginn  &  Co.,  Boston,  U.S.A.


3F

133


EDITOR'S PREFACE.


The  "  Outlines  of  Psychology  "  was  the  first  to
appear  of  that  series  of  eight  small  volumes  of  Dic-
tate from  the  lectures  of  Lotze,  which  followed  each
other  in  rapid  succession  after  their  author's  death.
The  present  translation  is  from  the  German  of  the
third  edition,  published  at  Leipzig,  by  S.  Hirzel,  in
1884.  The  first  German  edition  was  issued  in  the
early  Fall  of  188 1.  It  consisted  mainly  of  the  lecture-
notes  of  Robert  Lotze,  a  son  of  the  philosopher,  who
attended  his  father's  course  in  Psychology  for  the
Winter  Semester  of  1880-81,  and  who  testifies  in
the  Preface  that  he  recorded  them  as  they  were
formulated  by  the  lecturer  himself.  The  volume
was,  however,  before  publication,  subjected  to  the
thorough  revision  of  Professor  Rehnisch,  Lotze's
colleague  in  Gottingen.  The  third  German  edition
of  the  "  Outlines  of  Psychology "  is  somewhat
changed,  in  certain  passages,  from  the  first  ;  in
particular,  some  difficult  points  —  for  example,  the
rise  and  nature  of  our  mental  picture  of  ourselves,
in Chap,  vi., "  The Feelings  "  —  have been more


VI  EDITOR  S PREFACE.


fully  explained.  All  three  editions,  however,  are
throughout  substantially,  and  for  the  most  part
even  verbally,  the  same.

It  is  not  likely  that  any  other  compend  of
truths  touching  the  science  of  Mind,  at  once  so
brief  and  so  comprehensive,  is  to  be  found  in  all
the  literature  of  the  subject.  I  am  sure  that  there
is  no  other  by  so  mature  and  competent  an  authority.
By  preference,  native  facility,  training,  and  practice,
Lotze  was  almost  incomparably  well  fitted  to  deal
with  the  great  science  of  Psychology.  In  his  bio-
graphical and  eulogistic  sketch  of  Lotze  (contained
in  the  appendix  to  the  "Outlines  of  Esthetics"),
Professor  Rehnisch  speaks  of  this  as  the  "  darling
lecture-course  "  of  its  lamented  author.  First  and
last,  directly  and  indirectly,  far  more  of  Lotze's
published  work  deals  with  the  human  soul  as  its
subject  than  with  any  other  philosophical  inquiry.
He  may  fitly  be  called  a  born  psychologist.  He  had
the  delicate  tact,  the  reflective  insight,  the  subtlety
in  analysis  of  mental  states,  which  psychology  de-
mands for  its  successful  cultivation.  Moreover,  his
training  was  of  that  comprehensive  kind  which  alone
makes  it  possible  to  look  upon  the  many-sided  human
mind  from  all  of  its  many  sides.  Like  more  than
one  other  notable  philosopher  (and  among  them  all
by  far  most  notable  —  Aristotle),  Lotze  was  the  son


EDITOR  S PREFACE.  Vll

of  a  physician.  He  was  thoroughly  versed  in  the
sciences  of  human  physiology  and  human  pathology.
His  early  lecture-courses  included  these  subjects.
While  a  young  man  at  Leipzig,  we  find  him  offer-
ing instruction  in  "pastoral  medicine,"  therapeutics,
general  pathology,  "juridical  medicine,"  and  the
functions  and  diseases  of  the  nervous  system.  His
published  works  include  treatises  on  the  Philosoph-
ical Principles  of  Biology,  on  Life  and  Vital  Force,
on  General  Physiology  and  Medical  Psychology,  and
on  Life  and  Mechanism,  etc.  He  was  thoroughly
acquainted  with  all  that  modern  science  has  done
for  the  study  of  mind  by  opening  the  approaches
to  it  from  the  experimental  and  physiological  points
of  view.

But  Lotze  was  equally  well  equipped  by  nature
and  cultivation  to  discuss  the  metaphysical  problems
which  enter  into  the  study  of  psychology  and  which
so  largely  impart  to  it  its  peculiar  value  and  charm.
While  admitting  the  help  of  objective  experimental
methods,  he  did  not  depreciate  the  instrument  of
self-consciousness.  While  proposing  a  brilliant  ex-
position of  nature's  method  of  giving  to  us  our  ideas
of  the  spatial  qualities  and  relations  of  objects,  in
his  theory  of  so-called  "local  signs,"  he  detected  the
fallacies  of  all  attempts  —  \n\\qX\\q.x  a  priori  or  a  poste-
riori ^  2X  the  so-called  "deduction  of  space." The


Vlll  EDITOR  S PREFACE.

offences  against  metaphysic  which  are  committed  by
all  materialistic  views  when  introduced  into  psychol-
ogy were  patent  to  Lotze.

The  third  Part  of  his  large  work  on  Metaphysic,
and  considerable  portions  of  his  Logic  and  of  the
Microcosmus,  are  treatises  on  psychology.  I  doubt
whether  any  one  workman  of  the  century  is  entitled
to  higher  esteem  than  Lotze  for  the  quantity  and
quality  of  his  teaching  regarding  the  nature  of  Mind.

The  attention  of  the  reader  is  called  to  the  wide
range  of  the  subjects  touched  upon  within  the  limits
of  this  brief  treatise.  The  second  or  theoretical  part
of  the  "  Outlines  of  Psychology "  includes  chapters
on  the  Seat  of  the  Soul,  its  reciprocal  Relations  to
the  Body,  its  Essential  Nature,  and  even  on  the
Realm  of  Souls.  Accustomed  as  w^e  are  to  see
almost  all  the  available  space  in  psychological
treatises  appropriated  to  the  details  of  the  phenom-
ena of  intellect,  it  may  appear  strange  that  any
space  can  be  given  in  so  brief  a  compend  to  sub-
jects such  as  these.  We  shall  do  well  to  remember,
however,  that  tJiese  are  just  the  subjects  into  which
we  all  desire  to  look.  It  is  the  teacher's  business
then  to  try  to  hold  open  —  at  least  wide  enough  for
a  glimpse  through  —  the  door  between  the  soul's
self-conscious  activity  and  the  soul's  real  self.

No  other  one  of  Lotze's  philosophical  Outlines  is


EDITOR  S PREFACE,  IX

more  nearly  complete  and  symmetrical  than  this.
But  it  is,  of  course,  only  a  brief  presentation  of
outlines.  It  will  be  a  pleasure  and  a  reward  to  the
translator,  if  the  perusal  of  this  small  work  shall  re-
sult in  an  increased  study  of  the  more  voluminous
psychological  writings  of  its  distinguished  author.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


Introduction


PACK
I


PART  FIRST. THE  SINGLE  ELEMENTS  OF  THE
INNER  LIFE.

I. Of  Simple  Sensations .
The  Course  of  Ideas
The  Act  of  Relative  Knowledge  and

Attention

The  Intuitions  of  Space .
Of  the  Apprehension of  the  World
by  the Senses,  and of  Errors of

Sense

Chapter VI. The  Feelings

Chapter  VII. Of  Motions

PART SECOND. THEORETICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


Chapter

I.

Chapter

II.

Chapter

III.

Chapter

IV.

Chapter

V.

Chapter  I.

Chapter  II.

Chapter  III.

Chapter  IV.

Chapter  V.

Chapter  VI.

Chapter  VII.


Of  the  Soul

Of the Reciprocal Action between

Soul  and  Body ....
The  Seat  of  the  Soul
The  Time-Relations  of  the  Soul  .
The  SouPs  Essence  . . . .
The  Changeable  States  of  the  Soul,
The  Realm  of  Souls


5
28

40
47


66
73
83


91

98
105
112
119
129

145


INTRODUCTION.


§  1.  Sensations,  ideas,  feelings,  and  acts  of  will,
constitute  the  well-known  facts,  the  whole  of  which
we  are  accustomed  to  designate,  although  with  the
proviso  of  future  proof,  as  the  life  of  a  peculiar
entity,  called  '  the  Soul'

The  requirements  of  science  would  be  perfectly
satisfied,  —

(i)  in  case  we  could,  as  exact  observation  directs
us,  furnish  a  complete  exhibition  of  all  the  single
elements  of  this  life  and  of  the  general  forms  in
which  they  are  combined  {Descriptive  or  Empirical
Psychology) ;  —

(2)  in  case  we  could  tell  the  nature  of  the  subject
of  this  entire  life,  as  well  as  the  efficient  forces  and
conditions  by  which  it  is  produced  and  compelled
to  keep  within  those  forms  of  its  course  that  are
known  empirically  {Explanatory,  Mechanical  or
Metaphysical  Psychology)  • and,  finally,  —

(3)  in  case  we  could  specify  what  is  the  rational
meaning  for  which  all  this  exists,  or  the  vocation
which  the  life  of the soul in general  has  to  fulfil


OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


in  the  totality  of  the  world  {Ideal  or  Speculative
Psychology).

Since  the  last  of  the  foregoing  problems  does  not
admit  of  a  solution  in  strictly  scientific  form,  and  the
treatment  of  the  first  may  conveniently  be  combined
with  that  of  the  second,  the  essential  question  with
which  we  are  to  be  occupied  is  the  following :  Under
what  conditions,  and  by  means  of  what  forces,  do  the
individual  processes  of  the  spiritual  life  originate  ;
and  how  do  they  combine  with  and  modify  each
other,  and  by  such  cooperation  bring  to  pass  the
whole  of  the  spiritual  life .''

We  choose  our  way,  however,  so  as  to  follow  the
course  of  the  thing  itself ;  that  is  to  say,  we  speak
first  of  the  external  impressions  by  which  the  spirit-
ual activity  is  at  every  moment  aroused  anew,  then
of  the  manifold  internal  elaboration  which  these
impressions  undergo,  finally  of  the  reflex  activities,
motions,  and  other  actions,  which  result  from  them.
It  is  only  after  passing  in  review  these  single  ele-
ments of  the  spiritual  life  that  it  is  possible  to  give
a  comprehensive  exposition  of  the  interior  nature  of
the  subject  which  leads  this  life.


Part First.


THE SINGLE ELEMENTS OF THE INNER

LIFE.


Part First.


THE SINGLE ELEMENTS OF THE INNER

LIFE.


CHAPTER L

OF SIMPLE SENSATIONS.
/SS/S

§  2.  By  *  simple  sensations  '  we-  understand,  in  this
place,  those  in  whose  content  no  composite  structure
out  of  parts,  whether  dissimilar  or  similar,  is  to  be
observed  :  and  we  further  conceive  of  such  sensa-
tions—  for  so  the  case  customarily  is  —  as  induced
by  external  impressions.

In  such  a  case  we  distinguish,  as  the  primary
process  in  the  originating  of  sensations,  the  exter-
nal sense-stimulus.  Nothing  becomes  an  object  of
perception  by  means  of  its  bare  existence :  every-
Mhing  becomes  such  only  by  being  either  itself
•? brought  near  to  the  point  of  contact  with  our  body,
as  is  the  case  of  impact ;  or  else  by  imparting  to  a
medium,  which  surrounds  it,  certain  motions  that
are  transplanted  from  element  to  element  in  this
medium,  and that finally  reach our body,  —  as is


OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY,


the  case  with  waves  of  sound  and  light.  In  all
cases,  however,  such  external  sense-stimulus  con-
sists in  some  form  or  other  of  the  motion  of  certain
masses  of  matter  :  and  it  possesses  in  itself  no  sim-
ilarity to  the  spiritual  processes  that  are  to  result
from  it.

§  3.  The  second  process  which  is  necessary  is  that
within  the  body  which  the  external  stimulus  excites.

On  its  entrance  into  the  superficial  parts  of  our
body,  the  external  stimulus  produces  manifold
changes  in  the  most  external  layers  of  its  covering,
—  changes  of  which  we  know  little,  and  which  we  do
not  need  to  investigate  from  the  psychological  point
of  view.  For  none  of  them  become  the  occasions
of  sensations  until  they  reach  the  ends  of  the  nerve-
fibres  that  are  distributed  everywhere  throughout
the  body,  and  produce  in  these  fibres  an  excitation
which  must  be  propagated  along  the  entire  course  of
the  nerve-thread  up  to  the  brain,  if  a  sensation  is  to
originate.  Every  injury  to  the  nerve  which  prevents
such  propagation  of  the  impulse  has,  therefore,  also
the  effect  of  rendering  all  stimulation  of  the  peri-
pheral nerve-ending  completely  inoperative  so  far  as
consciousness  is  concerned.  Now  we  do  not  know
with  definiteness  in  what  the  aforesaid  excitation,
the  so-called  '  nerve-process,'  consists ; and it  is  of


THE SUBJECT OF SENSATION.


importance  for  psychology  merely  to  inquire,  whether
this  process  is  simply  a  process  of  physical  motion,
or  whether  it  from  the  beginning  participates  in  the
character  of  the  spiritual  life.

Now  a  sensation  cannot  e.xist  in  the  nerve  in  a
merely  general  form,  but  it  must  be  accurately  speci-
fied precisely  %v]io  is  to  Jiavc  the  sensation.  The
nerve  as  a  whole  cannot  be  this  subject ;  because  the
nerve  is  an  aggregate  of  many  parts,  and  besides,  it
is  by  no  means  all  at  one  time  in  the  condition  of
excitation.  On  the  contrary,  one  part  after  the
other  is  affected  in  succession.  Nothing  more,  there-
fore, could  possibly  be  asserted  than  that  each  indi-
visible atom  of  the  nerve  is  a  'sensitive  subject,'  and
imparts  its  own  sensation  to  its  neighbor  until  finally
it  arrives  at  the  soul.

Since,  however,  this  propagation  of  the  excitation
can  be  prevented  by  altering  the  physical  continuity
of  the  nerve  —  for  example,  by  section  of  it  —  it  is
also  undoubtedly  not  the  result  of  an  immediate
sympathy,  but  of  a  physical  influence  which  one
nerve-atom  a  exercises  upon  the  next  atom  b,  etc.
We  should  accordingly  be  compelled  to  say  :  The
atom  a  acts  physically  upon  b ;  in  consequence  of
its  suffering  this  influence,  b  is  thrown  into  a  state
of  sensation  S ;  and,  again,  in  consequence  of  that,  b
exerts  a  new  physical  impact  upon  c,  which  in  turn


8  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

is  by  this  means  induced  to  the  sensation  S  and  in
consequence  thereof  to  the  exercise  of  a  physical  im-
pact upon  the  atom  d.  The  last  nerve-atom  z  would
then  act,  in  a  manner  as  yet  quite  obscure,  upon  the
soul,  and  stir  this,  too,  to  produce  its  sensation  S.

Now  it  is  obvious  that  this  last  impact  by  means
of  which  our  sensation  (the  only  one  of  which  we
actually  know  anything)  originates  in  us,  will  have
had  its  result  quite  as  truly  if  the  nerve-atoms  should
exercise  merely  a  physical  influence  upon  each  other,
and  if  sensations  of  their  own  (which  are  merely
empty  conjectures  and  not  demonstrated  facts)
should be  wholly  dispensed  with.

Since,  therefore,  these  sensations  peculiar  to  the
nerves  contribute  nothing  whatever  to  the  explana-
tion of  otir  ozvn  sensation,  and  besides  are  not  demon-
strable, while  the  propagation  of  a  physical  impact
cannot  be  denied  ;  we  shall  in  future  consider  the
nerve-process  also  as  merely  a  process  of  physical
motion,  that  is  carried  over  from  one  particle  of  the
nerve  to  another,  and  as  yet  has  nothing  of  the
psychical  character  which  belongs  to  the  sensation
that  follows  it.

§  4.  The  third  member  of  this  chain  of  pro-
cesses is,  now,  the  state  of  consciousness  so  well
known  to  us  all,  the sensation  itself,  —  the 'seeing'


TWO ELEMENTS OF SENSATION.


of  a light  of definite  color  or  the  '  hearing ' of  a
sound.

Of  the  two  elements  in  the  latter  process  which
we  can  distinguish  in  our  thinking,  —  namely,  the
qualitative  content  of  which  we  have  an  experience  [
in  sensation  and  the  activity  in  sensation  by  means  '
of  which  we  are  conscious  of  this  content,  —  neither  f
the  one  nor  the  other  is  comparable  with  the  nature
of  the  external  stimulus  or  of  the  neural  process.
However  accurately,  too,  we  may  analyze  the  nature
of  the  waves  of  ether,  we  never  discover  in  it  a  reason
why  it  must  be  seen  as  brightness  and  not  rather
heard  as  sound;  and  just  as  little,  why  some  waves
must  be  experienced  as  the  sensation  red,  and  others
as  the  sensation  blue, — and  not  the  reverse.  Further  :
however  we  may  combine  physical  motions  of  nerve-
atoms  with  one  another,  there  never  comes  a  point
at  which  it  would  be  comprehensible  as  a  matter  of
course,  that  the  motion  last  produced  is  bound  to  re-
main motioji  no  longer,  and  must  rather  pass  over  into
this  process  of  sensation  so  totally  different  in  kind.

All  efforts  to  demonstrate  how  it  comes  about
that  the  merely  physical  motion  gradually  passes
over  into  sensation  are,  therefore,  wholly  in  vain.
We  must  rather  be  satisfied  with  asserting  that  a  ne-
cessity of  nature,  which  has  hitherto  wholly  escaped
our  knowledge,  has  in  fact  united  these  two  series


lO  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


of  processes,  —  the  motions  and  the  sensations,  —
incomparable  and  irreducible  to  each  other  as  the
two  are ;  and  has  done  this  in  such  a  way  that
a  definite  member  of  the  one  series  always  has  for
its  consequent  a  definite  member  of  the  other.

§  5.  It  is  now,  however,  to  be  assumed  that  these
two  series  of  processes  will  not  be  concatenated
wholly  without  some  controlling  principle  ;  that
rather  similar  sensations  will  correspond  to  similar
stimuli,  and  different  sensations  to  different  stimuli  ;
and  that  in  cases  where  a  definite  increase,  inter-
ference, periodicity,  or  prominent  point  exists  in  the
series  of  stimuli,  all  these  will  find  expression  in
some  way  or  other  in  the  series  of  sensations  also.

Empirically  we  are  able  as  yet  to  establish  the
foregoing  conjecture  to  only  a  very  limited  extent.

In  the  first  place,  the  various  classes  of  sensations
(colors,  tones,  smells)  exist  without  intervening
terms  and  as  a  bare  matter  of  fact,  side  by  side  with
each  other  ;  and  they  do  not  constitute  a  closed  sys-
tem. For  example,  from  the  fact  that  we  experience
waves  of  ether  as  light,  it  does  not  in  the  least  de-
gree follow  that  we  must  consequently  experience
waves  of  air  as  sound.

The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  single  members  of
the  particular  classes. He  who  had  merely  had  the


DISSIMILARITY OF SENSATIONS,  II

sensation  of  'sour'  or  of  'yellow,'  would  not  thereby
be  led  to  the  thought  that  there  must  be  also  'bitter'
and  '  blue.'

Further,  that  a  definite  increase  in  the  sensations
corresponds  to  a  definite  increase  in  the  series  of
stimuli  we  observe  to  be  true  only  in  the  case  of
tones,  the  pitch  of  which  rises  with  the  number  of
the  vibrations  of  the  acoustic  waves.  On  this  matter
it  deserves  to  be  remarked,  that  the  manner  in  which
the  sensation  renders  these  differences  of  the  stimuli
is  quite  peculiar  to  itself.  The  difference  in  pitch
between  two  tones  has  no  similarity  at  all  to  the
difference  of  two  numbers,  but  expresses  an  alto-
gether peculiar  increment  of  qualitative  intensity,
which  by  no  means  admits  of  being  divined  before-
hand, and  of  which  we  have  elsewhere  no  example.
Just  so  the  distinguished  instance  of  a  doubling  of  the
number  of  waves  finds  an  expression  peculiar  to  it,  in
the  octave,  which  is  not  experienced  in  sensation  as  a
doubling  of  anything  whatever,  but  as  a  noteworthy
and  otherwise  unexampled  combination  of  the  iden-
tity and  difference  of  both  tones.  Colors,  on  the
contrary,  although  in  their  prismatic  arrangement
they  originate  from  a  similar  ascending  scale  of  the
number  of  waves,  do  not  by  any  means  arrange
themselves  for  the  immediate  impression  into  a
series  of  increasing  pitch. This  is  dependent  on  the


12  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

fact,  that  we  can  rightly  expect  a  proportionality  to
exist  only  between  the  sensations  and  the  neural
processes  as  their  proximate  conditions.  But  we
have  no  acquaintance  with  these  latter ;  and  on  this
account  we  compare,  without  reaching  any  compre-
hensive result,  the  sensations  with  the  external  stim-
uli on  which  they  do  not  immediately  depend.

Penally,  since  our  sensations  do  not  constitute  a
closed  system,  the  thought  is  possible  that  the  realm
of  the  sensible  is  not  exhausted  by  our  senses  ;  on
the  contrary,  that  there  are  other  animal  souls,  with
kinds  of  sensation  quite  different  and  yet  —  as  is
natural  —  wholly  unknown  to  us.

§  6.  The  duration  of  sensation  can  be  compared
as  a  gross  magnitude  with  the  duration  of  the
neural  process  which  excited  it.  For  we  find  that
under  ordinary  circumstances  it  is  never  longer  than
the  duration  of  the  external  stimulus,  unless  this
latter  leaves  behind  permanent  after-effects,  either
outside  of  or  within  us,  which  themselves  in  turn
become  stimuli  for  new  sensations.

Strictly  taken,  an  excitation  of  the  nerve  which
has  once  originated  can  never  cease  of  itself,  but
must  be  annulled  by  efficient  counteracting  forces.
This  customarily  takes  place ;  and,  when  the  vitality
is  sound,  it  takes  place  by  means  of the  ceaseless


ENDURING EFFECTS OF STIMULI.


activity  of  the  whole  process  of  metabolism,  by  which
constantly  the  nerve's  normal  condition  of  equilib-
rium is  re-established,  and  thus  rendered  capable
of  an  impartial  reception  of  new  impressions.

Such  recovery,  however,  fails  to  take  place  with
sufficient  speed,  not  merely  when  the  stimuli  are  of
very  great  strength,  but  particularly  in  the  sense
of  sight  as  a  rule  ;  and,  in  such  a  case,  the  well-
known  after-images  correspond  to  the  excitation
which  still  continues  to  be  kept  up,  and  which
sometimes  even  undergoes  again  a  periodical  in-
crease. By  '  after-images '  is  meant  actual  sensations
which,  if  they  are  lively  enough,  make  the  organ  of
sense  incapable  of  the  reception  of  new  impres-
sions ;  —  as,  for  example,  the  dazzling  images  which
follow  looking  at  the  sun.

§  7.  Certain  experiences  of  every-day  occurrence
—  for  example,  the  observation  of  a  light  approach-
ing, or  of  a  tone  dying  away  —  prove  that  we  are  in
general  very  sensitive  to  minute  differences  in  the
intensity  of  the  stimuli  of  sense.  But  this  remains
a  mere  matter  of  degree,  greater  or  less ;  and  the
moment  never  comes  when  we  could  say  that
according  to  the  measure  afforded  by  immediate
impression,  one  light  is  half  as  bright,  or  one  tone
twice  as  loud,  as  another.


14  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

The  above-mentioned  circumstance  prevents  us
from  discovering  in  the  shortest  way  the  exact  law
in  accordance  with  which  the  sensation  depends  on
the  strength  of  the  stimulus.  It  is  true  that  we  can
easily  establish  a  series  of  stimuli  whose  different
intensities  admit  of  accurate  measurement  ;  but  we
are  unable  to  assign  to  each  of  these  values,  on  the
ground  of  introspection,  the  strength  of  the  sensation
that  belongs  to  it,  in  numerical  terms  ;  and,  there-
fore, we  are  also  unable  to  discover,  from  a  compari-
son of  these  two  sets  of  values,  the  universal  law
which  satisfies  them  all.  We  are  therefore  compelled
to  employ  the  following  circuitous  method.

That  is  to  say,  it  happens  sometimes,  although
rarely,  that  we  are  uncertain  whether  two  impres-
sions, a  and  p,  are  at  all  different  and  not  rather  of
equal  intensity.  Now  since  in  any  case,  in  order
that  they  may  appear  different  at  all,  the  stimulus
which  forms  the  basis  of  one  must  be  greater  or
less  than  the  stimulus  to  which  the  other  corre-
sponds, the  question  may  be  raised  in  the  next  place  :
How  large  must  be  the  difference  between  two  stim-
uli (a  and  b)  of  the  same  kind,  in  order  that  the  two
sensations  (a  and  p)  corresponding  to  them  may
appear  '  just  observably  different ' }  and  further  :  Is
this  difference  of  the  stimuli  (l)-a),  which  is  the
necessary  condition  of  such  transition  from  the  sim-


THE LAW OF WEBER.  1 5

ilarity  of  the  sensations  to  the  'just  observable  dif-
ference '  in  their  intensity,  always  the  same,  or  does
it  alter  with  the  increase  of  the  absolute  magnitude
of  the  stimulus  ?

According  to  the  fundamental  investigations  of
Ernst  Heinrich  Weber,  which  have  since  been  con-
firmed and  extended  by  many  others,  two  sensations
are  distinguished  as  two  only  in  case  the  intensities
of  both  the  stimuli  which  occasion  them  stand  in  a
definite  geometrical  relation.  In  other  words  :  To
a  certain  stimulus  a,  in  order  that  the  sensation  a,
first  excited  by  it,  may  pass  over  into  a  sensation  p,
whose  difference  from  the  former  is  just  observable,
there  must  be  joined  an  increment  x  which  is  so
much  the  greater,  the  greater  a  itself  already  is.

This  relation  which  a  and  b  (or,  respectively,  a  and
x)  must  sustain  to  the  result  in  question,  remains
the  same  for  the  sensations  of  one  and  the  same
sense ;  but,  of  course,  only  within  the  limits  be-
tween stimuli  of  too  small  intensity,  which  do  not
excite  the  nerve,  and  those  of  too  great  intensity,
which  disturb  its  function.  On  the  contrary,  it  is
different  for  different  senses  :  —  approximately  about
3  : 4  for  hearing  and  for  mere  sensations  of  pressure
on  the  skin  ;  15  :  i6  for  the  latter,  in  case  they  are  sup-
plemented (when  the  weights  are  lifted)  by  muscular
feeling  ;  100  :  loi  for  sensations  of  light.


l6  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

§  8.  This  dependence  of  our  capacity  for  making
distinctions  upon  the  relation,  in  respect  of  magni-
tudes, of  the  stimuli,  which  has  been  directly  derived
from  the  observations,  forms  the  content  of  the  so-
called  "  Law  of  Weber."

In  all  the  foregoing  the  question  remains  as  yet
wholly  undecided,  in  what  way  precisely  this  relation
in  the  magnitudes  of  the  stimuli  makes  us  capable
of  distinguishing  the  resulting  impressions  :  that  is
to  say,  whether  it  is  due  to  the  fact  that  stimuli  of
different  intensity  produce  an  observably  different
intensity  of  the  sensation,  while  its  kind  remains
wholly  unchanged  ;  or  whether  it  is  due  to  the  fact
that  different  '  intensities '  of  the  same  stimulus  be-
get qualitatively  different  sensations,  which  are  then
separated  by  us  just  according  to  their  differences
of  quality.

In  itself  considered,  every  sensation  is  a  single
indivisible  act.  Now  it  is  undoubtedly  permissible
for  us  to  separate  in  thought,  as  two  constituent
parts  of  this  act,  the  qualitative  content  and  the
intensity  with  which  this  content  is  experienced  ;  —
this,  so  far  as  the  immediate  impression,  which  alone
can  decide  the  point,  accords  therewith.  Such  is,  for
example,  the  case  with  tones.  Here  we  may  actually
convince  ourselves  that  a  tone  of  definite  pitch
and color  of  'clang'  can sound louder  or  weaker


DISCUSSION OF WEBER's LAW.  1/

without,  on  that  account,  altering  its  nature.  On
the  contrary,  it  is  very  questionable  whether  the
sensation  of  a  pressure  of  greater  intensity  is  really
the  same  sensation  as  that  of  a  smaller  intensity,
except  that  the  former  is  stronger  than  the  latter  ;
further,  whether  the  taste  of  a  concentrated  acid  is
really  the  same  taste  as  that  of  the  dilute  acid.  Much
more  repugnant  still  is  immediate  feeling  toward  our
considering  cold  as  merely  a  weaker  intensity  of
heat.  Both  are  rather  at  opposite  poles,  although
the  causes  of  their  production  are  similar  processes.
Finally,  different  intensities  of  light  actually  have
likewise  different  shades  of  colors ;  a  white  of  a  less
intensity  of  brightness  is  not  merely  so,  but  it  has
become  a  gray,  and  this  gray,  as  well  as  the  black,
which  is  the  last  result,  cannot  possibly  be  regarded
as  merely  a  feebler  sensation  of  the  white.

The  foregoing  considerations  have  hitherto  not
been  sufficiently  regarded ;  and  neither  have  they
been  refuted.  What  further  is  now  to  be  adduced
depends  upon  an  assumption  which  is  perhaps  cor-
rect but  which  is  unproved  :  namely,  that  sensations
become  distinguishable  because  their  intensities  vary
according  to  a  fixed  standard.

§  9.  We  have,  then,  in  the  first  place,  to  recognize
the  truth  that  there  must  be  a  certain  small  magni-


l8  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

tilde  of  stimulus  for  each  sense,  below  which  it  can-
not fall  if  any  sensation  whatever  is  to  originate.
Naturally  enough,  some  resistance,  by  which  the
stimuli  of  too  small  intensity  are  kept  from  an  influ-
ence on  the  soul,  is  assumed  in  order  to  explain  the
above-mentioned  circumstance,  which  is  by  no  means
a  matter  of  course.  But  where  such  resistance  is
achieved,  as  it  were,  is  not  known.

It  is  further  assumed,  that  the  transition  from  com-
plete likeness  or  unobservable  difference  between
two  impressions  to  a  difference  just  observable  is
always  one  and  the  same  constant  increment  of
the  intensity  of  the  sensation  (that  is,  of  the  sec-
ond impression  compared  with  that  of  the  first)  ;
and,  accordingly,  the  fineness  of  the  distinctions  may
be  employed  as  a  measure  for  the  intensity  of  the
sensations.

The  question  may  then  be  asked :  How  must  the
stimuli  increase,  in  order  that  the  transition  from
one  of  its  values  to  another  may  invariably  result  in
the  same  constant  increment  of  the  intensity  of  the
sensation  .'*

According  to  the  investigations  already  referred  to,
the  foregoing  question  is  answered  as  follows :  If
the  intensities  of  the  sensation  are  to  increase  by  a
constant  difference,  and  therefore  in  an  arithmetical
series,  the  intensities of the  stimuli  must  be  aug-


DISCUSSION OF WEBER  S LAW.  I9


mented  much  more  rapidly,  that  is,  in  a  geometrical
series.  Or  —  what  is  the  same  thing  —  the  relation
of  the  first  to  the  second  is  comparable  to  the  rela-
tion of  a  logarithm  to  the  number  of  which  it  is  the
logarithm.  More  simply  expressed  ;  the  sensation
belongs  to  those  achievements  or  activities  which
are  always  to  be  raised  to  a  higher  degree  with
the  more  difficulty  the  greater  the  intensity  with
which  they  are  already  in  exercise.

The  following  questions,  however,  still  remain  to
be  answered  :  —

(i)  Why  does  this  peculiar  relation  take  place  at
all ;  and  why  does  not  the  sensation  rather  (a  thin  v
which  would  be  much  more  natural)  increase  as  a
simple  proportional  of  the  stimulus  ?  None  of  the
theories  proposed  on  this  point  is  satisfactory  ;  but
still  the  most  probable  is  the  assumption  that,  in  the
transformation  of  the  external  stimulus  into  excita-
tions of  the  nerves,  something  or  other  occurs  which
causes  the  latter  to  augment  much  more  slowly  than
the  external  stimuli  increase.

(2)  But  how  does  it  come  about  that,  while  the
stimulus  constantly  augments  in  intensity,  the  inten-
sity of  the  sensation  increases  not  merely  in  a  much
smaller  degree  but  also  only  discontinuously  .-'  Why
are  not,  as  a  rule,  all  the  impressions  distinguished
as different } How does it come about that,  for


20  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGV.

example,  a  weight  3  must  increase  to  at  least  4  in
order  to  give  a  new  sensation  of  pressure  ;  that,  on
the  contrary,  it  gives  no  such  sensation,  if  it  is  only
3J,  3J,  3|  ?  Something  in  itself  impossible  is  in-
volved in  the  thought  that  a  force  which  increases
constantly  should,  nevertheless,  furnish  the  occasion
for  a  second  kind  of  action  only  by  sudden  incre-
ments or  discontinuously  ;  and  if  not  thus,  then
not  at  all.  There  are,  then,  doubtless  contrivances
conceivable,  by  means  of  which  this  discontinuity
of  the  sensation  could  be  produced.  But  we  have
not  the  least  information  as  to  where  or  how,  in
the  body  or  in  the  soul,  such  contrivances  do  in
fact  exist.

Both  these  riddles  are  therefore  wholly  unsolved.

§  10.  It  may  perhaps  be  asserted  that  a  state  of
rest,  or  an  excitation  maintained  with  complete  uni-
formity, is  never  the  proximate  condition  of  a  sen-
sation ;  but  that  such  condition  is  always  nothing
but  the  transition  from  one  state  to  another.

It  would  follow  from  the  foregoing  that  sensa-
tions, such  as  we  might  have  last  during  a  con-
siderable time, — for  example,  the  seeing  of  a  light
or  the  hearing  of  a  tone,  —  must  depend  on  certain
series  of  single  impulses  with  intervening  pauses  ;
so  that  in  this  case  also  a  frequent  repetition  of  the


CHANGE NECESSARY TO SENSATION.  21

alternation  between  excitation  and  non-excitation
would  take  place.  For  sensations  of  light  and  sound
this  admits  of  being  established  by  proof.  In  these
cases,  to  be  sure,  every  single  flash  of  light,  or
every  tone  however  brief,  depends  upon  a  consider-
able number  of  such  discrete  impulses  which  are
carried  to  the  organ  of  sense.  As  to  the  rest  of
the  senses  we  lack  information.

Now  if  the  above-mentioned  fact  is  expressed  as
follows,  —  that  all  processes  of  excitation  which  are
to  lead  to  sensations  must  have  this  form  of  oscil-
lation between  two  opposite  states,  —  then  we  must
at  least  not  add  the  statement  that  the  sensation
itself  consists  in  the  recounting,  as  it  were,  of  these
single  impulses.  In  these  impulses  we  can  never
see  anything  but  the  matter-of-fact  condition  to
which  the  originating  of  the  sensation  is  attached
in  an  incomprehensible  way.  For  in  the  content  of
the  sensation  itself,  in  the  red  or  the  warm,  we  per-
ceive nothing  of  motions  whatever ;  and  still  less  of
the  number  of  their  oscillations,  by  means  of  which
they  become  the  causes  of  sensation.

§  11.  If  the  same  excitation  a,  which  is  customarily
effected  in  a  nerve  by  an  external  stimulus,  and  upon
which  the  sensation  a  follows,  is  exceptionally  pro-
duced by  a  stimulus  originated  in  the  interior  of  the


22  OUTLINES OF FSVCHOLOGY.

body  ;  then  the  same  sensation  a  follows  as  well.
In  such  a  case  the  sensation  is  called  subjective.
Common  examples  are  ringing  in  the  ears,  flashes
of  light  before  the  eyes,  the  chill  and  flush  of  fever.

In  connection  with  this,  the  so-called  principle
of  the  "  Specific  Energy  of  the  Nerves  "  has  been
laid  down,  according  to  which  every  individual  nerve
of  sense,  by  whatsoever  means  it  may  have  been
excited,  always  produces  the  same  sensation.

If  the  fact  were  such,  it  would  not  be  very  won-
derful. For  every  coherent  system  of  parts,  which
is  disturbed  but  not  destroyed,  enters  upon  efforts
at  the  re-establishment  of  its  equilibrium,  the  form
of  which  depends  solely  upon  its  own  structure
and  upon  the  connection  of  the  forces  effective  in
it ;  and  such  system  is  not  altered  according  to
the  variety  of  the  disturbing  stimuli.  But  in  order
that  these  efforts  in  the  one  nerve  may  be  dis-
tinguished from  those  in  every  other,  each  nerve
must  have  its  own  special  structure,  —  a  matter  of
which  we  as  yet  know  nothing.

There  are  no  facts,  however,  such  as  it  is  intended
to  explain  in  this  way.  We  merely  know  that
the  stimulus  of  light,  impact  and  pressure,  the  pas-
sage of  a  current  of  electricity  through  the  eye,
awaken  the  sensation  of  light ;  and  perhaps  that
impact and electricity  produce also the  sensation


SPECIFIC STIMULI OF SENSE.  23


of  sound  ;  and  the  latter  also  the  sensation  of  taste.
Now  a  motion  of  the  ponderable  parts  by  means
of  impact  can  scarcely  take  place  in  the  tense
eye-ball  without  a  part  of  this  motion  being  also
converted  into  motions  of  the  ether  that  exists
in  the  eye,  and  so  producing  a  motion  of  light,
which  acts  as  adequate  stimulus  upon  the  nerve  of
sight  in  precisely  the  same  way  as  if  it  came  from
without.  Just  so  the  imparted  shocks  may  be
changed  into  oscillations  of  the  tense  parts  and
membranes,  which  are  then  normal  stimuli  for  the
nerve  of  hearing  just  as  well  as  are  the  acoustic
waves  that  come  from  without.  Finally,  it  is  quite
certain  that  the  electrical  current  excites  chemical
decomposition  of  the  fluids  of  the  mouth,  and  that
the  adequate  stimulus  for  the  nerve  of  taste  consists
in  this  directly.  It  is  still  possible  to  make  the
following  assertion  :  In  order  that  a  nerve  may  be
thrown  into  the  state  a,  upon  which  the  sensation
a  follows,  a  definite  adequate  stimulus  is  always
necessary ;  but  very  many  inadequate  stimuli,  in
case  of  their  being  of  influence,  divide  into  dif-
ferent components :  one  of  these  components  is
then  the  adequate  stimulus  which  is  the  condition
of  the  sensation  a;  and  the  others  become  objects
of  perception  through  other  sensations  (for  example,
the  pain  contemporaneous  with  the  impact).


24  OUTLINES OF I'SYCHOLOGY.

§  12.  The  influence  of  the  external  stimuli  does
not  take  place  in  so  simple  a  manner  as  was  for-
merly supposed  ;  in  such  manner,  for  example,  that
the  waves  of  light  immediately  as  such  act  upon
the  nerve  of  sight  and,  in  accordance  with  their
nature,  awaken  all  possible  sensations  of  color  and
light.  Instead  of  this  we  find  in  the  eye  certain
layers  of  a  peculiar,  and  still  in  many  respects
mysterious,  structure  (layers  of  rods  and  cones),
which  seem  designed  to  transform  the  motion  of
light  that  reaches  them  into  a  chemical  altera-
tion of  a  special  substance  (visual  purple)  which,
in  turn,  acts  as  the  primary  stimulus  upon  the
nerve  of  sight.  Just  so  do  we  find  in  the  skin,
and  in  the  tongue,  peculiarly  constructed  corpus-
cles of  touch  and  corpuscles  of  taste,  which  first
give  to  the  stimulus,  in  a  manner  as  yet  unknown,
the  form  in  which  it  is  to  act  upon  the  nerves
contained  in  them.

In  the  organ  of  hearing  we  do  not  know  of  any-
thing similar.  For  its  purpose,  however,  another
form  of  contrivance  seems  to  have  been  hit  upon,  so
that  each  single  nerve-fibre  is  susceptible  only  for  a
single  tone.  The  entire  expansion  of  the  fibres  (upon
the  organ  of  Corti)  would  therefore  be  comparable  to
the  key-board  of  a  piano,  and  each  fibre  accessible
only  to  a  definite  rate  of  the  vibration  of  the  waves.


FUNDAMENTAL COLORS.  2?

^ : -^

The  phenomena  of  *  color-blindness  '  have  led  to
a  similar  hypothesis  in  relation  to  the  eye.  It  is
supposed  that  there  are  three  species  of  fibres,  each
of  which,  when  stimulated  by  itself  alone,  causes
the  sensation  of  one  of  the  three  fundamental  colors,
—  green,  red,  and  violet.  From  the  synchronous
excitation  of  the  fibres  of  different  species  the  other
colors  are  then  supposed  to  arise.  This  hypoth-
esis is  not  invented  gratuitously;  but,  as  was  just
said,  it  has  a  reference  to  the  facts  of  color-blindness,
which  it  is  designed  to  explain.  The  further  demand,
however,  must  not  be  made,  —  namely,  to  see  into
the  reason  why  a  definite  mixture  of  synchronous
excitations  from  red,  green,  and  violet,  causes  the
other  colors,  like  blue  and  yellow,  to  originate ;
when  the  latter,  so  far  as  the  mere  immediate
impression  of  sensation  is  concerned,  do  not  in  the
least  degree  appear  deducible  from  the  former. /

§  13.  In  another  meaning  of  the  words,  a//  our
sensations  are  only  'subjective';  that  is  to  say,
only  phenomena  in  our  consciousness,  to  which
nothing  in  the  external  world  corresponds.  Even  in
antiquity  this  assertion  was  made ;  modern  physics
further  completes  the  picture.  The  world  outside
of  us  is  neither  still  nor  resonant,  neither  bright
nor  dark ;  but it  is as utterly  incomparable  to  all


26  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

that  as  sweetness  is,  for  example,  to  a  line.  Noth-
ing happens  outside  of  us  but  motions  of  various
forms.  Finally,  physiology  often  expresses  the  fact
in  the  following  inapt  terms  .  Sensations  are  merely
perceptions  of  our  own  states.  But  what  takes  place
in  the  nerves  while  we  are  seeing,  we  do  not  at  all
perceive  ;  and  a  state  which,  within  our  own  soul,
precedes  the  sensation  in  such  a  way  that  the  latter
could  be  designated  as  the  perception  of  it,  is  also
unknown  to  us.  We  can  therefore  simply  say :
Sensations  are  phenomena  in  us  which,  although
they  are  the  consequences  of  external  stimuli,  are
not  copies  of  them.

The  proofs,  however,  by  means  of  which  the
effort  is  ordinarily  made  to  establish  the  foregoing
principle,  all  admit  of  still  other  subterfuges.  It
would  still  always  be  possible  to  assume,  that
'  Things '  are  actually  red  or  sweet,  but  that  we
could  of  course  only  know  this  in  case  they  caused
motions  to  act  upon  us ;  which  motions  —  to
be  sure  —  are  neither  red  nor  sweet,  and  yet  in
the  last  result  cause  to  originate  in  our  soul,  as
sensations,  the  same  redness  and  sweetness  which
belong  as  properties  to  the  Things.  The  only  proof,
in  the  last  analysis,  consists  in  this,  that  such  objec-
tive properties  are  in  themselves  inconceivable.  In
what  the  shining  of  a  light  which  absolutely  no  one


SENSATIONS  AS  ATTRIBUTES.  2/

were  to  see,  or  the  sounding  of  a  tone  which  no  one
were  to  hear,  could  consist,  is  just  as  impossible
to  tell,  as  what  a  tooth-ache,  which  no  one  were  to
have,  would  be.

It  is  therefore  involved  in  the  nature  of  colors,
tones,  smells,  etc.,  that  they  always  have  only
one  place  and  one  way  where  and  how  they  can  by
any  possibility  exist,  —  namely,  the  consciousness
of  a  soul ;  and,  of  course,  only  at  the  moment  when
they  are  experienced  by  this  soul.


CHAPTER II.

THE COURSE OF IDEAS,

§  14.  'Ideas,'  in  contrast  to  'sensations,'  is  the
name  primarily  given  to  those  images  of  memory
arising  from  previous  sensations,  with  which  we  meet
in  consciousness.  This  accords  with  the  usage  of
speech ;  we  form  an  idea  of  what  is  absent,  of  what
we  do  not  perceive  by  sense ;  but  we  perceive  by
sense  what  is  present, — that  of  which,  on  just  that
very  account,  we  do  not  need  to  form  an  idea.
Ideas  have  their  peculiar  differences  from  sensa-
tions. The  idea  of  the  brightest  radiance  does  not
shine,  that  of  the  intensest  noise  does  not  sound,
that  of  the  greatest  torture  produces  no  pain  ;  while
all  this  is  true,  however,  the  idea  quite  accurately
represents  the  radiance,  the  sound,  or  the  pain,
which  it  does  not  actually  reproduce.

§  15.  Even  in  the  aforesaid  form  the  images  of
memory  derived  from  earlier  impressions  are  not
always  present  in  consciousness,  but  only  tempo-
rarily return  in  it ;  and  then  in  such  manner  that
no  external  stimulus  was  necessary  in  order  to
produce  them  anew.


GROUND OF FORGETFULNESS,  29

From  the  foregoing  facts  we  conclude,  that
meantime  our  ideas  have  not  been  wholly  lost  to
us,  but  have  been  transformed  into  some  kind  of
'  unconscious  states,'  of  which  we,  of  course,  can
give  no  description,  and  for  which  we  employ  the
self-contradictory  but  convenient  name  of  'uncon-
scious ideas,'  in  order  to  indicate  that  they  have
originated  from  ideas  and,  under  certain  conditions,
can  become  such  again.  A  theory  of  the  so-called
'  course  of  ideas '  would  have  to  explain  both  the
above-mentioned  events.

§  16.  The  vanishing  of  ideas  out  of  conscious-
ness no  one  can  observe :  concerning  this  matter
we  can  speak  only  on  the  ground  of  conclusions
from  what  we  subsequently  find  in  consciousness,
or  on  the  ground  of  very  general  principles.

Here  two  views  stand  opposed  to  each  other.  It
was  formerly  held  that  the  vanishing  of  the  ideas
is  natural,  and  the  opposite  of  this,  memory,  was
believed  to  need  explanation.  The  analogy  of  the
physical  law  of  inertia  is  now  followed,  and  forget-
fulness  is  believed  to  need  explanation,  because  of
itself  the  eternal  continuance  of  a  state  once  excited
is  a  self-evident  affair.

The  foregoing  analogy  is  not  without  weight.  It
is  true  of  the  motion  of  bodies. But  motion  is  only


30  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


a  change  of  external  relations,  from  which  the  body
moved  suffers  nothing,  for  it  exists  in  one  place
exactly  as  well  as  in  another ;  and  it  has  therefore
neither  a  reason  nor  a  standard  for  offering  resist-
ance to  the  motion.  The  soul,  on  the  contrary,
exists  in  different  inner  states,  according  as  it  has
the  idea  a,  or  the  idea  b,  or  no  idea  at  all.  It  would
therefore  be  conceivable  that  it  should  react  against
each  impression  that  is  obtruded  upon  it,  and  should
by  this  means  ])erhaps  have  the  power  to  transform
this  impression  from  a  conscious  sensation  into
an  unconscious  state,  although  never,  of  course,
the  power  of  annulling  it.

The  other  principle,  too,  which  in  itself  considered
is  certainly  to  be  recognized,  —  namely,  that  it  is
the  unity  of  the  soul,  which  necessitates  the  many
ideas  to  reciprocal  action  in  such  manner  that  some
of  them  supplant  the  others,  —  does  not  lead  us  to
the  desired  end.  For  if  the  question  is  raised,  In
what  way  then  shall  this  unity  of  the  soul  make
itself  felt  upon  the  manifoldness  of  the  ideas.'  —
then  the  most  probable  conjecture  would  be  this,
that  it  fuses  all  the  qualitatively  different  sensations
or  ideas  into  a  single  homogeneous  intermediate
state.  This  does  not  happen,  however ;  but  the
ideas,  —  for  example,  *  gold  '  and  '  blue  '  or  '  large  '
and  'small,'  —  which  have once  arisen  as  different


OPPOSITION OF IDEAS.  3I

in  consciousness,  are  never  afterward  intermingled.
It  is  also  obvious  that  every  higher  spiritual  produc-
tion, which  consists  essentially  in  relations  between
different  points  of  relation,  would  be  impossible,  if
the  difference  in  the  points  to  be  related  were  made
to  vanish  through  being  thus  thrown  together  into  a
single  mixed  state.

Nothing  else  is  therefore  left  for  us  but  to  con-
sider the  following  thoughts  as  mere  hypotheses
which  are  not  deducible  from  first  principles.

§  17.  In  accordance  with  the  analogy  of  physi-
cal mechanics,  the  ideas  are  considered  as  'forces'
which  act  on  each  other  according  to  the  measure
of  their  'opposition'  and  their  'intensity.'  Both
parts  of  this  hypothesis  are  scarcely  to  be  estab-
lished on  grounds  of  experience.

In  the  first  place,  as  to  what  concerns  the  inten-
sity, this  conception  is  certainly  applicable  to  sen-
sations;  and,  indeed,  in  such  a  manner  that  the
greater  content  of  the  sensation  is  at  all  times  a
greater  achievement  of  the  activity  of  sensation,
or  a  greater  commotion  and  affection  of  the  sentient
subject.  But  the  bare  idea  of  a  bright  lustre  is  no
greater  achievement  of  the  ideating  activity  than
that  of  a  dull  glimmer  ;  and  that  of  thunder  demands
no greater exertion of  .this activity  than that of


32  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


the  slightest  whisper.  The  ideating  activity  there-
fore appears  in  general  to  admit  of  no  differences
in  intensity,  but  such  differences  appertain  wholly
to  the  content  of  the  idea.

Even  the  more  or  less  '  obscure '  ideas,  which
we  think  we  have  of  one  and  the  same  content,
produce  no  different  intensity  in  the  ideating  act.
Simple  ideas,  which  we  believe  we  have  only  '  ob-
scurely,'■ —  for  example,  that  of  the  taste  of  a  rare
fruit,  —  we  do  not  have  at  all  ;  but  we  merely  know
from  another  source  that  the  fruit  has  some  taste.
Now  the  greater  the  scope  within  the  limits  of
which  we  are  able  to  choose  between  different
tastes,  yet  without  knowing  how  to  make  a  deci-
sion, the  more  obscure  does  the  idea  of  the  actual
taste  appear  to  us,  which  we  are  merely  seeking  for,
but  do  not  possess.  Composite  ideas,  such  as  images
of  external  objects  or  scientific  principles,  do  not
become  '  obscure '  by  their  entire  content  being
gradually  more  weakly  illuminated  ;  but  they  thus
become  incomplete.  Single  factors  fail  wholly  ;  but
especially  are  those  definite  combinations  forgotten,
in  which  the  yet  remaining  factors  or  points  of  rela-
tion stand.  Again,  the  greater  is  the  throng  of  pos-
sible connections  between  which  we  are  wavering
in  our  uncertainty ;  so  much  the  greater  is  the  so-
called  obscurity  of  the  aforesaid  ideas. Conversely,


OPPOSITION OF IDEAS.  33

arf  soon  as  an  idea  is  thought  of  completely,  with
all  its  content  and  all  the  combinations  of  its  parts,
it  is  then  no  longer  possible  mentally  to  represent
it  with  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  intensity.  Only
it  appears  to  receive  a  further  increment  of  clear-
ness, —  for  example,  the  idea  of  a  triangle,  —  in  case
a  throng  of  other  thoughts  are  connected  therewith
in  the  experience  of  an  expert,  which  are  still  un-
known to  the  beginner.

§  18.  The  other  conception  applicable  in  this
place,  that  of  opposition,  also  awakens  the  inquiry,
whether  it  is  to  be  referred  to  the  content  of  the
ideas  or  to  the  activities  by  which  they  are  mentally
represented.

The  two  things  are  not  coincident.  Ideas  in  gen-
eral, never  are,  of  themselves,  that  which  they  sig-
nify:  the  idea  of  what  is  red  is  not  a  red  idea;  the
idea  of  what  is  triangular  is  not  triangular  ;  the  idea
of  what  is  choleric  is  not  choleric.  If,  therefore,
the  contents  of  two  ideas,  —  like  'right'  and  'left,'
'plus'  and  'minus,'  'white'  and  'black,'  —  are  op-
posed to  each  other,  it  does  not  in  the  least  degree
follow  from  this,  that  the  ideating  activities  by
which  they  are  produced  as  ideas  are  opposed  to
each  other  in  the  same  way ;  and  that  they  must
on  this  account,  as  a  matter  of  course,  hinder  each


34  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

Other,  after  the  analogy  of  opposed  physical  motions
or  forces.

§  19.  Moreover,  the  conceptions  of  intensity  and
opposition  could  serve  as  a  foundation  for  a  'psy-
chical mechanics,'  in  a  self-evident  way,  only  in
case  they  should  have  reference  to  the  ideating
activities. This  is  not  the  case.

If  therefore  the  intensity  and  opposition  of  the
content  ideated  were  the  decisive  conditions  for
the  reciprocal  action  of  the  ideas,  we  should  be
compelled  to  recognize  it  as  a  bare  fact.  Experi-
ence does  not  establish  this.  The  idea  of  a  greater
content  by  no  means  always  supplants  that  of  the
smaller ;  on  the  contrary,  the  latter  itself  is  some-
times in  a  position  to  suppress  the  sensation  from
external  stimuli.

But  ideas  never  make  their  appearance  in  a  soul
which  does  nothing  else  besides  ;  on  the  contrary,
there  is  also  connected  with  every  impression,  a
somewhat  that  is  represented  in  idea  in  consequence
of  this,  —  namely,  a  feeling  of  the  value  which
the  impression  has  for  the  bodily  and  spiritual  well-
being  of  the  percipient.  Such  feelings  of  pleasure
and  pain  are  just  as  obviously  capable  of  a  grada-
tion of  degrees  as  the  bare  act  of  mental  represen-
tation is  incapable  of  this. Now  according  to  the


ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS.  35

magnitude  of  this  proportion  of  feeling,  which  is
moreover  extraordinarily  changeable  according  to
the  variety  of  the  total  condition  in  which  the  soul
is  at  the  time,  —  or,  briefly  said,  according  to  the
degree  of  the  interest  which  an  idea  is,  for  mani-
fold reasons,  able  to  awaken  at  each  moment,  —  its
greater  or  less  power  is  directed  toward  the  sup-
planting of  other  ideas.  And  it  is  only  in  this,  and
not  in  an  original  property  which  it  might  be  sup-
posed to  possess  as  a  mere  idea,  that  what  may
be  called  its  '  iiitetisity  '  consists.

§  20.  The  second  question  (§  15)  was  this:  How
'  do  ideas  return  in  consciousness  t

On  this  point  we  merely  know  that  an  idea  b
very  often  returns  in  case  another  idea  a  has  been
produced  in  consciousness.

Now  however,  since  it  is  not  every  b  that  returns
in  consequence  of  any  a  we  please,  there  must  be
a  closer  connection  between  those  which  do  in  this
way  recall  each  other,  than  between  those  which
do  not.  Such  connection  is  called  'Association  ';  —
a  mere  name  which  does  not  in  the  least  express
by  what  means  the  connection  is  established.  In
the  same  way  '  Reproduction '  is  a  mere  name  for
the  fact  that  a  definite  a  brings  back  again  into
consciousness  some  b  associated  with  it.


36  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

But,  nevertheless,  the  conditions  can  be  studied
under  which  both,  association  and  reproduction,  as
a  matter  of  fact  take  place.

The  two  classes  customarily  adduced  first,  accord-
ing to  which  similar  ideas  on  the  one  hand,  and
opposed  ideas  on  the  other  hand,  recall  each  other,
it  is  found  difficult  to  establish  by  experience.  For
it  cannot  well  be  said,  that  a  tone  or  a  color  recalls
to  remembrance  all  other  tones  and  colors  in  a  more
lively  way  than  it  recalls  any  other  ideas  whatever.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  things  opposed,  —  like  darkness
to  light,  night  to  day,  plus  to  minus, — cause  each
other  to  be  thought  of,  the  reason  does  not  lie  in
such  opposition  alone,  but  in  the  special  value  which"
it  has  for  our  life  or  for  particular  employments,  so
that  we  are  on  this  account  reminded  by  one  of  the
other.

On  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  third
and  fourth  cases  do  occur ;  according  to  which,  on
the  one  hand,  each  part  of  a  space-whole  reproduces
the  remaining  parts  and  the  whole,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  the  parts  of  a  successive  whole  —  for  example,
a  melody  —  recall  each  other  following  their  original
order.  Examples  are  unnecessary.  It  also  appears
unnecessary  to  reduce  the  third  case,  as  is  frequently
done,  to  the  fourth,  because  (as  is  said)  even  the  per-


ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS.  37


ception  of  a  simultaneous  whole  happens  after  all  in
the  way  of  a  succession ;  since  the  eye  with  its
glance  runs  over  the  forms  and  gradually  becomes
conscious  of  the  connection  of  each  point  with  the
next.  We  certainly  do  attain  accurate  mental  images
only  in  the  aforesaid  manner ;  still  it  is  not  to  be
denied  that  even  an  instantaneous  apprehension  of
mental  images  can  be  left  behind,  the  single  parts
of  which  will  reproduce  each  other.

We  may  therefore  summarize  all  the  facts  in  the
following  way  :  Every  two  ideas,  whatever  their  con-
tent may  be,  become  associated  in  case  they  are
produced  either  simultaneously  or  immediately  (that
is,  without  any  intermediate  member)  following  each
other.  And  upon  this  fact  would  be  founded  with
out  further  technicality  the  special  facility  with
which  we  repeat  a  number  of  ideas  according  to
their  series  but  not  outside  of  the  series.

Finally,  if  we  designate  as  a  special  case  the
'  immediate '  reproduction  with  which  a  is  again
awakened  by  the  influence  of  a  new  stimulus  that
produces  the  same  a,  then  we  are  to  consider  that
the  second  a  could  not  be  distinguished  at  all
from  the  first  as  a  repetition  of  it,  if  both  were
completely  alike.  But  the  first,  which  is  re-awakened
by  the second,  reproduces  in its  turn the idea of


38  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

the  concomitant  circumstances  under  which  it  was
previously  perceived ;  and  these  are  different  from
the  circumstances  of  the  present  moment.  There-
fore the  recognition  of  the  same  a  depends  after
all  on  '  mediated  '  reproduction,  —  that  is,  reproduc-
tion of  other  ideas  tJirongJi  a.

§  21.  In  the  case  of  most  ideas,  each  has  become
associated  in  the  course  of  life  with  very  many  others
in  the  same  way.  If,  therefore,  a  definite  f  has
returned  again  in  consciousness,  it  still  remains  quite
undecided  which  of  the  many  other  ideas,  g,  h,  i,  k,
has  just  now  reproduced  it,  since  it  was  previously
connected  with  them  all.  The  grounds  for  the  deci-
sion of  this  point  will  generally  lie,  partly  in  the
course  which  the  ideas  before  f  have  taken,  and  into
the  connection  of  which  g,  h,  i,  k,  do  not  all  fit  equally
well ;  partly  in  our  common  feeling  or  the  mood
in  which  we  are  at  each  moment  as  respects  the
vitality  or  the  restraints  of  our  whole  existence ;
and  finally,  partly  in  special  conditions  of  our  cor-
poreal life,  that  are  to  be  altogether  excluded  from
this  part  of  the  discussion,  but  of  which  we  shall
speak  later  on.

The  foregoing  points  of  view  only  admit  of  being
brought  forward  in  a  general  way. On  the  contrary,


ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS.  39

it  is  impossible  to  form  a  theory  from  them  which
enters  into  particulars ;  and  just  as  impossible  in
any  single  case  really  to  demonstrate  the  reasons
which  have  in  fact  led  to  the  course  of  our  thoughts,
appearing  often  so  capricious  as  it  does.


CHAPTER III.

THE ACT OF RELATIVE KNOWLEDGE AND
ATTENTION.

§  22.  Thus  far  wc  have  spoken  of  the  relations
and  interchange  of  ideas.  There  is  in  our  interior
Hfe,  however,  besides  this,  a  mental  representation
of  these  relations  and  of  this  interchange.

The  two  are  very  different  things.  We  know  that
if  the  idea  of  'blue,'  and  at  the  same  time  that  of
red,  originates  within  us,  the  two  by  no  means  min-
gle and  produce  'violet.'  Were  this,  however,  to
happen,  then  a  third  simple  idea  would  merely  have
taken  the  place  of  the  two  others,  and  a  compar-
ison of  these  two  would  have  been  made  impos-
sible by  their  vanishing.  Every  comparison,  and  in
general  every  relation  between  two  elements  (in  this
case,  red  and  blue),  presupposes  that  both  points
of  relation  remain  separate,  and  that  an  ideating
activity  passes  over  from  the  one  a  to  the  other
b,  and  at  the  same  time  becomes  conscious  of  that
alteration  which  it  has  experienced  in  this  transi-
tion from  the  act  of  forming  the  idea  of  a  to  that
of  forming  b.


THE IDEA OF "LIKENESS.  4I


Such  an  activity  do  we  exercise  in  case  we  com-
pare red  and  blue  ;  and  thereupon  there  originates
in  us  the  new  idea  of  a  qualitative  similarity  which
we  ascribe  to  both.

If  at  the  same  time  a  strong  and  a  weak  light
are  perceived,  then  the  sensation  therefrom  is  not
that  of  a  single  light  which  might  be  the  sum  of
both  ;  both  rather  remain  separate ;  and  again  on
passing  from  one  to  the  other,  we  become  conscious
of  another  alteration  in  our  state,  —  namely,  that
of  the  merely  quantitative  more  or  less  of  one  and
the  same  impression.

Finally,  if  two  quite  similar  impressions  have
been  able  to  originate  as  distinct  ideas  within  us,
then  they  no  longer  fuse  into  a  third  ;  but  when
we  compare  them  in  the  foregoing  way  and,  on  the
transition  from  one  to  the  other,  become  conscious
of  no  alteration  of  our  mental  representation,  the
new  idea  of  '  Likeness  '  originates  in  our  minds.

§  23.  It  is  important  to  make  it  obvious  that  all
these  new  ideas,  which  we  may  designate  as  ideas
of  a  higher  order,  by  no  means  arise  as  result-
ants from  a  mere  reciprocal  action  of  the  original
simple  ideas,  in  the  same  way  as  a  third  motion  is
constructed  in  mechanics  from  the  coincidence  of
two  others.


42  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

The  foregoing  analogy  by  no  means  holds  good  in
the  spiritual  domain.  The  rather  are  both  the  im-
pressions a  and  b  always  to  be  regarded  merely
as  stimuli,  that  act  upon  the  entire  peculiar  and
'  monadic  '  nature  of  an  ideating  subject,  and  stir
up  as  a  reaction  in  this  subject  the  activity  by
means  of  which  the  new  ideas,  —  for  example,  of
similarity,  likeness,  contrast,  etc.,  —  originate  ;  nor
would  such  ideas,  without  the  excitation  of  this
new  spiritual  activity,  originate  from  the  mere
co-working of the single impressions.

§  24.  In  the  same  manner  as  the  aforesaid  new
ideas  does  all  that  originate  which  we  designate  as
'  general  notions.'

It  is  customary  to  assert  that  those  factors  of  the
ideas  compared,  which  arc  of  unlike  kind,  annul  each
other  by  their  opposition,  and  that  the  remainder
which  is  of  like  kind  then,  of  itself  alone,  exhibits
the  so-called  "general  "  factor.

But  the  single  examples  from  which  we  form  a
general  notion  by  no  means  perish  thereupon  ;  on
the  contrary,  their  ideas  continue  to  maintain  them-
selves side  by  side  with  the  general  one,  which  is
merely  added  to  them  as  a  new  product.  The  gen-
eral notion  also  never  constitutes  anything  which
admits  of being mentally  represented in intuitive


NATURE  OF  GENERAL  NOTIONS. 43

form,  as  a  definite  image,  in  the  same  way  as  do  the
individual  examples  from  which  it  originated.  Thus
'  color  in  general '  is  not  representable  by  an  idea ;
it  looks  neither  green  nor  red,  but  has  no  look
whatever.  And  just  so  there  is  no  definite  and
fixed  mental  image  whatever  of  animal  in  general,
having  an  intuitive  character  similar  to  the  image
of  each  individual  species  of animal.

All  such  general  notions,  therefore,  are  not  prod-
ucts of  a  cooperation  of  many  individual  ideas ;  for
in  that  case  they  would  have  the  same  character  as
do  these  their  components.  The  names  by  which
we  designate  them  —  for  example,  '  colors  '  —  are,
strictly  speaking,  nothing  more  than  demands  made
upon  us  mentally  to  represent  a  series  of  different
individual  impressions  ;  though  with  the  adjunct
thought  that  what  is  contained  in  them  belongs  not
to  them,  but  to  what  they  have  in  common,  and  yet
does  not  admit  of  being  separated  from  them  as  an
idea  of  like  kind.

§  25.  The  different  narrower  and  broader  mean-
ings of  the  term  Cousciousjiess  are  connected  with
the  foregoing  subject.

It  often  happens  that  we  perceive  a  multiplicity  of
elements,  but  still  do  not  at  the  instant  know  how
to  specify  the  definite  relations  between  them. On


44  OUTLINKS OF PSYCHOLOGY.

the  other  hand,  it  is  {possible  subsequently  to  become
conscious  of  the  relations,  after  the  aforesaid  sen-
suous impressions  are  already  past.  It  follows  from
this  that  these  impressions  themselves  are  by  no
means  uncojisciotts  ;  otherwise  they  would  not  sub-
sequently be  remembered.  On  the  contrary,  the
relating  activity  of  the  mind,  which  enumerates
them  and  also  mentally  represents  the  relations
that  actually  exist  between  them,  has  not  been
exercised.

We  see  from  this  that  the  two  operations  are
separable  from  each  other :  the  relating  activity
can  never  originate  as  a  higher  form  without  the
simple  conscious  sensation  to  which  it  is  related  ;
but  the  latter,  as  the  lower  form,  does  not  need  to
be  accompanied  by  the  former.

Ordinary  experiences  show  that  there  are  ver}
many  circumstances  which  hinder  the  appearance
of  this  higher  activity.  In  the  case  of  manifold
movements  of  the  mind,  we  hear  the  tones  but  do
not  understand  the  words  ;  or  understand  the  words
but  not  their  meaning ;  or,  finally,  this  too,  but
nothing  of  the  significance  which  it  has  for  our
interests.  Even  bodily  conditions,  of  which  we  yet
know  almost  nothing,  bring  it  about  that  the  matter
stops  with  the  mere  sensation  of  impressions  :  and
neither their external and intuitive, nor their


DEGREES OF ATTENTION.  45


interior,  connection  comes  into  consciousness  (^  sonl-
blindncss ').

§  26.  What  we  have  here  depicted  is,  funda-
mentally considered,  nothing  else  but  the  series  of
different  degrees  of  Attention.

This  was  formerly  considered  as  an  activity  exer-
cised by  the  spirit,  which,  like  a  light  waxing  and
waning,  illumines  to  greater  clearness  the  of  them-
selves unconscious  impressions.  Later  (Herbart)
this  thought  of  an  activity  has  been  wholly  aban-
doned :  and  it  has  been  supposed  that  the  sentence,
"we  are  attentive  to  something,"  only  signifies:
The  idea  of  this  something  rises  into  our  conscious-
ness by  its  own  strength.

We  cannot  accede  to  this  latter  assumption  ;  but
just  as  little  do  we  understand  attention  to  be
merely  a  stronger  illumination  of  a  given  content.
By  attention  we  gain  something  merely  in  case  the
content  mentally  represented  gives  occasion  for  its
work  to  our  relating  and  comparing  faculty  of
knowledge.  Even  an  altogether  simple  content  is
at  least  compared  by  us  with  other  simple  contents,
or  with  itself  at  different  moments  of  its  duration.
If  we  disregard  this  fact,  then  the  mere  persistence
of  the  content,  with  whatever  intensity  it  may
occur,  is  of absolutely  no  help  to  us.


46  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

It  is  understood,  finally,  that  this  relation  of  one
content  to  another  can  be  carried  further  at  pleas-
ure. We  can  therefore  certainly  distinguish  yet
other  different  degrees  of  consciousness  concerning
the  content  of  an  idea  ;  —  and  this  according  as  we
mentally  represent  merely  the  idea  itself  and  its
own  nature,  or  its  connection  with  other  ideas,  or,
finally,  its  value  and  significance  for  the  totality  of
our  personal  life.


CHAPTER IV.

THE INTUITIONS OF SPACE.

§  27.  Metaphysic  raises  the  doubt,  whether  space
is  actually  extended  and  we,  together  with  '  Things,'
are  contained  in  it;  whether  —  just  the  reverse  —
the  whole  spatial  world  is  not  rather  only  a  form
of  intuition  in  us.

This  question  we  for  the  present  leave  one  side,
and  in  the  meantime  take  our  point  of  departure
from  the  assumption,  previously  alluded  to,  with
which  we  are  all  conversant.  But  since  Things  in
space  can  never  become  the  object  of  our  per-
ception by  virtue  of  their  bare  existence,  and,  on
the  contrary,  become  such  solely  through  the
effects  which  they  exercise  upon  us,  the  question
arises :  How  do  the  Things  by  their  influence
upon  us  bring  it  to  pass,  that  we  are  compelled
mentally  to  represent  them  in  the  same  reciprocal
position  in  space,  in  which  they  actually  exist
outside  of  us .-'

§  28.  In  the  case  of  the  eye,  nature  has  devised  a
painstaking  structure,  such  that  the  rays  of  light
which come from a luminous point are collected


48  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY,

again  at  one  point  on  the  retina,  and  that  the  differ-
ent points  of  the  image,  which  originate  here,  assume
the  same  reciprocal  relation  toward  one  another  as
the  points  of  the  object  outside  of  us,  to  which  they
correspond.  Without  doubt,  this  so-called  '  image  of
the  object,'  so  carefully  prepared,  is  an  indispensable
condition  of  our  being  able  mentally  to  present  the
object  in  its  true  form  and  position.  But  it  is  the
source  of  all  the  errors  in  this  matter,  to  believe  that
the  bare  existence  of  this  image,  without  anything
else,  explains  our  idea  of  the  position  of  its  parts.
The  entire  image  is  essentially  nothing  but  a  repre-
sentative of  the  external  object,  transposed  into  the
interior  of  the  organ  of  sense  ;  and  how  we  know
and  experience  aught  of  it,  is  now  just  as  much  the
question  as  the  question  previously  was,  —  How  can
we  perceive  the  external  object .''

§  29.  If  one  wished  to  conceive  of  the  soul  itself
as  an  extended  being,  then  the  impressions  on  the
retina  would,  of  course,  be  able  to  transplant  them-
selves, with  all  their  geometrical  regularity,  to  the
soul.  One  point  of  the  soul  would  be  excited  as
green,  the  other  red,  a  third  yellow  ;  and  these  three
would  lie  at  the  corners  of  a  triangle  precisely  in  the
same  way  as  the  three  corresponding  excitations  on
the  retina.


EXTENSION IN THE SOUL.  49


It  is  also  obvious,  however,  that  there  is  no  real
eain  in  all  this.  The  bare  fact  that  three  differ-
ent  points  of  the  soul  are  excited  is,  primarily,  a  dis-
connected three-fold  fact.  A  knowledge  thereof,
however,  and  therefore  a  knowledge  of  this  three-fold-
ness,  and  of  the  reciprocal  positions  of  the  three
points,  is,  nevertheless,  by  no  means  given  in  this
way  :  but  such  knowledge  could  be  brought  about
only  by  means  of  a  uniting  and  relating  activity;
and  this  itself,  like  every  activity,  would  be  per-
fectly foreign  to  all  predicates  of  extension  and
magnitudes  in  space.

§  30.  The  same  thought  is  more  immediately  obvi-
ous if  we  surrender  this  useless  notion  of  the  soul
being  extended,  and  consider  it  as  a  supersensible
essence,  which,  in  case  we  wish  to  bring  it  at  all
into  connection  with  spatial  determinations,  could
be  represented  only  as  an  indivisible  point.

On  making  the  transition  into  this  indivisible
point,  the  manifold  impressions  must  obviously  lose
all  the  geometrical  relations  which  they  might  still
have  upon  the  extended  retina, — just  in  the  same
way  as  the  rays  of  light,  which  converge  at  the
single  focus  of  a  lens,  are  not  side  by  side  with  one
another,  but  only  all  together,  in  this  point.  Beyond
the  focus,  the  rays  diverge  in  the  same  order  as  that


50  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

in  which  they  entered  it.  Nothing  analogous  to
this,  however,  happens  in  our  consciousness  ;  that
is  to  say,  the  many  impressions,  which  were  pre-
viously side  by  side  with  one  another,  do  not  actually
again  separate  from  each  other ;  but,  instead  of  this,
the  aforesaid  activity  of  mental  presentation  simply
occurs,  and  it  transposes  their  images  to  different
places  in  the  space  that  is  only  '  intuited  '  by  it.

Here,  too,  the  previous  observation  holds  good :
The  mental  presentation  is  not  that  which  it  pre-
sents ;  and  the  idea  of  a  point  on  the  left  does  not  lie
on  the  left  of  the  idea  of  a  point  on  the  right ;  but  of
one  mental  presentation,  which  in  itself  has  no  spa-
tial properties  whatever,  both  points  are  merely
themselves  so  presented  before  the  mind,  as  though
one  lay  to  the  left,  the  other  to  the  right.

§  31.  The  following  result  now  stands  before  us  :
Many  impressions  exist  conjointly  in  the  soul,  al-
though not  spatially  side  by  side  with  one  another;
but  they  are  merely  together  in  the  same  way  as  the
synchronous  tones  of  a  chord  ;  that  is  to  say,  quali-
tatively different,  but  not  side  by  side  with,  above
or  below,  one  another.  Notwithstanding,  the  mental
presentation  of  a  spatial  order  must  be  produced
again  from  these  impressions.  The  question  is,
therefore,  in  the  first  place,  to  be raised  : How  in


ORIGIN OF SPATIAL CONCEPTS.  5 1

general  does  the  soul  come  to  apprehend  these
impressions,  not  in  the  form  in  which  they  actually
are,  —  to  wit,  non-spatial,  —  but  as  they  are  not,  in
a  spatial  juxtaposition?

The  satisfactory  reason  obviously  cannot  lie  in  the
impressions  themselves,  but  must  lie  solely  in  the
nature  of  the  soul  in  which  they  appear,  and  upon
which  they  themselves  act  simply  as  stimuli.

On  this  account,  it  is  customary  to  ascribe  to  the
soul  this  tendency  to  form  an  intuition  of  space,  as
an  originally  inborn  capacity.  And  indeed  we  are
compelled  to  rest  satisfied  with  this.  All  the  '  deduc-
tions '  of  space,  hitherto  attempted,  which  have  tried
to  show  on  what  ground  it  is  necessary  to  the  nature
of  the  soul  to  develop  this  intuition  of  space,  have
utterly  failed  of  success.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to
complain  over  this  matter  ;  for  the  simplest  modes  of
the  experience  of  the  soul  must  always  merely  be
recognized  as  given  facts, — just  as,  for  example,
no  one  seriously  asks  why  we  only  hear,  and  do
not  rather  taste,  the  waves  of  air.

§  32.  The  second  question  is  much  more  impor-
tant. Let  it  be  assumed  that  the  soul  once  for  all
lies  under  the  necessity  of  mentally  presenting  a
certain  manifold  as  in  juxtaposition  in  space ;  How
does  it  come  to  localize  every  individual  impression


52  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

at  a  definite  j^lacc  in  the  space  intuited  by  it,  in  such
manner  that  the  entire  image  thus  intuited  is  similar
to  the  external  object  which  acted  on  the  eye?

Obviously,  such  a  clue  must  lie  in  the  impressions
themselves.  The  simple  quality  of  the  sensation
'  green  '  or  '  red  '  does  not,  however,  contain  it ;  for
every  such  color  can  in  turn  appear  at  every  point  in
space,  and  on  this  account  does  not,  of  itself,  require
always  to  be  referred  to  the  one  definite  point.

We  now  remind  ourselves,  however,  that  the  care-
fulness with  which  the  regular  position  on  the  retina
of  the  particular  excitations  is  secured,  cannot  be
without  a  purpose.  To  be  sure,  an  impression  is
not  scat  at  a  definite  point  on  account  of  its  being
situated  at  such  point  ;  but  it  may  perhaps  by
means  of  this  definite  situation  act  on  the  soul
otherwise  than  if  it  were  elsewhere  situated.

Accordingly  we  conceive  of  this  in  the  follow-
ing way  :  Every  impression  of  color  r  —  for  exam-
ple, red  —  produces  on  all  places  of  the  retina,
which  it  reaches,  the  same  sensation  of  redness.
In  addition  to  this,  however,  it  produces  on  each
of  these  different  places,  a,  b,  c,  a  certain  accessory
impression,  a,  p,  7,  which  is  independent  of  the
nature  of  the  color  seen,  and  dependent  merely
on  the  nature  of  the  place  excited.  This  second
local  impression  would  therefore  be  associated  with


THEORY OF LOCAL SIGNS.  53

every  impression  of  color  r,  in  such  manner  that
ra  signifies  a  red  that  acts  on  the  point  a,  rp  sig-
nifies the  same  red  in  case  it  acts  on  the  point  b.
These  associated  accessory  impressions  would,  ac-
cordingly, render  for  the  soul  the  clue,  by  following
which  it  transposes  the  same  red,  now  to  one,  now
to  another  spot,  or  simultaneously  to  different  spots
in  the  space  intuited  by  it.

In  order,  however,  that  this  may  take  place  in  a
methodical  way,  these  accessory  impressions  must
be  completely  different  from  the  main  impressions,
the  colors,  and  must  not  disturb  the  latter.  They
must  be,  however,  not  merely  of  the  same  kind
among  themselves,  but  wholly  definite  members  of
a  series  or  a  system  of  series  ;  so  that  for  every
impression  r  there  may  be  assigned,  by  the  aid  of
this  adjoined  'local  sign,'  not  merely  a  particular,
but  a  quite  definite  spot  among  all  the  rest  of  the
impressions.

§  33.  The  foregoing  is  the  theory  of  'Local
Signs'  Their  fundamental  thought  consists  in  this,
that  all  spatial  differences  and  relations  among  the
impressions  on  the  retina  must  be  compensated  for
by  corresponding  non-spatial  and  merely  intensive
relations  among  the  impressions  which  exist  to-
gether without space-form in the soul  ; and that


54  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

from  them  in  reverse  order  there  must  arise,  not
a  new  actual  arrangement  of  these  impressions
in  extension,  but  only  the  mental  presentation  of
such  an  arrangement  in  us.  To  such  an  extent  do
we  hold  this  principle  to  be  a  necessary  one.

On  the  contrary,  only  hypotheses  are  possible  in
order  to  answer  the  question.  In  what  do  those
accessory  impressions  requisite  consist,  so  far  as
the  sense  of  sight  is  concerned  ?  We  propose  the
following  conjecture  :  —

In  case  a  bright  light  falls  upon  a  lateral  part
of  the  retina,  on  which — as  is  well  known — the
sensitiveness  to  impressions  is  more  obtuse  than
in  the  middle  of  the  retina,  then  there  follows  a
rotation  of  the  eye  until  the  most  sensitive  middle
part  of  the  retina,  as  the  receptive  organ,  is  brought
beneath  this  light :  we  are  accustomed  to  style
this  the  "fixation  of  vision"  upon  the  aforesaid
light.  Such  motion  happens  involuntarily,  without
any  original  cognition  of  its  purpose,  and  uniformly
without  cognition  of  the  means  by  which  it  is
brought  about.  We  may  therefore  reckon  it  among
the  so-called  reflex  motions,  which  originate  by
means  of  an  excitation  of  one  nerve,  that  serves  at
other  times  for  sensation,  being  transplanted  to
motor  nerves  without  any  further  assistance  from
the  soul  and  in  accordance  with  the  pre-existing  ana-


THEORY OF LOCAL SIGNS.  55

tomical  connections  ;  and  these  latter  nerves  being
therefore  stimulated  to  execute  a  definite  motion  in
a  perfectly  mechanical  way.  Now  in  order  to
execute  such  a  rotation  of  the  eye  as  serves  the
purpose  previously  alluded  to,  every  single  spot
in  the  retina,  in  case  it  is  stimulated,  must  occasion
a  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  aforesaid  rota-
tion peculiar  to  it  alone.  But  at  the  same  time  all
these  rotations  of  the  eye  would  be  perfectly  com-
parable motions,  and,  of  course,  members  of  a
system  of  series  that  are  graded  according  to  mag-
nitude and  direction.

§  34.  The  application  of  the  foregoing  hypothesis
(many  more  minute  particular  questions  being  dis-
regarded) we  conceive  of  as  follows  :  —  In  case  a
bright  light  falls  upon  a  lateral  point  P  of  a  retina,
which  has  not  yet  had  any  sensation  of  light  what-
ever, then  there  arises,  in  consequence  of  the  con-
nection in  the  excitation  of  the  nerves,  such  a  rota-
tion of  the  eye  as  that,  instead  of  the  place  P,
the  place  E  of  clearest  vision  is  brought  beneath
the  approaching  stimulus  of  the  light.  Now  while
the  eye  is  passing  through  the  arc  PE,  the  soul
receives  at  each  instant  a  feeling  of  its  momentary
position,  —  a  feeling  of  the  same  kind  as  that  by
which  we are,  when  in  the  dark,  informed  of  the


56  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

position  of  our  limbs.  To  the  arc  PE  there  corre-
sponds then  a  series  of  constantly  changing  feelings
of  position,  the  first  member  of  which  we  call  ir,
and  the  last  of  which  we  call  i.

If  now,  in  a  second  instance,  the  place  P  is  again
stimulated  by  the  light,  then  there  originates  not
simply  the  rotation  PE  for  a  second  time,  but  the
initial  member  of  the  series  of  feelings  of  position,
IT,  reproduces  in  memory  the  entire  series  asso-
ciated with  it,  irt;  and  this  series  of  mental  pre-
sentations is  independent  of  the  fact  that  at  the
same  time  also  the  rotation  of  the  eye  PE  actually
follows.

Exactly  the  same  thing  would  hold  good  of
another  point  R ;  only  the  arc  RE,  the  series  of
feelings  pe,  and  also  the  initial  member  of  the  series,
P,  would  have  other  values.

Now  finally,  in  case  it  came  about  that  both
places,  P  and  R,  were  simultaneously  stimulated
with  an  equal  intensity,  and  that  the  arcs  PE  and
RE  were  equal  but  in  opposite  directions  to  each
other,  then  the  actual  rotation  of  the  eye  PE  and
RE  could  not  take  place  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the
excitation  upon  the  places  P  and  R  is  nevertheless
not  without  effect ;  each  reproduces  the  series  of
feelings  of  position  belonging  to  it,  —  respectively,
w€ and p€. Although therefore the eye does not


THEORY OF LOCAL SIGNS.  $7

now  move,  yet  there  is  connected  with  every  exci-
tation of  the  places  P  and  R  the  mental  presen-
tation  of  the  magnitude  and  of  the  qualitative
peculiarity  of  a  series  of  changes,  which  conscious-
ness or  the  common  feeling  would  have  to  expe-
rience, in  order  that  these  excitations  may  fall  upon
the  place  of  clearest  vision,  or,  according  to  the
customary  expression,  in  the  line  of  vision.

And  now  we  assert  that  to  see  anything  'to  the
right  'or  'to  the  left '  of  this  line  of  vision  means
nothing  more  than  this,  to  be  conscious  of  the
magnitude  of  the  achievement  which  would  be
necessary  to  bring  the  object  into  this  line.

§  35.  By  the  foregoing  considerations  nothing
further  would  be  established  than  the  relative
position  of  the  single  colored  points  in  the  field  of
vision.  The  entire  image,  on  the  contrary,  would
still  have  no  place  at  all  in  a  yet  larger  space  ;
indeed,  even  the  mental  presentation  of  such  a
place  would  as  yet  have  no  existence.

Now  this  image  first  attains  a  place  with  refer-
ence to  the  eye,  the  repeated  opening  and  clos-
ing of  which,  since  it  can  become  known  to  us  in
another  way,  is  the  condition  of  its  existence  or
non-existence.  That  is  to  say,  the  visible  world
is in  front  before our eyes. What is behind us


58  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

not  merely  has  no  existence  whatever  for  us,  but
we  do  not  once  know  that  there  is  anything  which
should  be  called  '  behind.'

The  motions  of  the  body  lead  us  further.  If  the
field  of  vision  in  a  position  of  rest  contains  from
left  to  right  the  images  a  be,  and  we  then  turn
ourselves  to  the  right  upon  our  axis,  a  vanishes,
but  d  appears  on  the  right,  and  therefore  the  images
bed,  ede,  def,  .  .  .  xyz,  yza,  zab,  a  be,  succeed  in
order.  As  a  result  of  such  recurrence  of  the  images
with  which  we  began,  the  two  following  thoughts
originate  ;  namely,  that  the  visible  world  of  objects
exists  in  a  closed  circuit  of  extension  about  us,  and
that  the  alteration  of  our  own  position,  which
we  perceive  by  means  of  the  changing  feelings  of
position  while  turning,  depends  upon  an  alteration
of  our  relation  to  this  immovable  world  of  objects, —
that  is  to  say,  upon  a  motion.

It  is  easily  understood  that  the  mental  picture
of  a  spherical  extension  originates  from  the  afore-
said mental  picture  of  a  closed  horizon  by  means
of  repeatedly  turning  in  a  similar  way  in  various
other  directions.

§  36.  But,  nevertheless,  this  spl^erical  surface  also
would  always  have  only  a  superficial  extension ;
no  intimation  would  as  yet  exist  of  a  deptJi  to  space.


KNOWLEDGE OF A THIRD DIMExNSION.  59


Now  the  mental  presentation,  to  the  effect  that
something  like  a  third  dimension  of  space  in  general
exists,  cannot  originate  of  itself,  but  only  through
the  experience  which  we  have  in  case  we  move
about  among  the  visible  objects.  From  the  manifold
displacements  which  the  particular  visual  images
experience,  in  a  manner  that  is  tedious  to  describe
but  very  easy  to  imagine,  we  gain  the  impression,
that  each  line  in  an  image  originally  seen  is  the
beginning  of  new  surfaces  which  do  not  coincide
with  that  previously  seen,  but  which  lead  out  into
this  space,  now  extended  on  all  sides,  to  greater
or  less  distances  from  the  line.

Another  question  to  be  treated  subsequently  is
this:  By  what  means  do  we  estimate  the  different
magnitudes  of  the  distance  into  this  depth  of
space }

§  37.  The  crossing  of  the  rays  of  light  in  the  nar-
row opening  of  the  pupil  is  the  cause  of  the  image  of
the  upper  points  of  the  object  being  formed  beneath,
that  of  the  lower  points  above  on  the  retina ;  and  of
the  whole  picture  having  therefore  a  position  the
reverse  of  the  object.  But  it  is  a  prejudice  on  this
account  to  consider  seeing  in  inverse  position  to  be
natural,  and  seeing  in  upright  position  to  be  mysteri-
ous. Like  every  geometrical  property  of  the  image,


60  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

SO  this  one  of  its  position,  too,  on  passing  into  con-
sciousness, is  completely  lost ;  and  the  position  in
which  we  see  things  is  in  no  way  prejudiced  by  the
aforesaid  position  of  the  image  on  the  retina.

Now,  however,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to
ascribe  to  objects  a  position  at  all,  in  order  therefore
that  the  expressions  '  above,'  '  below,'  '  upright,'  and
'  inverted,'  may  have  a  meaning,  we  must  have,  inde-
pendent of  all  sensation  by  sight,  a  mental  picture  of
a  space  in  which  the  entire  content  of  the  field  of
vision  shall  be  arranged,  and  in  which  '  above  '  and
'  below '  are  two  qualitatively  opposite  and,  on  this
account,  not  exchangeable  directions.

The  muscular  feeling  affords  us  such  a  mental
presentation.  '  Below '  is  the  place  toward  which
the  direction  of  gravity  moves;  'above,'  the  opposite.
Both  directions  are  distinguished  perfectly  for  us  by
means  of  an  immediate  feeling  ;  and,  on  this  account,
we  are  never  deceived  even  in  the  dark  about  the
position  and  situation  of  our  body.

Accordingly  we  see  objects  'upright'  in  case  the
lower  points  of  the  object  are  reached  by  one  and
the  same  movement  of  the  eyes  simultaneously
with  those  points  of  our  own  body  which  are
'below'  according  to  the  testimony  of  the  aforesaid
muscular  feeling  ;  and  the  upper  points  by  a  move-
ment which, according to the same testimony,


CAUSE OF SINGLE VISION.  6 1

renders  visible  simultaneously  the  upper  parts  of  our
own  selves.

Now  it  is  exactly  such  agreement  that  is  secured
in  our  eye,  in  which  the  axis  lies  in  front  of  the
sensitive  retina,  by  means  of  the  inverted  position  of
the  retinal  image.  In  an  other  eye,  in  which  the
sensitive  surface  should  be  placed  in  front  of  the
axis,  and  yet  the  greatest  sensitiveness  also  should
appear  in  the  middle  portion  of  that  surface,  the
retinal  image  would  have  to  stand  upright  to  serve
the  same  purpose.

§  38.  The  final  and  valid  answer  to  the  question,
why  we  have  single  vision  with  two  eyes,  is  not  to  be
given.  As  is  well  known,  it  does  not  always  happen.
The  rather  must  two  impressions  fall  on  two  quite
definite  points  of  the  retina  in  order  to  coalesce.
We  see  double,  on  the  contrary,  if  they  fall  on  other
points.  Naturally,  we  shall  say:  The  two  places  which
belong  together  would  have  to  impart  like  local  signs
to  their  impressions,  and  thereby  render  them  indis-
tinguishable ;  but  we  are  not  able  to  demonstrate  in
what  manner  this  postulate  is  fulfilled.  Physiology,
too,  in  the  last  analysis,  satisfies  itself  with  a  mere
term  for  the  fact ;  it  calls  *  identical '  those  places  in
both  retinas  which  give  one  simple  impression,  and
'non-identical '  those  which  give  a  double  impression.


62  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


§  39.  Irritations  of  the  skin  wc  naturally  refer  at
once  to  the  place  of  the  skin  on  which  we  see  them
acting.  But  in  case  of  their  repetition,  when  we  are
not  able  to  see  them,  we  have  no  assistance  from  re-
membering them  ;  for  the  most  ordinary  stimuli  have
already  in  the  course  of  our  life  touched  all  possible
places  of  the  skin,  and  could  therefore  now  as  well  be
referred  to  one  place  as  to  another.  In  order  that  they
may  be  correctly  localized,  they  would  have  at  every
instant  to  tell  us  anew  where  they  belong ;  that  is  to
say,  there  must  be  attached  to  the  main  impression
(impact,  pressure,  heat  or  cold)  an  au.xiliary  impres-
sion which  is  independent  of  the  latter  and,  on  the
contrary,  dependent  on  the  place  of  the  skin  that  is
irritated.

The  skin  can  supply  such  local  signs  ;  for  since  it
is  connected  without  interruption,  a  single  point  of
it  cannot  be  irritated  at  all,  without  the  surrounding
portion  experiencing  a  displacement,  pulling,  stretch-
ing, or  concussion  of  some  kind.  But,  further,  since
the  skin  possesses  at  different  places  a  different  thick-
ness, different  tension  or  liability  to  displacement,  —
extends  sometimes  above  the  firm  surfaces  of  the
bones,  sometimes  over  the  flesh  of  the  muscles,  som.e-
times  over  cavities  ;  since,  moreover,  the  members
being  manifold,  these  relations  change  frojii  one
stretch  of  skin  to  another ;  therefore the  aforesaid


THE FINENESS OF TOUCH.  63

sum  of  secondary  effects  around  the  point  irritated
will  be  different  for  each  one  from  the  remainder ;
and  such  effects,  if  they  are  taken  up  by  the  nerve-
endings  and  act  on  consciousness,  may  occasion  the
feelings  so  difficult  to  describe,  according  to  which
we  distinguish  a  contact  at  one  place  from  the  same
contact  at  another.

It  cannot  be  said,  however,  that  each  point  of  the
skin  has  its  special  local  sign.  It  is  known  from  the
investigations  of  E.  H.  Weber,  that  on  the  margin  of
the  lips,  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  the  tips  of  the  fingers,
being  touched  in  two  places  (by  the  points  of  a  pair
of  compasses)  can  be  distinguished  as  two  at  an
interval  of  only  |  line  ;  while  there  are  places  on
the  arms,  legs,  and  on  the  back,  which  require  for
making  the  distinction  a  distance  between  them  of
as  much  as  20  lines.  We  interpret  this  in  the
following  way.  Where  the  structure  of  the  skin
changes  little  for  long  stretches,  the  local  signs  also
alter  only  a  little  from  point  to  point.  And  if  two
stimuli  act  simultaneously,  and  accordingly  a  recipro-
cal disturbance  of  these  secondary  effects  occurs,  they
will  be  undistinguishable  ;  on  the  contrary,  in  cases
where  both  stimuli  act  successively,  and  therefore  the
aforesaid  disturbance  ceases,  both  are  still  frequently
distinguishable.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  nothing
further  to  allege  as  to  how  the  extraordinary  sensitive-
ness—  for  example  —  of  the  lips  is  occasioned.


64  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


§  40.  The  preceding  statement  merely  explains
the  possibility  of  distinguishing  impressions  made
at  different  places  ;  but  each  impression  must  also
be  referred  to  the  definite  place  at  which  it  acts.

This  is  easy  for  one  who  sees,  since  he  already
possesses  a  picture  of  the  surface  of  his  own  body  ;
and,  on  this  account,  he  now  by  means  of  the
unchanging  local  sign,  even  in  the  dark,  translates
each  stimulus  which  he  has  once  seen  act  on  a
definite  place,  to  the  same  place  in  this  picture
of  the  body  that  is  mentally  presented  before  him.
One  born  blind  would  be  compelled  to  construct
such  a  picture  first  by  means  of  the  sense  of  touch  ;
and  this  naturally  is  accomplished  through  motions
of  the  tactual  members  and  by  estimating  the  dis-
tances which  they  would  have  to  travel  in  order  to
reach  from  contact  at  the  point  a  to  contact  at  the
other  point  h.  It  is  to  be  considered,  however,
that  these  motions  —  which  in  this  case  are  not
seen  —  are  perceivable  only  by  so-called  muscular
feelings ;  —  that  is  to  say,  by  feelings  which  in
themselves  are  merely  certain  species  of  the  way
we  feci,  and  do  not  of  themselves  at  all  indicate  the
motions  which  are  in  fact  the  causes  of  them.

Now  it  cannot  be  described,  how  it  is  that  this
interpretation  of  the  muscular  feelings  actually
originates  in  the  case  of  those  born  blind  ;  but  the


SPACE IN ONE BORN BLIND.  6$

helps  which  lead  to  it  are  very  probably  found  in
the  fact,  that  the  sense  of  touch  as  well  as  the  eye
can  receive  many  impressions  simultaneously,  and
that,  in  case  of  a  movement,  the  previous  impres-
sion does  not  vanish  without  trace  and  have  its
place  taken  by  a  wholly  new  one  ;  but  that,  in  the
manner  previously  alleged,  the  combinations  a  be,
bed,  etc.,  follow  one  another,  and  therefore  some
part  in  common  is  always  left  over  for  the  next  two
impressions.  By  this  alone  does  it  seem  possible  to
awaken  the  idea  that  the  same  occurrence,  from
which  the  series  of  changeable  muscular  feelings
originates  for  us,  consists  in  an  alteration  of  our
relation  to  a  series  of  objects  previously  existent
side  by  side  and  to  be  found  arranged  in  a  definite
order ;  it  consists,  therefore,  in  a  motion.

§  41.  It  is  questionable  whether  the  mental  pic-
ture of  space  which  one  born  blind  attains  solely  by
the  sense  of  touch  will  be  altogether  like  that  of
one  who  sees  ;  it  is  rather  to  be  assumed  that  a
much  less  intuitable  system  of  mental  presenta-
tions of  time,  of  the  magnitude  of  motion,  and  of
the  exertion  which  is  needed  in  order  to  reach
from  contact  at  one  point  to  that  at  another,  takes
the  place  of  the  clear,  easy,  and  at  once  all-com-
prehending intuition,  with  which  he  who  sees  is
endowed.


CHAPTER  V.

OF  THE  APPREHENSION  OF  THE  WORLD  BY  THE

SENSES,  AND  OF  ERRORS  OF  SENSE.

§  42.  A  simple  impression  of  sense  represents
only  itself,  and  tells  nothing  concerning  the  '  Things  '
to  which  it  belongs,  —  either  as  property,  state,  or
action.  This  further  interpretation  is  certainly,  as
the  saying  is,  an  affair  of  the  Understanding ;  and
it  is  the  understanding  that  is  deceived  in  case  it
permits  itself  to  be  led  astray  by  means  of  a  mental
presentation  a,  which  it  previously,  under  secondary
conditions  (c)  imperfectly  apprehended,  found  com-
bined with  a  presentation  b,  so  as  to  think  an  a,
when  repeated  under  other  conditions  d,  to  be
connected  with  the  same  b.

But  the  senses  are  not  always  so  innocent.  The
eye,  for  example,  when  it  pictures  the  world  as
extended  in  three  dimensions  on  a  plane,  gives  us
absolutely  false  relations  between  the  images  of  the
single  objects.  In  this  case,  therefore,  in  which
sense  yields  what  is  false,  while  the  intellect  must
furnish  the  corrections,  we  have  a  right  to  speak  of
"errors of sense." Under this class belong,  for


WRONG ESTIMATES OF MAGNITUDE.  6/

example,  the  incorrect  diminishing  of  remote  objects,
the  convergence  of  parallel  lines  in  the  distance,  the
elevation  of  the  level  of  the  sea  above  the  coast,  —
pure  phenomena  which  persist  for  the  intuitions  of
sense,  even  after  the  intellect  is  no  longer  uncer-
tain concerning  the  true  state  of  affairs.

§  43.  The  same  magnitudes  of  space  we  estimate
as  greater  when  they  are  bright-colored  ;  smaller,
when  they  are  dark.  The  surface  filled  with  mani-
fold objects  appears  larger  to  the  eye  ;  the  empty
one,  smaller.  To  the  sense  of  touch  the  rough
surface  appears  larger  than  the  smooth.  In  that
direction  which  is  made  prominent  by  a  manifold
repetition  of  lines,  things  appear  to  extend  farther
than  they  actually  do.  All  this  is  made  use  of  in
manifold  ways  by  the  decorative  arts.

Distances  we  estimate  (very  indefinitely)  as  smaller
for  bright  objects,  larger  for  the  dark  ones ;  (much
more  accurately)  as  smaller  so  long  as  the  interior
delineation  of  things  continues  to  be  clear,  larger
in  case  it  makes  a  confused  impression  as  a  whole.

We  principally  employ,  however,  three  factors ;
the  actual  magnitude  of  a  thing,  its  apparent  mag-
nitude, and  the  distance,  in  order  from  two  of  them
to  ascertain  the  third.  If  the  true  magnitude  is
given  (for  example,  by  our  knowing  that  the  object


68  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

in  question  is  a  man  or  a  child)  and  likewise  the
apparent  magnitude,  then  we  estimate  the  distance
as  so  much  the  greater  the  smaller  the  second  is
in  comparison  with  the  first.  If  we  know,  besides
the  apparent  magnitude,  the  distance,  then  we
can  reckon  the  actual  magnitude  in  the  same  way.
Finally,  if  we  know  the  true  magnitude  and  the
distance,  then  we  can  find  the  apparent  magnitude,
which  —  for  example  —  painting  must  give  to  the
picture  of  an  object,  in  order  to  make  it  appear  at
this  distance.  But  where  objects  —  for  example,
mountains  and  watercourses  —  have  no  natural
measure,  and  therefore  merely  the  apparent  magni-
tude is  given,  we  can  make  a  conclusion  with  some
accuracy  to  the  actual  magnitude  and  the  distance
directly,  only  by  separating  the  latter  into  parts,  and
estimating  each  one  of  them  according  to  the  rela-
tion of  the  apparent  magnitude  of  some  well-known
object  found  in  them,  to  its  true  magnitude.

A  very  important  means,  finally,  is  the  parallax,
—  that  is  to  say,  the  magnitude  of  the  displacement
which  the  image  of  an  object  C  experiences  as  seen
against  points  definitely  marked,  P,  Q,  R,  on  an  im-
movable background,  in  case  we  consider  it  from
the  two  terminal  points,  A  and  B,  of  a  line  AB.  It
is  greater  for  nearer,  and  smaller  for  more  remote
objects. We  daily  employ  this  means  of  assistance,


COMPARISON OF SENSATIONS  69

since  we  fixate  the  object  alternately  with  one  eye
or  the  other,  or  incline  the  head  to  the  right  and
left,  or  actually  move  hither  and  thither.  Science
has  made  manifold  use  of  this  means,  since  it  per-
forms this  experiment  carefully  and  with  the  addi-
tional help  of  finer  instruments  of  measurement.

§  44.  The  comparison  of  sensible  qualities  (colors,
tones,  tastes,  degrees  of  heat)  requires  a  certain  mod-
erateness of  the  impression,  whether  it  be  intensity,
or  extension  in  space,  or  duration  in  time.  It  requires,
besides,  that  the  testing  organ  be  the  same  through-
out, in  order  that  the  different  local  signs  of  different
organs  may  not  modify  the  impressions.  Accord-
ingly, we  do  not  test  the  heat  of  two  bodies  of  water
with  two  fingers  simultaneously,  but  successively
with  the  same  finger,  etc.  In  such  cases  the  other
snare  is  to  be  shunned,  —  that  of  taking  the  interval
too  great  to  leave  both  impressions  still  lively  enough
in  consciousness,  or  too  small,  so  that  the  after-effects
of  the  first  impression  are  mingled  with  the  second.

These  after-effects  are  of  a  two-fold  kind.  If  they
are  strong  and  recent,  they  obscure  the  second
impicssion.  But  very  frequently,  and  in  different
sen!^)^s,  the  other  result  also  occurs,  —  namely,
that  a  nerve  which  has  been  for  a  considerable  time
thrown into the same one-sided excitation by an


70  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


impression  a,  after  the  cessation  of  this  stimulus,
assumes  of  itself  another  form  of  excitation  through
which  it  returns  to  its  impartial  condition  of  equi-
librium. These  counter-excitations  also  produce
sensations.  Thus,  for  example,  an  eye  that  has
been  a  long  time  busy  with  green,  red,  or  yellow,
subsequently  sees  the  complementary  colors,  —  red,
green,  and  violet.  In  the  domain  of  the  sense  of
touch  and  of  the  muscular  feeling,  as  well,  these
'  sensations  of  contrast '  occur.

§  45.  We  hold  an  object  to  be  moved,  the  image
of  which  tra\-els  over  our  retina.  And  such  an
appearance  takes  place,  not  merely  in  case  we  are
moving  through  the  objects  with  a  perfectly  passive
motion  (for  example,  sailing  on  a  vessel),  but  also
in  case  we  are  moving  through  them  in  the  con-
sciousness of  our  actual  motion  and  in  the  convic-
tion that  they  are  unmoved.  Naturally  the  apparent
aiotion  of  the  objects  has  then  the  opposite  direction
io  our  own.

The  well-known  rotating  motion,  with  which
objects  hasten  by  us  after  we  have  been  for  a  long
iime  rotating  on  the  axis  of  our  body  and  then
immediately  stand  still,  appears  to  have  its  basis  in
this,  that  the  eyes  unconsciously  to  ourselves  still
follow  for  some  time  the  direction  in  which  the  body


FEELINGS OF DOUBLE CONTACT.  "Jl

previously  turned,  and  when  they  have  reached  the
extreme  angle  of  vision  immediately  turn  back  to
begin  anew  the  same  course.  Therefore  it  is  always
the  same  objects  which  ceaselessly  pass  by  before
us  without  vanishing  from  sight.

§  46.  In  case  some  object  or  other  (for  example,  a
stick)  is  brought  into  a  rather  loose  connection  with
our  body  (for  example,  the  hand),  such  as  admits  of
displacements  of  its  position,  then  at  each  momen-
tary position  a  new  and  special  combination  of  sen-
sations of  pressure  (for  example,  on  the  different
fingers)  is  occasioned.  In  accordance  with  earlier
experiences  which  we  have  had,  we  form  for  ourselves
out  of  each  such  combination  a  mental  picture  of  the
position  which  the  object  (the  stick)  has  at  the  mo-
ment. Now  if  it  discovers  in  all  positions  the  same
resistance  to  an  external  object,  and  if  also  this
pressure  by  the  stick  acts  constantly  on  our  hand,
then  we  not  only  transfer  the  seat  of  this  resistance
to  the  common  point  of  intersection  of  all  these  suc-
cessive positions,  but  we  believe  with  an  altogether
immediate  perspicuity  that  we  have  a  direct  sensa-
tion of  it  at  the  spot  where  the  resistance  is  accom-
plished, exactly  as  though  we  were  just  as  much
present,  with  our  capacity  for  sensation,  at  the  end
of  this  stick,  as  in  the  surface  of  the  hand  where
the  other  end  of  the  stick  is  pressing.


72  OUTLINES OF I'SYCHOLOGY.

These  feelings  of  'double  contact,'  which  occur
in  almost  innumerable  examples,  introduce  into  our
mental  presentations  uf  external  things  a  very  pecu-
liar life-likeness.  Above  all  do  they  alone  avail  to
make  possible  the  serviceable  use  of  many  tools,  —
for  example,  j:) robes,  knifes,  forks,  pens ;  since  we
believe  that  by  means  of  them  we  perceive  the
resistances  or  hinderances  which  these  instruments
find  at  the  surface  of  their  objects,  quite  directly
ill  loco ;  and  since  we  are  able  to  apply  the  counter
means  that  are  each  moment  appropriate.  They  are
further  instructive  concerning  many  properties  of
things,  —  for  example,  concerning  the  length  of
a  balanced  i)ole,  concerning  the  breadth  of  a  ladder-
rung  when  stepped  on,  concerning  the  length  of  the
thread  fastened  to  which  a  ball  is  swung  round  in
a  circle.  Finally,  they  give  us  in  general  the  agree-
able feeling  of  our  spiritual  presence  being  ex-
tended beyond  the  real  limits  of  our  body ;  and
this  is  the  reason  for  the  many,  in  part  elegant,
and  in  part  bizarre,  movable  additions  or  appendages
lo  our  bodies,  of  which  the  passion  for  dress  is  wont
to  avail  itself.


CHAPTER VI.


THE FEELINGS.


§  47.  We  apply  the  name  '  Feelings  '  exclusively
to  states  of  pleasure  and  pain,  in  contrast  with
sensations  as  indifferent  perceptions  of  a  certain
content.

We  do  not  thereby  assert  that  these  two  spiritual
performances  occur  separate  from  each  other  ;  we
find  it  much  more  probable  that  primarily  no  mental
presentation  is  completely  indifferent,  and  that  rather
the  value  of  pleasure  or  pain  attached  to  it  only
escapes  our  attention,  because,  in  educated  life  the
meaning,  and  the  significance,  which  the  impres-
sions have  for  our  purposes  in  life,  has  become  more
important  to  us  than  the  consideration  of  the  im-
pression  itself.

On  the  other  hand,  we  adhere  to  the  statement
that,  judged  by  the  very  notion  of  them,  sensations
and  feelings  are  two  different  performances  which,
although  always  connected,  are  nevertheless,  not  de-
ducible  from  each  other.  A  mere  relation  of  some
sort  between  different  simultaneous  impressions  or
states  does  not, therefore, of  itself  produce  a  feel-


74  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


ing  ;  this  is  done  only  by  means  of  the  relation  act-
in";  as  a  stimulus  on  the  entire  nature  of  the  soul,
and,  since  it  cncites  a  capacity  of  the  soul  of  which
\vc  have  not  previously  taken  account,  inducing  the
soul  to  a  reaction,  —  namely,  to  the  production  of
the  feeling.

§  48.  It  is  not  demonstrable,  but  a  natural  pre-
judgment, and  a  probable  hypothesis,  that  feelings
arc  the  results  and  tokens  of  the  agreement  or  dis-
agreement between  the  excitations  produced  in  us,
and  the  conditions  of  our  permanent  well-being.
Pleasure  would  therefore  depend  upon  every  encite-
ment  to  the  use  of  our  natural  capacities  within  the
limits  of  these  conditions,  and  it  would  rise  in  de-
gree with  the  intensity  of  these  cncitements  ;  on
the  contrary,  pain  would  depend  upon  the  fact  that
the  excitations  suffered  are  at  strife  with  the
aforesaid  conditions,  in  part  as  respects  their
strength,  and  in  part  also,  as  respects  their  form
(a  thing  commonly  overlooked).

The  foregoing  statement  does  not  mean  that
the  soul  first  observes  the  excitations,  and  then  their
relation  with  respect  to  these  conditions  ;  and  finally,
according  to  its  view  of  these  acts,  decides  whether
to  experience  pleasure  or  pain.  The  rather,  just  as
sensation  —  for  example,  that  of  red  —  is  merely
the  result of a series of processes  in  the  nerves,


THE FEELINGS OF SENSE.  75

but  tells  US  nothing  whatever  concerning  these
processes  ;  so  is  feeling  simply  the  last  result  of
the  aforesaid  strife  or  concord,  and  it  only  makes
its  appearance  in  consciousness  after  these  uncon-
scious processes.

§  49.  Pleasure  and  pain  are  general  designations,
which,  in  this  form  of  generality  (exactly  as,  for
example,  '  color,'  too)  express  nothing  actual.  The
rather  has  every  actual  pleasure  or  pain  its  own
entirely  specific  character,  and  it  can  by  no  means
be  made  up  out  of  various  component  parts  of  a
general  pleasure  and  pain  ;  just  as  the  different
colors  are  not  produced  by  different  mixtures  of
bright  and  dark.

Concerning  the  conditions,  under  which  the  feel-
ings, in  general,  or  definite  forms  of  them,  originate,
we  know  almost  nothing.

The  first  group  which  we  are  able  to  distinguish,
the  feelings  of  sense,  —  that  is  to  say,  those  directly
dependent  on  sense-stimuli,  —  are  in  the  case  of
the  different  senses  so  much  the  more  intensive,
the  less  these  senses  are  capable  of  fine  objective
perceptions.  Colors  and  their  contrasts  merely
excite  satisfaction  or  dissatisfaction  ;  dissonances  of
tones  cause  suffering  to  the  hearer  personally  ;  the
pleasure  and  pain  of  smell  and  taste  are  much  more


76  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


intensive  ;  but  it  is  only  in  the  skin,  which  of  itself
alone  furnishes  little  cognition,  and  in  the  interior
parts,  which  contribute  to  cognition  nothing  what-
ever, that  the  pain  assumes  the  character  of  physi-
cal suffering.  The  purposeful  nature  of  this  arrange-
ment is  manifest  ;  its  mechanical  basis  is  unknown.

§  50.  These  less  intense  feelings  of  the  higher
senses  form  the  transition  to  a  second  class,  tJic
(EstJietic  feelings,  which  are  not  quite  exclusively,
but  in  the  main,  attached  to  a  simultaneous  mul-
tiplicity of  impressions,  and  in  the  simplest  cases,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  depend  on  the  simplicity  or
difficulty  of  the  relations  which  obtain  between
them.  The  precise  reason,  however,  on  account
of  which  this  simplicity  —  for  example,  in  the  case
of  consonant  tones  —  acts  favorably  upon  us  is
unknown  ;  for  as  a  rule  we  do  not  perceive  these
relations  of  fact  as  such.  The  character  of  these
aesthetic  feelings  of  satisfaction  and  dissatisfaction
can  be  expressed,  in  contrast  to  sensuous  comfort
or  discomfort,  by  saying  that  only  the  universal
spirit  in  us,  and  not  our  merely  personal  well-being,
is  furthered or  disturbed  by  these impressions.

In  this  class  are  included  tJic  ethical  feelings,  of
which  we  are  compelled  to  speak  on  this  account,
because moral approbation or disapprobation is


AFFECTIONS AND SENTIMENTS.  JJ

nothing  else  but  the  expression  of  a  value,  or
absence  of  value,  which  we  perceive  only  in  feel-
ing, and  which  is,  on  this  account,  totally  distinct
from  a  merely  theoretical  judgment  concerning  the
truth  or  untruth  of  a  proposition.

§  51,  A  further  description  of  the  feelings  is
useless  ;  it  is  of  use,  on  the  other  hand,  to  distin-
guish two  states  thereof.

That  is  frequently  called  feeling  which  is  more
precisely  to  be  called  '  Affection,'  and  which  does
not  consist  in  a  quiet  state  or  a  mere  disposition  of
the  mind,  but  in  a  movement  (as  in  the  case  of
rage  and  terror)  that  also  produces  disorder  in  the
train  of  ideas,  and  besides  ordinarily  includes  un-
conscious movements,  partly  mere  gestures,  and
partly  the  beginnings  of  actions  which  would  pro-
ceed from  the  inducement  given,  unless  they
should  be  restrained.

In  like  manner  must  we  distinguish  the  '  Sen-
timents,'—  that  is  to  say,  permanent  species  of
mental  constitution,  which  proceed  from  this,  that
a  definite  value  is  once  for  all  placed  upon  certain
contents  of  ideas ;  they  are,  therefore,  —  for  ex-
ample, piety  or  patriotism,  —  not  themselves  simple
definite  feelings,  but  causes  from  which  the  differ-
ent species  of  feelings  can  originate  according  to
the  nature  of  circumstances.


y8  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


§  52.  More  important  still  is  the  connection  of
feeling  with  '  Self-consciousness.'

The  latter  includes  two  things:  —  first,  that  we
form  some  picture  or  other  of  us  (similar  or  dissimi-
lar) ;  and,  secondly,  that  we  recognize  this  picture  as
the  picture  of  ourselves.

As  far  as  the  first  point  is  concerned,  we  under-
stand how  the  picture  of  our  body,  because  it  intrudes
into  the  recollection  of  all  our  experiences,  appears
as  the  point  of  issue  for  our  entire  spiritual  life  ;  and
that  other  experiences  likewise  incite  us  to  con-
ceive of  ourselves  as  not,  to  be  sure,  identical  with
the  body,  but  as  in  an  obscure  manner  connected
with  it.  Beyond  this  point  of  standing  we  do  not
get  in  ordinary  life.  It  is  science  which  first
attempts  further  to  explain  (and  such,  too,  will  be
the  task  we  set  ourselves  later  on)  this  essential
being  of  the  soul  itself  as  well  as  also  the  manner
of  its  connection  with  the  body.

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  here  met  by  the  second
question,  —  namely:  How  do  we  come  to  hold  such
a  mental  picture  when  attained,  not  as  the  picture
of  some  object  or  other,  but  as  the  picture  of  our
otvn  selves,  and  to  separate  this  'ego'  of  ours  from
all  the  rest  of  the  world  by  an  absolute  distinction
which  has  quite  another  value  than  the  distinction
of  any  other  Thing  from  a  second  or  a  third  ?


DEFINITION OF THE EGO.  JC)


It  is  obvious  that  the  foregoing  question  cannot  be
answered  by  a  definition  of  the  general  character
of  ' egohood\- — for  example,  by  the  following:  The
'Ego'  is  that  subject  which  is  at  the  same  time  its
own  object.  For  such  a  general  notion  corresponds
to  every  'ego,'  and  therefore  to  'thee'  and  to  'him  '
just  as  well  as  to  'me.'  Self-consciousness,  however,
ought  to  set  forth,  not  merely  the  general  spiritual
property  —  which  is  common  to  all  persons,  but  it
ought  to  distinguish  '  me '  from  every  other  person.

And  now  it  may  be  said  :  I  am  the  subject  of  my
world  of  thought,  and  thou  art  the  subject  of  thine.

But  to  say  this  would  be  useless,  as  long  as  we
were  not  to  possess  an  immediate  perspicuity  con-
cerning the  distinction  of  what  is  vivie  from  that
which  is  not  mine.

No  merely  theoretical  consideration  can  teach  the
aforesaid  distinction.  We  should  be  betrayed  into
an  endless  circle  if  we  should  wish  to  say,  for  exam-
ple :  Mine  is  what  I  have,  and  thine  is  what  thou
hast.

Nothing  else  remains,  therefore,  but  to  recognize
the  fact,  that  that  which  is  my  state  announces
itself,  —  in  a  manner  wholly  immediate  and  admit-
ting of  no  further  deduction,  —  as  something  in
itself  altogether  special;  —  as  something,  that  is  to
say,  which  is  distinguished  from  that  which is  not


So  OUTLINES UK I'bVLHULOGV.

my  state,  not  merely  as  this  state  foreign  to  me  is
from  a  third,  but  in  such  manner  that  we  have  ample
reason  for  separatin<;  this  state  of  our  own  from  all
else  that  occurs  in  the  world,  by  an  incomparable
distinction.

Now  what  is  referred  to  above  happens  in  real-
ity in  a  very  simple  way,  just  by  means  of  feeling.
Each  of  our  own  states,  everything  which  we  our-
selves actually  suffer,  are  sensible  of,  or  do,  is  desig-
nated by  means  of  a  feeling  being  immediately
attached  to  it  (of  pleasure,  of  pain,  of  interest,  etc.)  ;
while  this  accompaniment  is  wanting  to  that  which
we  merely  represent  mentally  as  the  states,  the
doing,  sensation,  suffering,  of  other  beings,  but  do
not  ourselves  experience  or  suffer.

Accordingly,  no  difficult  intermediation  whatever  is
necessary,  in  order  to  answer  the  second  of  the  ques-
tions proposed  above.  It  amounts  only  to  affirming
that  a  bare  knozving  in  general  cannot  furnish  the
impulse  for  this  altogether  unexampled  distinction
by  means  of  which  every  being  with  a  soul  sets  itself
over  opposite  to  all  the  rest  of  the  world.

§  53.  In  the  way  described  above,  as  we  believe,
does  the  meaning  of  the  }^ossessive  pronoun  'mine'
first  become  perspicuous.  It  is  not  until  afterward,
when  we  direct  our  reflective  thought  to  these  cir-


SELF-FEELING OF THE EGO.  8l

cumstances,  that  we  also  form  the  substantive  name
of  the  '  ego '  as  the  being  to  which  that  belongs
which  is  called  '  mine.'

And  here  a  two-fold  distinction  must  be  made.
The  mental  picture  which  we  form  for  ourselves  of
our  own  being  may  be  more  or  less  apt  or  errone-
ous ;  that  depends  upon  the  elevation  of  the  power
of  cognition  by  means  of  which  every  being  endeav-
ors theoretically  to  render  to  itself  an  explanation
concerning  this  centre  of  its  own  mental  states.
On  the  other  hand,  the  perspicuity  and  intimateness
with  which  each  being  that  has  feeling  distinguishes
itself  from  the  entire  world  does  not  at  all  depend  on
the  aptness  of  this  insight  of  it  into  its  own  being,
but  is  expressed  in  the  case  of  the  lowest  animals,  in
so  far  as  they  recognize  their  states  as  their  own  by
means  of  physical  pain  or  of  pleasure,  in  just  as
lively  fashion  as  is  the  case  with  the  most  intelligent
spirit,  A  spirit,  however,  which  should  penetrate
everything,  but  have  no  interest  of  pleasurable  or
painful  sort  in  anything,  would  surely  neither  be
capable  of  opposing  itself  as  an  '  ego '  to  the  rest  of
the  world,  nor  would  it  have  any  inducement  so  to  do.
It  would  only  appear  to  itself  as  one,  but  not  as  one
in  any  way  to  be  preferred,  of  the  many  examples  of
a  being  which  is  at  the  same  time  subject  and
object  of  thought.


S2  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

And  these  two  achievements,  of  knowing  its  own
bein^-  and  of  feehng  itself  as  a  '  self,'  are  therefore
not  necessarily  connected  with  each  other.  But  the
first  of  the  two  we  have  to  consider  as  being
just  that  immediate  self-fccling,  whose  presence  as
well  as  its  liveliness  is  altogether  independent  of  the
degree  of  the  self-cognition  which  we  ordinarily
think  of,  under  the  name  of  '  self-consciousness.'
The  latter  is  rather  nothing  more  than  the  interpre-
tation which  thought,  as  it  progresses  in  the  further
course  of  our  spiritual  development,  gives  to  that
inner  experience  which  is  originally  possible  only  in
the  form  of  feeling.


CHAPTER VII.


OF MOTIONS.


§  54.  We  execute  our  bodily  movements  without
knowledge  of  the  means  necessary  to  them,  —
the  muscles  and  their  contractility  ;  and  in  particular,
without  knowing  how  we  must  set  about  to  induce
thereto  a  definite  motor  nerve,  that  it  may  throw
the  muscles  necessary  for  a  definite  motion  into
a  fitting  state  of  excitation.  It  follows  from  this,
that  in  no  case  does  the  soul  bring,  the  move-
ments about,  and  execute  them  in  particular,  by  its
own  laying  hand  to  it,  as  it  were.  The  rather
does  it,  without  exception,  beget  nothing  more
than  a  certain  inner  state  confined  to  itself  (as
of  wishing,  willing,  desiring).  With  such  state,  an
order  of  nature,  unapproachable  to  our  conscious-
ness and  wholly  independent  of  our  will,  has  there-
upon connected  the  originating  of  a  bodily  movement
as  a  result  in  fact.  Primarily,  therefore,  we  have
nothing  to  do  but  to  learn  to  know  the  different
psychical  states  which  are  in  this  manner  the
occasion  of the bodily movements.


84  OUTLINES OF I'SVCHOLOGY.


§  55.  In  a  livini;-  body  changes  are  ceaselessly
happening'  that  also  have  an  influence  upon  the
motor  nerves,  and  occasion  motions  in  the  produc-
tion of  which  the  soul  does  not  participate  at  all.
Nevertheless  they  are  important.  For  only  by
means  of  the  fact  that  motions  happen  of  them-
selves, and  then  become  objects  of  its  observa-
tion, does  the  soul  of  an  animal  arrive  at  the
thought  that  its  body  is  movable,  and  that  its
motions  stand  in  connection  with  its  own  inner
states  ;  —  a  thought,  at  which  it  would  not  arrive,
if  it  were  dwelling  in  a  body  which  was  never  of
itself,  or by  external causes,  thrown into motion.

§  56.  Of  the  before-mentioned  motions  we  may
bring  forward,  as  a  special  class,  the  njlcx  luotions.
These  are  such  as  originate  through  the  excitation
of  a  sensory  nerve  by  external  or  internal  stimuli
being  transferred,  without  the  soul's  cooperation,
in  the  central  organ,  to  the  motor  nerves,  in  such
a  manner  that  it  arouses  to  motion  with  a  single
shock  a  group  of  muscles  coordinated  for  some
purposeful  action.  In  this  case  a  conscious  sen-
sation may  originate  at  the  same  time  ;  but  the
excitation  may  also,  without  begetting  any  such  sen-
sation, bend  aside,  as  it  were,  and  produce  the  same
motions without consciousness having any share


THE MIMETIC MOTIONS.  85

in  them.  Many  of  these  motions  —  like  coughing,
sneezing,  the  changes  of  the  pupils  of  the  eye  when
stimulated  by  light  —  admit  of  being  apprehended
as  reactions  which  nature  has  arranged  for  in  the
structure  of  the  body  as  a  means  of  guarding  it
against  injuries.  They  are  shown  to  be  purely
mechanical  results  of  the  excitations,  by  the  fact
that  they  not  only  proceed  involuntarily,  but  cannot
even  be  inhibited  by  a  mere  will  to  the  contrary ;
for  this  they  rather  require  some  artificial  counter-
acting agency.

§  57.  In  the  mimetic  and  physiognomic  motions
—  laughing,  weeping,  sobbing,  and  the  like  —  the
point  of  starting  in  the  first  instance  is  a  psychical
state,  —  a  state,  that  is,  of  the  mind.  As  a  whole,
they  do  not  admit  of  being  counterfeited  artificially
except  in  a  very  imperfect  way  ;  even  such  an
imperfect  counterfeit  is  brought  about  only  by
artificially  transposing  one's  self  through  fancy
into  the  same  mood  of  mind  as  that  which  is  the
actual  cause  of  them.  All  these  motions  like-
wise take  place  without  knowledge  of  their  reason
and  their  use  ;  for  we  cannot  tell  exactly  why
we  are  compelled  to  laugh  at  joy  and  to  weep
at  pain,  and  not  rather  the  reverse.  They  are
therefore,  too,  motions  which  an  order  of  nature,  not


86  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


contrived, and also not understood by us, has
attached  as  results in  fact  to  our states of mind.

§  58.  Another  class  is  composed  of  the  imita-
tive motions  with  which,  for  example,  the  observer
undesignedly  accompanies  the  thrusts  of  the  fencer
or  of  the  player  at  nine-pins  ;  and  with  which  the
uneducated  narrator  imitates  the  motions  that  he
describes.  In  this  case  it  is  the  mental  picture,
and  of  course  that  of  a  definite  motion,  which,
without  further  knowledge  and  volition,  of  itself
passes  over  into  the execution of  the  movement.

In  this  class  are  to  be  reckoned  the  most  of
our  every-day  motions,  such  as  we  frequently  call
'  actions.'  As  soon  as,  at  the  end  of  a  series  of
thoughts,  the  idea  of  a  motion  based  upon  them
emerges  in  us,  and  no  resistance  from  any  quarter
is  brought  to  bear  against  it,  this  idea  passes
over  into  motion  of  itself  and  without  our  having
to  assume,  or  being  able  to  demonstrate,  an  impulse
of  the  will  expressly  directed  toward  the  motion.
This  is  true  in  a  very  special  manner  of  dexterities
previously  acquired,  —  for  example,  writing,  or  play-
ing the  piano,  —  where  the  mere  idea  of  a  sound,
to  be  fixed  upon  or  brought  forth,  immediately
induces  the  necessary  motions,  without  a  clear  idea
of  the  latter  needing  to  be  previously  developed  in
consciousness.


THE VOLUNTAKV MOTIONS.  87

§  59.  The  foregoing  considerations  appear  to
annul  a  distinction  between  voluntary  and  involun-
tary motions. In  fact  they  do  not.

Whatever  may  be  our  conviction  (subsequently  to
be  developed),  concerning  the  nature  of  the  will,  we
can  in  no  case  impute  to  it  the  power  to  do  more
than  to  zvill.  That  an  accomplishment  of  the  thing
willed  follows  thereupon,  docs  not  depend  on  it  at
all,  but  only  on  the  fact  that  with  it,  in  so  far  as  it
is  a  definite  state  of  the  soul  different  from  other
states,  an  order  of  nature  entirely  independent  of
it  has  connected  a  definite  change,  different  from
other  changes,  in  the  state  of  the  motor  nerves.
Where  this  is  not  the  case,  the  will,  which  is  then
no  more  than  a  futile  wish,  remains  without  any
results.

An  action  is  therefore  '  voluntary '  in  case  the
interior  initial  state,  from  which  a  motion  would
originate  as  a  result,  does  not  merely  take  place  but
is  approbated  or  adopted  or  endorsed  by  the  will.
Every  action  is  '  involuntary '  which,  mechanically
considered,  issues  from  the  same  initial  point,  and
wholly  in  the  same  manner,  but  without  having
experienced such approbation.

The  control  of  the  will  over  the  motions  of  the
body  may,  accordingly,  be  compared  perhaps  to  our
use  of  the  alphabet. New  sounds  or  letters  we  are


88  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


not  able  to  fabricate,  but  are  bound  to  those  which
our  instruments  of  speech  make  possible  for  us.
We  can  combine  them,  however,  in  innumerable
ways.  And  just  so  the  soul,  when  it  combines
according  to  its  designs  those  inner  initial  states,  in
whatever  series  it  prefers,  can  also  compound  these
elements  of  motions,  corporeally  made  ready  as  they
are  beforehand,  into  the  most  varied  actions  for
the  expression  of  its  will.


Part S


ECOND.


THEORETICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


r  ART bECOND.
THEORETICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


CHAPTER L

OF  THE  SOUL.

§  60.  After  the  foregoing  complete  review  of  the
individual  elements  of  the  inner  life,  we  inquire
concerning  the  Nature  of  the  Subject  in  which  they
all  occur,  or  are  possible.  Our  final  conviction  on
this  point  will  be  made  clear  in  the  simplest  way
if,  for  the  present,  we  let  the  current  views  hold,  —
such  views,  that  is,  as  are  wont  in  the  first  in-
stance to  be  formed  on  the  inducement  of  experi-
ence; and  then  gradually  transform  them,  in  order
to  adapt  them  to  the  solution  of  difficulties  which
they  could  not  solve  in  their  earlier  form.  It
must  therefore  be  considered  that  everything  can-
not be  said  at  once,  and  that  only  the  final  form
which  our  view  will  assume,  is  our  permanent
conviction.

§  61.  The  constant  connection  of  the  spiritual  life
with  that  of  the  body,  in  which  alone  it  is  the  sub-


92  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

ject  of  observation,  makes  the  attempt  natural  to
apprehend  it,  too,  as  simply  the  product  of  the
bodily  functions.

Nevertheless  it  is  an  ancient  truth,  which  has  no
need  whatever  of  a  modern  re-discovery,  that  the
origin  of  a  spiritual  condition  is  never  analytically
comprehensible  from  all  possible  combinations  of
material  conditions.  Or,  more  simply  said  :  If  we
conceive  of  material  elements  in  such  a  way  that
we  presuppose  nothing  in  them  which  does  not
strictly  belong  to  the  conception  of  matter ;  if  we
therefore  apprehend  them  merely  as  space-filling
realities,  which  are  movable  and  can  produce
motions  in  each  other  by  means  of  the  forces
belonging  to  them  ;  if,  finally,  we  conceive  of  these
motions,  whether  of  one  or  of  many  elements,  as
no  matter  how  much  varied  or  combined ;  still  the
moment  never  comes  when  we  should  be  able  to
say  :  Now  it  is  self-evident  that  this  motion  last
produced  can  no  longer  remain  motion,  but  must
pass  over  into  sensation.

A  Materialism,  therefore,  which  should  neverthe-
less assert  that  the  spiritual  life  could  proceed  from
bare  physical  states  or  motions  of  corporeal  atoms,
would  be  a  perfectly  barren  assumption ;  and  in
this  form,  too,  materialism  has  hardly  ever  been
proposed  in  earnest. The  materialistic  views  which


THE ASSUMPTIONS OF MATERIALISM.  93

have  actually  had  faith  in  their  own  principles,  have
always  taken  their  point  of  departure  from  the  other
presupposition,  —  namely,  that  what  they  proceed
to  style  '  matter '  is  actually  something  much  better
than  the  name  tells,  and  than  what  it  appears  to  be
from  the  outside.  It  is  assumed  to  contain  in  itself
a  fundamental  property,  from  which  the  spiritual
states  would  be  able  to  develop  in  just  the  same
way  as  the  physical  predicates  of  extension,  impene-
trability, etc.,  develop  from  another  fundamental
property which it likewise possesses.

Accordingly  the  new  form  of  the  attempt  arose  ;
—  exactly  as  physiology  deduces  the  corporeal  life
from  the  reciprocal  actions  of  the  physical  forces  of
all  the  corporeal  elements,  exactly  so  has  psychology
to  explain  the  spiritual  life  from  the  joint  action  of
the,  psychical  iorcQS  of  these  elements.

§  62.  The  foregoing  view  —  not  inconceivable  pre-
vious to  investigation  —  nevertheless  goes  to  wreck
upon  the  fact  that,  it  is  impossible  for  it  to  compre-
hend the  origin  of  that  Unity  of  Consciousness,
which  is  a  fact  of  experience,  and  from  which  we
are  not  at  liberty  arbitrarily  to  withdraw  our  atten-
tion, simply  because  it  is  very  enigmatical,  in  order
then  more  conveniently  to  explain  the  remainder  of
the  content  of  experience.


94  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

It  is  an  error  for  one  to  think  that  it  is  pos-
sible to  construe  this  "  unity  of  consciousness  "
according  to  the  analogy  of  the  composition  of
physical  forces.  For  if  it  is  said,  that  just  as  a
single  resultant  originates  from  two  different  mo-
tions, and  no  further  regard  is  paid  to  the  duality
of  the  causes  from  which  it  sprung,  so  also,  can
a  perfect  unity  of  consciousness  proceed  from  a
multiplicity  of  psychical  motions  when  united;  —
then  this  analogy  derived  from  mechanics  has  been
only  inaccurately  expressed.  In  truth,  the  assertion
amounts  to  this  :  If  two  motions  act  upon  one
and  the  same  indivisible  point,  or  on  the  same
real  element,  they  produce  a  single  resultant,  which
does  not  then  hover  in  mid-air,  but  exists  only  as
a  state  of  the  very  same  simple  clement  on  which
the  components  act.

Thus  completed,  the  analogy  by  no  means  leads
to  the  result  wished  for,  but  directly  back  to  the
ordinary  view.  That  is  to  say,  the  many  elements,
even  in  case  they  should  possess  psychical  capacity,
would  produce  the  unity  of  consciousness  only  if
there  were  some  one  indivisible  '  unit-element,'
into  which  all  their  influences  might  discharge,  as
it  were,  and  which  by  its  own  nature  would  be
capable  of  focusing  all  these  impressions  in  its  own
consciousness.


UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS.  95

§  63.  If  we  call  a,  b  .  .  .  z,  the  single  corporeal
elements,  each  of  which  may  be  at  the  same  time
physically  and  psychically  endowed,  then  the  ques-
tion arises,  What  result,  at  a  given  time,  can  the
reciprocal  action  of each with every  other have  ?

Were  they  all  of  like  species,  and  under  like
conditions,  then  scarcely  anything  else  could  happen
but  that,  at  the  end  of  the  time,  all  would  be  in  the
same  terminal  state  Z.  Were  this  Z,  therefore,  a
consciousness,  then  it  would  be  such,  and  of  course
with  the  same  content,  repeated  as  many  times
over  as  there  are  elements  which  act  on  each
other.  On  the  contrary,  a  unity  of  consciousness
apart  from  this  similarity  of  all  the  exemplars  of
consciousness,  would  not  originate.

In  reality,  however,  the  elements  a,  b  .  .  .  z,  are
not  of  like  species  ;  but  they  certainly  are  sub-
ject, in  the  structure  of  the  organism,  to  very
diverse  conditions.  Some  of  them,  on  account  of
their  inferior  nature,  and  their  unfavorable  situ-
ation, can  only  receive  a  few  influences  from
without  in  an  immediate  and  lively  way ;  others,
in  themselves  superior  or  more  favorably  placed,
develop  a  much  richer  consciousness  representing
in  itself  all  possible  states  of  the  others.  Which
now  of  these  many  dissimilar  examples  of  con-
sciousness is  our  own,  —  the  one  we  know  through
inner  experience }


96  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

We  should  naturally  assume  it  would  be  the  con-
sciousness of  the  most  preeminent  element  of  all,  —
the  central  monad  of  our  body  according  to  Leibnitz.
For  we  find  that  the  changes  of  our  body  are
most  intimately  connected  with  the  states  of  our
ego,  and  that  very  little  happens  in  it  which  we
should  have  reason  to  ascribe  to  the  activity  of
other  centres of consciousness.

§  64.  According  to  the  foregoing  it  follows,  there-
fore, that  we  can  in  no  way  get  rid  of  regarding
the  one  and  indivisible  subject  of  our  conscious-
ness as  a  party  separate  by  itself ;  while  the  other
party  consists  in  the  body,  —  that  is,  in  an  aggre-
gate or  ordered  multiplicity  of  elements  which,
taken  singly,  are  perhaps  kindred  to  the  nature
of  the  soul,  and  yet  are  in  no  case  identical  with
it, but  of  a  different  essence.

This  assumption  —  in  itself  conceivable  —  of  a
psychical  life  in  every  element  of  the  body,  remains
otherwise  wholly  useless  for  the  explanation  of  our
soul-life  ;  for  if  we  can  never  transport  ourselves
into  these  states  of  the  elements,  they  have  a
value  for  us  merely  in  so  far  as  they  act  upon
our  soul  as  stimuli,  and  cause  the  latter  to  pro-
duce its  oivn  inner  states,  which  are  the  only
ones known  to  us. On  this  account, the  material


ESSENCE OF THE SOUL.  97


elements  also  can  be  further  considered  merely  as
being  material.

The  other  assumption,  intimately  connected  with
the  foregoing,  that  the  soul  also  on  its  side  has
physical  properties,  perhaps  answers  to  some  use  ;
but  the  ordinary  mode  of  conception  has  not  main-
tained it,  but  has  set  the  soul  as  an  immaterial
essence,  in  opposition  to  the  material  elements,  and
has  thus  at  once  produced  the  difficulties  of  the
following  chapter.


CHAPTER II.

OF THE RECIPROCAL ACTION BETWEEN SOUL AND

BODY,

§  65.  If  the  possibility  of  an  immaterial  essence
is  conceded  (on  which  point,  see  later),  it  is  custo-
mary to  object  further,  —  in  that  case  a  reciprocal
action  between  it  and  the  body  is  at  least  impos-
sible.

The  latter,  it  is  said,  would  find  no  point  of  at-
tachment for  its  physical  forces  to  the  compara-
tively phantom-like  soul  ;  the  soul  would  exercise
no  motor  force  by  means  of  its  inner  states  upon
the  masses  of  the  body ;  the  perfect  incompara-
bility  of  the  two  therefore  abolishes  all  action  be-
tween them.

§  66.  To  this  it  is  to  be  replied  :  We  deceive
ourselves  if  we  believe  we  are  able  in  any  case  to
comprehend  how  it  is  that  a  reciprocal  action  takes
place ;  and  if  we  then  regard  the  relation  between
body  and  soul  as  an  incoiivenient  exception  in  which
this  effort  at  explanation  does  not  succeed.

If  we  observe  the  motive  power  of  a  machine  and
the  way  in  which  its  component  parts  work  on  each


THE MYSTERY OF MECHANISM.  99

Other,  we  believe  we  understand  its  action  ;  because
our  intuition  has  in  this  case  attained  a  view  of
various  things  about  it.  On  further  reflection,  how-
ever, we  discover  that  we  do  not  understand  the
two  conditions  on  which  the  action  of  all  machines
depends,  —  namely,  the  cohesion  of  the  solid  parts
and  the  communication  of  motion.  We  can  of
course  multiply  words  about  the  matter :  but,  in  the
last  result,  we  are  still  in  ignorance  how  one  part  of
a  solid  body  manages  to  hold  its  neighbor  firmly
attached  to  itself ;  or  how  it  manages  to  cause  a
motion,  in  which  it  is  itself  caught,  to  cease  and
to  reappear  in  another  place.  What  we  therefore
actually  observe  in  such  cases  is  merely  the  exter-
nal scenery  which  a  series  of  processes  runs  through,
every  single  one  of  which  is  connected  with  its
successor  in  a  perfectly  invisible  and  incomprehen-
sible manner.

In  the  relation  between  body  and  soul  we  are  not
able  to  follow  this  series  of  processes  quite  so  far
as  we  might  wish.  But  if  we  could  follow  it,  for
example,  up  to  the  point  where  the  physical  excita-
tions act  on  the  soul,  this  last  transition  would,  of
course,  be  in  no  respects  a  matter  of  intuitive  knowl-
edge ;  but  still  it  would  not  be  in  the  least  degree
more  incomprehensible  than  the  transition  of  a
motion  from  one  material  element  to  the  other.


lOO  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


§  67.  The  reason  that  awakens  the  doubt  to  which
we  alluded  is  the  false  assertion  —  frequently  to  be
met  with  even  in  antiquity  —  that  only  like  things
(or  what  is  of  like  species)  can  act  on  each  other  and
be  acted  on  by  each  other.

One  can  be  tempted  to  make  the  foregoing  asser-
tion only  in  case  one  regards  the  effect  to  be  pro-
duced as  a  state  which  is  pre-existent  ready-made  in
the  efficient  cause  a,  and  is  assumed  to  be  trans-
ferred unchanged  to  b,  and  on  this  account  naturally
requires  in  b  a  lodgement  similar  to  that  which  it
has  in  a,  and  therefore  a  comparability  in  general  of
b  with  a.

In  opposition  to  such  a  view  we  derive  from  meta-
physic  the  conviction,  that  such  a  loosing  of  a  state
from  that  of  which  it  is  a  state,  and  a  transition  of  it
to  another  subject,  is  wholly  inconceivable.  With-
out any  exception  the  action  of  an  a  upon  a  b  con-
sists in  this,  that,  according  to  a  general  order  of
the  world  (about  which  nothing  is  to  be  said  in  this
connection)  a  state  a  of  a  is  for  b  the  compelling
occasion,  on  which  this  b  produces  from  its  own
nature  a  new  state  p,  which  as  a  rule  need  have
no  similarity  whatever  to  the  state  a  of  a  ;  for,  as
even  the  most  ordinary  experience  teaches,  one  and
the  same  influence  a  has  very  different  results  ac-
cording as  the  objects  b,  c,  d  are  different,  on  which
-t  falls.


BONDS  BETWEEN  BODY  AND  SOUL. lOI

We  have  therefore  no  justification  at  all  for  setting
up  conditions,  which  must  be  fulfilled,  if  an  a  is  to
have  any  effect  whatever  on  a  b.  The  likeness  or
similarity  of  the  two  imparts  to  the  possibility  of
their  action  no  greater  comprehensibility  or  proba-
bility ;  and  their  unlikeness,  or  even  their  perfect
incomparability,  no  less.

§  68.  The  demand  is  frequently  made  for  3ome
bond  between  body  and  soul,  in  order  to  comprehend
the  possibility  of  their  reciprocal  action.

But  '  bonds '  are  needed  only  to  unite  those  things
which  do  not  of  themselves  act  on  each  other,  but
are  indifferent  to  each  other.  The  binding  power
of  the  bond  depends,  however,  upon  this,  that  its
single  parts  are  attached  to  each  other ;  and  this
fact  we  cannot  always  be  explaining  over  and  over
by  new  bonds  between  ;  but  in  the  last  result  it
depends  upon  a  perfectly  immediate  reciprocal  ac-
tion of  the  single  elements  which  hold  each  other
fast  without  any  conceivable  machinery  intervening.

We  should  therefore  make  use  of  a  bond  between
body  and  soul  only  in  case  we  regarded  them  as
wholly  indifferent  to  each  other.  But  even  if  we
had  such  a  bond,  it  would  be  of  no  service  to  us  ;
for  the  definite  forms  in  which  the  body  would  ac-
cordingly act  on  the  soul,  and  the  soul  on  it,  would


I02  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


by  no  means  proceed  from  the  bare  conception  of  the
aforesaid  bond,  but  only  from  the  specific  natures  of
the  two  elements  bound  together,  and  of  their  obli-
gation to  reciprocal  action.

Instead,  therefore,  of  otc  such  vain  bond,  we  assert
that  the  two  arc  connected  by  very  many  peculiarly
constituted  bonds  ;  each  single  reciprocal  action,  to
which  they  are  by  their  natures  necessitated,  is  such
a  bond,  which  holds  them  together,  not  in  a  merely
general  but  in  a  definite  way.

§  69.  We  proceeded  upon  the  concession  that  the
conception  of  the  soul  as  an  immaterial  essence  is
possible.  But  now  even  this  is  denied.  Only
things  of  sense,  it  is  said,  are  accredited  by  imme-
diate observation ;  supersensible  matters  are  invari-
ably products  of  phantasy.

But  only  the  most  elementary  view  of  nature  would
believe  in  the  sensible  properties  of  colors,  taste,
hardness,  etc.,  as  directly  constituting  the  real  being
of  the  'Thing'  apparent.  It  is  now  a  long  time  since
the  conviction  gained  ground  that  all  these  predi-
cates are  only  phenomena  which  arise  in  our  con-
sciousness at  the  excitation  of  an  external  some-
what. What,  on  the  other  hand,  this  external
reality  is,  through  whose  influence  these  predicates
come  to  be,  they  do  not  inform  us.


THE REAL AS SUPERSENSIBLE.  IO3

The  science  of  nature  therefore  very  early  re-
nounced the  pretence  of  having  actual  intuitions
through  the  senses  of  the  simplest  elements  of  real-
ity. But  in  its  conception  of  the  atoms,  it  still  for
a  long  time  thought  of  them  as  formally  similar  to
bodies  perceivable  by  the  senses,  such  as  might  be
supposed  to  spring  from  compounding  the  atoms  ;
that  is  to  say,  as  being  of  a  very  minute  and  yet  of
a  certain  extension,  and  of  an  unknown  and  yet
definite  shape,  and  as  filling  this  small  volume  with
a  perfect  impenetrability.

Manifold  difhculties,  in  which  this  conception  is
involved,  have  also  led  to  the  attempt  in  physics  to
apprehend  the  atoms  as  absolutely  without  extension
or  as  points  that  are  distinguished  from  empty  points
of  space  merely  by  their  being  centres  of  forces
which  act  outward,  as  well  as  real  points  of  seizure,
as  it  were,  for  forces  that  come  from  without.  Such
a  thought  has  no  other  meaning  than  this,  that  the
atoms,  too,  are  in  themselves  supersensible  beings  :  —
that  is  to  say,  such  beings  as  are  not  merely  in  fact,
on  account  of  their  minuteness,  perfectly  unapproach-
able to  ^?/;' perception  by  the  senses,  but  on  account
of  their  nature  are  so  to  every  such  perception  ;  and
that  all  the  intuitions  of  sense,  which  at  first  appear
to  set  before  us  with  exactness  what  is  in  itself  real,
are  merely  secondary  phenomena  in  which  the  re-


104 OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

suits  of  the  reciprocal  actions  of  elements,  in  them-
selves wholly  supersensible,  reach  our  perception.

Accordingly  it  is  not  the  conception  of  iuiviaterial,
but  that  of  material  being,  which  is  to  be  scrupled  at ;
and  the  gap  does  not  exist,  which  appears  to  us  at
first  to  separate  body  and  soul  as  two  perfectly
heterogeneous  elements,  and  to  render  their  recipro-
cal action  impossible.


CHAPTER III.

THE SEAT OF THE SOUL.

§  70.  An  immaterial  real  being  can  have  no  exten-
sion  in  space :  it  may,  however,  have  a  position  ;  and
this  we  define  as  the  point  up  to  which  all  influences
from  without  must  be  transplanted,  in  order  to  make
an  impression  on  this  being,  and  from  which  alone
outward  this  being  exercises  immediate  effects  upon
its  environment-  In  reference  to  the  soul  no  one
doubts  that  it  is  present  only  within  its  own  body ;
for  it  is  only  here  that  it  acts  immediately  upon
the  whole  external  world,  although  solely  through
the  mediation  of  the  body.

§  71.  Now  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  conceive
of  the  spatial  relation  of  the  soul  to  the  body,  in  the
first  place,  according  to  the  analogy  of  our  ideas  con-
cerning the  omnipresence  of  God.

By  this  we  mean  that  God  is  alike  near  to  every
point  of  the  world  with  his  immediate  activity  ;  that
consequently,  his  will  is  neither  compelled  to  traverse
any  way  whatever  in  order  to  reach  an  element  of
the  universe  z ;  nor  does  it  need  any  intermediate
agency,  in  order  to  act  on  z. But  we  by  no  means


I06  OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.


intend  by  this  that  the  infinite  extension  of  the
arena  which  God  thus  controls  belongs  as  a  spatial
property  to  God  himself.

Now  in  just  the  same  way  is  the  soul  assumed  to
be  present  everywhere  in  its  body  without  being
itself  a  space-magnitude.

The  foregoing  analogy  is,  however,  wholly  unser-
viceable. We  have  already  (to  wit,  on  the  occasion
of  considering  the  "  feelings  of  double  contact ")
seen,  by  how  complicated  means  it  is  that  nature
succeeds  in  producing  this  illusion,  so  indispensable
to  the  beauty  of  our  life,  as  though  we  were  present
immediately  sensitive  and  moving  about  in  every  part
of  our  body.  On  the  contrary,  physiological  experi-
ments show  that  the  soul  stands  in  immediate  reci-
procity with  absolutely  no  more  than  tlie  central
organs  of  the  nervous  system  ;  and  with  all  the
rest  of  the  body  only  mediately  through  the  nerves
themselves.

§  72.  Just  as  inapplicable  is  the  analogy  involved
in  a  second  way  of  representation,  to  which  natural
science  accustoms  us  ;  to  wit,  that  of  a  physical  force
which  acts  immediately,  and  without  any  intervening
mechanism,  in  all  infinitely  remote  regions,  but  with
a  graded  intensity,  that  is,  one  that  diminishes  with
the  distance. On  account  of  the  first  circumstance


CONNECTION  OF  SOUL  AND  BODY. IQ^

we  should  be  able  to  say  of  that  body  which  is  the
conveyer  of  the  force,  —  It  is  in  space  everywhere ;
on  account  of  the  second,  we  still  ascribe  to  it  a
limited  situation  in  space,  namely,  there  where  its
action  is  greatest.

But  the  smallest  interruption  in  the  continuity  of
a  nerve,  even  in  the  closest  proximity  to  the  brain,
abolishes  the  reciprocal  action  of  the  soul  with  that
region  of  the  body  over  which  the  same  nerve  is
expanded.  It  has  therefore  no  power  which  acts  at
a  distance,  such  as  would  be  able  to  stretch  itself
over  and  beyond  this  interruption.

Nothing  remains  for  us  then  but  the  third  analogy,
namely,  that  of  effects  which  follow  upon  contact  by
communication  of  motions.

§  73.  The  last  analogy  has  been  chiefly  followed,
and  search  has  been  made  for  such  a  point  in  the
central  organs,  in  which  all  the  sensory  nerves  unite,
in  order  there  to  render  their  messages,  and  from
which  all  the  motor  nerves  issue  forth,  in  order  to
conduct  the  excitations  there  received  over  to  the
body.

The  above-mentioned  idea  not  only  has  certain
inner  difficulties,  but  is  essentially  out  of  accord
with  our  empirical  cognition.  Not  merely  is  it  true
that  no  such  terminal  point  for  the  entire  net-work


nam


I08  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGV.

of  nerves  has  hitherto  been  discovered  ;  but  there
is  even  the  most  well-founded  cause  for  the  asser-
tion that  it  never  will  be  found.

The  question  now  arises,  how  we  can  ever  still
maintain  under  these  circumstances  the  conception
of  a  seat  for  the  soul.

§  74.  We  recur  to  our  original  definition  of  such  a
seat,  but  we  interpret  it  still  further  by  the  following
means.

We  are  in  error  if  we  say  that  a  being  is  first  in  a
place,  and  then  in  consequence  thereof  is  able  to  act
on  its  environment.  As  long  as  we  continue  to
abstract  from  the  effects,  it  can  by  no  means  be
made  clear,  precisely  in  what  the  Thing's  being  at
this  place  consists  ;  and  whereby  this  is  distinguished
from  its  being  at  another  place,  at  which  the  Thing
would  exist  exactly  as  w-ell  as  at  the  former  place.
We  believe  rather  that  the  order  of  the  thoughts
must  be  reversed,  and  wc  must  say :  If  it  is  in-
volved in  tlie  nature  of  a  being  a,  in  general  to  in-
terchange actions  and  reactions  with  b,  c,  <1,  then  its
systematic  position  in  the  coherency  of  things  is
determined  thereby,  and  in  the  spatial  arrangement
of  the  world  it  is  that  point  whose  immediate  envi-
ronment is  constituted  by  b,  c,  and  d.

Now  in  general,  the  connection  of  all  things  may


POSITION AND THE SOUL.


109


be  so  many-sided  that  an  element  a  is  not  merely-
destined  to  enter  into  reciprocal  action  with  the
group  b,  c,  d,  but  also  just  as  immediately  with
another  group  p,  q,  r;  while,  nevertheless,  p,  q,  r  on
account  of  other  different  relations  do  not  possess
their  systematic  position  with  b,  c,  d,  and  therefore
do  not  have  their  spatial  position  in  the  neighbor-
hood of  the  latter,  but  separated  by  a  distance  from
them.  In  this  case  the  active  element  a  will  have
not  one  but,  with  equal  right,  several  special  positions
without  on  this  account  itself  falling  into  a  multitude
of  pieces  ;  precisely  as  we  should  think  of  God  as
present  everywhere  and  still  not  in  Himself  ex-
tended. Omnipresence  would,  of  course,  compre-
hend all  space :  in  this  case,  on  the  contrary,  we
should  be  compelled  to  require  in  particular  that
several  positions  separated  in  space  should  be  as-
cribed to  the  immaterial  being  ;  and  that  these
positions  should  be  separated  from  each  other  by
intervening  spaces  in  which  its  presence  would  not
be  found  in  the  same  way.  But  no  special  difficulty
is  involved  in  this.  We  have  merely  to  overcome
the  customary  propensity  of  our  power  of  imagina-
tion, which  might  persist  in  apprehending  the  im-
material being  after  the  model  of  a  corporeal  atom,
and  in  ascribing  to  it,  on  this  account,  a  visible
circumscribed  magnitude  and  form,  and  accordingly
also  only  one  position  in  space.


IIO  OUTLlNIiS OF I'SVCllOLUC.V


^  75.  The  question  still  remains  unanswered,  Why
then  should  single  parts  of  the  brain  have  the
preference  of  being  '  seats  '  of  the  soul,  and  other
parts,  on  the  contrary,  not  be  thus  preferred ;
although  still,  so  far  as  we  know,  there  exist  no
significant  differences  in  their  structure  or  compo-
sition ?

On  this  point,  too,  we  are  compelled  to  alter  a
customary  representation.  An  element  a  is  not
destined  to  stand  at  all  times  in  reciprocal  rela-
tions with  a  certain  other  sort  of  element  1>,  and
not  with  a  third  sort  c  ;  the  rather  is  every  being
a  interested,  or  excited  to  action,  only  through  what
happens  in  other  beings.  If  this  X,  on  occurring,
is,  according  to  the  plan  of  the  whole  arrangement
of  the  world,  the  conditioning  premise  from  which
the  new  state  is  to  originate  in  a,  then  it,  too,  docs
originate ;  and  in  such  case  a  experiences  the  in-
fluence of  this  X,  whether  this  came  about  in  b  or
in  c.  If,  on  the  contrary,  X  is  not  such  premise,
then  a  remains  in  equilibrium  and  unaltered,  whether
now  X  takes  place  in  a  b  or  in  a  c.

Now  just  so  will  the  soul  enter  into  reciprocal
action  only  with  those  points  of  the  central  organs
in  which  all  the  combinations,  equilibrations,  and
elaborations  of  the  physical  excitations  are  executed ;
and  only  after  the  perfecting  of  the  former  do  the


THE BRAIN AND THE MIND.  Ill

latter, it  is  assumed,  reach the  soul's  cognition  or
become  legitimate  encitements  of  its  activity.

§  76.  If  therefore  any  one  should  be  able  to
observe  with  a  microscope  what  goes  on  in  the
interior  of  the  brain,  just  as  accurately  as  the  ana-
tomical structure  admits  of  being  observed,  super-
ficially everything  would  appear  precisely  as  mate-
rialism asserts.  That  is  to  say,  at  different  points
of  the  brain  individual  psychical  processes  would
be  set  up  on  occasion  of  the  physical  processes
taking  their  course  thither ;  and  nowhere  would  a
being  of  the  soul  in  its  unity  show  itself  as  the
object  of  such  contemplation.

But  the  interpretation,  which  materialism  gives  of
this  matter  of  fact,  we  do  not  share.  These  psychi-
cal functions  do  not  originate  from  those  physical
processes  as  an  addendum,  or  a  product,  that  carries
its  own  explanation  with  it  :  they  are  invariably
possible  only  in  case  we  apprehend  these  latter  as
mere  stimuli  which  act  upon  the  peculiar  nature
of  the  soul's  essential  being, — everywhere  present
here  and  not  bound  to  one  seat  of  the  form  of  a
mathematical  point,  —  and  which  cause  it  to  exer-
cise its  own  capacities.


CHAPTER IV.

THE TIME-RELATIONS OF THE SOUL.

§  77.  Mere  experience  could  only  lead  us  to  the
thought: — The  soul  originates  with  the  body,  and
with  it  perishes  as  well.  Necessities  of  quite  an-
other order,  which  are  foreign  to  this  theoretical
investigation,  have  excited  the  wish  to  make  sure
of  its  immortality ;  and  the  attempt  has  been  made
to  do  this  by  subordinating  it  under  a  conception
of  '  Substance,'  which  would  per  se  contain  the
predicate  of  indestructibility.

Such  subordination  leads,  in  the  first  place,  to  two
inconvenient  consequences,  which  one  would  gladly
avoid.  That  is  to  say,  the  reasons  on  account  of
which  the  Jininan  soul  might  be  subordinated  under
this  conception  of  substance  would  also  hold  good
for  every  animal  soul.  On  the  other  hand,  inde-
structibility would  include,  not  merely  immortality
after  death,  but  also  unending  pre-existence  before
the  present  life ;  and  with  the  latter  we  neither
know  how  to  make  a  beginning,  nor  do  we  find  in
our  experience  any  evidence  for  such  a  previous  life.

Finally,  moreover,  the  question  would  be  asked :


THE SOUL AS SUBSTANCE.  II3

Whether,  in  case  the  conception  of  substance  in-
cludes such  an  impossibility  of  ceasing  to  be,  it  is
of  any  use  whatever,  and  not  a  mere  figment  of  the
brain  ;  and  whether,  in  the  former  case,  the  soul  cer-
tainly belongs  to  what  must  be  included  under  the
conception.

§  78.  Now  'Substance'  is  in  fact  nothing  but  a
title  which  is  attached  to  everything  that  has  the
power  to  act  on  something  else,  and  be  acted  upon
by  something  else,  to  experience  different  states,
and  in  the  interchange  of  such  states  to  do  work
as  a  permanent  unity.

On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  figment  of  the  brain  to
believe  we  can  discover  yet  further  explanations  on
the  point,  how  the  capacity  for  such  mode  of  behav-
ior is  brought  to  pass ;  and  to  seek  for  such  expla-
nation in  thinking  of  a  bit  of  rigid  and  indestructible
substance  as  being  included  in  everything,  and  of
all  the  rest  of  the  properties  or  states,  by  which  one
such  thing  is  distinguished  from  another,  as  being
grouped  about  this  firm  kernel.  If  one  attempts
actually  to  make  use  of  such  a  conception,  it  uni-
formly shows  itself  completely  useless  in  explain-
ing the  phenomena  for  the  sake  of  which  it  was
assumed.  It  does  not  admit  of  being  shown  how
such a substantial kernel could consist with the


114  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

nianiloldness  and  changeableness  of  the  properties
of  which  it  is  asserted  (and  this,  too,  again  with  a
word  devoid  of  meaning)  that  they  'inhere'  in  it.

Briefly  expressed,  then  :  Things  are  not  '  things '
by  means  of  a  so-called  substance  being  concealed
in  them  ;  but,  because  they  are  such  as  they  are,
and  behave  themselves  in  the  manner  in  which  they
do  behave  themselves,  they  produce  for  our  imagina-
tion the  false  appearance,  as  though  such  a  substance
existed  in them  as  the  basis  of  their  behavior.

Now  the  soul,  so  long  as  it  does  not  merely
exhibit  itself  to  others  as  a  "  unit-subject "  of  its
interior  states,  but  is  itself  conscious  there  of,  de-
serves in  the  fullest  measure  this  title  of  a  "  sub-
stance "  or  real  being.  '

On  the  other  hand,  nothing  whatever  justices  us
in  making  the  assertion  that  just  this  capacity,  if  it
is  once  exercised,  must  then  eternally  be  exercised,
and  cannot  in  the  course  of  things  be  originated  or
perish  again.

§  79.  To  reach  a  decision  on  this  point,  we  bor-
row from  Metaphysic  a  conviction  that  sta'ads  in
opposition  to  the  ideas  to  which  the  investigation
of  nature  has  accustomed  us.

For  the  latter  believes  that  the  course  of  the
world  admits  of  being  explained  by  the  assumption


THE SOUL AS SUBSTANCE.  II5


of  a  multiplicity  of  original  elements,  which  are  held
to  be  independent  of  each  other  in  such  manner  that
each  could  exist  alone  even  if  all  the  others  were
not ;  which,  further,  have  in  themselves  no  necessary
relation  to  one  another,  but  in  fact  have  either  been
subsequently  drawn  into  such  relations  or  have  stood
in  them  even  from  eternity ;  and  which,  finally,  are
compelled  by  general  laws  to  exercise  this  reciprocal
action  in  this  relation,  and  another  action  in  a  differ-
ent relation.

On  the  contrary,  we  affirm  briefly  this  :  No  influ-
ence whatever  of  one  element  on  another  is  really
conceivable  without  self-contradiction,  as  long  as
these  elements  are  thought  of  as  originally  inde-
pendent of  each  other  and  devoid  of  relation  toward
each  other.  Such  influence  is  only  possible  in  case
we  consider  them  all  simply  as  modifications,  de-
pendent and  constantly  related  to  each  other,  of
One  single  truly  existent  Being,  which  is  in  them
all  as  the  ground  of  their  existence;  —  the  ground,
further,  on  account  of  which  they  are  compelled  to
effectuate  somewhat  definite  under  fixed  conditions,
and  the  ground,  finally,  of  this  also,  that  these  pre-
scribed obligations  are  able  to  attain  to  accomplish-
ment.

Or,  to  express  the  same  truth  in  another  way,
all  '  Things  '  are  what  they  are,  and  accomplish  what


Il6  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

they  do  accomplish,  not  by  means  of  a  natural  right
which  became  theirs  previous  to  the  existence  of  the
world,  so  that  subsequently  the  world  was  compelled
to  govern  itself  accordingly,  and  could  only  actualize
that  which  these  privileged  ones  allowed.  Tlie  rather
is  it  true  that  Things  are  and  accomplish  all,  only
on  the  commission,  as  it  were,  of  this  One  true
Being ;  and  all  which  we  commonly  regard  as
ultimate  unchangeable  elements  and  laws  of  the
world's  course,  has  this  unchangeableness  and  this
value,  too,  only  on  commission  of  the  plan  for  the
actualization  of  which  it  is  bound  to  serve.

§  80.  The  foregoing  way  of  apprehending  the
matter  has  not  been  devised,  for  the  first  time,  in
favor  of  our  present  inquiry.  It  is  rather  necessary,
in  order  to  comprehend  even  the  most  insignificant
action  of  one  element  on  another.  But  it  admits  of
an  application  to  the  case  we  are  now  considering.

It  may  even  be  a  part  of  the  plan  of  actuality,
that  over  a  wide  domain  all  its  changing  phenomena
are  effectuated  by  means  of  combinations  of  unalter-
able elements  and  according  to  the  rule  of  universal
laws.  Accordingly,  there  exist  in  the  world  these
constant  masses,  the  activity  of  which  always  results
in  like  manner,  and  which  are  nothing  else  but
^^ actions'''  uniformly  maintained  or  exercised  by  the
aforesaid  sole  Existence.


THE ORIGIN OF THE SOUL.  llj


But  in  the  same  way  it  may  be  a  part  of  the  be-
fore-mentioned plan,  that  other  elements  make  their
appearance  only  at  definite  points  of  time  in  the
world's  course,  —  that  is  to  say,  when  all  the  prelim-
inary conditions  are  actualized,  which,  according  to
the  plan  of  the  whole,  may  form  the  basis  of  their
existence.  But  nothing  hinders  these  elements,  too,
in  case  they  have  originated,  from  maintaining  them-
selves as  real  units,  indivisible  and  independent
centres  of  ingoing  and  outgoing  effects.

Among  SKc/i  elements  do  we  reckon  the  Soul.
But  a  further  inquiry,  as  to  how  this  its  independence
is  brought  about,  we  dismiss  as  quite  out  of  place.
We  should  just  as  little  be  able  to  specify  how  it  is
reached,  or  brought  about,  that  one  of  those  con-
stant elemental  masses  can  exist  and  maintain  itself
forever.

§  81.  At  the  place  where,  and  at  the  moment
when,  the  germ  of  an  organic  being  is  formed  amid
the  coherent  system  of  the  physical  course  of  nature,
this  fact  furnishes  the  encitement  or  the  moving
reason,  which  induces  that  all-comprehending  One
Being,  —  present  not  otherwheres,  but  even  here,  —
to  beget  from  himself,  besides,  as  a  consistent  sup-
plement to  such  physical  fact,  the  soul  belonging  to
this  organism.


Il8  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


Superficially  regarded,  therefore,  Materialism  has
the  right  of  it  here  also  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  soul  also
originates  /;/  and  with  the  body,  but,  in  sooth,  not  of
and  thi'oiigh  it.  And  all  inquiries  are  useless  con-
cerning the  manner  in  which  it  is,  as  it  were,  joined
from  the  outside  with  the  body.

Touching  Immortality,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is
no  subject  for  theoretical  decision.  In  general  we
simply  hold  the  principle  to  be  valid,  that  everything
which  has  once  originated  will  endure  forever,  as
soon  as  it  possesses  an  unalterable  value  for  the
coherent  system  of  the  world  ;  but  it  will,  as  a
matter  of  course,  in  turn  cease  to  be,  if  this  is  not
the  case.  However,  this  principle  is  wholly  inappli-
cable in  our  human  hands  ;  we  cannot  presume  to
tell  in  what  the  merits  might  consist  which  justify
such  duration  ;  or  in  what  the  deficiency  which
makes  it  impossible.


CHAPTER V.


THE SOUL  S ESSENCE.


§  82.  In  investigating  the  '  Essence '  of  a  Thing
we  may  wish  to  know,  in  the  first  place  :  whereby
this  thing  is  distinguished  from  others  ;  and  second  :
how  it  is  possible  for  the  content  thus  designated  to
exist  as  real  Thiwr.

The  second  inquiry  admits  of  being  answered  in
the  case  of  objects  whose  distinguishing  character
consists  simply  in  the  shaping  of  a  previously  ex-
isting material ;  wc  are  then  wont  to  consider  just
this  material  as  the  essence  and  the  aforesaid  form
as  only  unessential.  But  a  simple  material  itself,
like  every  simple  essence,  can  never  consist  of  some-
what other  than  it  is  itself.

On  the  other  hand,  to  specify  how  it  is  brought
about  that  any  so-called  '  content '  whatever  can  be,
act,  and  be  acted  upon,  as  a  '  Thing,'  we  have  already
often  declined  to  consider,  as  an  unanswerable
inquiry.  Accordingly,  our  discourse  can  only  be
of this  :  by  what peculiar character, which consti-


I20  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.


tutes its essence, the soul is distinguished from
other  substances.

§  83.  We  liave  no  other  way  of  learning  what
is  the  nature  of  any  Thing,  even  that  of  matter,
except  by  its  achievements  and  its  effects.  It  is
therefore  no  fault  of  psychology,  but  the  most  nat-
ural way  of  procedure,  to  determine  in  this  manner,
by  reasoning  backward,  the  nature of  the  soul.

The  first  systematic  attempt  at  this,  the  doctrine
of  the  soul's  faculties,  has  certainly  remained  without
result.  The  various  psychical  achievements  were
classified  according  to  their  similarity  ;  and  it  was
then  of  course  correct  to  assume,  besides,  a  '  faculty '
for  every  such  group  of  actual  achievements.  But
this  conception  was  not  so  fruitful  as  that  of  'force'
for  the  science  of  physics.  For  the  physicist  does
not  speak  of  force  seriously  until  the  time  when
he  is  able  to  specify,  not  merely  a  form  of  action,
but  also  a  law  according  to  which  the  magnitude
of  the  action  alters  in  proportion  to  the  alteration
of  certain  conditions.

The  faculties  of  the  soul,  on  the  contrary,  were
merely  abstracted  from  the  form  of  the  achievements
themselves,  and  no  law  for  them  was  known ;  it
amounted,  accordingly,  merely  to  the  tautology  that,
for  example,  the  faculty  of  sensation  produces  sen-


THE  THEORY  OF  FACULTIES.  121

sations  ;  but  nothing  was  known  as  to  what  sensa-
tions under  what  conditions.

On  the  other  hand,  physics  is  only  so  far  perfected
as  it  is  possible  to  reduce  all  natural  processes  to
mere  motions  of  masses.  By  means  of  such  specific
likeness  in  what  happens,  it  is  possible  accurately
to  determine  the  result  which  originates  from
the  simultaneous  co-operation  of  different  forces
upon  the  same  object.  On  the  contrary,  the  psychi-
cal states  could  be  reduced  to  no  such  common
measure.  What  must  originate,  therefore,  in  case
an  act  of  the  faculty  of  feeling  coincides  with  an
act  of  the  faculty  of  representation,  does  not  admit
in  the  least  of  being  conjectured  on  grounds  of  this
theory.  What  is  known  on  that  point  is  known
independently  of  the  theory,  —  on  grounds  of  expe-
rience and  knowledge  of  men.

Neither  of  these  two  deficiencies  is  to  be  set  aside
by  any  improved  carrying  out  of  this  theory.  It
can  therefore  hold  good  simply  as  a  summary  cata-
logueing  of  spiritual  achievements,  but  not  as  an
explanation.

§  84.  The  unproductiveness  of  the  above-men-
tioned theory,  and  the  slight  account  that  it  took
of  the  connection  of  the  different  faculties,  which
it  nevertheless  always  regarded  as  expressions  of  a


122  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

soul  that  is  a  unity  in  the  strictest  sense,  induced
Herbart  to  attempt  to  demonstrate  all  spiritual  ac-
tivities and  all  these  faculties  as  a  series  of  results
that  spring  successively  from  a  single  primitive
activity  of  the  soul.

The  soul,  he  held,  is  one  of  those  supersensible
real  beings  of  perfectly  simple  quality,  which  left  to
themselves  alone  would  always  remain  unmoved  the
same,  but  which,  on  the  other  hand,  would  exercise
acti\itics  of  '  self-preservation  '  as  soon  as  they  are
exposed  to  external  stimuli  whose  influence,  if  it
took  effect,  would  cause  a  disturbance  of  their  nature.
And  indeed  these  acts  of  self-preservation  are  differ-
ent in  kind,  according  as  the  disturbances  through
which  they  are  induced  are  different.  Of  the  rest
of  real  things,  —  for  example,  those  which  lie  at
the  basis  of  matter,  —  we  are  not  able  to  know
precisely  in  what  their  self-preservation  consists.
Of  the  soul,  on  the  contrary,  we  do  know,  or  believe
that  we  are  bound  to  assume,  that  they  are  univer-
sally in  the  form  of  the  idea.  By  means  of  physical
stimuli,  whose  influence  Herbart  did  not  follow
further,  these  inducements  to  self-preservation  are
imparted  to  the  soul,  and  the  ideas  here  originating
—  that  is,  simple  sensations,  of  a  definite  color,  of
a  tone,  of  a  taste  —  are  now  the  simple  elements  out
of  whose  further  reciprocal  action  the  totality  of  the
rest  of  the  soul's  life  is  assumed  to  originate.


HERBART  S  THEORY  OF  THE  SOUL. 1 23

We  here  simply  refer  with  gratitude  to  the  ex-
planations previously  alluded  to,  which  the  course
of  ideas  has  received,  in  accordance  with  general
mechanical  laws,  by  means  of  the  above-mentioned
view.  On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  accord  with
the  attempt  to  derive  all  the  soul's  higher  activities
as  self-evident  mechanical  products  of  this  course
of  ideas  without  presupposing  any  one  of  those
faculties  that  have  not  as  yet  attained  to  an  expres-
sion of  themselves.  This  principle  was  not  at  all
necessary,  for  Herbart  himself  confessed  that  even
the  simple  sensations  divide  up  into  quite  different
classes,  —  colors,  tones,  tastes,  etc.,  —  no  one  of  which
is  deducible  from  the  others  ;  that  the  soul,  there-
fore, really  possesses  quite  distinct  faculties  which
we  are  not  able  really  to  deduce  from  its  unity,
although  we  certainly  hold  fast  by  such  unity.
Nothing  therefore  would  have  hindered  the  as-
sumption that  these  simple  sensations  also  and  their
relations  to  each  other  acted  as  new  stimuli  upon
the  whole  soul,  and  then  called  forth  in  it  wholly
new  reactions  which  could  by  no  means  be  derived
from  the  aforesaid  inducements  alone.

Such  an  assumption  as  the  foregoing  could  be
refuted  only  by  the  demonstration  that  it  is  unnec-
essary, and  that  in  reality  all  higher  spiritual  activi-
ties are perfectly  self-evident  consequences  of the


124  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

mutual  impact,  as  it  were,  of  the  simple  ideas.  Such
demonstration  has  not  succeeded;  —  on  which  point
reference  may  be  made  to  the  following  examples.

§  85.  We  have  already  in  previous  articles  found
it  to  be  impossible  that  a  soul,  were  it  simply  an
ideating  being,  should  apprehend  the  relations  be-
tween its  ideas  otherwise  than  they  are,  and  there-
fore as  spatial  while  they  are  really  non-spatial.
If  it  nevertheless  does  so,  then  it  manifestly  adds
out  of  its  own  nature  to  this  matter  of  fact  something
new  which  does  not  follow  of  itself.

Just  as  impossible  was  it  to  regard  attention  as
mere  intensity  of  the  idea  itself  ;  for  then  the  subject
would  be  wanting,  which  exercises  all  those  relating
activities  in  which  every  actual  work  of  attention
consists.

Just  now  we  found  it  quite  as  impossible  to  con-
sider feelings  of  pleasure  or  pain  as  self-evident
results  of  the  different  situations  in  which  the  ideas
can  come  to  be  toward  each  other  during  their
course.  Were  the  soul  simply  an  'ideating  being'
then  it  would  only  ideate  all  these  facts,  even  if
they  contained  its  own  destruction,  with  accuracy
and  complete  indifference.  That  it  takes  an  inter-
est therein,  is  a  new  fact  which  must  flow  from
another  peculiarity  of  its  essential  being.


HEKBART  S  THEORY  OF  THE  SOUL. 1 25

Finally,  no  one  will  be  persuaded  that  what  we
mean  when  we  say,  "  I  will,"  has  no  other  sig-
nificance than  the  arising  in  consciousness  of  an
idea,  in  a  struggle  with  forces  which  seek  to  hin-
der it.  However  obscure  and  mysterious  the  other
thing  which  we  mean  by  that  expression  may  be,
—  namely,  that  in  this  case  not  a  mere  occurrence
but  a  deed  is  before  us,  which  is  accomplished  by
ourselves  as  the  one  subject  of  our  entire  world  of
ideas  ;  still  the  fact  itself,  which  we  do  thus  des-
ignate and  discover  in  immediate  in,ner  experience,
cannot  be  got  out  of  the  way  by  this  hypothe-
sis, utterly  failing  as  it  does,  to  explain  how  even
the  simple  appearance  of  such  acting  (in  contrast
with mere  happening)  can  originate  in our  view.

We  accordingly  conclude  with  the  following  con-
viction :  It  was  possible  and  necessary  to  entrust
to  the  soul  as  a  unity  much  more  than  the
bare  capacity  for  having  ideas ;  and  even  those
acts  of  self-preservation  of  the  primary  order,  which
arose  as  'ideas'  in  consequence  of  external  stim-
uli, could  subsequently  by  means  of  their  relations
and  combinations  come  to  be  new  internal  stimuli
by  which  the  other  capacities  of  the  soul,  not  pre-
viously taken  into  account,  were  induced  to  express
themselves.


126  OUTLINES OF PSVCHOLOGY.

§  86.  We  should  therefore  be  compelled  to  sur-
render the  attempt  to  comprehend  the  origin  of  the
higher  spiritual  activities  from  the  lower.  Instead
of  such  a  mechanical  construction,  however,  an-
other way  of  apprehending  the  matter  admits  of
being  substituted,  —  a  way  which  would  show  that,
in  any  case,  the  collective  whole  of  spiritual  expres-
sions —  let  them  originate  as  they  will  —  fit  into
one  another,  and  are  collectively  necessary  in  order
perfectly  to  actualize  the  Idea  which  expresses  the
soul's  destiny.  Such  an  attempt  did  the  idealistic
systems  make  ;  and,  last,  that  of  Hegel.

The  world  in  general,  they  held,  is  no  mere  fact,
but  has  also  a  meaning.  In  this  totality  every  in-
dividual has  its  definite  place  ;  and  the  essence  of
each  Thing  consists,  strictly  speaking,  only  in  the
partial  idea  whose  actualization  is  committed  to  it,
and  by  means  of  which  it  makes  its  own  contribu-
tion to  the  uninterrupted  fulfilment  of  the  highest
or  total  Idea  of  the  world.  Could  we  now  formu-
late for  this  highest  Idea  an  accurate  and  exhaus-
tive expression,  then  we  should  be  able  to  deduce
from  it  the  shape  of  each  Thing,  the  collective
whole  of  the  capacities  necessary  to  it,  and,  finally,
the  general  laws  according  to  which  these  must  act
in  order  to  attain  the  aforesaid  destiny.

But  since  the  foregoing  presupposition does  not


PLACE OF THE HIGHEST IDEA.  12/

admit  of  fulfilment,  instead  of  a  scientific  deduc-
tion that  is  accessible  to  proof  and  counter-proof,
only  such  an  one  can  be  secured  as,  with  more  or
less  of  taste,  greater  or  less  of  aesthetic  justifica-
tion, places  the  individual  spiritual  activities  in  con-
nection with  a  more  or  less  profoundly  apprehended
expression  which  is  thought  to  have  been  discovered
for the aforesaid highest Idea.

The  ingenious  conceptions,  which  are  after  all
still  possible,  and  which  have  not  been  wanting,
have  moreover  been  rendered  one-sided  by  an  his-
torical circumstance.  The  inquiry  into  the  kind
and  truth  of  our  cognition,  or  into  the  relation
between  subject  and  object,  had  so  much  riveted
all  attention,  that  the  process  by  which  the  Exist-
ent attains  to  the  apprehension  of  itself  —  that  is
to  say,  the  development  of  self-consciousness  —  was
held  to  be  the  genuine  goal  or  ultimate  content  of
the  entire  ordering  of  the  world.  And  now  the
soul,  too,  appeared  destined  to  solve  this  problem
of  'self-mirroring'  within  the  bounds  of  the  earthly
life ;  and  the  different  forms  in  which  this  problem
of  pure  intelligence  is  progressively  more  and  more
completely  solved,  occupied  pretty  nearly  the  whole
space  in  psychology.  But  the  content  of  that
which  is  known  by  sense,  intuited,  or  conceived,
withdrew on the other hand, as much into the


128  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

background,  as  all  the  rest  of  the  soul's  life, — the
feelings  and  efforts  ;  and  the  latter  themselves  came
again  into  consideration  only  in  so  far  as  they  also
could  be  put  into  relation  with  the  aforesaid  for-
mal problem  of  self-objectifying.


CHAPTER VI.

THE CHANGEABLE STATES OF THE SOUL.

§  87.  The  life  of  the  soul  does  not  consist  in
the  uniform  possession  but  in  the  changeable  ex-
ercise of  its  capacities.  In  this  regard  we  find  it
in  manifest  dependence  on  the  body ;  but  for  the
most  part  attain  the  possibility  of  more  accu-
rately defining  this  dependence  only  on  occasion
of  definite  disturbances  of  the  body.

The  observations  which  may  be  made  on  this
subject  admit,  however,  of  three  interpretations.
In  the  first  place,  it  might  be  that  an  organ  now
destroyed  has  been  the  productive  cause  of  the
spiritual  function  which  becomes  impossible  after
the  destruction  of  the  organ.  It  might  be  in  the
second  place,  that  this  organ  has  been  the  exclu-
sive medium  of  those  stimuli  of  which  the  soul
has  need,  in  order  that  it  may  be  induced  to  the
exercise  of  a  function  that  is  otherwise  comprehen-
sible only  from  the  soul's  own  nature.  Lastly,  and
in  the  third  place,  it  might  be  that  the  destruction
of  the  organ,  either  immediately  or  by  virtue  of  the
alteration  by  which  it  is  followed  in  other  organs,
exercises upon  the  soul  a  positive  effect,  although


130  OUTLINES  OF  I'SVCHOLOGY,

of  an  iiihibito)-)'  kind  ;  and  thereby  prevents  for  a
time  the  expression  of  a  capacity  which,  in  itself
considered,  continues  to  exist.

Only  the  first  of  these  interpretations  appears  to
us  in  itself  untenable,  on  account  of  the  impossi-
bility of  comprehending  psychical  functions  as  self-
evident  products  of  physical  processes.  But  if  we
desired  to  know  how  both  are  to  be  understood
simply  as  united  in  fact,  then  one  of  the  two  other
interpretations  besides  would  be  necessary  in  each
individual  case.  Only  the  latter,  therefore,  need  be
tested  further.

§  88.  If  by  Consciousness  we  understand  what
we  yet  more  clearly  call  our  '  waking  state,'  then
the  question  arises,  first  :  Upon  what  does  its
opposite,  namely,  unconsciousness,  depend,  —  the
primary  example  of  which  is  normal  sleep.

Now  in  relation  to  this  it  is  perfectly  manifest
that,  in  general,  both  the  above-mentioned  modes
of  explanation  are  admissible  ;  but  that,  still  the
occurrence  of  sleep  (which  in  the  case  of  healthy
persons  results  very  quickly,  and  after  having  found
them  only  a  moment  since  in  the  full  possession
of  their  spiritual  powers),  and  the  possibility  of  its
interruption,  does  not  argue  an  exhaustion  of  the
nervous  forces,  which  would  now  be  unable  longer


CONDITIONS OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.  I3I


to  supply  the  stimuli  necessary  for  the  maintenance
of  the  waking  condition,  but  rather  a  positive  inhi-
bition consisting  in  all  manner  of  minute  feelings
of  weariness,  that,  in  the  aggregate,  diminish  the
interest  of  the  soul  in  the  carrying-on  of  the  life
of  thought,  and  that  have  attained  a  heightened
effectiveness  just  on  account  of  this  surrender  of
the  soul  to  them.

Sudden  unconsciousness  from  fright  appears  to
originate  in  like  manner.  Considered  as  a  mere
physical  stimulus,  the  frightful  sight  or  report  is
very  insignificant  and  harmless.  It  is  only  our  re-
flection, which  interprets  the  significance  thereof  in
its  total  connection  with  our  life,  that  gives  to  what
is  perceived  this  power  to  frighten  us.  From  this
point  on,  the  course  of  our  spiritual  functions  may
immediately  be  disturbed,  and  the  bodily  powerless-
ness  which  follows  thereupon  may  simply  be  the
reaction  of  the  psychical  disturbances.

Even  unconsciousness  in  sickness,  or  after  in-
juries of  the  brain,  does  not  wholly  exclude  this
view  of  the  subject.  The  inhibitory  influences
are  partially  observable  in  the  form  of  pain  ;  this
is  not,  however,  necessary.  Just  as  we  observe
nothing  whatever  of  the  states  prevailing  in  our
nerves  previous  to  sensation,  but  only  the  latter
itself appears in consciousness, so  may  conscious-


132  OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

ness  also  vanish  without  the  work  of  the  forces
which  inhibited  it  needing  previously  to  become
an object of perception.

§  89.  Manifold  thought  has  been  bestowed  in  re-
cent times  upon  the  effectiveness  of  certain  stimuli
in  maintaining  the  state  of  waking,  or  of  their  ab-
sence in  producing  unconsciousness.

From  experiments  in  hypnotism  it  has  been  con-
cluded that,  by  the  complete  exclusion  of  external
sense-stimuli,  and  by  the  prevention  of  motion,  the
whole  spiritual  movement  becomes  so  depressed
that  the  waking  state  cannot  be  maintained,  but
complete  unconsciousness  takes  place,  —  a  process
which  in  a  few  cases  has  been  observed  even  in
human  beings,  but  which  affords  no  trustworthy
conclusions.

As  for  the  rest,  we  know  that  if  our  inner  move-
ment of  thought,  which  is  maintained  by  some  in-
terest or  other,  does  not  take  place,  —  therefore,
in  states  of  ennui, — even  the  influence  of  exter-
nal stimuli  that  do  still  actually  take  place,  does
not prevent our  falling  asleep.

Positive  influences  too  are  known,  which  dispose
us  to  falling  asleep ;  such  as  a  number  of  regu-
larly recurring  rhythmic  movements  of  the  body,
rocking, stroking,  combing  the  head,  constant  look-


CONDITIONS OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS.  1 33

ing  at  large  illuminated  uniform  surfaces,  the  con-
vergence of  the  axes  of  the  eyes  in  squinting,  etc.
Finally,  the  manipulations  of  the  mesmerist  be-
long under  this  head.  But  all  these  methods  are
not  a  fit  basis  for  critical  judgment,  on  account  of
the  fact  that  the  instances  of  their  inefficacy  are
extraordinarily  frequent,  and  they  consequently  ad-
mit of  the  assumption  of  some  adjunct  condition
of their  result as  yet  unknown.

But  in  all  cases,  at  the  very  most,  only  the
external  means  on  the  one  hand,  and  its  effect  on
the  other  hand,  are  known  to  us  ;  the  intermediate
processes  which  connect  the  former  with  the  latter
are  quite  obscure.

§  90.  If  the  minimum  of  the  waking  state  —  that
is,  the  sensation  of  external  impressions — be  pres-
ent, it  is  not  necessary  on  this  account  that  the  next
higher  activity,  —  that  is,  the  consciousness  of  the
relations  between  the  single  impressions,  —  should
also  be  connected  therewith.  It  is  well  known  that,
in  our  quite  ordinary  experience,  this  latter  action
is  often  wanting  ;  for  example,  in  cases  when  the
impressions  are  foreign  to  a  train  of  thought  which
we  are  attentively  following,  or  in  cases  when  our
mind  is  moved  with  painful  emotions  Moreover,
there  are  also  pathological  disturbance  ,  of  a  nature


134  OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGV.

indeed  as  yet  unknown,  which  form  the  conditions
(§  25)  of  this  incapacity  (recently  called  'soul-blind-
ness ')  for  reflective  combination  or  for  the  under-
standing of  impressions  perceived  by  the  senses,

§  91.  The  unconsciousness  of  sleep  is  in  general
of  varied  depth,  which  admits  of  being  measured  by
the  magnitude  of  the  excitations  that  are  necessary
for  waking.  It  is,  however,  very  frequently  imper-
fect in  so  far  as,  for  example,  excitements  of  the
sense  of  hearing  and  of  touch  still  act  on  the  con-
sciousness and  occasion  the  corresponding  sensa-
tions.

Nevertheless,  since  in  sleep  there  is  an  absence
of  the  attention  guided  by  design,  which,  during
waking  hours  and  principally  by  the  help  of  the
sense  of  sight,  is  conscious  of  the  entire  connection
of  the  surrounding  reality,  those  sensations  now  re-
produce, without  any  selection  of  what  is  probable,
such  others  as  they  cohere  with  in  respect  to  their
bare  content,  or  as  have  been  brought  into  coher-
ency by  means  of  some  earlier  train  of  ideas.

Accordingly,  that  phantastic  character  dreams
have  is  set  agoing,  which  very  frequently  gather
close  around  some  small  nucleus  of  an  actual  sen-
sation details  of  scenery  that,  although  in  accord
with  it,  have  no  connection  at  all  with  the  reality.


CORPOREAL BASIS OF MEMORY.  1 35


Such  activity  of  consciousness  in  sleep  admits  of
being  heightened  so  that  questions  may  be  answered
correctly ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  so  far  forth  made  pos-
sible for  the  spirit  of  one  who  is  awake  to  direct  to
some  extent  the  course  of  the  dreamer's  thought,
and  perhaps  even  his  actions.  For  in  such  a  case
no  collective  consciousness  of  actual  surroundings,
and  of  one's  personal  situation  in  them,  stands  in
the  way  of  the  immediate  transition  of  the  idea  of
an  action,  when  once  aroused,  into  actual  accom-
plishment.

§  92.  For  the  retention  of  ideas  onee  acquired
and  therefore  for  the  fact  of  Memory,  we  should  not
suppose  that  a  corporeal  basis  is  needed ;  since  even
in  the  case  of  material  elements  we  are  unable  to
demonstrate  how  far  it  is  exactly  their  materiality
which  is  the  basis  of  the  observed  persistence  of
their  states.  On  this  account  we  might  as  well
ascribe  this  property  to  every  immaterial  subject
which  is  at  all  capable  of  acting  and  being  acted
upon.

But  the  necessity  for  thinking  of  innumerable
different  impressions  as  enduring  unmixed  in  the
perfect  unity  of  the  soul  would  favor  the  other
thought,  that  this  problem  could  be  much  better
satisfied by  a  great  multiplicity  of  elements. We


136  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

should  not  think  of  it  as  though  the  impressions  left
behind  them  a  state  of  qiiiescoice  as  an  after-effect.
We  should  rather  follow  the  analogy  of  the  vibrations
of  light  and  sound,  and  conceive  of  motions  which
extend  over  many  elements  and,  in  spite  of  single
disturbances,  are  further  transplanted  after  their
intersection.  Only  it  would  be  impossible  to  make
this  general  analogy  of  any  value  in  detail.  Each
image  of  an  approaching  object  would  at  every
instant  be  the  source  for  new  vibrations  which  are
not  covered  by  the  preceding  ones.  How  one  idea
of  the  object  is  to  originate  from  these  ;  again,  how
two  simultaneous  motions  arc  to  be  associated  with
one  another  in  such  manner  tliat  the  renewal  of  the
one  sets  the  other  agoing  again,  without  resulting  in
a  special  new  impact  for  the  latter ;  finally,  how  it
comes  about  that  a  motion  which  belongs  to  a
partial  impression  of  a  composite  image  re-awakens
exactly  those  others  which  belong  with  it  as  other
parts  of  the  same  image;  —  for  the  answer  to  all
these  questions  there  is  a  complete  lack  of  physical
analogies.

If,  accordingly,  a  corporeal  basis  of  memory
appears  unnecessary,  still  pathological  observations
show  that  such  a  basis  nevertheless  exists  in  some
manner  or  other.  The  fact  that  those  events  which
immediately precede an attack of illness easily


DOCTRINE OF TEMPERAMENTS.  1 3/

remain  forgotten  may  be  put  upon  the  ground  that
their  mental  picture  has  been  associated  with  a
general  feeling  of  illness,  which  no  longer  exists
after  recovery,  so  that  such  recollections  want  the
lever  that  could  reproduce  them.  But  other  facts,
such  as  the  incapacity  for  recalling  certain  groups
of  ideas  that  are  substantially  similar  —  for  example,
surnames  or  single  parts  of  speech — have  hitherto
been  inaccessible  to  explanation.

§  93.  We  ascribe  considerable  influence  over  the
course  of  all  the  spiritual  states  to  the  Tempera-
ments ;  —  by  which  we  understand  nothing  more
than  the  differences,  in  kind  and  degree,  of  excit-
ability for  external  impressions  ;  the  greater  or  less
extent  to  which  the  ideas  excited  reproduce  others  ;
the  rapidity  with  which  the  ideas  vary  ;  the  strength
with  which  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  are  asso-
ciated with  them  ;  finally,  the  ease  with  which  ex-
ternal actions  associate  with  these  inner  states
themselves.

Immeasurably  different  as  the  temperaments,  in
this  meaning  of  the  word,  are,  nevertheless  the  four
well-known  ones  may  be  mentioned  as  the  most
definite  types  :  the  sanguine  with  its  great  rapid-
ity of  change  and  lively  excitability ;  the  phleg-
matic, with slightly varied and slow, but not on


138  OUTLINES OF PSVCIIOLOUY.


this  account,  weak  reactions ;  the  choleric,  with
one-sided  receptivity  and  great  energy  in  single
directions  ;  instead  of  the  melancholic  and  prefera-
bly, the  sentimental,  —  distinguished  by  special  re-
ceptivity for  the  feeling  of  the  value  of  all  possible
relations,  but  indifferent  toward  bare  matter  of  fact.
One  must  guard  one's  self  against  confusing  the
temperaments  with  various  pathological  conditions
or  peculiarities  of  character ;  although  it  is  perfectly
obvious  that  each  has  its  own  peculiar  strong  and
weak  sides,  for  moral  culture  and  bodily  health.
Concerning  the  corporeal  basis  of  temperaments  we
know  nothing:  decisive.


't>


§  94.  Phrenology  or  cranioscopy  has  believed  that
it  could  demonstrate  a  series  of  organs  for  the  indi-
vidual  spiritual  functions.  Its  belief  is,  indeed,  with-
out any  foundation  in  so  far  as  it  separated  these
organs  in  space  and  sought  to  define  their  position  ;
on  the  contrary,  it  was  certainly  not  entirely  base-
less, when  it  regarded  certain  external  formations  —
for  example,  of  the  skull  —  merely  as  indications
which  betray  and  guarantee  the  fact  that  conditions,
otherwise  wholly  unknown,  exist,  on  which  depend
the  realization  or  the  particular  intensity  of  the
aforesaid  t unctions,  in  a  manner  not  further  de-
monstrable but  given  as  matter  of  fact.


LOCALIZATION OF FUNCTION.  1 39

It  was  moreover  prevented  from  making  such  a
useful  collection  of  facts,  by  another  fault.  Only
those  functions  or  talents  could  profitably  be  taken
into  account,  the  meaning  of  which  is  unambigu-
ous, and  which  can  neither  well  be  concealed  when
present,  nor  counterfeited  when  absent  —  for  exam-
ple, musical,  artistic,  mathematical  talents  ;  of  all  of
which  we  have  examples  enough  as  inherited  within
a  family.  On  the  contrary,  characteristics  which
can  on.iy  be  estimated  by  a  refined  knowledge  of
men,  and  even  then  never  with  certainty,  and  which
in  a  given  case  may  be  the  product  not  merely  of
natural  disposition  but  of  education  and  of  accident,
are  not  at  all  adapted  for  being  determined  in  this
way,  although  they  have  been  most  frequently  so
employed.

§  95.  A  sensorwm  commune,  and  in  more  recent
times,  a  motorium  commune  have  been  distinguished.

A  necessary  function  for  the  first  of  the  two  might
perhaps  be  found  in  this,  that  the  individual  impres-
sions do  not  as  such  become  an  object  for  the  soul's
cognition,  but  only  after  combinations  or  other
adjustments  have  taken  place.  This  work  of  elabo-
ration the  organ  would  have  to  accomplish  ;  a  mere
collecting  of  the  impressions  in  one  place  would
seem superfluous. Now how far such a process


140  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

extends  we  do  not  know  ;  apparently  it  accords  with
what  was  previously  said  in  reference  to  our  space-
intuitions, —  to  which  perhaps  a  greater  part  of  the
brain  is  appropriated.

It  would  be  required  of  the  vwtoriicm  commune
that  it  should  combine  the  individual  motor  nerve-
roots  with  each  other  in  such  various  ways  that  a
series  of  subordinated  centres  originates,  each  of
which  needs  only  a  single  excitation  in  order  simul-
taneously to  set  agoing  several  motions  that  are  com-
bined in  a  purposeful  way.  But  the  nature  of  the
influence  which  the  soul  itself  exercises  upon  these
points  is  certainly  incorrectly  represented,  if  we  con-
ceive of  impulses  as  proceeding  from  the  soul,  that
are  of  the  same  species  and  distinguished  in  their
effects  merely  by  the  direction  which  they  take,
and  hence  by  the  different  terminal  points  which
they  reach.  To  determine  such  a  direction  would
be  impossible  for  the  soul  without  a  knowledge  of
the  structure  of  the  brain,  with  which  we  cannot
credit  it.  We  therefore  assert,  on  the  contrary,
that  every  idea  of  a  motion  a,  which  originates  in
the  soul,  is  a  qualitatively  different  state  from  the
other  idea  of  a  motion  b.  To  a,  accordingly,  be-
longs a  resulting  state  a,  to  b  another,  p.  These
two  states  could  only  originate  in  those  points  of
the  nervous mass,  which by  their  organization  are


THE ORGAN OF SPEECH.  I4I

exactly  capable  of  being  stimulated  to  produce  them ;
just  as  a  glass,  for  example,  resounds  only  to  those
tones  which,  on  its  being  struck,  it  would  produce
by  virtue  of  its  own  tension.  The  impulses  of  the
soul  do  not  therefore  need  to  be  directed,  but  spon-
taneously find  the  places  where  they  are  effective  ;
naturally,  when  the  case  is  rightly  understood,  in
such  a  way  that  they  do  not  have  to  traverse  a
certain  distance  from  a  given  point  to  that  place.

In  similar  manner  should  we  conceive  of  the  func-
tion of  the  organ  of  speech  —  the  only  one  which  has
thus  far  been  discovered  with  any  great  certainty  at
a  definite  spot  in  the  hemispheres  of  the  large  brain.
Extirpation  of  this  spot  destroys  the  capacity  for
combining  the  representative  '  sound-pictures '  of  a
word  with  the  excitement  of  the  motions  in  the
muscles  of  speech,  as  would  be  required  for  the
actual  utterance  of  the  word.  Although  we  can  in
this  case  form  but  little  conception  of  the  kind  of
action  which  constitutes  the  function  of  this  organ,
we  are  yet  more  in  the  dark  as  to  how  such  a  dis-
turbance of  its  action  can  be  brought  about  as  is
presented  to  us  in  the  type  of  disease  called
*  aphasia.'

§  96.  For  all  the  higher  spiritual  capacities,  which
consist  in  judgment  of  the  relations  of  given  concep-


142  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

tions,  wc  neither  know  liow  empirically  to  demon-
strate a  definite  bodily  organ,  nor  should  we  know
how  to  conceive  precisely  what,  that  is  of  any  use,
such  an  organ  could  contribute  toward  the  solution
of  the  most  essential  part  of  this  problem  —  that  is,
the  pronouncing  of  the  judgment  itself.  It  is  con-
ceivable, on  the  other  hand,  that  these  higher  activi-
ties might  presuppose  the  complete  and  clear  repre-
sentation of  the  content  about  which  the  judgment
is  to  be  passed;  and,  consequently,  also  the  undis-
turbed function  of  those  organs  which  contribute
first  to  perception  by  the  senses,  then  1;o  its  repro-
duction and  combination  with  other  perceptions,
and,  finally,  to  the  appropriate  attachment  of  feel-
ings of  value  to  each  of  them.

§  97.  There  remains  a  large  number  of  narratives
concerning  extraordinary  spiritual  activity  in  states
of  bodily  ailment.  The  various  points  thereof  are
not  all  alike  unworthy  of  belief.

The  assertion  that  there  are  cases  of  an  imme-
diate (without  the  agency  of  any  physical  medium)
'rapport'  between  consciousness  and  distant  parts
of  the  external  world,  docs  not  admit  of  refutation
a  priori ;  for  all  effects  through  media  must,  in  the
last  analysis,  be  based  upon  immediate  effects.  Only
experience can teach us where such effects are


FAR-SIGHT AND MIND-READING.  I43


met  with,  and  where  not ;  and  it  certainly  does
teach  us  that  the  entire  spiritual  life,  awake  and
healthy,  and  so  accessible  to  safe  experiment,  is
universally  connected  with  the  external  world  only
through  physical  media.

On  the  other  hand,  the  assumption  is  at  all  events
senseless,  that  the  precise  phenomena  which  are  sup-
posed to  be  perceived  can  be  explained  in  the  lump
by  the  efflux  and  influx  of  an  animal  magnetism.

Again,  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  same  sim-
ple sensation  —  for  example,  that  of  light  —  may  also
originate  in  other  nerves  which  are  not  specifically
designed  for  it  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  impos-
sible that  an  orderly  apprehension  of  a  multiplicity
of  sensations  —  for  example,  the  reading  of  a  letter
—  should  result  through  the  nerves  of  the  skin,
which  are  not  (like  the  optic  nerve)  constructed
for  such  a  combination  of  impressions.

It  is  possible,  finally,  that  all  manner  of  spir-
itual functions  take  place  with  more  liveliness
in  such  pathological  conditions  as  diminish  the
regular  intercourse  with  the  external  world,  and
thereby  remove  all  the  minute  circumspection  and
timorousness  which  in  ordinary  life  oppose  the
exercise  of  a  given  capacity.  In  such  cases  —  for
example,  when  problems  previously  insoluble  are
solved in somnambulance  —  this achievement is


144  OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

never  accomplished  except  with  the  help  of  the
capacities  which  have  been  gained  in  waking  life.
Finally,  that  in  such  states  nothing  higher  is  at-
tained than  would  be  attainable  to  ordinary  human
nature,  is  shown  by  the  insignificant  content  of  all
the  revelations  alleged  to  be  received  in  them  ;  as
well  as  by  the  fact  that  the  many  examples  of  such
cases  in  history  have  never  been  allied  with  any
advance  in  our  knowledge.


CHAPTER VII.


THE REALM OF SOULS.


§  98.  The  requirement  that  we  should  speak  of  a
'  soul '  is  of  course  first  made  upon  us  at  the  point
where  facts  would  be  incomprehensible  without  this
assumption.  In  reality,  however,  the  endowing  of
things  with  a  soul  may  extend  further  than  this
requirement.

In  fact  all  Things  have  been  spoken  of  as  though
endowed  with  souls  ;  but  this  thought,  for  which  we
may  have  good  grounds,  has  thus  far  been  unfruitful
for  the  explanation  of  individual  phenomena.  With
still  greater  predilection  have  '  plant-souls '  been
spoken  of  (Fechner,  "  Nanna  or  the  soul-life  of  plants."
Leipzig,  1848).  And  certainly  the  possession  of  a
soul  is  by  no  means  bound  to  the  centralized  struc-
ture which  we  observe  in  the  animal  and  find  wanting
in  the  plant.  Nevertheless,  the  more  the  organiza-
tion of  the  plant  and  consequently  also  the  expres-
sions by  means  of  which  it  might  make  intelligible
to  us  whatever  inner  life  it  happens  to  have,  vary
from  such  structure,  so  much  the  less  is  it  possible


146  OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.

to  construct from this fancy,  however  correct,  an
object  of  science.

The  animal  kingdom  alone  remains,  therefore,  as
affording  us  an  ascending  series  of  spiritual  life.

§  99.  It  would  be  an  error  to  regard  all  animal
souls  as  beings  of  originally  the  same  sort,  which
were  merely  afterwards  either  equipped  with  more
or  fewer  faculties,  or  else  adapted  for  their  greater
or  less  elevation  and  for  the  peculiarities  of  their
spiritual  culture,  by  the  variety  of  the  external  im-
pressions made  upon  them.  As  before,  so  now  we
consider  the  word  '  Soul  '  simply  as  a  title  which
belongs  to  all  beings  that  have  an  experience  of
their  own  inner  states  and  reactions  upon  stimuli,
in  the  form  of  ideas,  feelings,  and  acts  of  will.  But
what  is  expressed  in  this  common  term  —  that  is,
the  peculiar  essence  of  the  soul — may  be  as  radi-
cally different  as  we  conceive  gold,  silver,  and  lead
originally  to  be,  although  they  all  have  the  power
of  expressing  themselves  only  by  differences  in  de-
gree of  the  same  i)hysical  transactions,  —  gravity,
cohesion,  hardness,  etc.

The  question  may  arise  as  to  where  we  begin  to
deal  with  the  Instinct  of  animals  ;  under  which  is
to  be  reckoned  not  merely  certain  wonderful  artistic
impulses,  but,  properly  speaking,  the entire  typical


NATURE OF ANIMAL INSTINCT.  I47

mode  of  life  of  each  species  of  animals.  Perhaps,
especially  in  the  lower  classes  of  animals,  the  souls
are  by  no  means  destined,  to  the  same  extent  as
human  souls,  for  learning  from  experience ;  but,  in
accordance  with  their  bodily  organization,  have  an
original  content  of  consciousness,  by  which  they  are
controlled  just  as  we  sometimes  are  by  an  idea  that
has  arisen  perchance  in  a  dream.  But  this  assump-
tion cannot  be  turned  to  further  profit.  As  an  ad-
ditional aid  in  explanation  it  is  to  be  said  further,
that,  in  case  of  a  wholly  different  structure  of  the
nervous  system,  the  vegetative  processes,  of  which
we  remain  entirely  unconscious,  are  in  the  lower  ani-
mals permanent  objects  of  perception  and  points  of
starting  for  acts  which  appear  to  us  groundless.
And  not  less  may  there  be  sensations  of  external
circumstances  for  which  we  lack  the  requisite  or-
gans,—  for  example,  sensations  of  minute  electrical
changes  in  the  environment,  from  which  the  sensi-
tiveness to  changes  of  weather  results  not  as  fore-
sight of  the  future  but  as  perception  of  what  has
already  occurred.

It  would,  nevertheless,  be  incorrect  to  limit  all  the
soul-life  of  animals  to  such  '  instinct  '  ;  the  rather
does  an  accommodation  to  the  circumstances  take
place  in  their  actions,  so  that  obviously  the  same  in-
terpretation and  use  of  experience  as  that  on  which


148  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY'.

our  cvery-day  life  is  based, must  have  taken  place
in  their  case  also.

§  100.  If  the  IiitcUect  and  its  function  —  namely,
thinking  —  be  considered  as  characteristic  of  man,
what  we  mean  by  this  is,  that  the  intellect  does  not
simply  suffer  the  course  of  ideas  to  occur  of  itself
as  it  occurs  when  regulated  by  mechanical  laws,  but
that  it  exercises  an  activity  which  separates  again
the  ideas  that  do  not  belong  together ;  and  not
merely  permits  those  that  belong  together  to  re-
main so,  but  is  likewise  conscious,  in  the  form  of
general  notions  or  principles,  of  those  valid  rea-
sons on  account  of  which  they  belong  together.
We  have  no  reason  to  credit  the  animals  with  such
a  far-reaching  reflection,  in  order  to  make  possible
their  purposeful  behavior  and  the  way  they  adapt
themselves  to  circumstances.  For  them  the  ordi-
nary course  of  ideas  is  quite  suflficient  (since  even
in  it  what  belongs  together  is  gradually  more  firmly
associated  than  aught  else)  ;  just  as  man  also  in  a
great  part  of  his  every-day  life  entrusts  himself  to
it  alone.

If  therefore  the  intellect,  or  thinking,  is  held  to  be
a  distinguishing  talent  of  man,  then  among  the  cir-
cumstances which  favor  its  cultivation  the  following
may  be  adduced  as  pre-eminent  :  the  long  helpless


REASON CHARACTERISTIC OF MAN.  I49

childhood,  which  induces  the  accumulation  of  many
experiences  before  it  makes  conduct  possible ;  the
skillfulness  of  the  hand  which  makes  man  the  born
experimenter  and  permits  a  multitude  of  coherent
observations;  finally,  speech  —  partly  because  the
articulate  sounds  as  symbols  for  ideas  fix  their  con-
tent, and  serve  to  make  the  combination  of  many
ideas  into  the  object  of  an  inner  intuition  ;  partly,
and  principally,  because  communication  develops
further  the  course  of  each  individual's  ideas  by
means  of  the  stimulating,  enriching,  and  correcting
intervention  of  another's  course  of  thought.

§  101.  Most  definitively  is  Reason  regarded  as  the
characteristic  of  man  ;  and  by  this  is  understood  the
capacity  for  perceiving  eternal  verities  immediately
per  se,  as  soon  as  external  experiences  have  furnished
consciousness  with  the  matter  of  fact,  about  which
these  same  verities  have  to  express  a  judgment,  —
principally  one  of  moral  approbation  or  disappro-
bation.

We  know  nothing  about  a  primary  psychological
origin  for  these  simplest  principles  of  Conscience ;
and  we  accordingly  have  reason  to  consider  them  as
one  of  those  reactions  of  the  original  nature  of  the
spirit,  that  are  never  explicable  —  however  often,  to
be sure, the attempt is made  —  by the external


150  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY.

inducements  which  they  certainly  require  in  order  to
be  awakened.  It  is,  moreover,  an  indifferent  matter
whether  they  are  regarded  as  endowment  inborn  or
as  gained  by  the  experience  of  life ;  if  only  it  be
admitted  that,  after  they  have  originated  within  us,
they  are  the  expressions  of  a  truth  which,  although
it  is  discovered  by  experience,  is  with  respect  to  its
content  and  its  value  quite  independent  thereof.

§  102,  Moral  truths  exist  in  order  to  determine
the  will.  Of  this,  too,  we  speak  only  in  the  case  of
men  ;  to  the  animals  we  do  not  impute  what  they  do,
because  we  consider  it  as  the  natural  result  of
instinct,  but  not  as  the  actions  of  a  will.

Instincts  are  primarily  nothing  but  feelings  ;  and
that,  chiefly,  of  pain  or  at  any  rate  uneasiness.  They
are  wont,  however,  to  be  connected  with  motor
impulses,  that,  in  the  manner  of  reflex  motions,  lead
to  all  kinds  of  movements  by  which,  after  more  or
less  of  error,  the  means  are  discovered  for  doing
away  with  the  aforesaid  pain.  It  is  only  after  the
idea  of  that  action  by  which  the  pain  is  relieved,
has  combined  with  feeling,  that  an  instinct,  strictly
speaking,  has  been  formed,  such  as  has  a  goal  to
reach  and  such  that  the  soul  of  the  animal  is  in-
stinctively moved  by  it.

In the same manner do innumerable so-called


THE MEANING OF "l WILL."  151


'actions'  of  the  human  life  occur,  of  which  we  say,
incorrectly,  —  They  are  '  ivilled.'  But  the  fact  simply
is,  that  there  has  been  no  will  active  in  order  to
prevent  their  occurrence.

It  is  correct  to  speak  of  'willing,'  only  in  case
the  motives  for  different  actions,  and  their  values,
have  been  compared  with  full  consciousness,  and
then  a  decision  for  one  of  them  has  been  reached.
It  is  utterly  groundless  to  assert  that  we  even  then
express  by  the  proposition,  "  I  will,"  nothing  more
than  the  foresight  of  the  future  tense,  "I  shall."
This  would  hold  good  only  in  case  the  verb,  whose
future  tense  we  employ,  has  itself  the  significance
of  an  action  in  the  very  conception  of  which  there
is  inherent  an  antecedent  volition.  Otherwise,  un-
prejudiced observation  will  admit  that  the  peculiar
approval  of  the  action  conceived,  or  the  adoption
of  a  decision  that  proceeds  from  the  personal  ego,
—  however  impossible  it  may  be  to  construe  such
a  thing  further,  —  is  nevertheless  a  process  in  our
inner  life  that  is  given  in  fact  and  is  explicable  by
no  mechanism  of  ideas.

§  103.  Even  if  such  a  nature  of  the  will  be
recognized,  we  should  still  be  able  to  conceive  of
it  as  determined  in  every  one  of  its  expressions
according  to  definite  laws,  in  case  we  rely  solely
upon explanatory  science.


152  OUTLINES OF PSYCHOLOGY,

Now  if  Ethics  believes  that  it  needs  freedom  of
the  will  for  establishing  its  views,  then  Psychol-
ogy must  at  least  not  be  misused  in  the  attempt
to  decide  about  the  possibility  of  such  an  assump-
tion, on  grounds  of  so-called  experience.

It  is  not  true  that  we  find  in  our  self-observa-
tion the  determining  causes  for  all  our  actions.
Very  frequently  we  find  nothing  of  the  kind.  But
even  where  we  suppose  we  find  such  a  thing,  the
matter  is  ambiguous.  For  if  the  motives  for  two
opposed  actions,  a  and  h,  have  been  for  a  long  time
compared  in  reflection,  and  then  a  decision  for  a
has  taken  place,  it  must  always  afterward  appear
as  though  the  reasons  for  a  had  prevailed  over
those  for  1>  by  their  very  strength  in  a  mechani-
cal way ;  and  such  an  appearance  would  have  to
originate  in  exactly  the  same  manner,  if  the  deci-
sion for  a  were  in  fact  accomplished  by  means  of
a  perfectly  undetermined  freedom.

To  MetapJiysic  must  the  question  be  relegated,
whether  in  other  regards  the  conception  of  such  a
freedom  is  capable  of  being  harmonized  with  our
entire  way  of  regarding  the  world  ;  and  to  Prac-
tical PJtilosopJiy,  the  question  whether  it  promises
the  advantages  for  the  sake  of  which  we  venture
to make it.


INDEX.


INDEX.


A.

Affections,  nature  of,  'jj.

Animals,  souls  of,  145  f ;  instinct  of,  146  i.

Aphasia,  141.

Association  of  Ideas,  fact  of,  35  f. ;  law  s  of,  36  f.

Attention,  40  ff. ;  degrees  of,  45  f.


Body,  picture  of  how  formed,  64  f.;  action  of  on  soul,  98  f ;  bonds  of  loi.
Brain,  as  seat  of  soul,  no  f.

C.

Color,  prismatic  arrangement  of,  11  f;  stimuli  of  sensations  of,  23;  blind-
ness to,  25  ;  fundamental  forms  of  25  ;  impressions  of  52  f.

Comparison,  act  of,  40  f. ;  of  sensations,  69.

Consciousness,  ideas  in,  29  f.,  35  f;  meanings  of  43f. ;  degrees  of  44  ;  of
self,  78  f.;  psychical  unity  of,  93f,  95f. ;  feelings  of  126  f.;  as  waking
state,  130  f  ;  loss  of  131,  133  f. ;  abnormal  phenomena  of  142.

Corti,  organ  of,  24.

E.

Ego,  the,  in  self-consciousness,  79  f,  81  f.

Eye,  structure  of,  24,  47  f.,  59;  use  in  intuiting  space,  53  f,  55  f.,  59  f.

F.

Faculties  of  the  soul,  120  f

Feelings,  of  double  contact,  71  f. ;  definition  of  the,  73  ;  always  specific,  75  ;

of  sense,  75  f. ;  aesthetic,  76 ;  ethical,  76  f.;  of  self-consciousness,  124  f.
Freedom,  fact  of,  151  f.

G.
God,  omnipresence  of,  105,  108  f.

H.

Hegel,  doctrine  of  the  soul,  126,

Herbart,  on  attention,  45;  and  faculties  of  the  soul,  122,  123  f.


156  INDEX,


I.

Ideas,  nature  of,  28 ;  course  of,  28  ff.,  31  f.,  35  f. ;  relation  to  consciousness,
28  f.;  mechanics  of,  31  f.,  34;  simple  and  obscure,  32  f. ;  opposition  of
33  f. ;  association  of,  35  f.,  37  f.

Immortality  of  the  soul,  112,  114,  118.

Instinct,  146  f.,  150.

Intellect,  characteristic  of  man,  148  f.

K.

Knowledge,  relative,  40  f.

L.

Leibnitz,  monad  of,  96.

Likeness,  origin  of  idea  of,  41  f.

Local  signs,  theory  of,  52,  53  ff.,  61  f. ;  of  the  eye,  53  f. ;  of  the  skin,  62  t.

Localization,  of  the  eye,  53  f. ;  of  the  skin,  62  f. ;  in  the  whole  body,  64  f.

M.

Materialism,  assumptions  of,  92  f.,  loi,  118.

Matter,  incapable  of  psychical  stales,  92  f.

Mechanics,  psychical,  31  f.,  34.

Mechanism,  and  force,  106.

Memory,  phenomena  of,  29  f. ;  physical  basis  of,  135  f.

Motion,  concepts  of,  58  f. ;  judgments  of,  70  f.

Motions,  tlie  bodily,  83;  the  reflex,  84  f. ;  the  mimetic,  85  f.;  the  imitative,

86  f. ;  voluntary  and  involuntary,  87.
Motorium  commune,  139  f.

N.

Nerve-fibre,  excitement  of,  6,  12;  propagation  in,  7f. ;  specific  energy  01,

22  f. ;  kinds  of,  in  the  eye,  25.
Nerve-process,  nature  physical,  6  f.
Notion,  the  general,  42  f.

O.

Organs,  the  bodily,  as  related  to  consciousness,  129  f. ;  none,  for  higher
faculties,  141  f.

P.
Phrenology,  138  f.

Place,  of  a  Thing,  108  ;  of  a  spiritual  Being,  108  f.

Plants,  psychical  life  of,  145.  • -

Psychology,  definition  of,  1 ;  kinds  of,  i  f.

R.

Reason,  characteristic  of  man,  149  f.

Retina,  relation  of,  to  intuitions  of  space,  49  f.,  52  f.,  55  f.,  59;  local  signo
of,  54  f.,  61  f.


INDEX,  157


S.

Sensation,  simple,  5  ff. ;  processes  of,  5  f. ;  a  psychical  experience,  7  f.,  9  f. ;
elements  of,  8  f. ;  classes  of,  10  f. ;  intensity  of,  11  f.,  14  f.,  16  f.,  19  f. ;  dur-
ation of,  12  f. ;  quality  of,  16  f.,  52 ;  repetition  of,  20  f. ;  subjective,  21  f  ;
subjectivity  of,  25  f. ;  in  contrast  to  ideas,  27,  31  f. ;  comparison  of,  69;
differs  from  feelings,  73.

Senses,  apprehension  of  world  by,  66;  errors  of,  66  f. ;  feelings  of,  75.

Sensorium  commune,  139  f.

Sentiments,  nature  of,  77.

Skin,  localization  of  sensations  in,  62  f. ;  Weber's  investigations,  63.

Sleep,  causes  of,  132,  134  f.

Somnambulism,  143.

Soul,  life  of,  I ;  relation  of,  to  ideas,  29  f. ;  unity  of,  30  f.,  42,  93  f. ;  extension
in,  48  f.;  as  subject,  91 ;  connection  with  body,  91  f.,  98  f.,  loi ;  states
of,  96 f.,  129  f.,  132  f. ;  as  monad,  96 ;  immaterial  essence,  98  f.,  102, 119  f. ;
seat  of,  105  f.,  iiof. ;  time-relations  of,  112  f. ;  immortality  of,  112  f.,  118  ;
origin  of,  117;  faculties  of,  120  f.;  destiny  of,  126.

Sound,  impressions  of,  16  f.

Space,  intuitions  of,  47f.,  49f.,  51  f.,  55  f-".  deductions  of,  51;  construction
of  world  in,  57  f.,  64  f. ;  depth  of,  58f.;  mental  picture  of,  65;  magni.
tudes  in,  67  f.

States,  unconscious,  29 ;  as  related  to  ego,  79  f.,  96  f. ;  not  separable  from
soul,  100.

Stimuli,  external,  5  f. ;  relations  of,  to  sensations,  10,  14  ff.,  18  f.;  sensitive-
ness to  differences  in,  13  f.,  18  f.,  63  f. ;  internal,  21  f. ;  of  color  sensations,
22  f. ;  influence  of,  24 ;  feelings  due  to,  75.

Substance,  the  soul  a,  112  f. ;  meaning  of  a,  113  f,

T.

Temperaments,  doctrine  of,  137 ;  kinds  of,  137  f.

Tilings,  objective  properties  of,  26  f. ;  relation  to  space,  47 ;  and  to  one
Being,  115;  essence  of,  119.

U.
Understanding,  work  of,  66.

V.

Vision,  after-images  of,  12  f.  ;  quality  of  sensations  in,  17;  causes  of,  22 f.;
organ  of,  24,  47  f. ;  use  of  eye  in,  47  f.,  55  f. ;  image  of,  48,  59  f. ;  of  \e-
verse  objects,  60  f. ;  reasons  for  single,  61.

W.
Weber,  the  law  of,  15  ff.,  19  f. ;  investigations  of  skin  sensations,  63.
"Will,  relation  to  bodily  motions,  87  f. ;  meaning  of  the,  125  f.,  150  f.

1891


ADVERTISEMENTS


Inductive Logic

By WM. G. BALLANTINE,

President  of  Oberlin  College.


12mo.  Cloth,  viii  +  174  pages.  For  introduction,  80  cents.

Although  this  is  preeminently  a  scientific  age,  surprisingly
little  attention  is  given  in  our  colleges  and  universities  to  the  study
of  inductive  logic.  The  neglect  is  probably  due  to  the  lack  of  a
satisfactory  text-book.  Such  manuals  as  are  found  are  hardly
more  than  meager  abridgments  of  some  chapters  of  the  great
but  unequal  work  of  Mill.

It  is  the  aim  of  this  book  to  present,  within  reasonable
compass,  a  fresh  and  independent  statement  of  the  fundamental
principles  of  inductive  logic,  consistently  carried  out  in  detail  and
amply  illustrated  by  extracts  from  a  wide  range  of  philosophical
and  scientific  writers.  The  best  modern  teachers  make  large  use
of  the  library  and,  while  setting  forth  their  own  views,  seek  to
acquaint  their  students  with  the  literature  of  the  subject  and  the
history  of  opinion.  It  is  believed  that  these  numerous  quotations
from  Bacon,  Mill,  Darwin,  Helmholtz,  G.  F.  Wright,  and  others,
while  exactly  in  point  as  illustrations  and  elucidations,  will  also
be  found  strikingly  interesting  in  themselves  and  highly  useful  in
familiarizing  the  reader  with  the  phraseology,  literary  styles  and
modes  of  thinking  of  those  eminent  authorities.

Teachers  of  inductive  logic  will  be  pleased  to  find  here  a
simple  account  of  the  relations  of  induction  and  deduction  which
discards  the  notion  of  two  separate  realms  of  thought  in  one  of
which  it  is,  and  in  the  other  is  not,  legitimate  to  draw  a  conclusion
wider  than  the  premises.  The  classification  of  inductions  under
three  heads,  as  primary,  secondary  and  mixed,  clears  away  the
confusions  which  have  arisen  from  the  attempt  to  bring  all  induc-
tions under  a  single  definition.  The  doctrine  of  Causation  is  treated
with  great  thoroughness,  but  the  notion  of  cause  is  not  made,  as
in  Mill's  system,  the  root  of  the  whole  theory  of  induction.


GINN & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS,

Boston.  New  York.  CtLicago.  Atlanta.


Books  on  Political  Science

List Mailing

Price Price

Boynton's  Syllabus  of  Civics $0.25 $0.27

Bryan's  The  Mark  in  Europe  and  America.  A
Review  of  the  Discussion  on  liaily  Land
Tenure i.oo i.io

Burgess'  Political  Science  and  Comparative  Consti-
tutional Law.  'iwo  vuluines. Ketail  price,  #.5.00

Clark's The Philosophy  of  Wealth. Economic

Principles  Newly  Formulated 1.00 i.io

Dawes' How  We  are  Governed. (Revised  Edition) i.oo 1.15

Dunbar's  Currency,  Finance,  and  Banking.

Retail  price,  $2.50

Macy's  Our  Government. How  it  Grew,  What  it

Does,  and  How  it  Does  it .75  .85

Macy's  First  Lessons  in  Civil  Government . . .60 .70

Macy's  Iowa  Government  Text-Book 40 .45

Political  Science  Quarterly.  A  Review  devoted  to
the  Historical,  Statistical,  and  Comparative
Study  of  PoHtics,  Economics,  and  Public  Law.
Edited  by  tlie  Faculty  of  Political  Science  of
Columbia  University.  Annual  subscription,
$3.00  ;  single  numbers,  75 cents.

The  Gold-Silver  Controversy.  Essays  from  the
"  Political  Science  Quarterly." List  price,  50  cents.

Tosti's  The  Sociological  Theories  of  Gabriel
Tarde.  Reprinted  from  tlie  "  Political  Science
(Juarterly." List  price,  15 cents.

Seelye's  Citizenship. A  P)Ook  on  Government  and

Law,  for  the  Pul)lic  Schools .30  .35

Seligman's  Railway  Tariffs  and  Interstate  Law.

Retail  price,  50  cents
Steiner's  Institutions and Civil  Government of

Maryland 90 i.oo

Thompson's  Political  Economy 50 .55

University  of  Pennsylvania  Publications. Series

in  Political  Economy  and  J'ublic  Law . . .

(Send  for  a  special  circular.')

White's  Money  and  Banking.  Illustrated  by
American  History.  Second  edition.  Revised
and  continued  to  the  year  1902 1.50 1.65

CINN  &  COMPANY  Publishers

BOSTON  NEW  YORK  CHICAGO  SAN  FRANCISCO

ATLANTA  DALLAS  COLUMBUS  LONDON


ETHICAL SERIES

UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF

E.  HERSHEY  SNEATH,
Assistant  Professor  o/  Philosophy  in  Yale  University.

The  primary  object  of  the  Series  is  to  facilitate  the  study  of  the
History  of  Ethics  in  colleges.  This  History  will  be  in  the  form  of  a
series  of  small  volumes,  each  devoted  to  the  presentation  of  a  represen-
tative system  of  Modern  Ethics  in  selections  from  the  original  works.
The  selections  will  be  accompanied  by  Notes,  and  prefaced  by  a  brief
biographical  sketch  of  the  author,  a  statement  of  the  relation  of  his
system  to  preceding  and  subsequent  ethical  thought,  a  brief  exposition
of  the  system,  and  a  bibliography.

The  following  volumes  of  the  Series  are  now  ready :

The  Ethics  of  Hume.  By  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Professor  of  Logic  and
Ethics  in  Columbia  University.  i2mo.  Cloth.  275  pages.  For
introduction,  $1.00.

The  present  volume  contains  the  whole  of  the  third  book  of  the
Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  and  such  portions  of  the  second  book  as
throw  light  upon  or  are  connected  with  Hume's  moral  theory.

The  analysis  and  criticism  of  his  system  follows  lines  somewhat
different  from  that  of  Green,  and  are  designed  to  present  Hume  in
another  light.  In  all  respects  it  is  hoped  that  the  volume  may  prove
helpful  to  those  who  wish  to  study  the  ethical  system  of  Kant's
predecessor.

The  Ethics  of  Hegel.  Translated  Selections  from  his  "Rechtsphi-
losophie."  With  an  Introduction  by  J.  Macbride  Sterrett,
Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  Columbian  University,  Washing-
ton, D.C. i2mo. Cloth. 216  pages. For  introduction,  ^i. 00.

The  great  revival  of  interest  and  work  in  the  department  of  Ethics
during  the  present  quarter  of  a  century  has  had  its  chief  inspiration
and  source  in  the  idealistic  philosophy  of  Germany.  Of  this  philosophy
Hegel  was  the  culmination  and  crown.  Apart  from  the  empirical  evo-
lutionary school,  nearly  all  the  prominent  writers  on  Ethics  in  England
have  been  following  quite  the  spirit  and  substance  of  Hegel.

The  Ethics  of  Hobbes.  As  contained  in  Selections  from  his  Works.
With  an  Introduction  by  E.  Hershey  Sneath,  Assistant  Pro-
fessor of  Philosophy  in  Yale  University.  i2mo.  Cloth.  349
pages. For  introduction,


GINN  &  COMPANY,  Publishers,

Boston.  New  York.  Chicago.  Atlanta.  Dallas.


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hiigard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


■  '^  ^^^  0 1  ^^J^J^,


L
W


wiAt  L  oiwa


nil  L9-


u *^


3 1158


00201 2036


v^


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


AA 000  509  943


11.


•  v


i!i«f


11
