Mars (Percival Lowell, 1895)
============================
Percival Lowell — Mars (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1895). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (mars00lowe_0).


-O   <i


^    .r.^^


0


r  <^


.        \>        o     V    *   0  ,       ^1^  '  \>


te^^  ^>«<^\%#^;


<:Ly


<<^       '.  ^"^^r^^^


V'


'^<^.      .X^       .".^,^#.1._^-_  "^.       A^      ^"^%^A>,    %     >


v^^^


^^ .  ^  V


^onlis  bp  Pcrcibal  lotDell.


THE    SOUL   OF   THE    FAR    EAST.      i6mo,  gilt

top,  $1.25.
CHOSON:    THE    LAND    OF    THE    MORNING

CALM.    A  Sketch  of  Korea.     Illustrated.    4to,

gilt  top,  $5.00;  half  calf,  I9.00;  tree  calf,  $12.00.
Library  Edition.     8vo,  gilt  top,  f  3. 00;    half  calf,

$6.00.
NOTO:      AN      UNEXPLORED     CORNER     OF

JAPAN.     i6mo,  gilt  top,  11.25.
OCCULT  JAPAN:    THE  WAY  OF  THE  GODS.

Illustrated.     Crown  8vo,  $1.75.

HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  AND  COMPANY,
Boston  and  New  York.


MARS


BY


PERCIVAL    LOWELL

FELLOW    AMERICAN    ACADEMY*,    MEMBER    ROYAL    ASIATIC   SOCIETY
GREAT   BRITAIN    AND    IRELAND,  ETC.


BOSTON   AND   NEW  YORK
HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  AND   COMPANY

1895


Ml  rights  reserved.


The  Riverside  Press,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.  S.  A.
Electrotyped  and  Printed  by  H.  O.  Houghton  Si  Ca


9^5


S^


TO

PROFESSOR  WILLIAM  EDWARD  STORY

SOMETIME  AT  FLAGSTAFF  HIMSELF

THIS  NEWS   FROM  A  NEIGHBOR

IS  INSCRIBED


PEEFACE

This  book  is  the  result  of  a  special  study  of
the  planet  made  during  the  last  opposition,  at
an  observatory  put  up  for  the  purpose  of  get-
ting as  good  air  as  practicable,  at  Flagstaif,
Arizona.  A  steady  atmosphere  is  essential  to
the  study  of  planetary  detail :  size  of  instru-
ment being  a  very  secondary  matter.  A  large
instrument  in  poor  air  will  not  begin  to  show
what  a  smaller  one  in  good  air  will.  When  this
is  recognized,  as  it  eventually  will  be,  it  will  be-
come the  fashion  to  put  up  observatories  where
they  may  see  rather  than  be  seen.

Next  to  atmosphere  comes  systematic  study.
Of  the  extent  to  which  this  was  realized  at
Flagstaff,  I  need  only  say  that  the  planet  was
observed  there  from  May  24,  1894,  to  April  3,
1895,  during  which  time,  to  mention  nothing
else,  917  drawings  and  sketches  were  made  of
it.     Prof.    W.    H.    Pickering   and    Mr.    A.    E.


VI  PREFACE

Douglass  were  associated  with  me  in  the    ob-
servations herein  described.

Such  as  care  to  see  the  original  data  more
technically  and  minutely  treated  will  find  them
in  the  first  volume  of  the  Annals  of  this  obser-
vatory.

Lowell  Observatory,

November,  1895.


CONTENTS

CHAFTEB  PAGE

I.  General  Characteristics 1

1.  As  a  Star 1

2.  Orbit 8

3.  Size  and  Shape 14^

II.  Atmosphere 31

1.  Evidence  of  it 31

2.  Clouds 60

III.  Water 76

1.  The  Polar  Cap         .         .         .         .         .         .76

2.  Areography 92

3.  Seas 107

IV.  Canals    . 129

1.  First  Appearances 129

2.  Map  and  Catalogue 141

3.  Artificiality 148

4.  Development 154

V.  Oases 176

1.  Spots  in  the  Light  Regions ....  176

2.  Double  Canals 188

3.  Spots  in  the  Dark  Regions  ....  197

VI.  Conclusion .        .        .  201

Appendix .        .  213

Index 223


LIST   OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE  PAGK

I.   Mars,  Sinus  Titanum      .       Colored  Frontispiece.
November,  1894.  (P.  L.)

Orbits  of  Mars  and  the  Earth       .        .        .11
HuYGHENs'  Drawing  of  the  Syrtis  Major    .     21
November  28,  1659.

{From  Flammarion's  "  La  Planete  Mars.'')

Terminator  Effects 38

(P.  L.)
II.   Map  of  the  South  Pole  of  Mars     .        .        .84
Showing  the  Polar  Cap  and  its  Changes  in  1894.

(P.  L.)

III.  Mars,  Longitude  0°  on  the  Meridian       .        .     96

(P.  Z.)

IV.  Mars,  Longitude  30°  on  the  Meridian      .        .    97

(P.  L.)
V.   Mars,  Longitude  60°  on  the  Meridian      .        .     99

(P.  L.)
VI.   Mars,  Longitude  90°  on  the  Meridian      .        .  100

(P.  L.)
VII.   Mars,  Longitude  120°  on  the  Meridian     .  101

(P.  L.)
VIII.   Mars,  Longitude  150°  on  the  Meridian    .        .  102

(P.  L.)
IX.   Mars,  Longitude  180°  on  the  Meridian    .        .  103

(P.  Z.)
X.   Mars,  Longitude  210°  on  the  Meridian    .        .  104

(P.  Z.)
XI.  Mars,  Longitude  240°  on  the  Meridian    .        .  105

(P.  Z.)


viii  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

XII.   Mars,  Longitude  270°  on  the  Meridian   .        .  105

(P.  L.)

XIII.  Mars,  Longitude  300°  on  the  Meridian   .        .  106

(P.  i.)

XIV.  Mars,  Longitude  330°  on  the  Meridian    .        .  107

(P.  Z.)

XV.   Syrtis  Major Ill

Showing  Seasonal  Change  during  1894.     (P.  i.)

XVI.  Hesperia 116

Showing  Seasonal  Change  during  1894.      (P.  i.)

XVII.   Sea  of  the  Sirens 122

Showing  Seasonal  Change  during  1894.      (P.  Z.)

XVIII.  Fastigium  Aryn 138

October,  1894.  (P.  L.)

XIX.  Lagus  Phoenicis 162

November,  1894.  (P.  L.)

XX.   Terminator  Views 170

August  24,  1894.  {W.  H.  P.)

XXI.   Drawings  after  Opposition  (except  one)        .  171

{A.  E.  D.)
XXII.   Drawings  after  Opposition       ....  173

{A.  E.  D.)

XXIII.  Phison  and  Euphrates 194

Both  Double,  November  18,  1894.  (P.  L.)

XXIV.  Mars,  on  Mercator's  Projection      .        .        .  218

(P.  i.)


MARS


I

GENERAL   CHARACTERISTICS
I.    AS   A   STAK

Once  in  about  every  fifteen  years  a  startling
visitant  makes  his  appearance  upon  our  mid-
night skies,  —  a  great  red  star  that  rises  at  sun-
set through  the  haze  about  the  eastern  horizon,
and  then,  mounting  higher  with  the  deepening
night,  blazes  forth  against  the  dark  background
of  space  with  a  splendor  that  outshines  Sirius
and  rivals  the  giant  Jupiter  himself.  Startling
for  its  size,  the  stranger  looks  the  more  fateful
for  being  a  fiery  red.  Small  wonder  that  by
many  folk  it  is  taken  for  a  portent.  Certainly,
no  one  who  had  not  followed  in  their  courses
what  the  Greeks  so  picturesquely  called  "  the
wanderers "  (ol  TtXavstoc)  would  recognize  in
the  apparition  an  orderly  member  of  our  own
solar  family.  Nevertheless,  one  of  the  wander-
ers it  is,  for  that  star  is  the  planet  Mars,  large
because  for  the  moment  near,  having  in  due
course  again  been  overtaken  by  the  Earth,  in


2  MARS

her  swifter  circling  about  the  Sun,  at  that  point
in  space  where  his  orbit  and  hers  make  their
closest  approach.

Although  the  apparent  new-comer  is  neither
new  nor  intrinsically  great,  he  possesses  for  us
an  interest  out  of  all  proportion  to  his  size  or
his  relative  importance  in  the  universe  ;  and
this  for  two  reasons  :  first,  because  he  is  of  our
own  cosmic  kin ;  and  secondly,  because  no  other
heavenly  body,  Venus  and  the  Moon  alone  ex-
cepted, ever  approaches  us  so  near.  What  is
more,  we  see  him  at  such  times  better  than  we
ever  do  Venus,  for  the  latter,  contrary  to  what
her  name  might  lead  one  to  expect,  keeps  her-
self so  constantly  cloaked  in  cloud  that  we  are
permitted  only  the  most  meagre  peeps  at  her
actual  surface  ;  while  Mars,  on  the  other  hand,
lets  us  see  him  as  he  is,  no  cloud-veil  of  his,  as
a  rule,  hiding  him  from  view.  He  thus  offers
us  effective  opportunities  for  study  at  closer
range  than  does  any  other  body  in  the  uni-
verse except  the  Moon.  And  the  Moon  balks
inquiry  at  the  outset.  For  that  body,  from
which  we  might  hope  to  learn  much,  appears
upon  inspection  to  be,  cosmically  speaking,
dead.  Upon  her  silent  surface  next  to  nothing
now  takes  place  save  for  the  possible  crumbling
in  of  a  crater  wall.  For  all  practical  purposes
Mars  is  our  nearest  neighbor  in  space.  Of  all
the  orbs  about  us,  therefore,  he  holds  out  most


AS  A  STAR  3

promise  of  response  to  that  question  which  man
instinctively  makes  as  he  gazes  up  at  the  stars :
What  goes  on  upon  all  those  distant  globes  ?
Are  they  worlds,  or  are  they  mere  masses  of
matter  ?  Are  physical  forces  alone  at  work
there,  or  has  evolution  begotten  something
more  complex,  something  not  unakin  to  what
we  know  on  Earth  as  life  ?  It  is  in  this  that
lies  the  peculiar  interest  of  Mars.

That  just  as  there  are  other  masses  of  matter
than  our  globe,  so  there  are  among  them  other
worlds  than  ours  is  an  instant  and  inevitable
inference  from  what  we  see  about  us.  That  we
are  the  only  part  of  the  cosmos  possessing  what
we  are  pleased  to  call  mind  is  so  earth-centred
a  supposition,  that  it  recalls  the  other  earth-
centred  view  once  so  devoutly  held,  that  our
little  globe  was  the  point  about  which  the
whole  company  of  heaven  was  good  enough
to  turn.  Indeed,  there  was  much  more  reason
to  think  that  then,  than  to  think  this  now,  for
there  was  at  least  the  appearance  of  turning,
whereas  there  is  no  indication  that  we  are  sole
denizens  of  all  we  survey,  and  every  inference
that  we  are  not.

That  we  are  in  some  wise  kin  to  all  the  rest
of  the  cosmos,  science  has  been  steadil}^  demon-
strating more  and  more  clearly.  The  essential
oneness  of  the  universe  is  the  goal  to  which  all
learning  tends.     Just  as  Newton  proved  all  the


4  MARS

planets  to  obey  a  common  force,  the  Sun  ;  just
as  Laplace  showed  it  to  be  probable  that  we
were  all  evolved  from  one  and  the  same  primal
nebula ;  so  more  recently  the  spectroscope  has
revealed  unsuspected  relationship  betwixt  us
and  the  stars.  Matter  turns  out  to  be  but  com-
mon property;  and  the  very  same  substances
with  which  we  are  so  familiar  on  the  Earth,  iron,
magnesium,  sodium,  and  so  forth,  prove  present
on  those  far-off  suns  that  strew  the  depths  of
space.     Only  in  detail  does  everything  differ.

So  much  for  matter.  As  for  that  manifesta-
tion of  it  known  as  mind,  modesty,  if  not  intel-
ligence, forbids  the  thought  that  we  are  sole
thinkers  in  all  we  see.  Indeed,  we  seldom  stop
in  our  locally  engrossing  pursuits  to  realize  how
small  the  part  we  play  in  the  universal  drama.
Let  ns  consider  for  a  moment  how  we  should
appear,  or,  more  exactly,  not  appear,  could  we
get  off  our  world  and  scan  it  from  without.  If
distance  could  thus  reduce  for  us  the  scale  upon
which  the  universe  is  fashioned  to  one  we  could
take  in,  that  on  which  the  Earth  should  be  rep-
resented by  a  good-sized  pea,  with  a  grain  of
mustard  seed,  the  Moon,  circling  about  it  at  a
distance  of  seven  inches,  the  Sun  would  be  a
globe  two  feet  in  diameter,  two  hundred  and
fifteen  feet  away.  Mars,  a  much  smaller  pea,
would  circle  around  the  two-foot  globe  three
hundred  and  twenty-five  feet  from  its  surface  ;


AS  A  STAR  6

Jupiter,  an  orange,  at  a  distance  of  a  fifth  of  a
mile ;  Saturn,  a  small  orange,  at  two  fifths  of
a  mile  ;  and  Uranus  and  Neptune,  good-sized
plums,  three  quarters  of  a  mile  and  a  mile  and
a  quarter  away,  respectively.  On  this  same
scale  the  nearest  star  would  lie  eight  thousand
miles  off,  and  an  average  third-magnitude  star
at  about  the  present  distance  of  our  Moon ;  that
is,  on  a  scale  upon  which  the  Moon  should  be
but  seven  inches  off,  the  average  star  would
still  be  as  far  from  us  as  the  Moon  is  now.
Now  when  we  think  that  each  of  these  stars
is  probably  the  centre  of  a  solar  system  grander
than  our  own,  we  cannot  seriously  take  our-
selves to  be  the  only  minds  in  it  all.

Probable,  however,  as  extra-terrestrial  life  in
general  is,  it  is  another  matter  to  predicate  it
in  any  particular  case.  Nevertheless,  if  it  exist
it  must  exist  somewhere,  and  the  first  place  to
scan  is  the  place  we  can  scan  best.  Now  the
Moon  appears  to  be  hopelessly  dead.  Mars,
therefore,  becomes  of  peculiar  interest,  and  it
was  in  hope  of  learning  something  on  the  sub-
ject that  the  observations  about  to  be  described
in  this  book  were  made.  Before  proceeding,
however,  to  an  account  of  what  in  consequence
we  have  learned  about  our  neighbor,  a  couple
of  misapprehensions  upon  the  subject,  —  not
confined,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  wholly  to  the  lay
mind,  —  must  first  be  corrected.    One  of  these  is


6  MARS

that  extra-terrestrial  life  means  extra-terrestrial
human  life.  Such  an  inference  recalls  to  my
mind  the  exclamation  of  an  innocent  globe-
trotter to  a  friend  of  mine  in  Japan  once,  a
connoisseur  of  Japanese  painting,  upon  being
told  that  the  Japanese  pictures  were  exceed-
ingly fine.  "What!"  the  globe-trotter  ex-
claimed in  surprise,  "  do  the  Japanese  have  pic-
tures,—  real  pictures,  I  mean,  in  gilt  frames?"
The  existence  of  extra-terrestrial  life  does  not
involve  "  real  life  in  trousers,"  or  any  other
particular  form  of  it  with  which  we  are  locally
conversant.  Under  changed  conditions,  life  it-
self must  take  on  other  forms.

The  next  point  is  as  to  what  constitutes
proof.  Now,  between  the  truths  we  take  for
granted  because  of  their  age,  and  those  we
question  because  of  their  youth,  we  are  apt  to
forget  that  in  both  proof  is  nothing  but  prepon-
derance of  probability.  The  law  of  gravitation,
for  example,  than  which  we  believe  nothing  to
be  more  true,  depends  eventually,  as  recognized
by  us,  upon  a  question  of  probability ;  and  so
do  the  thousand  and  one  problems  of  daily  life
upon  so  many  of  which  we  act  unhesitatingly
and  should  be  philosophic  fools  if  we  did  not.
All  deduction  rests  ultimately  upon  the  data
derived  from  experience.  This  is  the  tortoise
that  supports  our  conception  of  the  cosmos.
For  us,  therefore,  the  point   at   issue   in  any


AS  A  STAR  7

theory  is  not  whether  there  be  a  possibility  of
its  being  false,  but  whether  there  be  a  proba-
bility of  its  being  true.  This,  which  is  evident
enough  when  squarely  envisaged,  is  too  often
lost  sight  of  in  discussing  theories  on  their  road
to  recognition.  Negative  evidence  is  no  evi-
dence at  all,  and  the  possibility  that  a  thing
might  be  otherwise,  no  proof  whatever  that  it
is  not  so.  The  test  of  a  theory  is,  first,  that  it
shall  not  be  directly  contradicted  by  any  facts,
and  secondly,  that  the  probabilities  in  its  favor
shall  be  sufficiently  great.

As  to  what  constitutes  sufficiency  it  is  impor-
tant to  bear  in  mind  one  point  in  the  doctrine
of  probabilities,  namely,  that  the  chance  that
two  or  more  unrelated  events  will  occur  simul-
taneously is  not  the  sum  of  the  chances  that
each  separately  occurs,  but  the  product  of  these
chances.  Therefore,  if  the  probability  in  favor
of  a  theory,  in  consequence  of  its  explaining  a
certain  set  of  details,'  be  three  to  one,  and  be-
cause of  its  explaining  another  set,  —  for  the
purposes  of  argument  unrelated  to  the  first,  —
four  to  one,  then  the  probability  in  its  favor
from  its  explaining  both  sets  is  not  seven  to
one  but  twelve  to  one.  If  it  explain  a  third
set  with  an  independently  resulting  probability
of  five  to  one,  the  chances  in  its  favor  become,
from  its  explaining  all  three  sets,  not  twelve  to
one  but  sixty  to  one ;  if  a  fourth  set  be  added,


8  MARS

of  a  probability  of  five  to  one,  the  sum  total
from  the  four  becomes  not  seventeen  to  one
but  three  hundred  to  one  in  favor  of  its  beinp^
true.  It  will  be  seen  how  rapidly  the  proba-
bility of  the  truth  of  a  theory  mounts  up  from
the  amount  of  detail  it  explains.  This  law  is  to
be  remembered  throughout  the  coming  exposi-
tion, for  whatever  the  cogency  of  each  detail  of
the  argument  in  itself,  the  concurrence  of  all
renders  them  not  simply  additionally  but  multi-
plicitly  effective.  That  different  lines  of  induc-
tion all  converge  to  one  point  proves  that  point
to  be  the  radiant  point  of  the  result.

II.     ORBIT

To  determine  whether  a  planet  be  the  abode
of  life  in  the  least  resembling  that  with  which
we  are  acquainted,  two  questions  about  it  must
be  answered  in  turn :  first,  are  its  physical  con-
ditions such  as  render  it,  in  our  general  sense,
habitable  ;  and  secondly,  are  there  any  signs  of
its  actual  habitation  ?  These  problems  must  be
attacked  in  their  order,  for  unless  we  can
answer  the  first  satisfactorily,  it  were  largely
futile  to  seek  for  evidence  of  the  second.

Thoroughly  to  appreciate,  then,  the  physical
condition  of  Mars,  we  must  begin  at  the  begin-
ning of  our  knowledge  of  the  planet,  since  every
detail  will  be  found  to  play  its  part  in  the  final
result.     I  shall  therefore  give  in  a  word  or  two


ORBIT  9

the  general  facts  known  about  the  planet,  before
taking  up  the  observations  which  make  the  sub-
ject matter  of  this  book.  The  first  of  these
general  facts  is  the  path  the  planet  describes
about  the  Sun.  Who  first  found  out  that  the
ruddy  star  we  call  Mars  was  not  like  the  rest  of
the  company  about  him  we  do  not  know  ;  possi-
bly some,  to  fame  unknown,  Chaldean  shepherd
alone  with  the  night  upon  the  great  Chaldean
plains.  With  the  stars  for  sole  companions
while  his  sheep  slept,  he  must,  as  he  watched
them  night  after  night,  have  early  recognized
that  they  always  kept  the  same  configuration.
They  rose  and  set,  but  they  all  rose  and  set  to-
gether. But  one  night  he  thought  he  noticed
that  one  of  them  had  changed  its  place  with
reference  to  the  rest.  A  few  nights  later  he
became  sure  of  it.  One  of  the  immovable  had
patently  moved.  That  memorable  though  un-
remembered  night  marked  the  birth  of  our
acquaintance  with  the  rest  of  the  universe.

Whether  the  midnight  pioneer  was  Chaldean
or  Assyrian  or  of  some  other  race,  certain  it
is  that  to  the  Egyptians  we  owe  the  first  sys-
tematic study  of  the  motions  of  this  and  of  four
other  roving  stars,  and  to  the  Greeks  whom  they
taught,  the  name  by  which  we  know  them,  that
of  planets,  meaning  merely  wanderers.  Since
then,  as  we  know,  many  others  of  like  habit
have  been  added  to  the  list.


10  MARS

Now,  from  observations  of  the  apparent  places
of  a  planet,  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  rela-
tive path  of  the  planet  in  space  as  compared
with  the  path  of  the  Earth.  This  Kepler  did
from  observations  of  Tycho  Brahe's,  and  showed
the  wanderers  to  belong  to  a  system  of  bodies,
all  revolving  about  the  Sun  in  various  elliptic
orbits,  the  Sun  being  at  the  focus  of  each  ellipse.
He  also  found  that  the  line  connecting  each
planet  with  the  Sun  passed  over  equal  areas  in
equal  times,  and  thirdly,  that  the  times  of  their
revolutions  were  as  the  cubes  of  the  major  axes
of  their  orbits.  From  these  three  "laws"  New-
ton deduced  the  fact  that  the  force  controlling
the  planets  was  directed  toward  the  Sun,  that
it  varied  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance,
and  that  it  was  the  same  in  origin  for  all.  This
is  the  so-called  law  of  gravitation,  and  this  is
the  way  in  which  it  was  discovered.  We  do
not  yet  know  why  gravity  so  acts,  but  it  is  in-
teresting to  note  that  it  follows  the  simple  law
of  geometrical  expansion,  diminishing  in  exact
ratio  to  the  space  it  fills,  just  like  electricity  or
light.  It  may,  therefore,  also  be  a  wave  mo-
tion.

Thus  all  the  wanderers  proved  to  be  asso-
ciated in  common  dependence  on  the  Sun,  and
among  the  members  of  the  solar  family  thus
recognized  Mars  was  found  to  hold  the  position
next  exterior  to  the  Earth,  and  the  path  he  fol-


ORBIT


11


lowed  in  his  circuit  of  the  Sun  to  be  situated
with  regard  to  the  Earth's  as  in  the  following
diagram.


Autumnal  Equinox  of  MARS
Southern  Hemisphere


Nov.1,1894

.^VvoA  Oct.20.1804

Oct.1.1894


Vernal  Equinox  of  MARS  Southern  Hemlspliere
270°


Diagram  of  the  Orbits  of  Mars  and  the  Earth.

On  consulting  the  diagram  we  shall  at  once
perceive  why  it  is  that  every  fifteen  years  Mars
becomes  so  unusually  bright  as  to  seem,  to  one
who  has  not  kept  track  of  him,  a  new  and  start-
ling star.  His  orbit,  it  will  be  seen,  is  an  ellipse
of  some  eccentricity,  and  deviates  in  conse-
quence considerably  from  a  circle.  The  point
marked  Perihelion  denotes  the  point  where  the
planet  is  nearest  the  Sun;  the  point  marked


12  MARS

Aphelion,  the  point  where  the  planet  is  the
most  remote  from  the  Sun.  In  like  manner
the  points  marked  Perihelion  and  Aphelion  on
the  inner  circle  show  the  corresponding  points
of  the  Earth's  orbit,  which  is  much  more  nearly
circular.  Now  as  the  two  planets  revolve  in
different  periods  of  time,  Mars  taking  686.98  of
our  days  to  complete  his  circuit,  and  the  Earth
365.26  days  to  complete  hers,  the  one  planet
will  overtake  the  other  only  once  every  two
years  and  two  months  or  so.  Meanwhile  they
are  at  great  distances  apart.  But  even  when
they  do  meet,  they  do  not  always  meet  equally
near.  For  the  one  orbital  period  is  not  an  ex-
act multiple  of  the  other,  and  as  the  orbits  are
both  ellipses,  it  is  evident  that  these  meetings
of  the  two  planets  will  occur  at  different  points
of  their  orbits,  and,  therefore,  at  different  dis-
tances. If  the  meeting  occur  when  Mars  is  in
perihelion  the  planets  approach  one  another
within  35,050,000  miles ;  if  in  aphelion,  only
within  61,000,000  miles.

But  even  this  difference  in  distance  does  not
measure  the  full  extent  of  the  variation  in  bril-
liancy. As  the  brightness  of  an  illuminated
body  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  its  dis-
tance from  the  source  of  light,  and  as  the  total
amount  of  light  it  reflects  to  an  observer  varies
inversely  as  the  square  of  his  distance  from  it,
it  makes  every  difference  in  the  apparent  bril-


ORBIT  13

liancy  of  a  body  how  the  body  is  situated,  both
with  regard  to  the  source  of  Hght  and  with
regard  to  the  observer.  Now  it  so  chances  that
at  the  meetings  of  Mars  with  the  Earth  these
two  factors  attain  their  maximum  effects  nearly
together,  and  similarly  with  their  minimum.
For  at  the  times  when  we  are  closest  to  Mars,
Mars  is  nearly  at  his  closest  to  the  Sun,  and
reversely  when  we  meet  him  at  the  opposite
part  of  his  orbit.  It  thus  comes  about  that  at
some  meetings,  —  oppositions,  they  are  called,
because  Mars  then  is  in  the  opposite  part  of  the
sky  from  the  Sun,  —  the  planet  appears  four
and  one  half  times  as  bright  as  at  others.  Here,
then,  we  have  the  explanation  of  the  planet's
great  changes  in  appearance,  changes  so  great
as  to  deceive  any  one  who  has  not  followed  its
wanderings,  into  the  belief  that  it  is  some  new
and  portentous  apparition.

Important  as  is  the  ellipse  in  which  Mars
moves  with  regard  to  his  visibility  by  us,  it
is  considerably  more  important  as  regards  the
physical  condition  of  the  planet  itself.  For  the
Sun  being  situated  at  one  of  the  foci  of  his
orbit,  the  motion  of  the  planet  sweeps  him  now
near  to,  now  far  from  that  dispenser  of  light
and  warmth ;  and  the  amount  of  both  which
the  planet  receives  varies  just  like  gravity
with  his  distance  from  their  source.  Now  the
eccentricity  of  the  orbit  of  Mars  is  such  that


14  MARS

when  nearest  the  Sun  his  distance  is  129,-
600,000  miles,  when  at  his  mean  distance
141,500,000  miles,  and  when  most  remote
154,500,000  miles.  The  proportion  of  light
and  heat  he  receives  respectively  is  therefore
roughly  as  16  to  20  to  24 ;  or  half  as  much
again  at  certain  times  as  at  others.

So  much  in  our  knowledge  of  Mars  is  pre-
telescopic.  Men  might  have  and  practically
did  learn  this  much  without  ever  seeing  the
planet  other  than  as  a  point  of  light.  Its  orbit
was  tolerably  accurately  known  and  could  have
been  known  still  more  accurately  without  tele-
scopic aid  ;  not  so,  until  we  become  much  more
nearly  omniscient  than  we  at  present  are,  the
planet's  self.

III.     SIZE   AND   SHAPE

With  the  telescope  we  enter  upon  a  new
phase  in  our  knowledge  of  the  planet :  the  de-
termination of  its  shape  and  size.

The  relative  plan  of  the  solar  system  can  be
learned  with  great  accuracy  from  observations
of  the  motions  of  its  members;  not  so  easily
learned  is  the  scale  upon  which  it  is  con-
structed. Although  the  former  is  intrinsically
a  very  complicated,  the  latter  a  very  simple
problem,  two  characteristics  of  the  actual  sys-
tem make  it  possible  to  solve  the  former  much
more   nearly  than   the   latter.     One   of   these


SIZE   AND    SHAPE  15

characteristics  is  the  fact  that  the  distances
between  the  masses  which  compose  the  system
are  very  much  greater  than  the  dimensions  of
the  masses  themselves,  of  quite  a  higher  order
of  magnitude.  The  diameters  of  the  planets
are  measured  by  thousands  of  miles,  the  dis-
tances between  them  by  tens  of  millions.  The
second  characteristic  consists  in  the  approxi-
mately spherical  shape  of  the  planets  them-
selves, and  in  the  fact  that  by  a  mathematical
consequence  of  the  actual  law  of  gravitation  a
sphere  acts  upon  any  outside  body  as  if  all  its
mass  were  concentrated  at  its  centre,  a  most
interesting  peculiarity  not  true  under  many
other  supposable  laws.  These  two  facts  very
materially  simplify  the  problem  of  the  motions
of  celestial  mechanics.

But  just  as  the  first  of  these  peculiarities
helps  us  to  comprehension  of  the  relative  di-
mensions of  the  solar  system,  so  does  it  hinder
us  in  determining  its  actual  dimensions.  For
this  determination  depends  upon  a  problem  in
celestial'  surveying,  the  finding  the  distance  to
a  body  by  measuring  the  angle  it  subtends  from
the  two  ends  of  a  base-line.  Now,  as  unfortu-
nately we  cannot  get  off  the  earth  for  the  pur-
pose, our  base-line  is  at  most  the  diameter  of
the  earth  itself,  and  as  the  distance  to  the  other
body  immensely  exceeds  our  own  size,  the  angle
to  be  measured  becomes  so  excessively  small  as


16  MAKS

to  be  very  difficult  to  determine  with  accuracy.
Fortunately  this  is  matter  chiefly  of  theoretic
regret,  as  we  now  know  the  actual  sizes  to
within  a  degree  of  exactness  practically  suffi-
cient for  most  purposes  but  perturbations;  to
within  about  3^0  part  of  the  whole,  so  far  as
our  ultimate  measure  is  concerned,  the  distance
we  are  off  from  the  Sun.

A  good  idea  of  the  method  and  some  appre-
ciation of  the  difficulty  involved  in  it  can  be
got  by  considering  a  precisely  similar  case,  that
of  determining  the  distance  of  a  spire  a  mile
and  three  fifths  away  by  shutting  first  one  eye
and  then  the  other  and  noting  the  shift  of  the
spire  against  its  background.  It  is  needless
to  add  that  without  telescopic  aid  the  deter-
mination is  impossible,  and  that  it  is  exceeding
difficult  with  it.

Nevertheless,  from  the  distance  of  the  Sun
determined  in  this  manner,  we  find  from
measurements  of  the  apparent  disk  of  the
planet  made  at  Flagstaff  that  Mars  is  about
4,215  miles  in  diameter.  This  makes  his  sur-
face a  little  more  than  a  quarter  that  of  the
Earth  and  his  volume  about  one  seventh  of
hers.

The  next  point  to  find  out  is  his  mass,  that
is,  the  amount  of  matter  he  contains.  This  is
very  easy  to  determine  when  a  planet  has  a
satellite,  and  very  difficult  to  determine  when


SIZE  AND  SHAPE  IT

a  planet  has  not.  The  reason  is  this :  the  mass
of  a  body  is  known  from  the  pull  it  exerts,
inasmuch  as  this  pull  depends,  by  the  law  of
gravitation,  upon  its  mass  and  the  square  of
its  distance.  If  then  we  know  the  pull  and
the  distance  from  which  it  is  exerted,  we  can
find  the  mass.  Now  we  gauge  the  pull  from
its  effects  in  causing  some  other  body  to  move.
By  measuring,  therefore,  the  motion  of  this
other  body,  we  learn  the  mass  of  the  first  one.
To  get  this  accurately  the  motion  must  be  large
enough  to  admit  of  satisfactory  measurement  in
the  first  place,  and  be  as  uncomplicated  with
motions  due  to  pulls  of  other  bodies  as  pos-
sible, in  the  second.  As  each  body  pulls  every
other,  and  it  is  only  their  relative  displacement
we  can  measure,  as  we  have  no  foothold  in
space,  even  the  case  of  only  two  bodies  pre-
sents difficulties  of  apportionment.  We  can
learn  the  aggregate  mass  of  the  two,  but  not
the  separate  mass  of  either  alone  unless  it  so
happen  that  the  mass  of  one  is  so  insignificant
compared  w^ith  the  other  that  the  mass  of  that
other  may  be  taken  as  the  mass  of  both.  Now
this  is  substantially  realized  in  the  case  of  the
solar  system.  Owing  to  the  greatly  dispropor-
tionate size  of  primary  and  secondary  bodies  in
it,  the  great  si^  of  the  Sun  as  compared  with
that  of  any  of  the  planets,  and  the  great  size
of  the  planets  as  compared  with  their  satellites


18  MAKS

(with  the  exception  of  the  Moon,  and  she,  for-
tunately, is  an  only  child),  the  determination  of
the  mass  of  the  smaller  by  measurement  of  its
motion  about  the  larger,  —  as  if  only  the  pair
of  bodies  under  consideration  existed,  and  the
mass  of  both  were  concentrated  in  the  greater
of  the  two,  —  is  very  nearly  exact.  In  conse-
quence each  planet  discloses  with  some  accu-
racy the  mass  of  the  Sun,  but  tells  next  to
nothing  about  its  own  mass;  and  in  the  same
way  each  satellite  reveals  the  mass  of  its  pri-
mary. The  mass  of  a  planet  possessing  a  satel-
lite is,  therefore,  easy  of  determination.  Not
so  that  of  one  which  travels  unattended.  The
only  way  to  obtain  its  mass  is  from  the  pertur-
bations or  disturbing  pulls  it  exerts  upon  the
other  planets,  or  upon  stray  comets  from  time
to  time,  and  these  disturbances  are,  by  the
nature  of  the  case,  of  a  much  smaller  order  of
magnitude,  to  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  all
act  coincidently  to  increased  difficulty  of  disen-
tanglement. The  practical  outcome  of  this  in
the  case  of  Mars  was  that  before  his  satellites
were  discovered  the  values  obtained  for  his
mass  ranged  all  the  way  from  syo^oro  to
2500000  of  the  mass  of  the  Sun,  or,  in  other
words,  varied  fifty  per  cent.  His  insignificant
satellites,  however,  and  just  because  they  are
insignificant,  have  made  it  possible  to  learn  his
mass   with  great  exactness.     It   turns   out   to


SIZE  AND  SHAPE  19

be  3093500  of  that  of  the  Sun,  or  ^|  of  that  of
the  Earth.

Knowing  his  mass,  we  know  his  average  den-
sity, since  to  find  it  we  have  but  to  divide  his
mass  by  his  volume.  It  proves  to  be  -jVo  of
that  of  the  Earth.  We  also  learn  the  force  of
gravity  at  his  surface,  inasmuch  as  this  is  di-
rectly as  his  mass  and  inversely  as  the  square
of  his  radius.  It  comes  out  j^-q  of  that  of  the
Earth.  In  consequence,  all  things  there  would
weigh  but  yoq  of  their  weight  on  earth ;  a  man,
for  example,  weighing  150  pounds  here  would
weigh  but  55  pounds  if  transported  to  the  sur-
face of  Mars,  and  all  na^anual  labor  would  be
lightened  threefold.

So  soon  as  the  planet  was  scanned  telescopi-
cally,  he  was  seen  to  present  a  disk,  round  at
times,  at  other  times  lacking  somewhat  of  a
perfect  circle,  showing  like  the  Moon  when  two
days  off  from  full.  Such  appearance  visibly
demonstrated,  first,  that  he  was  not  a  self-
luminous  body,  and  secondly,  that  he  revolved
about  the  Sun  outside  of  the  Earth.  A  glance
at  the  diagram  of  the  orbit  will  make  the  latter
point  clearer.  If  we  draw  a  line  from  the  Sun
to  the  centre  of  Mars  and  pass  a  plane  through
the  planet  perpendicular  to  this  line  and  to  the
plane  of  his  orbit,  this  plane  will  divide  the
illumined  half  of  him  from  the  unillumined  half.
If  now  we  draw  another  line  from  any  point


20  MAHS

of  the  Earth's  orbit  to  Mars'  centre,  and  pass  a
plane  similarly  perpendicular  to  that,  it  will  cut
off  the  hemisphere  we  see  at  any  moment  from
the  one  we  do  not.  As  the  two  lines  do  not  in
general  coincide,  it  will  appear  that  in  certain
positions,  in  fact  in  all  but  two.  Mars  must  pre-
sent to  us  a  face  partly  steeped  in  daylight,
partly  shrouded  in  night ;  in  short,  that  he
shows  gibbous  like  the  Moon  when  she  is  be-
tween the  half  and  the  full.  This  accounts  for
the  look  of  the  drawings  made  during  June,
1894,  in  which  from  a  seventh  to  a  sixth  of
the  disk  is  wanting  on  the  left.^  By  drawing
lines  from  his  centre  to  more  than  one  posi-
tion occupied  by  the  Earth  it  will  be  seen  that
this  lacking  lune  reaches  a  maximum  when  the
Earth  as  viewed  from  Mars  is  at  extreme
elongation  from  the  Sun,  and  that  the  amount
of  the  phase  at  such  time  exactly  equals  the
number  of  degrees  of  this  elongation.  For
example,  on  the  sixteenth  of  last  June  the  lack-
ing lune  amounted  to  47°,  that  is,  the  Earth
was  then  evening  star  upon  the  Martian  twi-
light skies  at  an  angular  distance  of  47°  from
the  Sun,  about  what  Yenus  seems  to  us  at  her
extreme  elongation.  In  fact,  to  Mars  we  oc-
cupy much  the  sarne  astronomical  position  that
Venus  does  to  us.

To  Huyghens  we  owe  the  first  really  impor-

1  Plates  XV.,  XVI.,  XVII.


SIZE  AND   SHAPE


21


Huyghens'  drawing  of  the
Syrtis  Major,  Nov.  28, 1659,
7  p.  M.  Keproduced  from
Flammarion's  "  La  Planete
Mars."


tant  telescopic  observation  upon  the  planet.    On
November  28,  1659,  at  7  s

p.  M.,  he  made  the  first
drawing  of  the  planet
worthy  the  name,  for  on
it  is  the  first  identifiable
feature  ever  made  out  by
man  on  the  surface  of
Mars.  This  feature  is  the
Hourglass  Sea,  now  more
commonly  known  as  the
Syrtis  Major.  The  ac-
companying cut  of  it  is
reproduced  from  Flam-
marion.  If  the  dark  patch  in  it  be  compared
with  the  markings  in  the  other  pictures  of  the
planet,  shown  later  in  this  book,  it  will  be  seen
that  the  patch  can  be  none  other  than  the
Hourglass  Sea.

Now,  innocent  as  it  looks  of  much  detail,
Huyghens'  drawing  is  perhaps  the  most  im-
portant one  of  Mars  that  has  ever  been  made.
For,  from  his  observations  of  the  spot  it  depicts
at  successive  dates,  he  was  able  to  prove  that
Mars  rotated  on  his  own  axis,  and  to  determine
the  time  of  that  rotation,  about  24  hours.  As
he  subsequently  came  to  doubt  his  results,  the
honor  of  the  discovery  rests  with  Cassini,  who,
in  1666,  definitely  determined  that  the  planet
rotated  in  24  hours  40  minutes.     Thus  was  it


22  MARS

first  learned  that  Mars  had  a  day,  and  that  its
length  was  not  far  from  the  length  of  our  own.

The  importance  of  these  earliest  pictures  of
Mars  has  not  lapsed  with  the  lapse  of  time.  By
comparison  of  this  and  other  early  drawings
with  modern  ones,  has  been  deduced  a  very
accurate  value  of  the  length  of  the  Martian
day  (its  sidereal  day),  a  determination  accurate
to  the  tenth  of  a  second.  It  amounts  to  24
hours,  37  minutes,  22.7  seconds.  Our  sidereal
day,  that  is,  the  day  reckoned  by  the  stars,  not
by  the  Sun,  is  roughly  23  hours,  56  minutes;
so  that  the  Martian  day  is  about  40  minutes
longer  than  our  own.  The  result  is  not  given
here  closer  than  the  tenth  of  a  second,  because
the  Flagstaff  observations  have  shown  that  the
value  of  the  length  of  the  Martian  day  hitherto
accepted  is  probably  a  trifle  too  small.

From  the  discovery  of  the  rotation  followed
the  approximate  position  of  the  planet's  poles.
Eound  about  the  poles  so  determined  appeared
two  white  patches,  the  first  study  of  which  we
owe  to  Maraldi.  They  are  the  planet's  polar
caps.  They  are  to  be  detected  with  the  smallest
modern  telescope.

The  apparent  position  of  the  planet  poles  as
presented  to  the  Earth  gives  the  tilt  of  the
planet's  axis  to  the  plane  of  its  orbit.  It  turns
out  to  be  about  25°.  This  is  very  nearly  the
same  as  the  Earth's  axial  tilt  to  the  plane  of


SIZE  AND   SHAPE  23

her  orbit,  which  is  23°  24'.  As  the  indination
of  the  axis  to  the  plane  of  the  orbit  determines
the  seasons,  we  see  that  not  only  has  Mars  its
spring,  summer,  autumn,  and  winter,  but  that
these  are  not  very  unlike  our  own.

It  is  not  uninteresting  to  inquire  in  what  the
difference  consists.  The  slight  difTerence  of  tilt
in  the  Martian  axis  would  slightly  extend  the
breadth  of  the  tropical  and  the  polar  regions  at
the  expense  of  the  temperate  ones,  and  thus
accentuate  the  seasons,  but  the  chief  seasonal
contrast  between  Mars  and  the  Earth  would
come  in  in  consequence  of  the  much  greater
eccentricity  of  Mars'  orbit.  For  the  more  ec-
centric the  ellipse,  the  greater  the  variation  in
the  planet's  velocity  at  different  parts  of  it,  in-
asmuch as  the  Sun  pulls  the  planet  toward  him-
self with  a  force  depending  on  his  distance.
The  less  this  distance,  the  greater  the  angular
velocity.  But  the  angular  velocity  determines
the  length  of  the  seasons  upon  a  planet  whose
pole  of  rotation  is  tilted  to  the  plane  of  its
orbit,  like  the  Earth  or  Mars.  The  greater  the
eccentricity  of  the  ellipse,  therefore,  the  greater
the  difference  in  the  length  of  the  seasons.  In
the  case  of  the  Earth  the  difference  is  about
eight  days,  winter  in  the  northern  hemisphere
being  eight  days  shorter  than  summer.  In  the
case  of  Mars,  owing  to  the  much  greater  eccen-
tricity of  his   orbit  combined  with  his  longer


24  MARS

period,  the  difference  amounts  to  74  days.  In
one  hemisphere  winter  is  long  and  cold,  sum-
mer short  and  hot ;  in  the  other  winter  and
summer  interchange.  Owing  to  the  present
position  of  the  line  of  apsides,  the  line  connect-
ing the  points  of  Mars'  nearest  approach  to  and
farthest  recession  from  the  Sun,  the  former
hemisphere  happens  to  be  the  southern  one ;
the  latter,  the  northern.  The  lengths  of  their
respective  seasons  are  as  follows :  —

In  the  northern  hemisphere,  winter  lasts  147
of  his  own  days;  spring,  191  days;  summer,
181  days ;  autumn,  149  days ;  while  in  the
southern  hemisphere,  winter  lasts  181  days;
spring,  149  days ;  summer,  147  days ;  autumn,
191  days.

Curiously  enough,  an  analogous  distribution
of  heat  and  cold  occurs  also  at  the  present  time
in  the  case  of  the  Earth ;  its  axis  and  line  of
apsides  holding  the  same  relation  to  each  other
that  the  Martian  ones  do.  This  similarity  of
aspect  is,  as  we  shall  see  later,  apparently  very
curiously  reproduced  in  certain  peculiarities  of
the  surfaces  of  the  two  planets.  But  with  Mars
the  result  is  much  more  marked  on  account
of  the  greater  eccentricity  of  his  orbit,  which
is  .0931  as  against  the  Earth's  .0168.

As  even  under  these  exaggerated  conditions
his  two  polar  regions  show  much  alike,  modern
theories  about  our  glacial  epochs  are  consider-
ably shaken.


SIZE  AND   SHAPE  25

The  last  of  the  preliminary  points  to  be  taken
up  is  the  form  of  the  planet.  Consideration  of
it  makes  in  some  sort  a  bridge  from  the  planet's
past  to  its  present.  For  its  deviation  from  a
perfect  sphere  tells  us  something  of  its  history.

Between  the  shapes  of  the  large  planets,
Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  probably  Neptune,
and  those  of  the  small  ones.  Mercury,  Venus,
the  Earth,  and  Mars,  there  is  a  striking  dis-
similarity, the  former  being  markedly  oblate
spheroids,  the  latter  almost  perfect  spheres.

Into  the  cause  of  this,  very  interesting  as  it
is,  we  have  not  here  space  to  go.  The  effect,
however,  is  so  noticeable  that  while  the  most
casual  glance  at  the  disk  of  Jupiter  will  reveal
its  ellipticity,  the  most  careful  scrutiny  would
fail  to  show  Mars  other  than  perfectly  round.

Nevertheless,  the  planet  is  slightly  flattened
at  the  poles.  Measures  have  repeatedly  been
made  to  determine  the  extent  of  this  flattening,
with  surprisingly  discordant  results,  most  of  the
values  being  much  too  large.

Observations  at  Flagstaff  during  this  last  op-
position have  not  only  shown  that  most  of  the
values  w^ere  too  large,  but  have  revealed  the
cause  of  their  discrepancy.  There  turns  out  to
be  a  factor  in  the  case,  hitherto  unsuspected,
whose  presence  proves  to  be  precisely  such  as
would  cause  the  observed  variations  in  measure-
ments.    It  not  only  accounts  for  the  fact  of


26  MARS

discrepancy,  but  for  the  further  fact  that  the
discrepancies  should  usually  be  on  the  side  of
an  increase  of  the  apparent  polar  flattening.
This  factor  is  the  recognition  of  a  perceptible
twilight  upon  the  planet,  not  only  of  enough
account  to  be  visible,  but  to  have  been  actually
measured,  quite  unconsciously,  by  Mr.  Douglass,
and  disclosed  only  when  the  measures  came  to
be  compared  with  each  other.  Of  this  I  shall
speak  more  at  length  when  we  reach  the  sub-
ject of  atmosphere.  Here  it  is  only  necessary
to  say  that  the  presence  of  a  twilight  fringing
the  surface  of  the  planet  would  have  the  effect
of  increasing  the  apparent  size  of  the  equatorial
diameter  at  all  times,  but  to  a  different  degree
at  different  times,  and  almost  always  more  than
it  would  the  polar  one.  In  consequence,  the
polar  flattening,  which  is  the  ratio  borne  by  the
difference  of  the  equatorial  and  polar  diameters
to  the  equatorial  diameter,  would  be  seemingly
increased.

The  value  of  Mr.  Douglass'  measures  is  height-
ened by  a  certain  happy  event  of  an  unprece-
dented nature,  —  the  first  observed  disappear-
ance of  the  polar  cap,  and  that  at  the  very
time  the  most  important  measures  were  made.
The  presence  of  the  polar  cap  enters  as  a  dis-
turbing element  into  measures  of  the  planet's
disk,  on  account  of  the  increased  irradiation  it
causes  at  the  extremity  of  the  polar  diameter,


SIZE  AND   SHAPE  27

wliicli  makes  the  polar  diameter  measure  more
than  it  otherwise  would.  For  the  polar  cap  is
the  most  brilliant  part  of  the  disk ;  and  for  the
same  reason  that  any  bright  body  seems  larger
than  a  dark  one  of  the  same  size,  it  dilates  the
planet  unduly  in  that  direction.  The  resulting
effect  is  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that
the  polar  cap  is  eccentrically  situated  with  re-
gard to  the  pole  of  rotation,  as  we  shall  see
later ;  and  as  the  pole  is  tilted,  the  cap  is  some-
times on  the  edge  of  the  disk  and  the  irradia-
tion in  consequence  large,  and  sometimes  well
on  the  disk  itself  where  its  irradiation  is  little
or  nothing.  As  the  amount  of  its  magnifying
effect  is  not  accurately  known,  there  enters  with
it  an  unknown  error.  Now,  last  autumn  Nature
herself  kindly  eliminated  this  source  of  error.

The  measures  made  by  Mr.  Douglass  are  thus
entitled  to  special  regard,  not  only  because  of
their  number  (a  great  many  of  them  were
taken),  but  chiefly  because  Nature  made  the
disturbing  influence  of  the  polar  cap  nil.  When,
in  addition,  the  twilight  arc  is  allowed  for,  the
measures  show  a  most  satisfactory  accordance
and  give  for  the  value  of  the  polar  flattening
1^0  of  the  equatorial  diameter.

Now,  it  is  interesting  that  this  value  should
receive  corroborative  support  from  two  quite
different  directions.  The  first  of  these  is  that
1^  is  just  about  the  flattening  which  would  re-


28  MARS

suit  from  the  most  probable  supposition  we  can
make  as  to  the  past  history  of  the  planet.  To
show  this  we  may  take  the  case  of  the  Earth.
Investigations  along  several  different  lines  all
result  in  showing  that  the  polar  flattening  of
the  Earth  is  almost  exactly  such  as  would  re-
sult in  a  fluid  body  whose  density  from  surface
to  centre  increased  according  to  the  pressure
and  temperature  of  our  Earth  in  the  past,  and
which  rotated  with  its  present  angular  velocity.
In  the  case  of  Mars,  Tisserand  has  shown  that
the  polar  flattening  under  the  influence  of  his
present  rotation  would,  if  the  increase  of  den-
sity in  his  strata  were  similar  to  the  Earth's,
be  sJy  C)f  his  equatorial  diameter.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  his  mass  were  homogeneous,  his
polar  flattening  would  be  jj-g.  Now,  in  a  fluid
condition  a  body  could  not  remain  homogene-
ous, owing  to  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  outer
strata  upon  the  inner  ones,  unless  the  matter  of
which  it  was  composed  were  rigorously  incom-
pressible, which  is  certainly  not  the  case  with
the  Earth,  and  with  quite  equal  certainty  not
the  case  with  Mars.  On  the  other  hand,  the
increase  of  density  from  surface  to  centre  is  un-
doubtedly less  in  Mars  than  in  the  Earth,  since
the  pressure  depends  upon  the  mass  and  the
Earth's  mass  is  nearly  ten  times  that  of  Mars.
Consequently,  from  this  cause,  the  polar  flatten-
ing should  be  somewhere  between  jjs  ^^^  22T?


SIZE  AND   SHAPE  29

not  far  therefore  from  the  value  found  above,


1,

19'


The  second  bit  of  corroborative  testimony
comes  from  the  behavior  of  the  satellites  of  the
planet.  Unlike  a  sphere,  a  spheroid  acts  un-
equally upon  a  body  revolving  about  it,  not  in
the  plane  of  its  equator.  The  ring  of  matter
pulls  the  satellite  now  this  way,  now  that,  thus
altering  its  nodes,  that  is,  the  points  where
the  plane  of  its  orbit  crosses  the  planet's  equa-
tor, and  also  its  apsides,  or  the  points  in
which  the  satellite's  orbit  is  nearest  and  farthest
from  the  planet.  The  effect  of  an  equatorial
protuberance  tilted  thus  is  to  shift  these  points
round  the  orbit,  the  line  of  nodes  retrograding,
while  the  line  of  apsides  usually  advances.
From  the  speed  with  which  these  revolutions
take  place,  it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  size  of
the  bulge.  Hermann  Struve  has  just  done  this
for  the  lines  of  apsides  of  the  two  satellites  of
Mars,  and  finds  for  the  value  for  the  consequent
polar  flattening  of  the  planet  i^o  <^f  its  equa-
torial diameter.  From  these  two  independent
determinations  we  may  conclude  that  the  value
found  at  Flagstaff  is  pretty  nearly  correct.

We  find,  then,  that  Mars  is  a  little  flatter
than  our  Earth,  though  not  noticeably  so,  the
polar  flattening  amounting  to  about  22  miles.

The  value,  j^,  for  his  polar  flattening,  hints
that  at  some  past  time  Mars  was  in  a  fluid  —


30  MARS

that  iSj  a  molten — condition,  just  as  the  Earth's
polar  flattening  of  3^3  similarly  shows  her  to
have  been,  and  that  in  both  cases  the  flatten-
ing was  then  impressed.  Now,  inasmuch  as  the
tides,  lunar  and  solar  in  the  case  of  the  Earth,
solar  practically  alone  in  the  case  of  Mars,  have
been  slowing  up  the  planet's  rotation  ever  since
this  refrigeration  happened,  but  as  their  respec-
tive rates  of  rotation  still  agree  substantially
with  what  a  fluid  condition  demands,  it  is  evi-
dent that  in  the  case  of  neither  planet  could
the  cooling  have  begun  so  very  long  ago,  but
that  it  began  longer  ago  for  Mars  than  for  the
Earth.

In  so  far,  then,  we  trace  a  certain  similarity
of  development  in  the  early  chaotic  stage  of
evolution  of  the  two  planets,  a  stage  pre-natal
to  their  career  as  worlds.

From  these  basic  facts  of  size  and  shape  we
will  now  go  on  to  more  latter-day  detail.


n

ATMOSPHERE
I.    EVIDENCE   OF   IT

To  all  forms  of  life  of  which  we  have  any
conception,  two  things  in  nature  are  vital,  air
and  water.  A  planet  must  possess  these  two
requisites  to  be  able  to  support  any  life  at  all
upon  its  surface.  For  there  is  no  creature,  no
plant,  no  anything  endowed  with  the  possi-
bility of  that  kind  of  change  we  call  life,  which
is  not  in  some  measure  dependent  upon  both  of
them.     How,  then,  is  Mars  off  for  air  ?

Fortunately  for  an  answer  to  this  question,
air,  in  the  post-chaotic  part  of  a  planet's  career,
plays  as  vital  a  role  in  the  inorganic  processes
of  nature  as  in  the  organic  ones.  By  the  post-
chaotic  period  of  a  planet's  history  we  may  des-
ignate that  time  in  its  evolutionary  existence
which  follows  the  parting  with  its  own  inherent
heat.  After  its  heat  has  gone  from  it,  atmos-
phere becomes  essential,  not  only  to  any  form
of  life  upon  its  surface,  but  to  the  production  of
any  change  whatever  there.  Without  atmos-
phere all  development,  even  the  development


32  MARS

of  decay,  must  come  to  a  stand-still,  when  once
what  was  friable  had  crumbled  to  pieces  under
the  alternate  roasting  and  refrigerating,  rela-
tively speaking,  to  which  the  body's  surface
would  be  exposed  as  it  turned  round  on  its  axis
into  and  out  of  the  Sun's  rays.  Such  disinte-
gration once  accomplished,  the  planet  would  roll
thenceforth  a  mummy  world  through  space.

An  instance  of  this  death  in  life  we  have  ex-
emplified by  the  nearest  of  the  heavenly  bodies,
our  own  Moon.  That  cataclysmic  changes  once
occurred  there  is  still  legible  on  her  face,  while
the  present  well-nigh  complete  immutability  of
that  face  shows  that  next  to  nothing  happens
there  now.  Except  for  the  possible  tumbling
in  of  a  crater  wall,  such  as  seems  to  have  taken
place  in  the  case  of  Linne  a  few  years  ago,  all
is  now  deathly  still.  But  atmosphere  is  as  ab-
sent as  change.  Whatever  it  may  have  had  in
the  past,  there  is  at  present  no  perceptible  air
upon  the  surface  of  the  Moon.  And  change
'pro  tanto  knows  it  no  more.

With  Mars  it  is  otherwise.  Over  the  surface
of  that  planet  changes  do  occur,  changes  upon  a
scale  vast  enough  to  be  visible  from  the  Earth.
To  appreciate  the  character  and  extent  of  these
changes  we  will  begin  with  the  appearance  of
the  planet  last  June.^  From  the  drawings  it
will  be   seen   that   the   general  aspect  of  the

1  Plates  v.,  VI.,  VII.     Uppermost  figure.


ATMOSPHERE  33

planet's  surface  at  that  time  was  tripartite.
Upon  the  top  part  of  the  disk,  round  what  we
know  to  be  the  planet's  pole,  appeared  to  be  a
great  white  cap.  This  was  the  planet's  south
polar  cap.  The  south  lay  at  the  top,  because
all  astronomical  views  are,  for  optical  reasons,
upside  down;  but,  inasmuch  as  we  never  see
the  features  otherwise,  to  have  them  right  side
up  is  not  vital  to  the  effect.  Below  the  white
cap  lay  a  region  chiefly  bluish-green,  inter-
spersed, however,  with  portions  more  or  less
reddish-ochre.  Below  this,  again,  came  a  vast
reddish-ochre  stretch.

The  first  sign  of  change  occurred  in  the  polar
cap.  It  proceeded  slowly  to  dwindle  in  size.
Such  self-obliteration  it  has,  with  praiseworthy
regularity,  been  seen  to  undergo  once  every
two  years  since  it  was  first  seen  by  man.  For
nearly  two  hundred  years  now,  it  has  been
observed  to  wax  and  wane  with  clock-like  pre-
cision, a  precision  timed  to  the  change  of  sea-
son in  the  planet's  year.  During  the  spring,
these  snow-fields,  as  analogy  at  once  guesses
them  to  be,  and  as  beyond  doubt  they  really
are,  stretch  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  the
one  presented  to  us  at  this  last  opposition,  down
to  latitude  sixty-five  south  and  even  further,
covering  thus  more  than  the  whole  of  the
planet's  frigid  zone.  As  summer  comes  on,
they  dwindle  gradually  away,  till  by  early  au-


34  MAES

tumn  they  present  but  tiny  patches  a  few  hun-
dred miles  across.  This  year,  for  the  first  time
in  human  experience,  they  melted,  apparently,
completely.

The  history  of  the  cap's  vicissitudes  we  shall
take  up  farther  on  in  connection  with  the  ques-
tion of  water.  It  is  only  necessary  here  to  note
that  changes  occurred  in  it.

The  disappearance  of  the  polar  snows  is  by
no  means  the  only  change  discernible  upon  the
surface  of  the  planet.  Several  years  ago  Schia-
parelli  noticed  differences  in  tint  at  successive
oppositions  both  in  the  dark  areas  and  in  the
bright  ones.  These,  he  suggested,  might  be
due  to  seasons.  At  the  last  opposition,  that  of
1894,  it  was  possible  at  Flagstaff,  owing  to  the
length  of  time  the  planet  was  kept  under  ob-
servation, to  watch  the  changes  occur;  thus
conclusively  proving  them  to  be  changes  of  a
seasonal  character.

From  early  in  June,  which  corresponded  to
the  Martian  last  of  April,  to  the  end  of  Novem-
ber, which  corresponded  to  the  Martian  last  of
August,  the  bluish-green  areas  underwent  a
marked  transformation.  During  the  summer
of  the  Martian  southern  hemisphere,  a  wave  of
seasonal  change  swept  down  from  the  pole  over
the  face  of  the  planet.  What  and  why  it  was
we  will  examine  in  detail  when  we  take  up  the
question  of  water.     Like   the    changes  in   the


ATMOSPHERE  35

polar  cap,  it  suffices  here  to  chronicle  the  fact
that  it  took  place ;  for  the  fact  of  its  occurjrence
constitutes  proof  positive  of  the  presence  of  an
atmosphere.

A  moment's  consideration  will  show  how  ab-
solutely positive  this  proof  is.  It  is  the  inevi-
table deduction  from  the  simplest  of  observed
facts.  Its  cogency  gains  from  its  very  sim-
plicity. For  it  is  independent  of  difficult  detail
or  of  doubtful  interpretation.  It  is  not  con-
cerned with  what  may  be  the  constitution  of
the  polar  caps,  nor  with  the  character  of  the
transformation  that  sweeps,  wave-like,  over  the
rest  of  the  planet's  face.  It  merely  takes  note
that  change  occurs,  and  that  note  is  final.

Now,  since  this  was  originally  written,  certain
observations  made  at  this  observatory  by  Mr.
Douglass  have  resulted  apparently,  most  unex-
pectedly, in  actually  revealing  this  atmosphere
to  sight.  Although  the  existence  of  an  atmos-
phere is  absolutely  established  by  the  above
considerations,  it  is  interesting  to  have  ocular
demonstration  of  it  to  boot ;  and  this  the  more,
that  it  would  not  have  been  thought  possible  to
detect  what,  so  to  speak,  disclosed  itself.  For
the  discovery  was  quite  unconsciously  made,
being  of  the  nature  of  a  by-product  to  the
outcome  of  another  investigation.  So  syste-
matically was  his  general  search  conducted  that
when   the  results  came  to   be  worked   out   it


36  MARS

appeared  not  only  that  he  had  seen  an  atmos-
phere, but  actually  measured  it,  although  he
was  quite  unaware  of  doing  so  at  the  time.
The  occasion  was  the  measuring  of  the  diame-
ters of  the  planet,  polar  and  equatorial.  Micro-
metric  measures  of  these  were  begun  as  early
as  the  beginning  of  July,  and  kept  up  at  inter-
vals till  the  latter  part  of  November.  But  the
ones  that  proved  specially  tell-tale  were  those
made  from  September  20th  to  November  22d,
a  set  of  polar  and  a  set  of  equatorial  ones  hav-
ing been  taken  throughout  that  interval  on
twenty-six  nights.

Now,  when  these  measures  came  to  be  worked
out  by  me,  corrected  for  all  known  sources  of
error  and  reduced  to  distance  unity,  a  curi-
ous result  made  its  appearance.  As  they
stood  arranged  in  their  table  chronologically,
it  was  at  once  evident,  even  before  taking  the
means,  that,  as  time  went  on,  something  had
affected  the  equatorial  diameter  which  had
not  affected  the  polar  one.

The  values  for  the  polar  diameter  were  nearly
the  same  from  first  to  last.  The  equatorial
values,  on  the  other  hand,  showed,  apparently,
a  systematic  increase  as  the  eye  followed  down
the  column.  Something,  therefore,  had  been
at  work  on  the  one,  which  had  not  been  at
work  on  the  other.  Almost  as  instantaneously,
it  was  evident  what  this  something  was,  to  wit.


ATMOSPHERE  37

a  visible  twilight  unconsciously  measured  for  a
part  of  the  planet's  surface.  Like  the  .Down-
easter  who  shingled  fifty  feet  on  to  the  fog,
Mr.  Douglass  had  measured  several  miles  into
the  Martian  air.

A  word  or  two  will  explain  this.  The  planet
came  to  opposition  on  October  20.  The  first
measures  of  the  series,  therefore,  were  taken
within  a  few  days  of  opposition,  just  before  and
just  after  that  event.  The  subsequent  ones,
on  the  other  hand,  were  made  at  a  gradually
increasing  distance  from  this  position,  as  the
planet  passed  toward  quadrature.  Now,  at  op-
position, the  disk  of  the  planet  is  full,  like  the
full  Moon ;  while,  as  it  passes  to  quadrature,  it
loses  something  of  itself,  becoming  gibbous,  as
the  Moon  does  two  or  three  days  after  the  full.
This  loss  from  phase  chiefly  affects  the  equa-
torial diameter,  the  polar  one  remaining  sub-
stantially unchanged  by  it.  It  would  remain
absolutely  unchanged  if  the  planet  moved  in
the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  It  does  not  so  move,
but  the  quantity  resulting  from  lack  of  accord-
ance is  so  small  that  for  the  present  explana-
tion it  may  be  neglected.  Now,  this  question
of  phase  was  the  only  point,  practically,  in  which
the  equatorial  and  polar  diameters  differed  dur-
ing the  interval  under  consideration.  This,
then,  was  the  clew  to  the  discrepancy.

It  was  not,  however,  the  loss  of  phase  that


38


MAES


was  in  question.  That  would  have  decreased
the  values  of  the  equatorial  diameter  instead  of
increasing  thera,  and,  what  is  more  immediately
to  the  point,  the  correction  for  it  had  already
been  made.  This  correction  is  easily  ascer-
tained, for  it  depends  chiefly  upon  the  position
of  the  planet  in  its  orbit,  which  is  known  with
great  accuracy.  The  *  resulting  values,  there-
fore, had  nothing  to  do  with  the  phase  correc-
tion as  such,  but  they  did,  nevertheless,  have
to  do  with  the  phase  itself.


Earth

{3d  position)


Sun  Throughout


ATMOSPHERE  39

To  see  exactly  how  this  is  possible,  let  us
consider  the  effect  an  illuminated  atmosphere
would  have  upon  the  measurements  in  ques-
tion. To  make  matters  more  obvious  we  will
introduce  a  diagram.  The  inner  circle  repre-
sents a  section  of  the  planet  in  the  plane  of  the
ecliptic ;  the  arrows,  the  directions  in  the  same
plane  of  the  Sun  and  Earth  from  the  centre  of
the  planet,  in  the  different  positions  to  be  con-
sidered ;  and  the  outer  circle,  an  atmosphere
surrounding  the  planet,  at  the  limit  at  which
it  is  dense  enough  to  reflect  light.

At  opposition  the  Earth  lay  very  nearly  in
the  same  line  from  the  planet  as  the  Sun.  This
is  shown  by  the  left-hand  arrow.  The  illumi-
nated semi-circumference  of  the  planet's  surface,
at  that  time  also  the  semi- circumference  seen
from  the  Earth,  was  gcibp,  and  gop  was  the
equatorial  diameter ;  g'dVp'  and  g'opl  the  semi-
circumference  and  equatorial  diameter,  upon
the  supposition  of  an  atmospheric  envelope  en-
circling the  surface.  As  the  Earth  and  Mars
passed  along  their  orbits,  the  line  from  Mars
to  the  Earth  shifted  into  its  second  position,
the  Sun  remaining-  as  before.  The  illuminated
part  of  the  surface  of  Mars  continued,  there-
fore, to  be  gcibp  ;  but  the  portion  of  this  illumi-
nated surface  visible  from  the  Earth  was  only
dhp,  the  part  gd  being  invisible  from  the  Earth,
and  the  part  ph  lying  in  shadow.     If,  however,


40  MARS

there  were  an  atmosphere  capable  of  reflecting
light  up  to  a  height  represented  by  the  greater
circle,  the  Sun's  rays  would  strike  the  upper
visible  limit  of  this  atmosphere,  not  at  j)  but  at
s,  ST  being  drawn  parallel  to  the  line  from  o  to
the  Sun.  The  measured  equatorial  diameter,
which  is,  of  course,  the  projection  of  the  arc
dVs  on  the  line  d!li  ^  would  be  d!f  instead  of  c?e,
which  it  would  be  were  there  no  atmosphere.
It  thus  appears  that  owing  to  side-lengthening,
as  we  may  perhaps  style  this  reverse  of  fore-
shortening, the  fringe  of  atmosphere  increases
in  apparent  width  with  increase  of  phase,  to  an
apparent  increase  of  the  equatorial  diameter.

If,  now,  we  take  a  third  position  for  the  Earth
where  Mars  shows  a  yet  greater  phase,  the  third
arrow,  we  find  that  in  this  case  the  resulting
apparent  increase  in  the  equatorial  diameter  is
m?i,  and  we  notice  that  mn  is  greater  than  e/",
just  as  ef  was  greater  than  jyp'  or  qg  .  That  is,
we  see  that  the  apparent  increase  in  the  size  of
the  equatorial  diameter  varies  directly,  accord-
ing to  some  law,  with  the  increase  in  phase,  or,
as  it  is  technically  put,  is  a  function  of  the
phase.

This  increase,  being  an  increase  in  the  meas-
ure itself,  would  in  due  course  come  in  for  its
share  of  all  the  corrections  applied  to  the  diame-
ter. In  consequence,  that  diameter,  instead  of
coming  out  simply  the  full  equatorial  diameter,


ATMOSPHEKE  41

would  come  out  too  big  in  proportion  to  the
amount  added  by  the  twilight  arc.

Pursuant,  therefore,  to  the  supposition  that
such  was  the  cause  of  the  increase,  I  took  the
means  of  the  polar  and  of  the  equatorial  diame-
ters with  regard  to  the  time  from  opposition,  at
which  the  measures  were  made,  to  find  myself
confronted  by  a  series  of  values  counterparting
what  we  have  just  seen  would  be  given  by  the
presence  of  a  visible  twilight  arc.  The  result-
ing values  are :  —

Polar  Diameters :

October  15  to  23  inc.  9''.35

October  12  and  24  to  30  inc.        r.35
November  2  to  21  inc.  9'^36

Equatorial  Diameters :

October  15  to  23  inc.  r.40

October  12  and  24  to  30  inc.        r.43
November  2  to  21  inc.  9''.  51

The  measure  of  the  12th  of  October  and
those  of  the  24th  to  30th  are  taken  together,
because  equidistant  from  opposition  on  Octo-
ber 20.

The  agreement  of  this  table  with  that  de-
ducible  by  theory  from  the  effect  of  an  atmos-
phere is  striking.  But  the  agreement  is  even
more  exact  than  appears.  For,  as  the  polar
axis  was  not  in  the  same  line  as  the  axis  of
phase,  the  twilight  arc  to  some  extent  affected
the  polar  diameter  at  all  times,  but  specially


42  MARS

during  November.     This  becomes  evident,  nu-
merically, on   applying   the  correction   for  an
atmosphere,  which  gives  the  following  values :
Polar  Diameters :

October  15  to  23  inc.  9^32

October  12  and  24  to  30  inc.        r.31
November  2  to  21  inc.  ^.32

Equatorial  Diameters :

October  15  to  23  inc.  9''.37

October  12  and  24  to  30  inc.        9''.36
November  2  to  21  inc.  9''.37

The  middle  values  are  evidently  somewhat
too  small,  since  they  affect  both  the  polar  and
equatorial  diameters  alike.  Otherwise  the  varia-
tion in  the  values  of  the  same  diameter  is  less
than  the  probable  errors  of  observation.  Tak-
ing the  mean  of  all  but  the  middle  ones,  we
deduce  the  value  for  the  polar  flattening  given
above,  j^-q  of  the  equatorial  diameter.

From  the  correction  for  the  effect  of  the  at-
mosphere, we  find  the  amount  of  the  twilight
arc  upon  the  planet  visible  from  the  Earth  to
be  about  10°.  That  of  the  Earth,  as  seen  from
the  Earth's  surface,  is  18° ;  but  it  is  to  be  no-
ticed that  here  the  point  of  view  is  important.
From  the  topmost  layer  of  our  air  of  sufficient
density  to  be  capable  of  reflecting  light  we  are
but  forty  miles  away ;  from  the  corresponding
layer  of  the  Martian  air  we  are  forty  millions
of  miles  off.     We  cannot,  therefore,  expect  to


ATMOSPHERE  43

detect  the  one  to  the  same  extent  that  we  can
the  other.  The  value,  then,  for  the  Martian
twihght  arc  of  10°  is  simply  a  minimal  value,
not  an  absolute  one.  The  twilight  arc  cannot,
from  the  observations,  be  less  than  this,  but  it
may  be  much  more.

The  large  number  of  measures  from  which
the  above  means  were  deduced  not  only  ren-
ders error  in  the  result  less  likely,  but  shows
that  result  to  be  due  to  air  pure  and  simple.
This  appears  from  the  fact  that  the  observed
increase  is  systematic.  For  its  systematic  char-
acter proves  it  due  to  something  largely  trans-
parent. It  is  because  it  is  chiefly  not  seen  that
it  is  seen  at  all.  At  first  sight  this  deduction
seems  paradoxically  surprising.  But,  in  consid-
ering the  problem,  we  shall  realize  that  it  must
be  so.

If  what  was  seen  were  opaque,  as,  for  ex-
ample, a  mountain,  then  in  certain  positions  it
would  indeed  be  seen  projecting  beyond  the
terminator,  —  for  example,  if  it  were  at  s  in
the  diagram  on  page  38 ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,
it  were  in  the  position  r,  it  would,  instead  of
apparently  increasing,  decrease  the  diameter.
Now,  as  the  rotation  of  the  planet  would  bring
it  eventually  into  all  possible  positions,  it  would
be  as  likely  on  any  one  occasion  to  be  measured
in  a  position  to  decrease  the  diameter  as  to
increase  it.     From  but  a  few  measures,  there-


44  MARS

fore,  it  might  appear  that  there  was  an  in-
crease in  the  calculated  diameter,  or  it  might
seem  that  there  was  a  decrease  from  it,  and
either  would  be  equally  likely  to  happen.  If,
however,  many  measures  were  made,  and  just
in  proportion  as  they  were  many,  those  decreas-
ing the  diameter  would  offset  those  increasing
it,  and  the  mean  of  all  would  show  no  trace  of
either.  In  the  mean  the  minus  quantity  would
wipe  out  the  plus.  Indeed,  owing  to  the  fact
that  both  the  Sun  and  the  Earth  are  not  infi-
nitely far  off  from  Mars,  and  in  consequence
that  all  the  lines  to  them  are  not  strictly  par-
allel to  one  another,  the  decreasing  effect  would
actually  slightly  exceed  the  increasing  effect,
but  this  would  be  too  small  to  be  perceptible.

The  same  argument  that  applies  to  moun-
tains applies  to  clouds,  or  to  any  opaque  sub-
stance. Sporadic  increase  might  be  due  to
them ;  but  for  the  increase  to  be  systematic,
it  is  necessary  that  the  substance  seen  should
also  be  seen  through.  It  must  be  in  part  trans-
parent. The  measures,  therefore,  not  only  dis-
close the  presence  of  an  atmosphere,  but  do  so
directly.

Having  thus  seen  first  with  the  brain  and
then  with  the  eye,  and  both  in  the  simplest
possible  manner,  that  a  Martian  atmosphere
exists,  we  will  go  on  to  consider  what  it  may
be  like.


ATMOSPHERE  45

The  first  and  most  conspicuous  of  its  char-
acteristics is  cloudlessness.  A  cloud  is  an  event
on  Mars,  a  rare  and  unusual  phenomenon,  which
should  make  it  more  fittingly  appreciated  there
than  Ruskin  lamented  was  the  case  on  Earth,
for  it  is  almost  perpetually  fine  weather  on  our
neighbor  in  space.  From  the  day's  beginning
to  its  close,  and  from  one  end  of  the  year  to
the  other,  nothing  appears  to  veil  the  greater
part  of  the  planet's  surface.

This  would  seem  to  be  even  more  completely
the  case  than  has  hitherto  been  supposed.  We
read  sometimes  in  astronomical  books  and  arti-
cles picturesque  accounts  of  clouds  and  mists
gathering  over  certain  regions  of  the  disk,  hid-
ing the  coast-lines  and  continents  from  view,  and
then,  some  hours  later,  clearing  off  again.  Very
possibly  this  takes  place,  but  not  with  the  cer-
tainty imputed  to  it.  It  is  also  doubtful  if
certain  effects  of  longer  duration  are  really
attributable  to  such  cause.  For  closer  study
reveals  another  cause  at  work,  as  we  shall  see
later,  and  the  better  our  own  air  the  more  the
Martian  skies  seem  to  clear.  Certainly  no  in-
stance of  the  blotting  out  of  detail  upon  the
surface  of  Mars  has  been  seen  this  year  at
Flagstaff.  Though  the  planet's  face  has  been
scanned  there  almost  every  night,  from  the  last
day  of  May  to  the  end  of  November,  not  a
single  case    of   undoubted   obscuration  of   any


46  MARS

part  of  the  central  portions  of  the  planet,  from
any  Martian  cause,  has  been  detected  by  any
one  of  three  observers.  Certain  peculiar  bright-
ish  patches  have  from  time  to  time  been  noted,
but,  with  a  courtesy  uncommon  in  clouds,  they
have  carefully  refrained  from  obscuring  in  the
slightest  degree  any  feature  the  observer  might
be  engaged  in  looking  at.

The  only  certain  dimming  of  detail  upon  the
Martian  disk  has  been  along  its  bright  semi-
circular edge  or  edges,  as  the  case  may  be,  —
what  is  technically  called  its  limb.  Fringing
this  is  a  permanent  lune  of  light  that  swamps  all
except  the  very  darkest  markings  in  its  glare.
This  limb-light  has  commonly  been  taken  as
evidence  of  sunrise  or  sunset  mists  on  Mars.
But  observations  at  Flagstaff  during  last  June
show  that  such  cannot  be  the  case.  In  June
Mars  was  gibbous,  —  that  is,  he  showed  a  face
like  the  Moon  between  the  quarter  and  the
full,  —  and  along  his  limb,  then  upon  his  own
western  side,  lay  the  bright  limb-light,  stretch-
ing inward  about  thirty  degrees.  Since  the  face
turned  toward  us  was  only  in  part  illumined  by
the  Sun,  the  centre  of  it  did  not  stand  at  noon,
but  some  hours  later,  and  the  middle  of  the
limb  consequently  not  at  sunrise,  but  at  about
nine  o'clock  of  a  Martian  morning.  As  the
limb-light  extended  in  from  this  thirty  degrees,
or  two  hours  in  time,  the  mist,  if  mist  it  was,


ATMOSPHERE  47

must  have  lasted  till  eleven  o'clock  in  the  day.
Furthermore,  it  must  have  been  mist  of  a  sin-
gularly mathematical  turn  of  mind,  for  it
stretched  from  one  pole  to  the  other,  quite
oblivious  of  the  fact  that  every  hour  from  sun-
rise to  sunset  lay  represented  along  the  limb,
including  high  noon.  What  is  more,  as  the  disk
passed,  in  course  of  time,  from  the  gibbous  form
to  the  full,  and  then  to  the  gibbous  form  on  the
other  side,  the  limb-light  obligingly  clung  to
the  limb,  regardless  of  everything  except  its
geometric  curve.  But  as  it  did  so,  the  eleven
o'clock  meridian  swung  across  it  from  one  side
of  the  disk  to  the  other.  As  it  passed  the
centre  the  regions  there  showed  perfectly  clear ;
not  a  trace  of  obscuration  visible  as  it  lay  be-
neath the  observer's  eye.

From  the  first  observation  it  is  evident  that
Martian  sunrise  and  sunset  had  nothing  to  do
with  the  phenomenon,  since  it  was  not  either
Martian  sunrise  or  sunset  at  the  spot  where  it
was  seen ;  and,  from  both  observations  taken
together,  it  is  evident  that  the  phenomenon  did
have  to  do  with  the  position  of  the  observer.
For  nothing  on  Mars  had  changed  in  the  mean
time,  but  only  the  point  of  view  of  the  observer
on  Earth.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  it  was  not
a  case  of  Martian  diurnal  meteorological  change,
but  a  case  of  foreshortening  of  some  sort.

To  what,  then,  was  the  limb-light  due  ?     At


48  MARS

first  sight,  it  would  seem  as  if  the  Moon  might
help  us ;  for  the  Moon's  rim  is  similarly  ringed
by  a  lune  of  light.  In  her  case  the  effect  has
been  attributed  to  mountain  slopes  holding  the
Sun's  light  at  angles  beyond  the  possibility  of
plains.  But  Mars  has  few  mountains  worthy
the  name.  His  terminator  —  that  is,  the  part
of  the  disk  which  is  just  passing  in  or  out  of
sunlight,  and  discloses  mountains  by  the  way  in
which  they  catch  the  coming  light  before  the
plains  at  their  feet  are  illuminated  —  shows
irregularities  quite  inferior  to  the  lunar  ones,
proving  that  his  elevations  and  depressions  are
relatively  insignificant.

Not  due,  then,  to  either  mountains  or  mist,
there  is  something  we  know  that  would  produce
the  effect  we  see,  —  dust  or  water  particles  in
the  Martian  air ;  that  is,  just  as  the  Earth's
atmosphere  is  somewhat  of  a  veil,  so  is  the
Martian  one,  and  this  veiling  effect,  though
practically  imperceptible  in  the  centre  of  the
disk,  becomes  noticeable  as  we  pass  from  the
centre  to  the  edge,  owing  to  the  greater  thick-
ness of  the  stratum  through  which  we  look.
At  thirty  degrees  from  the  edge,  our  line  of
sight  pierces  twice  as  much  of  it  as  when  we
look  plumb  down  upon  the  centre  of  the  disk,
and  more  yet  as  we  approach  the  edge  itself ;
in  consequence,  what  would  be  diaphanous  at
the  centre  might  well  seem  opaque  toward  the


ATMOSPHERE  49

limb.  The  effect  we  are  familiar  with  on  Earth
in  the  haze  that  always  borders  the  horizon,  —
a  haze  most  noticeable  in  places  where  there  is
dust,  or  ice,  or  water  in  the  air.  Here,  then,
we  have  a  hint  of  the  state  of  things  on  Mars.
Ice  particles  both  are  probable  and  would  give
the  brilliancy  required.

This  first  hint  receives  independent  support
from  another  Martian  phenomenon.  Contrary
to  what  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the
Sun  and  the  thinness  of  its  atmospheric  en-
velope would  lead  us  to  expect,  the  climate  of
Mars  appears  to  be  astonishingly  mild.  Whereas
calculation  from  distance  and  atmospheric  den-
sity would  put  its  average  temperature  below
freezing,  thus  relegating  it  to  perpetual  ice,  the
planet's  surface  features  imply  that  the  tem-
perature is  relatively  high.  Observation  gives
every  evidence  that  the  mean  temperature
must  actually  be  above  that  of  the  Earth ;  for
not  only  is  there  practically  no  sign  of  snow  or
ice  outside  the  frigid  zone  at  any  time,  but  the
polar  snow-caps  melt  to  a  minimum  quite  be-
yond that  of  our  own,  affording  rare  chance
for  quixotic  polar  expeditions.  Such  pleasing
amelioration  of  the  climate  must  be  accounted
for,  and  aqueous  vapor  seems  the  most  likely
thing  to  do  it ;  for  aqueous  vapor  is  quite  spe-
cific as  a  planetary  comforter,  being  the  very
best  of  blankets.     It  acts,  indeed,  like  the  glass


60  MARS

of  a  conservatory^  letting  the  light-rays  in  and
opposing  the  passage  of  the  heat-rays  out.

The  state  of  things  thus  disclosed  by  observa-
tion, the  cloudlessness  and  the  rim  of  limb-light,
turns  out  to  agree  in  a  most  happy  manner
with  what  probability  would  lead  us  to  expect ;
for  the  most  natural  supposition  to  make  a
priori  about  the  Martian  atmosphere  is  the  fol-
lowing :  When  each  planet  was  produced  by
fission  from  the  parent  nebula,  we  may  suppose
that  it  took  with  it  as  its  birthright  its  propor-
tion of  chemical  constituents;  that  is,  that  its
amount  of  oxygen,  nitrogen  and  so  forth  was
proportional  to  its  mass.  Doubtless  its  place  in
the  primal  nebula  would  to  a  certain  extent
modify  the  ratio,  just  as  the  size  of  the  planet
would  to  a  certain  extent  modify  the  relative
amount  of  these  elements  that  would  thereupon
enter  into  combination.  Supposing,  however,
that  the  ratio  of  the  free  gases  to  the  other
elements  remained  substantially  the  same,  we
should  have  in  the  case  of  any  two  planets  the
same  relative  quantity  of  atmosphere.  But  the
size  of  the  planet  would  entirely  alter  the  dis-
tribution of  this  air.

Three  causes  would  all  combine  to  rob  the
smaller  planet  of  efficient  covering,  on  the  gen-
eral principle  that  he  that  hath  little  shall  have
less.

In  the  first  place,  the  smaller  the  planet  the


ATMOSPHERE  51

greater  would  be  its  volume  in  proportion  to
its  mass,  because  the  materials  of  which  it  was
composed,  being  subjected  to  less  pressure
owing  to  a  lesser  pull,  would  not  be  crowded
so  closely  together.  This  is  one  reason  why
Mars  should  have  a  thinner  atmosphere  than
our  Earth.

Secondly,  of  two  similar  bodies,  spheres  or
others,  the  smaller  has  the  greater  surface  for
its  volume,  since  the  one  quantity  is  of  two
dimensions  only,  the  other  of  three.  An  onion
will  give  us  a  good  instance  of  this.  By  strip-
ping off  layer  after  layer  we  reach  eventually
a  last  layer  which  is  all  surface,  inclosing  no-
thing. We  may,  if  we  please,  observe  something
analogous  in  men,  among  whom  the  most  super-
ficial contain  the  least.  In  consequence  of  this
principle,  the  atmosphere  of  the  smaller  body
finds  itself  obliged  to  cover  relatively  more  sur-
face, which  still  further  thins  it  out.

Lastly,  gravity  being  less  on  the  surface  of
the  smaller  body,  the  atmosphere  is  less  com-
pressed, and,  being  a  gas,  seizes  that  opportunity
to  spread  out  to  a  greater  height,  which  renders
it  still  less  dense  at  the  planet's  surface.

Thus,  for  three  reasons.  Mars  should  have  a
thinner  air  at  his  surface  than  is  found  on  the
surface  of  the  Earth.

Calculating  the  effect  of  the  above  causes
numerically  we  find  that  on  this  a  priori  sup-


52  MARS

position  Mars  would  have  at  his  surface  an  at-
mosphere of  about  fourteen  hundredths,  or  one
seventh,  of  the  density  of  our  terrestrial  one.

Observation  supports  this  general  supposi-
tion ;  for  the  cloudless  character  of  the  Martian
skies  is  precisely  what  we  should  look  for  in  a
rare  air.  Clouds  are  congeries  of  globules  of
water  or  particles  of  ice  buoyed  up  by  the  air
about  them.  The  smaller  these  are,  the  more
easily  are  they  buoyed  up,  because  gravity,
which  tends  to  pull  them  down,  acts  upon  their
mass,  while  the  resistance  they  offer  varies  as
the  surface  they  present  to  the  air,  and  this  is
relatively  greater  in  the  smaller  particles.  The
result  is  that  the  smaller  particles  can  float  in
thinner  air.  We  see  the  principle  exemplified
in  our  terrestrial  clouds  ;  the  low  nimbus  being
formed  of  comparatively  large  globules,  while
the  high  cirrus  is  made  up  of  very  minute  par-
ticles. If  we  go  yet  higher,  we  reach  a  region
incapable  of  supporting  clouds  of  any  kind,  so
rarefied  is  its  air.  This  occurs  about  five  miles
above  the  Earth's  surface ;  and  yet  even  at  this
height  the  density  of  our  air  is  greater  than  is
the  probable  density  of  the  air  at  the  surface  of
Mars.  We  see,  therefore,  that  the  Martian  at-
mosphere should  from  its  rarity  prove  cloudless,
just  as  we  observe  it  to  be.

So  far  in  this  our  investigation  of  the  Martian
atmosphere  we  have  been  indebted  solely  to  the


ATMOSPHERE  53

principles  of  mathematics  and  molar  physics  for
help,  and  these  have  told  us  something  about
the  probable  quantity  of  that  atmosphere,
though  silent  as  to  its  possible  quality.  On
this  latter  point,  however,  molecular  physics
turns  out  to  have  something  to  say ;  for  an
Irish  gentleman.  Dr.  Gr.  Johnstone  Stoney,  has
recently  made  an  ingenious  deduction  from  the
kinetic  theory  of  gases  bearing  upon  the  atmos-
pheric envelope  which  any  planet  can  retain.
His  deduction  is  as  acute  as  it  appears  from  ob-
servation to  be  in  keeping  with  the  facts.  It
is  this :  —

The  molecular  theory  of  gases  supposes  them
to  be  made  up  of  myriads  of  molecules  in  inces-
sant motion.  What  a  molecule  may  be  nobody
knows ;  some  scientists  supposing  it  to  be  a
vortex  ring  in  miniature,  —  something  like  the
swirl  made  by  a  teaspoon  drawn  through  a  cup
of  tea.  But,  whatever  it  be,  the  idea  of  it
accounts  very  creditably  for  the  facts.  The
motion  of  the  molecules  is  almost  inconceivably
swift  as  they  dart  hither  and  thither  through-
out the  space  occupied  by  the  gas,  and  their
speed  differs  for  different  gases.  From  the  ob-
served relations  of  the  volumes  and  weights  of
gases  to  the  pressures  to  which  they  are  sub-
jected is  deduced  the  fact  of  this  speed  and
its  amount.  It  appears  that  the  molecules  of
oxygen  travel,  on  the  average,  at  the  rate  of


54  MARS

fifteen  miles  a  minute ;  and  those  of  hydrogen,
which  are  the  fastest  known,  at  the  enormous
speed  of  more  than  a  mile  a  second.  But  this
average  velocity  may,  for  any  particular  mole-
cule, be  increased  by  collisions  with  its  neigh-
bors. The  maximum  speed  it  may  thus  attain
Clerk-Maxwell  deduced  from  the  doctrine  of
chances  to  be  sevenfold  the  averao-e.  What
may  thus  happen  to  one,  must  eventually  hap-
pen to  all.  Sooner  or  later,  on  the  doctrine  of
chances,  each  molecule  of  the  gas  is  bound  to
attain  this  maximum  velocity  of  its  kind.  When
it  is  attained,  the  molecule  of  oxygen  travels  at
the  rate  of  one  and  eight  tenths  miles  a  second,
the  molecule  of  water  vapor  at  the  rate  of  two
and  one  half  miles  a  second,  and  the  molecule
of  hydrogen  at  over  seven  miles  a  second,  or
four  hundred  and  fifty  times  as  fast  as  our  fast-
est express  train.

Now,  if  a  body,  whether  it  be  a  molecule
or  a  cannon-ball,  be  projected  away  from  the
Earth's  surface,  the  Earth  will  at  once  try  to
pull  it  down  again  :  this  instinctive  holding
on  of  Mother  Earth  to  what  she  has  we  call
gravity.  In  the  cases  with  which  we  are  per-
sonally familiar,  her  endeavor  is  eminently  suc-
cessful, what  goes  up  coming  down  again.  But
even  the  Earth  is  not  omnipotent.  As  the
velocity  with  which  the  body  is  projected  in-
creases, longer  and  longer  time  is  needed  for


ATMOSPHERE  55

the  Earth  to  overcome  it  and  compel  the  body's
return.  Finally  there  would  be  reached  a  speed
which  the  Earth  would  just  be  able  to  overcome
if  she  took  an  infinite  time  about  it.  In  that
case  the  body  would  continue  to  travel  away
from  her,  at  a  constantly  diminishing  rate,  but
still  at  some  rate,  on  and  on  into  the  depths  of
space,  if  there  were  no  other  bodies  in  the  uni-
verse but  the  Earth  and  the  molecule,  till  it
attained  infinity,  at  which  point  the  truant
would  stop,  and  then  reluctantly  return.  This
velocity  we  may  call  the  critical  velocity.  It
is  also  known  as  the  parabolic  velocity,  because
it  is  at  any  point  the  velocity  of  a  body  mov-
ing in  a  parabola  about  the  Earth,  under  the
Earth's  attraction ;  the  parabola  being  the  curve
of  a  fall  from  infinity.  The  critical  velocity  is
the  parabolic  velocity,  inasmuch  as  gravity  is
able  to  destroy  on  the  way  up  just  the  speed  it
is  able  to  impart  on  the  way  down.  But,  now,
if  the  body's  departure  were  even  hastier  than
this,  the  Earth  would  never  be  able  wholly  to
annihilate  its  speed,  and  the  body  would  travel
out  and  out  forever.  If  its  speed  at  starting
were  less  than  twenty-seven  miles  a  second,  it
would  become  thenceforth  a  satellite  of  the
Sun ;  if  its  speed  were  yet  greater,  it  would
become  an  independent  rover  through  space,
paying  brief  visits  only  to  star  after  star.  In
any  case  the  Earth  would  know  the  vagabond
no  more.


56  MARS

As  gravity  depends  upon  mass,  the  larger  the
attracting  planet  the  greater  is  its  critical  ve-
locity, the  velocity  it  can  just  control ;  and,
reversely,  the  smaller  the  planet  the  less  its
restraining  power.  With  the  Earth  the  critical
velocity  is  six  and  nine  tenths  miles  a  second.
If  any  of  us,  therefore,  could  manage  to  acquire
a  speed  greater  than  this,  socially  or  otherwise,
we  could  bid  defiance  to  the  whole  Earth,  and
begin  to  voyage  on  our  own  account  through
space.-^

This  speed  is  actually  attained,  as  we  have
seen,  by  the  molecules  of  hydrogen.  If,  there-
fore, a  molecule  of  free  hydrogen  were  present
at  the  surface  of  the  Earth,  and  met  with  no
other  gas  attractive  enough  to  tie  it  down  by
uniting  with  it,  the  rover  would,  in  course  of
time,  attain  a  speed  sufficient  to  allow  it  to  bid
good-by  to  Earth,  and  start  on  interspacial
travels  of  its  own.  That  it  should  reach  its
maximum  speed  is  all  that  is  essential  to  lib-
erty, the  direction  of  its  motion  being  immate-
rial. To  molecule  after  molecule  would  come
this  happy  dispatch,  till  the  Earth  stood  de-
prived of  every  atom  of  free  hydrogen.

Now,  it  is  a  highly  significant  fact  that  there
is  no  free  hydrogen  found  in  the  Earth's  atmos-
phere. There  is  plenty  of  it  in  the  captivity
of  chemical  combination,  but  none  in  the  free

1  See  Appendix.


ATMOSPHERE  57

state.  This  coincidence  of  lack  of  hydrogen
with  lack  of  liberty  takes  on  yet  more  signifi-
cance from  the  fm^ther  fact  that  the  same  is  not
true  of  oxygen,  water  vapor,  or  indeed  of  any
of  the  other  gases  we  know.  With  them,  free-
dom is  not  synonymous  with  absence.  The
Earth's  atmosphere  contains  plenty  of  free  oxy-
gen, nitrogen,  and  the  like.  But,  as  we  have
just  seen,^  the  maximum  speed  of  all  these  gases
falls  short  of  the  possibility  of  escape.  This
accoimts  for  their  presence.  They  have  stayed
with  us  solely  because  they  must.

The  appearance  of  the  other  heavenly  bodies
seems  to  confirm  this  conclusion.  The  Moon,
for  example,  possesses  no  atmosphere,  and  cal-
culation shows  that  the  velocity  it  can  control
falls  short  of  the  maximum  of  any  of  our  atmos-
pheric gases,  that  velocity  being  but  one  and
one  half  miles  a  second.  All  were,  therefore,
at  liberty  to  leave  it,  and  all  have  promptly
done  so.  On  the  other  hand,  the  giant  planets
give  evidence  of  very  dense  atmospheres.  They
have  kept  all  they  ever  had.

But  the  most  striking  confirmation  of  the
theory  comes  from  the  cusps  of  Yenus  and
Mercury;  for  an  atmosphere  would  prolong,
by  its  refraction,  the  cusps  of  a  crescent  beyond
their  true  limits.  Length  of  cusp  becomes,  con-
sequently, a  criterion  of  the  presence  of  an  at-

^  See  Appendix.


58  MARS

mospliere.  Now,  in  the  appearance  of  their
cusps  there  is  a  notable  difference  between
Venus  and  Mercury.  The  cusps  of  Venus  ex-
tend beyond  the  semi-circle ;  Mercury's  do  not.
We  see,  therefore,  that  Mercury  has  apparently
little  or  no  atmospheric  envelope,  and  we  find
that  his  critical  velocity  is  only  2.2  miles  per
second,  —  below  that  of  water  vapor,  and  peril-
ously near  that  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen.

Turning  to  the  case  of  Mars,  we  find  with
him  the  critical  velocity  to  be  three  and  one
tenths  miles  a  second.  Now,  curiously  enough,
this  is,  like  the  Earth's,  below  the  maximum
for  the  molecules  of  hydrogen,  but  also,  like
the  Earth's,  above  that  of  any  other  gas ;  from
which  we  have  reason  to  suppose  that,  except
for  possible  chemical  combinations,  his  atmos-
phere is  in  quality  not  very  unlike  our  own.

Having  seen  what  the  atmosphere  of  Mars  is
probably  like,  we  may  draw  certain  interesting
inferences  from  it  as  to  its  capabilities  for  mak-
ing life  comfortable.  The  first  consequence  of
it  is  that  Mars  is  blissfully  destitute  of  weather.
Unlike  New  England,  which  has  more  than  it
can  accommodate.  Mars  has  none  of  the  article.
What  takes  its  place  there,  as  the  staple  topic
of  conversation  for  empty-headed  folk,  remains
one  of  the  Martian  mysteries  yet  to  be  solved.
What  takes  its  place  in  fact  is  a  perpetual
serenity  such  as  we  can  scarcely  conceive  of.


ATMOSPHERE  59

Although  over  what  we  shall  later  see  to  be
the  great  continental  deserts  the  air  must  at
midday  be  highly  rarefied,  and  cause  vacuums
into  which  the  surrounding  air  must  rush,  the
actual  difference  of  gradient,  owing  to  the  initial
thinness  of  the  air,  must  be  very  slight.  With
a  normal  barometer  of  four  and  a  half  inches,
a  very  great  relative  fall  is  a  very  slight  actual
one.  In  consequence,  storms  would  be  such
mild-mannered  things  that,  for  objectionable
purposes,  they  might  as  well  not  be.  In  the
first  place,  there  can  be  but  little  rain,  or  hail,
or  snow,  for  the  particles  would  be  likely  to
be  deposited  before  they  gained  the  dignity  of
such  separate  existence.  Dew  or  frost  would
be  the  common  precipitation  on  Mars.  The
polar  snow-cap  or  ice-cap,  therefore,  is  doubt-
less formed,  not  by  the  falling  of  snow,  but  by
successive  depositions  of  dew.  Secondly,  there
would  be  about  the  Martian  storms  no  very
palpable  wind.  Though  the  gale  might  blow
at  fairly  respectable  rates,  so  flimsy  is  the  sub-
stance moved  that  it  might  buffet  a  man  un-
mercifully without  reproach.

Another  interesting  result  of  the  rarity  of
the  air  would  be  its  effect  upon  the  boiling-
point  of  water.  Reynault's  experiments  have
shown  that,  in  air  at  a  density  yo^  of  our  own,
water  would  boil  at  about  127°  Fahrenheit.
This,  then,  would  be  the  temperature  at  which


60  MARS

water  would  be  converted  into  steam  on  Mars.
So  low  a  boiling-point  would  raise  the  relative
amount  of  aqueous  vapor  held  in  suspension  by
the  air  at  any  temperature.  At  about  127°  the
air  would  be  saturated,  and  even  at  lower  tem-
peratures much  more  of  it  would  evaporate  and
load  the  surrounding  air  than  happens  at  similar
temperatures  on  Earth.  Thus  at  the  heels  of
similarity  treads  contrast.

We  may  now  go  on  to  some  phenomena  of
the  Martian  atmosphere  of  a  more  specific  char-
acter.

II.     CLOUDS

Although  no  case  of  obscuration  has  been
seen  at  Flagstaff  this  summer,  certain  parts  of
the  planet's  disk  have  appeared  unaccountably
bright  at  certain  times.  That  these  are  not
storm-clouds,  like  those  which,  by  a  wave-like
process  of  generation,  travel  across  the  Ameri-
can continent,  for  example,  is  shown  by  the
fact  that  they  do  not  travel,  but  are  local  fix-
tures. Commonly,  the  same  places  appear
bright  continuously  day  after  day  and  recur-
rently year  after  year,  different  astronomers  at
successive  oppositions  having  so  observed  them.
To  this  category  belong  the  regions  known  as
Elysium,  Ophir,  Memnonia,  Eridania,  and
Tempe,  which  at  certain  seasons  of  the  Martian
year  are  phenomenally  brilliant.  They  stay  so
for  some  time,  and  then  the  brightness  fades  out


CLOUDS  61

to  appear  again  at  the  next  opposition.  Still
smaller  bright  spots,  apparently  more  fugitive,
have  been  seen  this  year  by  Professor  W.  H.
Pickering,  notably  just  north  of  the  Mare  Si-
renum.  None  of  the  phenomena  look  distinc-
tively like  cloud.  There  are,  however,  pheno-
mena that  do.

Toward  the  end  of  August  there  were  seen
several  times,  first  by  Professor  Pickering  and
then  by  me,  strange  flocculent  collections  of
white  patches,  about  fifteen  degrees  from  the
pole,  in  the  place  where  the  snow-cap  had  been,
the  cap  itself  having  retreated  farther  south.
In  look  they  were  unlike  the  snow-cap ;  and
also  unlike  the  land.  But  they  did  have  very
much  the  look  of  clouds.  Possibly  they  were
clouds,  formed  from  the  vapor  left  in  the  air  by
the  melting  of  the  cap.  It  was  then  but  a  few
days  to  the  summer  solstice.

But  the  most  marked  instance  of  variability
was  detected  in  September  last  by  Mr.  Doug-
lass in  the  western  part  of  Elysium.  On  Sep-
tember 22  and  23  he  found  this  blissfully
bright  region  y  as  usual,  equally  bright  through-
out. But  on  September  24  he  noticed  that
the  western  half  of  it  had  suddenly  increased  in
brightness,  and  far  outshone  the  eastern  half,
being  almost  as  brilliant  as  the  polar  cap.
When  he  looked  at  it  again  the  next  night,
September  25,  the  effect  of  the  night  before


62  MARS

had  vanished,  the  western  half  being  now  ac-
tually the  darker  of  the  two.  So  fugitive  an
effect  suggests  cloud,  forming  presumably  over
high  ground,  and  subsequently  dissipating ;  it
also  suggests  a  deposition  of  frost,  melting  on
the  next  day.  It  is  specially  noteworthy  that
the  canals  inclosing  the  region,  the  Galaxias,  the
Boreas,  and  the  Eunostos,  were  not  in  any  way
obscured  by  the  bright  apparition.  On  the  con-
trary, Mr.  Douglass  found  them  perceptibly
darker  than  they  had  been,  an  effect  attributable
perhaps  to  contrast.

Although  not  storm-clouds,  it  is  possible  that
these  appearances  may  have  been  due  to  thin
cloud,  capping  high  land.  There  are  objections
to  this  view,  but  as  there  are  graver  ones
to  any  other  it  may  stand  provisionally,  the
more  so  that  there  are  appearances  not  easily
reconcilable  with  other  cause.  For  example,  a
most  singular  phenomenon  was  seen  by  Mr.
Douglass  on  November  25,  a  bright  detached
projection,  for  which,  from  measurement,  he
deduced  a  height  of  thirty  miles.  This  would
seem  to  have  been  cloud,  for  the  details  of  its
changes  in  appearance  seem  quite  incompatible
with  a  mountainous  character.  With  regard  to
its  enormous  height,  it  is  not  to  be  forgotten
that  a  few  years  ago  on  the  Earth  phenomenal
dust-clouds  were  observed  as  high  as  one  hun-
dred miles.


CLOUDS  63

We  now  come  to  a  highly  interesting  class
of  observations  bearing  upon  the  question  of
clouds,  —  Mr.  Douglass's  terminator  observa-
tions. During  the  last  opposition,  seven  hundred
and  thirty-six  irregularities  upon  the  terminator
of  the  planet  were  detected  at  Flagstaff.  They
were  seen  by  one  or  more  of  three  observers,
but  chiefly  by  Mr.  Douglass,  who  made  a  syste-
matic scrutiny  of  the  terminator  for  almost
every  degree  of  Martian  longitude.  Their  full
presentation  would  be  both  too  tabular  and  too
technical  for  this  book.  The  paper  embodying
them  will  be  found  among  the  published  annals
of  this  observatory.  I  shall  here  give  only  cer-
tain deductions  from  it.

Of  the  736  irregularities  observed,  694  were
not  only  recorded  but  measured.  Of  these  403
were  depressions.  It  is  singular,  in  view  of
their  easy  visibility,  that,  with  the  exception
of  Schroeter  in  the  last  century,  no  one  should
have  noticed  them  before.  Schroeter,  indeed,
saw  two  appearances  of  exactly  this  sort,  —  one
on  the  21st  of  September,  1798,  and  the  other
on  the  12th  of  November,  1800.  Nevertheless
they  are  not  difficult  to  see,  and  anything  but
rare.  When  the  phase  is  large  enough,  several
may  be  seen  every  night.

The  projections  number  291.  As  their  num-
ber shows,  they  are  less  common  than  the  de-
pressions, but  they  are  even  less  of  a  feature  of


64  MARS

the  surface  than  their  number  would  indicate,
for  the  depressions  extend  as  a  rule  much  fur-
ther both  in  latitude  and  longitude.

Usually  the  depressions  look  like  parings  from
the  planet's  rind,  and  almost  always  appear  upon
that  part  of  the  terminator  where  the  dark  re-
gions are  passing  out  of  sight ;  commonly  there-
fore, in  the  case  of  the  southern  hemisphere,
they  are  met  with  between  latitudes  30°  to  60°
south.  Not  so  common  is  it  for  them  to  occur
over  a  part  of  the  planet  which  is  bright.
Furthermore,  they  appear  to  occur  more  or  less
continuously.  This  would  not  be  the  case  were
they  real  depressions.

As  this  may  not  at  once  be  evident  to  the
reader,  and  yet  is  easily  made  evident,  we  will
consider  the  diagram  on  page  38.  It  will  there
be  seen  that  an  elevation  like  s  or  r  —  and  the
same  reasoning  applies  mutatis  mutandis  to  a
depression  —  appears  projected  a  relatively  long
way  without  or  within  the  terminator,  as  com-
pared with  its  actual  length,  owing  to  the  angles
under  which  it  is  respectively  illuminated  by
the  Sun  and  seen  from  the  Earth.  The  rela-
tion between  its  height  and  its  distance  from  the
edge  is  that  between  the  height  of  a  hill  and
the  shadow  it  casts  at  sunrise  or  sunset.  What,
therefore,  is  not  high  enough  to  be  seen  in  pro-
file on  the  limb,  becomes  vicariously  visible  on
the  terminator.     But  a  hill  could  not  continue


CLOUDS  65

long  to  appear  as  an  elevation,  as  the  rotation
of  the  planet  would  carry  it  in  due  course  from
the  position  r  to  the  position  s,  and  there  it
would  be  forced  to  masquerade  as  a  depression.
The  same,  reversely,  would  happen  to  a  val-
ley. In  order  that  a  depression  should  appear
continuously,  there  must  be  a  belt  of  lower
level  along  its  circle,  and  this  could  not  be
made  visible  as  in  the  former  case  by  projec-
tion, since  projection  depends  upon  difference  of
level  along  the  same  surface  contour,  not  as  be-
tween adjacent  ones.  It  could,  therefore,  only
be  noted  by  its  actual  profile,  —  a  very  small
affair,  still  further  diminished  by  reason  of  the
angle  under  which  that  profile  was  viewed.
The  resulting  quantity  in  the  case  of  Mars
would  be  exceedingly  minute.  We  perceive
therefore,  on  the  very  threshold  of  our  inquiry,
reason  to  doubt  the  mountainous  character  of
the  irregularities.  Such  inference  becomes  the
more  probable  on  a  more  detailed  investigation,
into  which  we  will  now  enter.  This  investiga-
tion depends  upon  a  very  important  principle  ;
namely,  that  if  we  have,  as  in  this  case,  a  great
number  of  observations,  it  is  possible,  by  divid-
ing them  into  classes  according  to  their  kind  and
then  taking  the  mean  value  of  each  class,  to
discover  characteristics  not  otherwise  exposed.

Means  are  very  telling  things.     They  are   so
from  the  fact  of  simplifying  the  effects  of  the


QQ  MARS

factors  at  work.  By  taking  tlie  average  of  the
series  of  observed  values  according  to  some  defi-
nite principle,  not  only  do  we  eliminate  a  very
large  class  of  errors,  but  we  allow  by  so  doing
the  various  causes  to  unmask  their  separate
results.  The  importance  of  reasoning  upon
averages  could  hardly  be  more  strikingly  ex-
emplified than  in  the  very  case  before  us,  —  that
of  these  depressions  and  projections  seen  on  the
terminator  of  Mars.

Of  the  694  irregularities  measured,  291  were
projections  and  403  were  depressions.  Here  at
the  very  outset,  then,  we  perceive  an  objection
to  the  theory  that  they  are  due  to  mountains ;
to  wit,  because  the  number  of  depressions  so
greatly  exceeds  the  number  of  projections.  As
previously  explained  on  page  64,  mountains
would  produce  on  the  average  as  many  projec-
tions as  depressions,  for  they  would  project  the
light  on  the  one  side  as  much  as  they  would
cut  it  off  on  the  other.

Now  let  us  classify  these  irregularities,  and
see  if  we  can  gain  further  information  about
them.  There  were  two  kinds  of  them,  —  the
long  and  low,  and  the  short  and  sharp.  Each
kind  had  its  representatives  among  both  the
projections  and  the  depressions.  Of  the  short
and  sharp  variety  there  were  95  projections.
These  averaged  0.276  seconds  of  arc  in  height.
Of  the  same  kind  there  were  similarly  57  depres-


CLOUDS  67

sions  which  averaged  0.368  seconds  of  arc  in
depth.  It  will  be  noticed  then,  first,  that  the
projections  of  this  character  exceeded  in  num-
ber the  depressions  of  the  same  ;  secondly,  that
the  average  depth  of  the  depressions  exceeded
the  average  height  of  the  projections.  Now,
if  the  appearances  had  been  due  to  mountains,
both  the  number  and  size  of  the  projections
and  of  the  depressions  should  have  been  sub-
stantially the  same.  They  were  emphatically
neither.  Consequently  mountains  fail  to  ex-
plain them.  But  there  is  another  possible  set
of  phenomena  that  will ;  namely,  clouds.  For,
in  the  first  place,  clouds  would  cause  apparent
depressions  and  projections,  since  the  light  would
linger  on  them  as  it  does  on  mountain  tops,  and
they  would  cast  shadows  as  mountains  do.  But
furthermore  their  two  effects,  of  extending  or
curtailing  the  limit  of  vision  along  the  termina-
tor, would  not  necessarily  be  equal,  as  would  be
the  case  with  hills.  Because  it  is  a  peculiarity
of  mountains  that  they  are  attached  to  the  soil,
and  are  commonly  permanencies ;  while  clouds
are  not.  The  latter  form  and  dissipate,  dissi-
pate and  re-form,  and  their  metamorphoses  are
phenomena  depending  upon  the  time  of  day.
Consequently  they  may  appear  in  one  place
at  one  time,  in  another  the  next ;  and  what  is
no  less  important,  they  may  form  at  different
heights  at  different  times.     They  therefore  not


68  MAES

only  account  for  irregularities  on  the  termina-
tor, but  they  account  also  for  irregularity  in  the
plus  or  minus  character  of  these  irregularities.
Cloudsj  therefore,  are  capable  of  explaining  the
case  before  us,  although  mountains  are  not.

From  what  we  have  just  shown  let  us  mark
now  just  what  clouds  are  here  required  to  ac-
count for  what  we  see.  The  clouds  that  cause
depressions  are  those  within  the  terminator, —
those,  that  is,  that  form  before  sunset  o/  after
sunrise ;  while  those  that  cause  projections  are
those  that  gather  after  sunset  or  before  sun-
rise. As  the  observed  projections  in  this
case  exceed  the  depressions  in  number,  we
infer,  then,  that  there  are  more  clouds  after
nightfall  than  before  it,  and  similarly  more
before  daybreak  than  after  it ;  next,  as  the
average  depression  is  greater  than  the  average
projection,  we  likewise  infer  that  the  day  clouds
lie  at  a  higher  altitude.  Now,  this  is  precisely
what  we  should  expect  would  be  the  case,  just
as  it  is  the  case  on  the  Earth.

Of  the  other  class  of  irregularities,  the  long
and  low,  there  were  observed  196  projections
and  346  depressions.  The  jirojections  averaged
0''.136  in  height;  the  depressions,  0'M25  in
depth.  Here,  then,  we  have  an  opposite  state  of
things  from  that  with  which  we  were  confronted
in  the  short  and  sharp  class.  Here,  as  compared
with  the  projections,  instead  of  relatively  few


CLOUDS  69

depressions  of  greater  height,  we  have  rela-
tively many  depressions  of  less  height.  Fur-
thermore, there  are  a  great  many  more  of  both
projections  and  depressions  than  there  were  of
the  former  variety,  and  they  are  both  of  much
less  height  or  depth.  Evidently,  therefore,  we
have  here,  in  part  at  least,  a  different  class  of
phenomena  from  what  we  have  previously  con-
sidered. Now  we  perceive  at  once  that  two
factors  enter  here  which  did  not  enter  in  the
case  of  the  short  and  sharp  irregularities.  The
long  and  low  depressions  occur,  as  we  shall  re-
call, almost  always  over  the  dark  areas,  while
the  short  and  sharp  ones  do  not.  In  the  next
place,  the  average  height  or  depth  of  the  long
and  low  irregularities  is  much  nearer  the  value
of  the  irradiation  constant,  that  is,  the  amount
by  which  a  bright  object  seems  bigger  on  ac-
count of  its  brightness ;  which  would  cause  the
dark  areas  to  seem  depressed.  From  these  facts
we  infer  that  most  of  the  depressions  of  this
class  are  due  to  the  character,  not  to  the  con-
tour, ol  the  surface  where  they  occur ;  partly  to
the  direct  effect  of  lack  of  irradiation,  partly
to  sombreness  of  the  surface,  which  would  cause
the  light  to  fade  from  them  at  a  greater  relative
distance  from  the  terminator.  On  eliminating
these  depressions,  therefore,  we  find  ourselves
left  with  very  few  depressions  as  against  nearly
200  projections.     The  excess  in  number  of  the


70  MARS

latter  shows,  as  in  the  case  of  the  other  variety,
that  we  are  here  deahng  chiefly  with  long  and
relatively  low  clouds  formed  after  sunset  or  be-
fore sunrise ;  those  so  formed  during  daylight
being  few  if  any.

One  more  observation  made  at  Flagstaff,  on
the  subject  of  cloud,  is  as  peculiar  as  it  is
important.  It  was  made  by  Mr.  Douglass,  and
I  shall  give  it  in  his  own  words.  A  more  de-
tailed account  of  it,  together  with  his  tables  of
figures,  will  appear  in  his  paper  upon  it  in  the
Observatory  annals :  —

"  On  November  25  and  26  a  bright  spot  was
seen  in  the  unilluminated  portion  of  Mars,  to
which,  in  my  opinion,  no  other  name  than  cloud
can  be  applied.  Its  great  height,  size,  and  bril-
liancy, and,  on  the  second  evening,  its  singu-
lar fluctuations,  render  it  of  importance  in  the
study  of  the  Martian  atmosphere.

"  I  first  saw  it  at  16h.  35m.,  G.  M.  T.,  of  No-
vember 25,  and  made  an  estimate  of  its  height.
It  seemed  to  be  rapidly  increasing  in  length  in
a  direction  parallel  to  the  terminator  at  that
point.  Subsequent  estimates  of  its  height  gave
a  different  and  greater  value  than  at  first,  until
its  sudden  disappearance  at  17h.  6m.,  or  perhaps
a  minute  later.  After  once  attaining  its  size,  it
seemed  to  remain  with  little  change,  presenting
the  appearance  of  a  line  115  miles  long  by  33
miles  wide  at  the  centre  and  lying  parallel  to


CLOUDS  71

the  terminator,  but  separated  from  it  by  an  ap-
parent space  of  over  80  miles.  It  was  gener-
ally yellowish  in  color,  like  the  limb,  but  of  less
brilliancy  than  the  centre  of  the  disk,  though
distinctly  surpassing  in  that  respect  the  adja-
cent terminator.  I  estimated  it  to  have  the
brilliancy  of  the  bright  areas  of  the  disk  at  a
distance  of  9°  from  the  terminator.  In  one
view  it  appeared  to  be  a  very  small  whitish
point,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  there
may  have  been  a  real  diminution  in  its  size  at
that  moment.  This  idea  is  partly  sustained  by
the  following  night's  observations.  At  16h.
54m.  it  was  observed  by  Professor  Pickering,
whose  estimate  gave  11  miles  for  its  height.  At
17h.  5m.,  after  obtaining  two  readings  of  the
micrometer  screw  for  latitude,  the  seeing,  which
had  been  quite  steadily  at  the  figure  7  (on  a
scale  of  10),  dropped  to  4,  and  in  attempt-
ing the  next  setting  I  could  not  find  the
'  cloud,'  although  once  before  it  had  remained
visible  when  the  seeing  dropped  instantaneously
to  that  figure.  Nor  did  it  reappear  in  the  next
half  hour.  This  sudden  disappearance,  without
any  previous  lessening  of  its  height  above  the
terminator  or  of  its  size,  made  its  cloud  charac-
ter unmistakable,  since  a  mountain  beyond  the
sunrise  terminator  must  either  constantly  de-
crease in  height,  or  soon  join  the  illuminated
disk.


72  MARS

"  A  subsequent  computation  showed  that  this
phenomenon  took  place  over  the  southern  part
of  Schiaparelli's  Protei  Kegio.  Other  reasons
lead  me  to  think,  however,  that  he  has  placed
that  island  some  5°  too  far  south.

"  On  November  26  the  cloud  promptly  ap-
peared at  17h.  15m.,  G.  M.  T.,  but  nearly  9°  far-
ther north.  Instead  of  remaining  continuously
Visible,  it  dissipated  and  reformed  at  irregular
intervals.  The  first  appearance  lasted  sixteen
minutes.  After  somewhat  over  four  minutes
had  passed,  it  reappeared  momentarily,  and  six
minutes  elapsed  before  it  appeared  again,  lasting
then  but  two  and  one  half  minutes.  Then  fol-
lowed an  absence  of  three  minutes,  presence  for
two  minutes,  absence  for  three  minutes,  presence
for  one  minute,  and  a  final  brief  appearance
eight  minutes  later  at  18h.  Im.  Its  presence
was  suspected  five  minutes  before  that  hour,
and  again  at  18h.  11m.,  but  with  great  uncer-
tainty.

"  At  this  time  it  presented  in  general  the
same  characteristics  as  the  night  before,  though
its  appearances  were  too  brief  to  permit  such
careful  observations  as  were  hoped  for.  The
seeing,  too,  was  not  so  good  as  before,  varying
from  4  to  7 ;  and  if  the  cloud  happened  to  ap-
pear under  the  former  figure,  its  observation
was  difficult.  It  is  needless  to  remark  that
under  such  conditions  it  was  impossible  to  ob-


CLOUDS  73

serve  its  appearance  or  disappearance  to  the
second.  In  general,  it  seemed  to  exhibit  a  less
elevation  than  the  night  before.  A  careful
estimate  of  its  latitude  placed  it  precisely  at  the
centre  of  the  terminator.  I  believe  these  lati-
tude observations,  though  made  rapidly,  cannot
be  subject  to  an  error  greater  than  2°,  and  prob-
ably less  than  1°.  On  November  27,  at  18h.,  I
searched  for  the  cloud,  but  was  not  rewarded  by
finding  any  trace  of  it.

''  Estimates  of  the  size  and  height  of  this
cloud  were  made  with  reference  to  a  glass
thread  in  the  micrometer,  whose  diameter  is
0''.6.  One  tenth  of  the  thread  was  found  to  rep-
resent on  Mars  a  little  less  than  twenty  miles.
This  gives  us  an  elevation  above  the  surface  of
between  10  and  11  miles.  In  this  process  we
have  taken  the  apparent  centre  of  the  cloud,
and  have  assumed  the  seeing  to  have  no  influ-
ence. We  obtain,  therefore,  the  smallest  possi-
ble mean  height  of  the  centre  of  the  cloud.  If
we  assume  that  the  seeing  was  not  perfect,  its
eifect  would  be  to  lessen  the  separation,  but  not
to  change  the  total  height.  Supposing,  for  ex-
ample, that  the  apparent  extension  of  the  cloud
was  due  to  poor  seeing  enlarging  a  point,  then
our  terminator  distance  would  be  245  miles,
and  our  minimum  elevation  15  miles.  There-
fore we  can  assume  15  miles  to  be  the  smallest
probable  mean   elevation  of   this  cloud.     The


74  MARS

average  height  of  our  cirrus  clouds  is  five  and
one  half  miles.

''  One  more  idea  requires  mention,  namely,
the  movement  of  this  cloud  in  latitude.  From
the  extreme  rarity  of  clouds  on  Mars  I  am  in-
clined to  connect  intimately  the  appearances  of
the  two  evenings,  and  consider  them  as  due  to
one  source,  presumably  a  large  body  of  air  mov-
ing northward.  Such  an  advance  would  be  at
the  rate  of  13.1  miles  per  hour.''

I  may  add  to  this  that  the  height  of  the
cloud  —  relatively  to  those  of  the  Earth  —  is
what  direct  deduction  from  the  less  rapid  thin-
ning out  of  the  air  above  the  Martian  surface,
which  must  result  from  the  smaller  mass  of
Mars,  would  lead  us  to  expect.  The  air  at  the
surface  would  be  thinner  than  at  the  surface
of  the  Earth,  but  the  rate  at  which  it  diminished
with  the  height  above  that  surface  would  not  be
so  great.  At  no  very  great  elevation  the  two
densities  would  come  to  be  the  same.

One  deduction  from  this  thin  air  we  must
be  careful  not  to  make  —  that  because  it  is  thin
it  is  incapable  of  supporting  intelligent  life.
That  beings  constituted  physically  as  w^e  are
would  find  it  a  most  uncomfortable  habitat  is
pretty  certain.  But  lungs  are  not  wedded  to
logic,  as  public  speeches  show,  and  there  is
nothing  in  the  world  or  beyond  it  to  prevent,  so
far  as  we  know,  a  being  with  gills,  for  example,


CLOUDS  75

from  being  a  most  superior  person.  A  fish  doubt-
less imagines  life  out  of  water  to  be  impossible  ;
and  similarly  to  argue  that  Hfe  of  an  order
as  high  as  our  own,  or  higher,  is  impossible
because  of  less  air  to  breathe  than  that  to
which  we  are  locally  accustomed,  is,  as  Flamma-
rion  happily  expresses  it,  to  argue,  not  as  a
philosopher,  but  as  a  fish.

To  sum  up,  now,  what  we  know  about  the
atmosphere  of  Mars :  we  have  proof  positive
that  Mars  has  an  atmosphere  ;  we  have  reason
to  believe  this  atmosphere  to  be  very  thin,  —
thinner  at  least  by  half  than  the  air  upon  the
summit  of  the  Himalayas,  —  and  in  constitution
not  to  difier  greatly  from  our  own.


Ill

WATER
I.     THE   POLAR   CAP

After  air,  water.  If  Mars  be  capable  of
supporting  life,  there  must  be  water  upon  his
surface  ;  for,  to  all  forms  of  life,  water  is  as  vital
a  matter  as  air.  On  the  question  of  habitabil-
ity,  therefore,  it  becomes  all-important  to  know
whether  there  be  water  on  Mars.

To  the  solution  of  this  inquiry,  also,  the
planet's  polar  cap  turns  out  to  hold  the  key.
For  just  as  the  fact  of  change  in  the  cap  proves
the  presence  of  air,  so  the  manner  of  that
change  implies  the  presence  of  water.  It  not
only  does  this ;  it  turns  out  to  do  a  deal  more.
For  to  the  whole  water  question  it  appears  to
play  the  part  not  only  of  occasion  but  of  cause.
In  more  senses  than  one,  it  is  in  that  great
glistening  white  patch  that  our  water  problem
takes  its  rise.

On  the  3d  of  June,  1894,  the  south  polar  cap
stretched,  almost  one  unbroken  waste  of  white,
over  about  55  degrees  of  latitude.  A  degree
on  Mars  measures  37  miles;  consequently  the


THE  POLAR  CAP  77

cap  was  2,035  miles  across.  Inasmuch  as  the
inclination  of  the  Martian  equator  to  the  plane
of  the  Martian  orbit  is,  according  to  Schiapa-
relli,  24°  52',  it  must  have  then  covered  more
than  the  whole  south  frigid  zone  of  the  planet.

Now,  to  take  in  the  full  meaning  of  the  con-
dition of  the  cap  at  this  time  and  of  the  changes
that  ensued,  we  must  begin  by  determining  the
Martian  time  of  year.  This  is  done  by  fixing
the  dates  at  which  the  Martian  pole  reached
its  maximum  tilt  toward  or  from  the  Sun,  and
the  dates  at  which  it  was  not  tilted  either  to
or  from,  but  sideways  to,  the  Sun ;  the  former
gives  us  the  Martian  solstices,  and  the  latter
the  Martian  equinoxes.  It  thus  appears  that
on  April  7,  1894,  occurred  the  vernal  equinox
of  the  Martian  southern  hemisphere,  on  August
31,  its  summer  solstice,  and  on  February  7,
1895,  its  autumnal  equinox.  From  these  dates
it  is  easy  to  transform  the  one  calendar  into  the
other.  On  the  3d  of  June,  1894,  therefore,  it
was  about  May  1  on  the  southern  hemisphere
of  Mars.

On  May  1,  then,  Martian  time,  the  cap  was
already  in  rapid  process  of  melting ;  and  the
speed  with  which  it  proceeded  to  dwindle
showed  that  hundreds  of  square  miles  of  it  were
disappearing  daily.  As  it  melted,  a  dark  band
appeared  surrounding  it  on  all  sides.  Except,  as
I  have  since  learned,  at  Arequipa,  this  band  has


78  MARS

never,  I  believe,  been  distinctively  noted  or
commented  on  before,  which  is  singular,  con-
sidering how  conspicuous  it  was  at  Flagstaff.
It  is  specially  remarkable  that  it  should  never
have  been  remarked  upon  elsewhere,  in  that
a  similar  one  girdling  the  north  polar  cap  was
seen  by  Beer  and  Madler  as  far  back  as  1830.
For  it  is,  as  we  shall  shortly  see,  a  most  signifi-
cant phenomenon.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  the
darkest  marking  upon  the  disk,  and  was  of  a
blue  color.  It  was  of  different  widths  at  differ-
ent longitudes,  and  was  especially  pronounced
in  tint  where  it  was  widest,  notably  in  two
spots  where  it  expanded  into  great  bays,  one  in
longitude  270°  and  one  in  longitude  330°.  The
former  of  these  was  very  striking  for  its  color,
a  deep  blue,  like  some  other-world  grotto  of
Capri.  The  band  was  bounded  on  the  north,
that  is,  on  the  side  toward  the  equator,  by  the
bluish-green  areas  of  the  disk.  It  was  con-
trasted with  these  both  in  tone  and  tint.  It
was  both  darker  and  more  blue.

The  band  not  only  varied  in  width  at  differ-
ent longitudes,  but  its  width  corresponded  to
the  amount  of  the  blue-green  areas  of  the  disk
visible  at  these  longitudes  below  it.  It  was
widest  where  these  were  greatest  in  extent,  and
narrowest  where  they  were  least.  If  we  con-
sult the  map  of  Mars  we  shall  see  that  below
the  bay  in  longitude  330°  hes  the  great  dark


THE  POLAR  CAP  79

area,  the  Syrtis  Major,  and,  below  the  one  in
longitude  270"^,  the  Syrtis  Minor.  This  corre-
lation was  highly  suggestive  in  itself.  As  if,
however,  to  remove  all  question  as  to  possible
coincidence  having  a  hand  in  the  matter,  the
agreement  in  position  was  emphasized  by  visi-
ble connection.  Two  long  dark  streaks  appeared
joining  respectively  each  bay  to  its  correspond-
ing Syrtis.

But  the  most  significant  fact  about  the  band
was  that  it  kept  pace  with  the  polar  cap's  re-
treat toward  the  pole.  As  the  white  cap  shrank
it  followed  pari  passu  so  as  always  to  border
the  edge  of  the  snow.  It  thus  showed  itself
not  to  be  a  permanent  marking  of  the  planet's
surface,  since  it  changed  its  place,  but  a  tempo-
rary one,  dependent  directly  upon  the  waning
of  the  cap  itself.  In  short,  it  was  an  associated
detail,  and  itself  instantly  suggested  its  charac-
ter, namely,  that  it  was  water  at  the  edge  of
the  cap  due  to  the  melting  of  the  polar  snow.

Not  only  did  the  band  conform  with  the  cap
in  position;  it  did  so  in  size.  As  the  snows
dwindled,  the  blue  band  about  them  shrank  in
width  to  correspond.  By  August  it  was  a
barely  discernible  thread  drawn  round  the  tiny
white  patch  which  was  all  that  remained  of  the
enormous  snow-fields  of  some  months  before.
Finally,  on  October  13,  when  the  snow  entirely
disappeared,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  the  spot


80  MARS

where  it  and  its  girdle,  long  since  grown  too
small  for  detection,  had  been  became  one  yellow
stretch.

That  the  blue  was  water  at  the  edge  of  the
melting  snow  seems  unquestionable.  That  it
was  the  color  of  water ;  that  it  so  persistently
bordered  the  melting  snow ;  and  that  it  subse-
quently vanish edjs^are  three  facts  mutually  con-
firmatory to  this  deduction.  But  a  fourth  bit
of  proof,  due  to  the  ingenuity  of  Professor  W.
H.  Pickering,  adds  its  weight  to  the  other  three.
For  he  made  the  polariscope  tell  the  same  tale.
On  scrutinizing  the  great  bay  through  an  Arago
polariscope,  he  found  the  light  coming  from  the
bay  to  be  polarized.  Now,  to  polarize  the  light
it  reflects  is  a  property,  as  we  know,  of  a  smooth
surface  such  as  that  of  water  is.

Before  going  further  we  will  take  up  here
at  the  outset  the  question  of  the  constitution
of  these  polar  caps,  which  in  their  general  be-
havior so  strikingly  suggest  our  own  ice-caps  as
they  would  appear  could  they  be  seen  from  a
distance  of  forty  millions  of  miles.  That  they
so  instantly  suggest  snow  has  suggested,  to  that
class  of  mind  which  likes  to  make  of  molehills
of  question  mountains  of  doubt,  the  possibility
that  instead  of  ice  we  have  here  snow-caps  of
solid  carbonic  acid  gas  (carbon  dioxide).  The
occasion  of  the  suggestion  is  the  fact  that  car-
bonic dioxide  under  certain  conditions  becomes


THE   POLAR  CAP  81

a  colorless  liquid,  and  then  a  solid  of  a  floccular,
snow-like  character.  It  assumes,  in  short,  under
proper  conditions  of  pressure  and  cold,  the  va-
rious appearances  presented  by  water  under
higher  temperatures,  although  it  does  so  with
very  different  degrees  of  ease.  Superficially,
therefore,  the  idea  seems  plausible.  Let  us  see
if  it  still  seems  so  when  critically  examined.

Faraday  made  experiments  on  the  relation  of
the  congealing  point  of  carbonic  acid  gas  to  the
pressure,  and  found  that  at  0°  C.  it  took  a  pres-
sure of  36  atmospheres,  that  is,  540  pounds  to
the  square  inch,  to  solidify  the  gas,  and  that  at
— 99°  C,  the  lowest  temperature  with  which  he
experimented,  it  took  1.14  atmospheres.  At
this  point  the  curve  representing  the  relation
was  becoming  apparently  asymptotic,  that  is,
a  slight  decrease  in  pressure  involved  a  great
falling  off  of  temperature.  Under  a  pressure
of  one  atmosphere,  therefore,  the  temperature
would  be  about  — 170°  F.,  that  is,  on  the  surface
of  the  Earth  this  would  be  the  congealing  point
of  the  gas.

He  found  further  that  the  curve  for  the  lique-
faction point  lay  very  close  to  that  for  the  con-
gealing point,  and  approached  yet  closer  as  the
pressure  decreased.  In  other  words,  the  gas
passed  almost  immediately  from  the  gaseous  to
the  solid  state.

In  the  light  of  these  facts  let  us  consider  the


82  MARS

condition  of  Mars.  Three  points  arise  which
we  will  take  in  the  inverse  order  of  their  im-
portance. First :  the  appearance  of  the  planet
shows  conclusively  that,  if  the  polar  caps  be
composed  of  solid  carbonic  acid  gas,  then  either
there  is  no  water  at  all  on  Mars  in  any  form
whatsoever,  or  what  there  is  is  ice  so  overlaid
with  detritus  as  to  be  invisible.  For  if  the  two
substances  were  there  together,  and  the  cold  at
the  surface  of  the  planet  of  so  extreme  a  char-
acter as  to  congeal  the  carbon  dioxide,  the  water
must  a  fortiori  be  frozen,  and  would  continue  so
long  after  the  temperature  rose  above  the  melt-
ing point  of  the  former  substance.  We  should
therefore  still  have  snow-fields  of  snow  after  the
melting  of  those  formed  of  carbonic  acid  gas,
either  visible  as  white  patches  or  so  covered  up
with  dirt  as  to  pass  for  land.  Now  there  are  no
such  additional  white  patches  to  be  seen,  nor,  so
far  as  we  can  judge,  does  any  part  of  the  planet
behave  as  if  it  were  glacier-bound.

Second :  carbonic  dioxide  passes,  as  we  saw,
almost  simultaneously  into  the  liquid  and  solid
states,  especially  under  slight  pressure.  Now,
the  pressure  is  certainly  very  slight  on  the
surface  of  Mars ;  not  probably  more  than,  and
probably  less  than,  one  seventh  of  an  atmosphere.
In  consequence,  on  a  rise  of  temperature  the
frozen  carbonic  acid  gas  would  there  pass  prac-
tically straight  from  the  solid  into  the  gaseous


THE  POLAR  CAP  83

state.  Now,  from  the  existence  of  the  surround-
ing polar  sea,  we  remark  that  in  the  substance
composing  the  polar  caps  of  Mars  this  does  not
occur.  A  considerable  portion  of  it  is  always
in  the  transition  state  of  a  liquid.  Carbonic  di-
oxide would  not  thus  tarry  :  water  would.

Third  :  from  the  curve  of  metamorphosis,  it  is
evident  that  the  temperature  necessary  to  freeze
the  gas  under  the  pressure  of  one  seventh  of  an
atmosphere  must  lie  between  — 100°  C.  and
—200°  C,  if  not  lower.  —200°  C.  is,  so  far  as
we  can  judge,  about  the  temperature  of  inter-
planetary space,  or  what  would  be  the  tempera-
ture of  the  night  side  of  Mars  were  the  planet
destitute  of  atmosphere.  But  there  is  an  atmos-
phere on  Mars,  and,  even  if  there  were  not,  on
melting  the  carbonic  dioxide  would  itself  make
an  atmosphere.  This  would  instantly  raise  the
temperature,  and  under  any  rise  in  temperature
the  congealing  of  the  gas  at  once  becomes  an
impossibility.  The  gas  itself  thus  suggests  its
own  refutation.

There  is  no  such  apparent  objection  to  water.
With  an  atmosphere  properly  constituted  (and
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  Martian  at-
mosphere is  not  so  constituted),  the  tempera-
ture might  easily  rise  high  enough  to  melt  ice.
We  may  therefore  conclude  water  to  be  the
most  probable  solution  of  the  question.

With  such    more    or   less   solid    ground    to


84  MAES

stand  on,  we  may  now  go  on  to  describe  the
behavior  of  the  cap  as  constituted  of  snow.
Whether  we  call  it  snow-cap  or  ice-cap  is  im-
material, as,  although  it  would  probably  be
deposited  as  hoar-frost  rather  than  as  snow  in
the  first  instance,  owing  to  the  thinness  of  the
Martian  air,  the  latter  end  of  either  form  of  the
substance  would  be  much  the  same,  —  glacier-
ice.

It  will  be  interesting  to  examine  more  in  de-
tail the  annual  history  of  the  ice-cap,  especially
as  this  history  was  unrolled  before  us  last  year
more  minutely  than  has  been  the  case  for  the
last  fifteen  years,  and  than  will  be  the  case  for
fifteen  years  to  come.  This  was  due  not  only
to  the  relative  proximity  of  the  planet  during
the  last  opposition,  but  to  the  further  fact
that  its  south  pole  was  tilted  toward  us  at  a
maximum  angle.  The  vicissitudes  which  the
polar  cap  underwent  stood,  in  consequence,  re-
markably well  displayed.  To  such  advantage
were  they  seen  that  it  has  been  possible  to  con-
struct a  map  of  the  Martian  south  circumpolar
regions  to  a  degree  of  detail  such  as  has  never
been  possible  before,  and  which  I  have  accord-
ingly done.  It  will  be  seen  from  it  (on  the
opposite  page)  how  much  farther  advanced  is
our  knowledge  of  the  Martian  south  pole,  and
the  regions  about  it,  than  is  our  knowledge  of
either   of  our  own.     It  is  also  pleasing  to  re-


Plate  II


igO"        '80°       170'


MAP   OF   THE    SOUTH   POLE   OF  MARS
Showing  the  polar  cap  and  its  changes  in  1894


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


THE  POLAR  CAP  85

member  that  during  this  our  polar  expedition
we  were  not  frost-bitten  for  life,  nor  did  we
have  to  be  rescued  by  a  search  party.  We  lived
not  unlike  civilized  beings  during  it  all,  and  we
actually  brought  back  some  of  the  information
we  went  out  to  acquire.

On  examining  the  chart  in  which  the  succes-
sive appearances  of  the  southern  ice-cap  are  de-
picted at  different  times,  from  June  3  to  October
13,  or,  in  terms  of  the  Martian  time  of  year,  from
May  1  to  July  15,  the  first  point  to  strike  one  is
that  the  cap  was  during  its  whole  existence  ec-
centrically placed  with  regard  to  the  geograph-
ical pole  of  the  planet.  In  other  words,  the  pole
of  rotation  and  the  pole  of  cold  did  not  coincide.
The  latter  lay  on  the  average  some  six  degrees
distant  from  the  former.  This  shows  that  the
isotherms  in  the  southern  hemisphere  of  Mars
do  not  coincide  with  the  parallels  of  latitude.

The  manner  of  the  cap's  melting  further
shows  that  differences  of  level  exist  in  it.  For,
in  addition  to  melting  round  its  edge,  the  cap
proceeded  to  melt  asymmetrically.  On  the  first
night  that  Professor  W.  H.  Pickering  observed
it,  on  May  22,  with  the  six-inch  telescope,  he
suspected  a  rift  crossing  the  cap  from  longitude
330°  to  longitude  170°.  This  rift  grew  more
and  more  evident,  until,  in  the  early  part  of
June,  it  was  unmistakable.  It  grew  in  visibility
chiefly  from  actual  growth  in  size.     On  June  6


86  MARS

it  was  estimated,  on  a  scale  of  ruled  lines  made
for  the  purpose,  to  be  about  100  miles  wide.
On  June  15  it  was  similarly  found  to  measure
350  miles.

Meanwhile  an  interesting  phenomenon  oc-
curred in  the  cap  on  June  7.  On  that  morn-
ing, at  about  a  quarter  of  six  (or,  more  precisely,
on  June  8,  Ih.  17m.,  G.  M.  T.),  as  I  was  watch-
ing the  planet,  I  saw  suddenly  two  points  like
stars  flash  out  in  the  midst  of  the  polar  cap.
Dazzlingly  bright  upon  the  duller  white  back-
ground of  the  snow,  these  stars  shone  for  a  few
moments  and  then  slowly  disappeared.  The
seeing  at  the  time  was  very  good.  It  is  at
once  evident  what  the  other-world  apparitions
were,  —  not  the  fabled  signal-lights  of  Martian
folk,  but  the  glint  of  ice-slopes  flashing  for
a  moment  earthward  as  the  rotation  of  the
planet  turned  the  slope  to  the  proper  angle ;
just  as,  in  sailing  by  some  glass-windowed  house
near  set  of  sun,  you  shall  for  a  moment  or  two
catch  a  dazzling  glint  of  glory  from  its  panes,
which  then  vanishes  as  it  came.  But  though
no  intelligence  lay  behind  the  action  of  these
lights,  they  were  none  the  less  startling  for
being  Nature's  own  flash-lights  across  one  hun-
dred millions  of  miles  of  space.  It  had  taken
them  nine  minutes  to  make  the  journey ;  nine
minutes  before  they  reached  Earth  they  had
ceased  to  be  on  Mars,  and,  after  their  travel  of


THE  POLAR  CAP  87

one  hundred  millions  of  miles,  found  to  note
them  but  one  watcher,  alone  on  a  hill-top  with
the  dawn.

Calculation  showed  the  position  of  the  star-
points  to  be  in  longitude  280°  and  290°  and
in  latitude  76°  south.  At  this  place  on  the
planet,  then,  there  was  a  range  of  slopes  suffi-
ciently tilted  to  reflect  the  Sun  from  their  ice-
clad  sides.  On  comparing  its  position  with
Green's  map  of  his  observations  upon  the  cap
at  Madeira  in  1877,  it  appeared  that  this  was
the  identical  position  of  the  spot  where  he  had
seen  star-points  then,  and  where  Mitchell  had
seen  them  in  1846,  to  whom  they  had  suggested
the  same  conclusion.  Green  christened  them
the  "  Mitchell  Mountains."  At  the  times  both
these  observers  saw  them,  they  were  detached
from  the  rest  of  the  cap.  At  the  time  of  this
observation  in  June,  they  were  still  in  the  midst
of  the  cap.  We  shall  see  that  they  eventually
became  islands,  just  as  Green  saw  them,  and
that  the  observation  in  June  marked  an  earlier
stage  in  their  history.

On  June  10  Mr.  Douglass  detected  a  second
rift  in  the  cap  backing  the  range  of  slopes.
And  on  June  13  I  noticed  that  behind  the
bright  points  the  snow  fell  off  shaded  to  this
rift.  Meanw^hile  a  third  rift  had  been  made
out  by  him,  running  from  longitude  170°  to
longitude  90°,  —  very  nearly,  therefore,  at  right


88  MARS

angles  to  the  first  rift  and  debouching  into  it.
Bright  points  continued  to  be  seen  at  various
points  to  the  westward  round  the  cap.  They
are  marked  by  crosses  on  the  chart.  Through-
out these  daysj  the  cap  was  wont  to  appear
shaded  upon  the  terminator  side,  as  one  might
expect  of  a  snow  or  ice  slope.  During  June,
also,  the  contour  of  the  cap  was  apparently
elliptical.  But  on  June  25  Professor  W.  H.
Pickering  noted,  for  the  first  time,  that  it  no
longer  looked  so.  The  melting  had  resulted  in
making  its  asymmetry  perceptible.

On  July  1  our  Martian  polar  expedition  dis-
closed what  used  to  be  the  supreme  quest  of
earthly  expeditions,  —  that  dream  of  arctic  ex-
plorers, an  open  polar  sea.  On  that  day  Pro-
fessor Pickering  perceived,  in  the  midst  of  the
cap,  in  longitude  260°  and  latitude  80°,  a  sheet
of  water  about  250  miles  long  by  150  broad.  It
was  in  fact  the  spreading  of  the  first  rift  about
midway  across  the  cap,  and  lay  not  far  from
the  geographical  pole  of  the  planet,  though  not,
it  is  to  be  noticed,  near  the  pole  of  cold,  for  it
lay  on  the  further  side  of  the  geographical  pole
from  it.  There  is  a  touch  of  the  irony  of  fate
in  this  detection  of  an  open  polar  sea  on  Mars
before  explorers  have  succeeded  in  doing  so  on
the  Earth.

In  addition  to  these  rifts  and  other  irregu-
larities of  melting,  small  detached  bits  of  the


THE  POLAR  CAP  89

cap  showed  from  time  to  time,  one  being  seen
by  Professor  Pickering  on  July  9  in  longitude
284°,  and  another  by  him  on  July  23  in  about
longitude  160°.

Meanwhile  the  cap  had  been  steadily  decreas-
ing in  size,  its  progressive  diminutions  being
shown  on  the  map  in  the  successive  contour
lines.  The  polar  sea  faithfully  followed  it  in
its  shrinkage,  even  the  bays  keeping  their  longi-
tudes unchanged.  But,  whereas  early  in  June
the  bay  at  longitude  270°  had  been  blue,  it  now
appeared  brown;  of  that  mud-color  land  does
from  which  the  water  has  recently  been  drained
off.

After  various  vicissitudes,  too  numerous  to
mention  in  detail,  on  August  6  a  separate
patch  of  snow  showed  very  conspicuous,  to  the
left  of  the  main  body.  The  smaller  detachment
lay  in  longitude  290°,  and  in  latitude  75°-78°.
Now,  on  turning  to  the  record  of  the  star-points
that  had  appeared  two  months  before,  it  will  be
seen  that  this  was  their  position.  Here,  then,
was  proof  of  the  identity  of  the  star-points  seen
in  June  with  the  islands  recorded  by  Mitchell
and  Green.  The  detached  patch  was  in  fact
the  range  of  slopes  left  in  isolated  insularity
after  all  about  it  had  melted  away.  From  this
we  have  an  interesting  bit  of  corroborative  testi-
mony that  it  stood  on  higher  ground.

On  August  11  the  detached  patch  was  yet


90  MARS

farther  separated  from  the  main  body  of  the
cap,  the  smaller  patch  being  many  degrees  dis-
tant to  the  north  of  either  the  geographical
pole  or  the  pole  of  cold,  with  water  and  even
dry  land  to  the  south  of  it.  It  will  be  remem-
bered, for  the  points  of  the  compass,  that  this  is
the  southern  hemisphere  of  which  we  are  speak-
ing, and  that,  for  climatic  purposes,  north  and
south  here  stand  interchanged.  On  August  13
the  detached  patch  is  recorded  for  the  last  time,
or,  in  other  words,  about  this  time  it  melted
away.  The  larger  one  remained,  contracting
in  size,  however,  as  time  went  on.  So  it  con-
tinued through  August,  September,  and  well
into  October.

On  October  12,  at  lOh.  40m.,  I  made  the  fol-
lowing entry  about  it :  "  Polar  cap  has  been
very  faint  for  some  time  ;  barely  visible."  At
13h.  26m.,  or,  in  other  words,  at  about  half
past  one  that  night,  Mr.  Douglass  measured  its
position  and  estimated  its  size,  as  was  his  wont
every  few  days.  He  found  it  to  be  six  degrees
distant  from  the  planet's  pole,  in  longitude  54°.
The  patch  was  very  small,  covering  about  one
hundred  and  fifty  miles  square.  On  looking
at  the  planet  on  October  13,  at  8h.  15m.,  to
his  surprise  he  found  the  cap  gone.  Not  a
trace  of  it  could  be  seen ;  nor  could  either
he  or  I  detect  it  during  the  rest  of  that  night,
although  such  was  the  longitude  of  the  central


THE  POLAR  CAP  91

meridian  throughout  it  as  to  bring  the  cap  on
the  nearer  side  of  the  pole,  and  therefore  show
it  to  best  advantage.  What  had  certainly  been
there  on  the  12th  was  not  there  on  the  13th.
The  ice-cap  had  disappeared.

No  such  occurrence  -has  ever  been  chronicled
before.  It  is  the  first  time  since  man  began  to
observe  the  planet  that  the  ice-cap  has  com-
pletely disappeared.  Hitherto  it  has  been  seen
to  diminish  to  a  minimum  of  from  7°  to  4°,  and
then  begin  to  increase  again.  This  last  autumn,
for  the  first  time,  it  vanished  entirely.  The
date  of  this  occurrence  was,  in  Martian  chro-
nology, about  July  20.  Evidently,  for  some
reason  unknown  to  us,  it  was  a  phenomenally
hot  season  in  the  southern  hemisphere  of  the
planet.

Practically  it  never  reappeared  again  during
the  season.  That  it  did  return  occasionally,  as
a  very  small  speck,  was  from  time  to  time  sus-
pected, and  doubtless  did  take  place.  Certainly
it  left  for  some  time  behind  it  a  glimmer  where
it  had  been,  due  presumably  to  the  moisture
from  its  melting,  still  tarrying  on  the  ground
or  lingering  in  the  air.  Otherwise,  to  all  intents
and  purposes,  where  the  polar  ice-cap  and  polar
sea  had  been  was  now  one  ochre  stretch  of
desert.

Having  thus  followed  to  its  vanishing  point
the  polar  cap,  we  will  now  return  to  it  in  the


92  .   MARS

heyday  of  its  youth,  in  June,  1894,  when  it
was  girdled  by  its  broad  blue  belt.  We  have
seen  that  we  have  reason  to  believe  this  to  be
in  all  probability  a  polar  sea,  a  real  body  of
water.  There  is,  therefore,  water  on  the  sur-
face of  Mars.  We  also  mark  that  this  body  of
water  is  ephemeral.  It  exists  while  the  ice-
cap is  melting,  and  then  it  somehow  vanishes.
What  becomes  of  it,  and  whether  there  be  other
bodies  of  water  on  the  planet,  either  permanent
or  temporary,  we  will  now  go  on  to  inquire.

II.  AEEOGRAPHY

As  in  the  course  of  our  inquiry  we  shall  have
occasion  to  refer  familiarly  to  different  Martian
features,  we  had  best  begin  it  with  some  slight
exposition  of  Martian  geography,  or  of  areo-
graphy,  as  it  may  by  analogy  be  called.  To  get
this  we  will,  by  the  help  of  Plates  III.  to  XIY.,
suppose  ourselves  to  be  viewing  the  planet
from  some  standpoint  in  space,  and  watching  the
surface  features  pass  in  procession  under  our
gaze  as  the  rotation  of  the  planet  brings  them
successively  round  into  view.  In  the  matter
of  names  the  map  of  the  planet  toward  the  end
of  the  book,  with  its  accompanying  index,  will
give  identification.  We  may  thus  make  a  far
journey  without  leaving  home,  and  from  the
depths  of  our  arm-chairs  travel  in  spirit  to  lands
we   have   no  hope  of  ever  reaching   in    body.


AREOGRAPHY  93

We  may  add  to  this  the  natural  delight  of  the
explorer,  for  we  shall  be  gazing  upon  details  of
Martian  geography  never  till  last  summer  seen
by  man.

Areography  is  a  true  geography,  as  real  as
our  own.  Quite  unlike  the  markings  upon
Jupiter  or  Saturn,  where  all  we  see  is  cloud,
in  the  markings  on  Mars  we  gaze  upon  the
actual  surface  features  of  the  Martian  globe.
That  we  do  so  we  know  from  the  permanency
of  the  spots  and  patches  thus  revealed  to  us.
They  change  in  appearance,  indeed,  according
to  times  and  seasons,  but  they  alter  as  true
surface  features  would,  not  like  cloud-belts  that
gather  to-day  and  vanish  forever  to-morrow.
That  the  markings  are  essentially  permanent
has  been  known  ever  since  Cassini  in  1666
definitely  discovered,  what  Huyghens  had
thought  to  detect  in  1659,  the  rotation  of  the
planet,  by  means  of  their  periodic  presentations.

The  twelve  views  we  shall  here  scan  are  of
the  nature  of  a  map,  made  in  November,  1894.
They  represent  the  ensemble  of  the  drawings
from  this  observatory,  for  about  that  date.
The  details  from  these  drawings  w^ere  plotted
upon  a  globe,  which  was  then  tilted  toward  the
observer  at  the  angle  at  which  the  Martian
south  pole  itself  was  tilted  toward  the  Earth
during  November,  and  photographed  at  inter-
vals of  30°.     The  negatives  were  then  made  to


94  MARS

conform  as  near  as  might  be  to  the  actual  look
of  the  planet.  To  photograph  minute  planetary
markings  directly  is,  for  reasons  too  long  to
state  here,  impossible.  The  views  give  between
them  the  whole  surface  of  the  planet  shown  us
at  what  corresponds  to  our  first  of  August.
Thus,  neither  the  polar  cap  nor  the  polar  sea
appear  in  the  pictures,  for  both  had  then  dis-
appeared. Nor  do  the  southern  parts  of  the  so-
called  straits  show,  for  a  similar  reason.  But
from  a  knowledge  of  the  features  here  presented
the  reader  will  find  interpolation  of  any  others
referred  to  easy.

Previous  to  the  present  chart,  the  most  de-
tailed map  of  the  planet  was  Schiaparelli's,
made  in  1888.  On  comparison  with  his,  it  will
be  seen  that  the  present  one  substantially  con-
firms all  his  detail,  and  adds  to  it  about  as  much
more.  I  have  adopted  his  nomenclature,  and
in  the  naming  of  the  newly  found  features
have  selected  names  conformable  to  his  scheme,
which  commends  itself  both  on  practical  and  on
poetic  grounds.

We  will  begin  our  journey  at  the  origin  of
Martian  longitudes  and  travel  west,  taking  the
points  of  the  compass  as  they  would  appear
were  we  standing  upon  the  planet.  As  all
astronomical  pictures  are,  for  optical  reasons,
upside  down,  south  lies  at  the  top  of  the  pic-
tures, west  to  the  right,  north  at  the  bottom.


AREOGRAPHY  95

and  east  to  the  left.  Mars  rotates  as  the
Earth  does,  from  west  to  east,  so  that  day  as  it
advances  across  the  face  of  the  planet  follows
the  order  here  shown  in  Plates  III.  to  XIV.,  the
order  in  which  we  shall  observe  them.  Places
on  the  right  of  the  picture  are  in  the  morning
of  their  Martian  day ;  places  on  the  left,  in  its
afternoon.  To  facilitate  reference  by  longitude
and  latitude,  the  globe  has  been  belted  by
meridians  and  parallels  each  10°  apart,  and  the
meridians  have  been  numbered  along  the
equator.  This  premised,  we  will  suppose  our-
selves to  be  standing  on  the  equator  at  its  in-
tersection with  the  0°  meridian.    (Plate  III.)

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  0°  meridian  passes
through  the  tip  of  a  triangular  peninsula  that
juts  out  into  a  dark  area  curiously  forked,  half
way  across  the  picture  and  about  two  thirds
way  down  it.  The  tip  of  this  triangle  is  the
received  Greenwich  of  Martian  longitudes,  and
has  been  named  by  Schiaparelli  the  Fastigium
Aryn,  such  having  been  the  name  of  a  mytho-
logic  spot  supposed  by  the  ancients  to  lie  mid-
way between  the  east  and  west,  the  north  and
south,  the  zenith  and  nadir.  It  thus  makes  a
fitting  name  for  the  starting-point  of  Martian
long:itudes  and  the  beo-innino^  of  time.  The
dark  forked  area,  called  by  Proctor  "  Dawes'
Forked  Bay,"  is  now  commonly  called  the
Sabaeus  Sinus.      At   the   times   these    marine


96  MARS

names  were  bestowed,  it  was  supposed  that  the
dark  markings  really  represented  water.  We
have  now  reason  to  believe  that  such  is  not  the
case.  But  it  is  better  to  keep  the  old  names,
although  I  shall  employ  them  in  a  Pickwickian
sense,  much  as  we  still  speak  of  the  Seas  of
the  Moon,  the  Mare  Tranquillitatis,  or  the  Mare
Serenitatis,  of  which  only  the  adjectives  have  in
them  anything  of  truth.

To  the  west  of  the  Sabaeus  Sinus  lies  an-
other dark,  wedge-shaped  area,  longer  than
it  but  single  instead  of  double.  This  is  the
Margaritifer  Sinus,  or  the  Pearl-bearing  Gulf,
so  named  before  it  was  known  that  that  name
possessed  any  significance.  But  a  prescience
must  have  presided  over  its  christening.  For
we  now  know  that  there  is  indeed  a  pearl  at
the  bottom  of  it,  —  the  round  spot  shown  in
the  picture.

Two  lines  will  be  noticed  prolonging  the  twin
forks  of  the  Sabaeus  Sinus.  If  we  let  our  look
follow  down  them,  we  shall  mark  others  and
then  yet  others,  and  so  we  might  proceed  from
line  to  line  all  over  the  bright  areas  of  the
planet.  These  lines  are  the  famous  canals  of
Mars.  With  regard  to  their  surprising  symme-
try, it  is  only  necessary  to  say  that  the  better
they  are  seen  the  more  symmetrical  they  look.
Of  the  two  first  mentioned,  the  right-hand  one
is  the  Gihon,  the  left-hand  one   the  Hiddekel,


Plate  III


^

^^^^^_^m'

f

1^

MARS
Longitude  o°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


MARS
Longitude  30°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


AREOGRAPHY  97

and  the  spot  at  the  limit  of  the  latter  is  the
Lacus  Ismenius.  From  the  pearl  at  the  bottom
of  the  Margaritifer  Sinus,  the  Oxia  Palus,  the
Oxus  runs  nearly  north  to  the  Pallas  Lacus,
while  another  canal,  the  Indus,  makes  off  north-
west.

Nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  disk  are  seen  two
of  those  strange  comet-tail  peninsulas  that  con-
stitute so  peculiar  a  feature  of  Martian  geo-
graphy. The  lower  is  Deucalionis  Regie ;  the
upper,  Pyrrhae  Regie.  Across  them  show  two
streaks,  which,  followed  up,  will  be  found  to
join  other  streaks  traversing  the  dark  regions.
These  introduce  us  to  Mr.  Douglass'  discovery
of  a  whole  system  of  canals  in  the  dark  regions,
paralleling  the  system  in  the  bright  areas, —
being  similarly  straight  and  similarly  inter-
secting one  another,  with  spots  at  the  intersec-
tions, making  what  Mr.  Douglass  aptly  terms  a
checkerboard  effect,  as  we  shall  see  more  strik-
ingly when  we  get  round  to  the  other  side  of
the  planet.

In  Plate  lY.  the  markings  have,  under  the
rotation  of  the  planet,  all  swung  30°  to  the  east,
thus  bringing  others  into  view  from  the  west.
The  great  swath  obliquely  belting  the  disk  is
the  canal  called  the  Jamuna.  It  was,  at  the
time  this  picture  represents  it,  apparently  in
process  of  doubling.  Crossing  it  obliquely  is
the  Hydraotes.     More  conspicuous  are  two  dark


98  MARS

swaths  that  make  with  the  Jamuna  a  nearly
right-angled  triangle.  The  lower  one  parallel
to  the  edge  of  the  disk  is  the  Dardanus ;  the
other,  ending  at  the  south  with  the  Jamuna  in
the  Aurorae  Sinus,  is  the  Ganges,  one  of  the
largest  and  most  important  of  the  Martian
canals.  At  the  date  of  the  drawing,  it  was  dis-
tinctly double.  The  doubling  is  very  curiously
prolonged  by  a  narrow  rectangle  lying  in  the
midst  of  the  dark  regions  to  the  south.  Some
idea  of  the  size  of  these  strangely  geometrical
markings  may  be  got  by  remembering  that  a
degree  on  Mars  represents  thirty-seven  miles.
Skirting  the  edge  of  the  dark  regions  westward,
we  come  to  a  short  canal,  the  Hebe,  leading  to
the  Fons  Juventae,  one  of  the  tiniest  markings
perceptible  on  the  disk,  from  which,  however,
some  six  canals  have  been  found  to  radiate.
Schiaparelli  detected  it  in  1877,  searched  for
it  in  vain  in  1879,  but  at  subsequent  oppositions
found  it  again,  happier  than  Ponce  de  Leon  in
his  futile  quest  after  an  earthly  Fountain  of
Youth.  Proceeding  still  farther  west,  we  reach
the  entrance  to  the  Agathodaemon,  at  the  point
where  the  edge  of  the  dark  regions  abruptly
trends  southward.  This  canal  brings  us  to  the
Solis  Lacus  region,  one  of  the  most  interesting
parts  of  the  planet.

In  Plate  Y.  it   has   swung  round  into  bet-
ter view,  where  we  will  therefore  consider  it.


Plate  V


MARS
Longitude  6o°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaflf,  A.  T.  1895


AREOGRAPHY  99

The  Solis  Lacus  is  a  great  oval  patch,  measur-
ing along  its  longest  diameter  five  hundred  and
forty  miles.  With  small  telescopic  power  or  in
poor  air  it  appears  of  uniform  tint  through-
out, but  under  better  visual  conditions  dark
spots  appear  in  it,  and  bright  causeways,  which
divide  it  into  five  portions.  Its  longitudinal
dividing  line  is  prolonged  into  the  Nectar,  the
short  canal  connecting  it  with  the  dark  regions
to  the  east.  The  Nectar  thus  appears  double.
Nor  does  the  causeway  stop  here.  It  continues
on  between  double  dark  lines  until  it  reaches
the  long  rectangular  area  spoken  of  before  as  a
sort  of  continuation  of  the  Ganges.

But  a  second  feature  of  this  region  is  no  less
noteworthy.  Surrounding  the  Solis  Lacus  is  a
perfect  cordon  of  canals  and  spots,  the  chief  of
which  are  the  Tithonius  Lacus,  nearly  due  north,
and  the  Lacus  Phoenicis,  or  Phoenix  Lake,  north-
west. The  spots  are  strung  like  beads  upon
the  loop  of  the  Agathodaemon  and  the  Dae-
mon. From  the  northeast  end  of  this  string  of
spots  runs  the  Chrysorrhoas  to  the  Lacus  Lunae
on  the  fifty-eighth  meridian.  Below  it  is  the
Labeatis  Lacus,  from  which  the  Gigas  starts
west,  to  be  lost  in  the  limb-light.

In  the  next  plate  (Plate  YI.),  the  Solis  Lacus
is  central,  the  Lacus  Phoenicis  somewhat  to  the
right  of  the  centre ;  and  southwest  of  the  Lacus
Phoenicis  is  the  Beak  of  the  Sirens,  the  eastern


100  MARS

end  of  the  sea  of  the  same  name,  which  has  just
come  round  the  corner  of  the  disk.  The  canal
connecting  it  with  the  Phoenix  Lake  is  the
Araxes ;  and  at  various  angles  to  this,  like
spokes  of  a  wheel  about  the  Phoenix  Lake  for
hub,  are  many  more  canals,  the  one  lying  most
nearly  due  south  being  the  Phasis.  Connecting
with  this  network  of  canals  is  a  similar  network
of  streaks  in  the  dark  regions,  making  a  set  of
triangles,  from  which  still  other  canals  run  up
almost  straight  toward  the  south  pole.

Between  the  dark  regions  and  the  Beak  of
the  Sirens  is  the  peninsula  Phaetontis,  crossing
which  some  way  up  is  a  short  canal  known  as
Herculis  Columnae.  Due  south  of  the  Lacus
Phoenicis  is  the  spot  Ceraunius,  joined  to  the
Lacus  Phoenicis  by  the  Iris,  and  to  the'  Titho-
nius  Lacus  by  the  Fortunae.  It  is  also  crossed
by  the  Gigas,  the  very  long  canal  in  the  right-
hand  lower  part  of  the  disk,  of  which  we  saw
the  beginning  in  the  last  plate,  and  shall  not
see  the  end  till  we  reach  the  next  one.

Westward  of  the  Lacus  Phoenicis  there  be-
gins to  show  a  congeries  of  spots  and  connecting
canals,  which  come  out  still  more  strikingly  in
Plate  VII.  The  great  canal  beaded  with  spots,
which  in  the  picture  traverses  nearly  the  centre
of  the  disk,  is  the  Eumenides,  and  its  continua-
tion, the  Orcus.  Its  farther  end  is  lost  in  the
limb-light.     At  an  angle  to  it,  running  nearly


MARS
Longitude  90°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


Plate  VII


MARS
Longitude  120°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


AREOGRAPHY  101

northwest  from  the  Lacus  Phoenicis,  is  the  Pyri-
phlegethon.  In  this  plate  the  Sea  of  the  Sirens
is  well  on,  its  beak  being  almost  on  the  central
meridian.  From  its  north  coast  strike  down
a  great  many  canals,  all  going  as  far  as  the
Eumenides  and  some  continuing  past  it.  The
first  one  from  the  Beak  of  the  Sirens  is  the
Sirenius.  It  crosses  the  Eumenides  at  the  first
of  its  large  spots  after  leaving  the  Phoenix  Lake,
the  Lucus  Arsine.  To  the  next  spot,  known
as  the  Nodus  Gordii,  the  Gorgon  comes  down
from  the  centre  of  the  coast-line,  meeting  the
Gigas,  which  itself  debouches,  at  the  west  end
of  the  sea,  into  what  is  called  the  Sinus  Titanum,
or  Gulf  of  the  Titans.

In  Plate  YIII.  the  Sinus  Titanum  has  come
round  into  view.  Owing  to  its  conspicuousness
at  certain  seasons,  it  is  one  of  the  most  impor-
tant features  on  the  planet  to  us,  and  seems  to
be  to  the  planet  itself,  as  some  seven  canals
radiate  from  it.  These  are  the  Gigas,  previ-
ously described,  and  to  the  right,  in  the  order
here  enumerated,  the  Steropes,  the  Brontes,  the
Titan,  —  the  one  straight  down  the  disk,  —  the
Arges,  the  Gyes,  and  the  Tartarus;  the  last
traveling  to  the  Trivium  Charon tis  invisible
in  this  plate.  Of  the  separate  existence  of  the
Arges  and  the  Gyes  I  am  not  quite  certain.
These  great  canals  show  like  the  sticks  of  a  fan,
with  the  Sinus  itself  for  pivot.


102  MARS

The  Sea  of  the  Sirens  is  now  nearly  central.
To  the  west,  dividing  it  from  the  Mare  Cimme-
rium^  which  is  just  coming  into  view,  is  the
peninsula  Atlantis,  curiously  uniting  the  conti-
nents to  the  islands  to  the  south.  Belting  the
disk  from  east  to  west  is  the  Eumenides-Orcus,
strung  with  spots.

Parallel  to  the  Eumenides-Orcus,  and  skirt-
ing the  north  shore  of  the  Sea  of  the  Sirens,  is
the  Erynnis.  Half  way  between  this  and  the
Eumenides  is  another  parallel  canal,  the  Parcae.
Curving  round  the  bottom  of  the  disk  is  a  chain
of  canals,  the  Pyriphlegethon,  Acheron,  and
Erebus,  the  last  of  which  runs  to  the  Trivium
Charontis.  At  the  junctions  of  these  various
canals  may  be  seen  any  number  of  spots.

On  the  next  plate  (Plate  IX.)  the  Trivium
Charontis  itself  has  come  into  view  toward  the
lower  right-hand  part  of  the  disk.  Two  nearly
parallel  canals,  a  double  Hades,  join  it  to  the  Pro-
pontis,  the  spot  almost  at  the  limb.  The  Titan
shows  well  near  the  centre  of  the  disk.  Were
the  centre  ten  degrees  farther  east,  the  canal
would  appear  more  striking  yet.  For  so  straight
is  it,  and  so  nearly  due  north  and  south  does  it
lie,  that  when  it  comes  to  the  meridian  it  seems
that  meridian  itself.  On  this  plate  we  have  the
western  end  of  the  Eumenides-Orcus,  at  whose
eastern  end  we  began  several  plates  back  when
we  left  the  Phoenix  Lake.     This  will  give  some


Plate  VIII


MARS
Longitude  150°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


Plate  IX


MARS
Longitude  i8o°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


AREOGRAPHY  103

idea  of  the  immense  length  of  the  canal,  which
is  no  less  than  three  thousand  four  hundred  and
fifty  miles  long.  Nearly  in  the  centre  of  the
disk  is  the  peninsula  Atlantis,  the  most  easterly
of  the  set  of  comet- tail  peninsulas  similar  to
those  seen  in  Plate  I.,  all  connecting  the  so-
called  continent  with  the  islands  to  the  south.
These  islands  look  not  unlike  great  vertebrae
of  the  planet's  backbone,  in  consequence  of  the
canals  which  cut  them  up  so  symmetrically.
Atlantis  shows  well,  between  Mare  Sirenum  and
Mare  Cimmerium,  two  areas  suggestively  alike
in  general  shape  and  directional  trend.  Both
are  seen  to  be  crossed  by  canals  which  connect,
at  what  resemble  nicks  in  the  coast-line,  with
the  canals  in  the  bright  regions.

In  Plate  X.  the  Mare  Cimmerium  is  cen-
tral. So,  also,  well  down  the  disk,  is  the  Tri-
vium  Charontis.  This  is  a  very  important
junction,  no  less  than  nine  canals  already  being
known  to  connect  with  it,  which,  taken  in  the
order,  east,  north,  west,  and  south,  are  the
Orcus,  the  Erebus,  the  twin  Hades,  the  Styx,
the  Cambyses,  the  Cerberus,  the  Laestrygon,
the  Tartarus,  and  so  back  to  the  Orcus  again.
In  this  picture  the  Laestrygon  traverses  nearly
the  centre  of  the  disk.  To  the  right  of  the
Trivium  Charontis  is  the  region  called  Elysium,
one  of  the  brightest  parts  of  the  planet.  It
was  here  that  Mr.  Douglass  made  his  interest-


104  MARS

ing  observation^  last  Septemberj  of  a  remarkable
change  of  tint  from  bright  to  sombre,  and  back
to  bright  again,  in  the  course  of  forty-eight
hours ;  suggesting  perhaps  the  formation  and
dissipation  of  cloud,  perhaps  the  deposition  and
subsequent  melting  of  hoar-frost  over  an  area
of  some  hundreds  of  square  miles.

Eeturning  to  the  Mare  Cimmerium,  we  ob-
serve in  the  middle  of  it  a  long,  lighter  streak,
Cimmeria,  scarcely  perceptible  at  this  last  oppo-
sition, and,  barring  its  western  end,  the  second
in  the  procession  of  similarly  inclined  peninsulas
that  follow  one  another  westward  upon  this  side
of  the  planet,  the  peninsula  Hesperia,  a  place
with  a  history,  as  will  appear  later  on.

In  the  next  picture  (Plate.  XI)  Hesperia  is
central,  dividing  the  Mare  Cimmerium  on  the
left  from  the  Mare  Tyrrhenum  on  the  right.
The  lower  end  of  the  latter  is  called  the  Syrtis
Minor,  in  contradistinction  to  the  Syrtis  Major,
which  is  just  appearing  round  the  western  limb.
From  the  bay,  so  to  speak,  upon  the  left  of
Hesperia,  two  canals  proceed  down  the  disk  in
divergent  directions,  —  the  most  easterly  one
the  Aethiops,  the  other  the  Achelous.  From
the  Syrtis  Minor  proceed  two  others,  more  or
less  similarly  inclined,  —  the  Lethes  and  the
Amenthes.

To  the  west  of  Hesperia  and  parallel  to  it  is
a  third  comet-tail  peninsula,  Lemuria,  connect-


MARS
Longitude  210°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


MARS
Longitude  240°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


Plate  XII


MARS
Longitude  270°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A,  T.  1895


AREOGRAPHY  105

ing  Ausonia  at  the  south  with  Libya  to  the
north,  Libya  being  upon  the  equator.  This
region  (Plate  XII.)  is  interesting  as  having  been
the  scene  of  great  changes  at  previous  oppo-
sitions. There  used  to  be  a  spot,  the  Lake
Moeris,  in  the  midst  of  it,  joined  by  the  Nepen-
thes —  the  canal  running  east  and  west  about
eight  degrees  north  of  the  equator  —  to  the
Syrtis  Major,  the  great  dark  gulf  somewhat  to
the  west  of  the  central  meridian  in  the  picture.
Latterly  the  Syrtis  Major  seems  to  have  en-
croached upon  Libya,  and,  at  the  last  opposi-
tion, only  the  faintest  glimpses  could  be  got  of
Lake  Moeris,  which  showed  chiefly  as  a  bay  of
the  Syrtis  Major  itself.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  I
use  aquatic  names  with  terrestrial  understand-
ing.

Parallel  in  a  general  way  to  the  Nepenthes,
and  about  as  much  below  it  as  it  is  below  the
coast-line,  lies  the  Astapus,  which  joins  the  bot-
tom of  the  Syrtis  Major  to  the  ends  of  the
Amenthes,  Lethes,  and  Achelous.

In  Plate  XIII.  two  features  are  striking,  both
not  far  from  central  on  the  disk,  —  the  lower,
the  Syrtis  Major ;  the  upper,  Hellas.  The
Syrtis  Major  was  the  first  marking  to  be  cer-
tainly recognized  on  Mars.  It  appears  in  a
drawing  by  Huyghens  made  on  October  13,
1659,  the  first  drawing  of  Mars  worthy  the
name  ever  made  by  man,   and  reproduced  on


106  MARS

page  20  from  Flammarion's  ^'  La  Planete  Mars/*
It  is  thus  our  oldest  Martian  acquaintance.
Hellas  is  the  surprisingly  round,  bright  area
nearly  on  the  meridian,  and  nearly  half  way
from  the  equator  to  the  south  pole.  It  is  very
strangely  quartered  by  two  canals,  the  Alpheus,
dividing  it  almost  due  north  and  south;  and  the
Peneus,  cutting  it  almost  due  east  and  west.
Between  it  and  the  Syrtis  Major  is  the  Mare
Hadriaticum,  a  blue-green  area  intersected  by
bright  causeways  and  seamed  by  dark  canals.

In  the  lower  right-hand  portion  of  the  disk  is
an  important  region,  bounded  on  the  east  by
the  Syrtis  Major,  on  the  north  by  the  Nilosyrtis
and  the  Protonilus,  on  the  west  by  the  Hidde-
kel,  and  on  the  south  by  the  long  dark  area
to  the  north  of  Deucalionis  Regio.  Its  south-
eastern cape  is  the  Hammonis  Cornu ;  its  south-
western one,  which  appears  in  Plate  XIY.,  is
the  Edom  promontory.  It  is  a  region  prolific
in  double  canals.  The  two  -  most  important  of
these  are  the  Phison  and  the  Euphrates.  Both
start  from  the  centre  of  the  coast  of  the  long
dark  area  between  the  Deucalionis  Regio  and
the  continent,  and  run,  the  Phison  northeast  to
the  western  end  of  the  Nilosyrtis,  in  longitude
300°,  latitude  33°  south ;  the  Euphrates,  nearly
due  south  to  the  Lacus  Ismenius,  longitude
337°,  latitude  37°  south,  where  it  connects  with
the  Hiddekel.     Parallel  to   the  coast-line  and


Plate  XIII


MARS
Longitude  300°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


Plate  XIV


MARS
Longitude  330°  on  the  Meridian


Lowell  Observatory
Flagsta£f,  A.  T.  1895


SEAS  107

about  15°  to  the  north  of  it  is,  on  the  east,  the
Typhon,  shown  double ;  on  the  west  the  Orontes,
still  single.  Two  other  doubles  shown  in  the
picture  I  saw  also  in  this  region,  though  I  am
not  yet  certain  that  they  are  distinct  from  the
Phison  and  the  Euphrates,  as  the  four  were  not
seen  together.  I  have  introduced  them  in  the
place  where  I  saw  them,  because,  first,  no  op-
tical effect  explains  any  such  shift ;  and,  second,
they  run  through  and  to  well-seen  spots,  which
renders  it  more  likely  that  they  are  distinct
canals.

Between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Sabaeus
Sinus  are  several  canals  and  spots  that  show
the  minute  manner  in  which  the  Martian  sur-
face is  cut  up.  But  so  much  only  hints  at  the
state  of  things  existent  there.  From  the  mark-
ings, not  well  enough  seen  to  admit  of  mapping,
it  is  apparent  that  the  system  of  lines  and  spots
is  very  complete  all  over  the  planet.

This  brings  us  back  again  to  the  Sabaeus
Sinus  and  the  Fastigium  Aryn,  from  which  we
set  out,  after  a  journey  which  it  takes  the  ro-
tation of  the  planet  twenty-four  hours'  thirty-
seven  minutes  and  about  twenty- three  seconds
to  accomplish.

III.    SEAS.

While  it  existed  in  any  size,  the  polar  sea
was  bordered  on  the  north,  all  the  way  round


108  MARS

and  during  all  the  time  it  was  visible,  by  blue-
green  areas.  These  blue-green  areas  were
strewn  with  several  more  or  less  bright  regions,
while  below  them  came  the  great  reddish-ochre
stretches  of  the  disk.  Now,  the  blue-green
areas  have  generally  been  considered  to  be  seas,
just  as  the  reddish-ochre  regions  have  been
held  to  be  land.  That  the  latter  are  land  there
is  very  little  doubt ;  not  only  land,  but  nothing
but  land,  —  land  very  pure  and  simple  ;  that  is,
deserts.  For  they  behave  just  as  deserts  should
behave,  that  is,  by  not  behaving  at  all;  re-
maining, except  for  certain  phenomena  to  be
specified  later,  unchangeable.

With  the  so-called  seas,  however,  the  case  is
different.  Several  important  facts  conspire  to
throw  grave  doubt,  and  worse,  upon  their
aquatic  character.  To  begin  with,  they  are  of
every  grade  of  tint,  —  a  very  curious  feature
for  seas  to  exhibit,  unless  they  were  every-
where but  a  few  feet  deep  ;  which  again  is  a
most  singular  characteristic  for  seas  that  cover
hundreds  of  thousands  of  square  miles  in  ex-
tent, —  seas,  that  is,  as  big  as  the  Bay  of  Ben-
gal. The  Martian  surface  would  have  to  be
amazingly  flat  for  this  to  be  possible.  We
know  it  to  be  relatively  flat,  but  to  be  as  flat  as
all  this  would  seem  to  pass  the  bounds  of  credi-
ble simplicity.  Here  also  Professor  W.  H.  Pick-
ering's polariscope  investigations  come  in  with


SEAS  109

effect,  for  he  found  the  Hght  from  the  supposed
seas  to  show  no  trace  of  polarization.  Hence
these  were  probably  not  water.

In  parenthesis  we  may  here  take  notice  of
the  absence  of  a  certain  phenomenon  whose
presence,  apparently,  should  follow  upon  water
surfaces  such  as  the  so-called  seas  would  offer
us.  Although  its  absence  is  not  perhaps  defini-
tive as  to  their  marine  character,  it  is  certainly
curious,  and  worth  noting.  If  a  planet  were
covered  by  a  sheet  of  water,  that  water  surface
would,  mirror-like,  reflect  the  sun  in  one  more
or  less  definite  spot.  Looked  at  from  a  dis-
tance, this  spot  would,  were  it  bright  enough^
be  seen  as  a  high  light  on  the  dark  background
of  the  ocean  about  it.  It  would  seem  to  be  a
fixed  star  at  a  certain  point  on  the  disk,  the
surface  features  rotating  under  it.  The  neces-
sary position  is  easily  calculated,  and  this  shows
that  parts  of  the  so-called  seas,  especially  at
oppositions  like  the  last  one,  pass  imder  the
point.  There  remains  merely  the  question  of
sufficient  brilliancy  in  the  spot  for  visibility;
but  as  in  the  case  of  Mars  its  brilliancy  should
be  equal  to  that  of  a  star  of  the  third  magni-
tude, it  would  seem  brilliant  enough  to  be  seen.
No  such  starlike  effect  in  such  position  has  ever
been  noticed  coming  from  the  blue-green  re-
gions. From  this  bit  of  negative  evidence,  to
be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth,  we  return  again
to  what  there  is  of  a  positive  sort.


110  MARS

Not  only  do  different  parts  of  the  so-called
seas  contrast  in  tint  with  one  another,  but  the
same  part  of  the  same  sea  varies  in  tint  at  dif-
ferent times.  Schiaparelli  noticed  that,  at  suc-
cessive oppositions,  the  same  sea  showed  differ-
ent degrees  of  darkness,  and  he  suggested  that
the  change  in  tone  was  dependent  in  some  way
upon  the  Martian  seasons.

Observations  at  Flagstaff  have  demonstrated
this  to  be  the  case,  for  it  has  been  possible  to
see  the  tints  occur  consecutively.  In  conse-
quence, we  know  not  only  that  changes  take
place  on  the  surface  of  Mars  other  than  in  the
polar  cap,  and  very  conspicuous  ones  too,  but
that  these  are  due  to  the  changing  seasons  of
the  planet's  year.  We  will  now  see  what  they
look  like.

To  the  transubstantiation  of  changes  of  the
sort  it  is  a  prime  essential  that  the  drawings
from  whose  comparison  the  contrast  appears
should  all  have  been  made  by  the  same  person,
at  the  same  telescope,  under  as  nearly  as  possi-
ble the  same  atmospheric  conditions,  since  other-
wise the  personal  equation  of  the  observer,  the
impersonal  inequalities  of  instruments,  and  the
special  atmosphere  of  the  station  play  so  large
a  part  in  the  result  as  to  mask  that  other  factor
in  the  case,  any  change  in  the  planet  itself.
How  easily  this  masking  is  accomplished  ap-
pears  from  drawings   made   by    different   ob-


Plate  XV


Fig.  I.     Syrtis  Major  at  June  presentation
Long.  290°.     Lat.  centre  of  disk.  24°  South


Fig.  IL     Syrtis  Major  ai  (Jciooer  presentation
Long.  305°.     Lat.  centre  of  disk  20°  South

SYRTIS   MAJOR
Showing  seasonal  change  during  1894


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1894


SEAS  111

servers  of  tlie  same  Martian  features  at  substan-
tially the  same  moment.  Several  interesting
specimens  of  such  personal  peculiarities  may  be
seen  by  the  curious  in  Flammarion's  admirable
thesaurus,  '^  La  Planete  Mars."  In  some  of  these
likenesses  of  the  planet  it  is  pretty  certain  that
Mars  would  never  recognize  himself.

To  have  drawings  simply  swear  at  one  an-
other across  a  page  is,  in  the  interests  of  de-
duction, objectionable.  For  their  testimony  to
be  worth  having,  they  must  agree  to  differ.
If,  therefore.  Mars  is  to  be  many,  his  draughts-
man must  be  one.  So  much,  at  least,  is  fulfilled
by  the  drawings  in  which  the  changes  now  to  be
described  are  recorded ;  for  they  w^ere  all  made
by  me,  at  the  same  instrument,  under  the  same
general  atmospheric  conditions.  As  the  same
personality  enters  all  of  them,  it  stands,  as  be-
tween them,  eliminated  from  all,  to  increased
certainty  of  deduction.  Since,  furthermore,
the  drawings  were  all  made  in  the  months
preceding  and  following  one  opposition,  change
due  to  secular  variation  is  reduced  to  a  mini-
mum. As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  changes  are
such  as  to  betray  their  own  seasonal  character.
They  constitute  a  kinematical  as  opposed  to  a
statical  study  of  the  planet's  surface.

The  changes  are  much  more  evident  than
might  be  supposed.  Indeed,  they  are  quite  un-
mistakable.    As  for  their  importance,  it  need


112  MARS

only  be  said  that  deduction  from  them  furnishes,
in  the  first  place,  inference  that  Mars  is  a  living
world,  subject  to  an  annual  cycle  of  surface
growth,  activity,  and  decay ;  and  shows,  in  the
second  place,  that  this  Martian  yearly  round  of
life  must  differ  in  certain  interesting  particulars
from  that  which  forms  our  terrestrial  expe-
rience. The  phenomena  evidently  make  part
of  a  definite  chain  of  changes  of  annual  devel-
opment. So  consecutive,  and,  in  their  broad
characteristics,  apparently  so  regular,  are  these
changes,  that  I  have  been  able  to  find  corrobora-
tion of  what  appears  to  be  their  general  scheme
in  drawings  made  at  a  previous  opposition.  In
consequence,  I  believe  it  will  be  possible  in  future
to  foretell,  with  something  approaching  the  cer-
tainty of  our  esteemed  weather  bureau's  prog-
nostications, not  indeed  what  the  weather  will
be  on  Mars,  —  for,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  more
than  doubtful  whether  Mars  has  what  we  call
weather  to  prognosticate,  —  but  the  aspect  of
any  part  of  the  planet  at  any  given  time.

The  changes  in  appearance  now  to  be  chroni-
cled refer,  not  to  the  melting  of  the  polar
snows,  except  as  such  melting  forms  the  neces-
sary preliminary  to  what  follows,  but  to  the
subsequent  changes  in  look  of  the  surface  itself.
To  their  exposition,  however,  the  polar  phe-
nomena become  inseparable  adjuncts,  since  they
are  inevitable  ancillaries  to  the  result.


SEAS  113

With  the  familiar  melting  of  the  snow-cap
begins  the  yearly  round  of  the  planet's  life.
With  the  melting  of  our  own  arctic  or  antarctic
cap  might  similarly  be  said  to  begin  the  earth's
annual  activity.  But  here  at  the  very  outset
there  appears  to  be  one  important  difference  be-
tween the  two  planets.  On  the  earth  the  rela-
tion of  the  melting  of  the  polar  snows  to  the
awakening  of  surface  activity  is  a  case  oipost
hoc  simply ;  on  Mars  it  seems  to  be  a  case  of
propter  hoc  as  well.  For,  unlike  the  earth,
which  has  water  to  spare,  and  to  which,  there-
fore, the  unlocking  of  its  polar  snows  is  a  matter
of  no  direct  economic  value.  Mars  is  apparently
in  straits  for  the  article,  and  has  to  draw  on  its
polar  reservoir  for  its  annual  supply.  Upon
the  melting  of  its  polar  cap,  and  the  transfer-
ence of  the  water  thus  annually  set  free  to  go
its  rounds,  seem  to  depend  all  the  seasonal  phe-
nomena on  the  surface  of  the  planet.

The  observations  upon  which  this  deduction
is  based  extend  over  a  period  of  nearly  six
months,  from  the  last  day  of  May  to  the  22d  of
November.  They  cover  the  regions  from  the
south  pole  to  about  latitude  forty  north.  That
changes  analogous  to  those  recorded,  differing,
however,  in  details,  occur  six  Martian  months
later  in  the  planet's  northern  hemisphere,  is
proved  by  what  Schiaparelli  has  seen ;  for
though  the  general  system  is,  curiously,  one  for


114  MARS

the  whole  planet,  the  particular  character  of
different  parts  of  the  surface  alters  the  action
there  to  some  extent.

For  an  appreciation  of  the  meaning  of  the
changes,  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  through-
out that  the  vernal  equinox  of  Mars'  southern
hemisphere  occurred  on  April  7,  1894;  the
summer  solstice  of  the  same  hemisphere  on
August  31 ;  and  its  autumnal  equinox  on  Feb-
ruary 7, 1895.

On  the  31st  of  May,  therefore,  it  was  toward
the  end  of  April  on  Mars.  The  south  polar  cap
was,  as  we  have  seen,  very  large,  and  the  polar
sea  in  proportion.  That  the  polar  sea  was  the
darkest  and  the  bluest  marking  on  the  disk  im-
plies that  it  was,  at  least,  the  deepest  body  of
water  on  the  planet,  whether  the  so-called  seas
were  seas  or  not.  But  from  the  fact  that  it  was
quite  wide,  —  350  miles,  —  and  that  it  all  event-
ually vanished,  it  can  hardly  have  been  very
deep.  Its  relative  appearance,  therefore,  casts
a  first  doubt  upon  the  fact  that  the  others  were
seas  at  all.  This  polar  sea  plays  deus  ex  ma-
china  to  all  that  follows.

So  soon  as  the  melting  of  the  snow  was  well
under  way,  long  straits,  of  deeper  tint  than
their  surroundings,  made  their  appearance  in
the  midst  of  the  dark  areas.  I  did  not  see  them
come,  but  as  I  afterward  saw  them  go  it  is
evident  that  they  must  have  come.     They  were


SEAS  115

already  there  on  tlie  last  day  of  May.  The
most  conspicuous  of  them  lay  between  Noachis
and  Hellas,  in  the  Mare  Australe.  It  began  in
the  great  polar  bay,  and  thence  traversed  the
Mare  Erythraeum  to  the  Hourglass  Sea  (Syr-
tis  Major).  The  next  most  conspicuous  one
started  in  the  other  bay,  and  came  down  be-
tween Hellas  and  Ausonia.  Although  these
straits  were  distinguishably  darker  than  the
seas  through  which  they  passed,  the  seas  them-
selves were  then  at  their  darkest.  The  fact
that  these  straits  traversed  the  seas  suffices  to
raise  a  second  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of
seas ;  the  first  suspicion  as  to  their  character  —
coming  from  their  being  a  little  oif  color ;  not  so
blue,  that  is,  as  what  we  practically  know  to  be
water,  the  polar  sea  —  finding  thus  corrobora-
tion. It  will  appear  later  that  in  all  probability
the  straits  themselves  were  impostors,  and  that
neither  seas  nor  straits  were  water.

The  appearance  of  things  at  this  initial  stage
of  the  Martian  Nile-like  inundation  last  June
was  most  destructive  to  modern  maps  of  Mars,
for  all  the  markings  between  the  south  polar
cap  and  the  continental  coast-line  seemed  with
one  consent  to  have,  as  nearly  as  might  be,  ob-
literated themselves.

It  was  impossible  to  fix  any  definite  boun-
daries to  the  south  temperate  chain  of  islands,
so  indistinguishably  did  the  light  areas  and  the


116  MAES

dark  ones  merge  into  each  other.  What  was
still  more  striking,  the  curious  peninsulas  which
connect  the  continent  with  the  chain  of  islands
to  the  south  of  it,  and  form  so  singular  a  fea-
ture of  the  planet's  geography,  were  invisible.
One  continuous  belt  of  blue-green  stretched
from  the  Syrtis  Major  to  the  Columns  of  Her-
cules.

For  some  time  the  dark  areas  continued
largely  unchanged  in  appearance  ;  that  is,  dur-
ing the  earlier  and  most  extensive  melting  of
the  snow-cap.  After  this  their  history  became
one  long  chronicle  of  fading  out.  Their  lighter
parts  grew  lighter,  and  their  darker  ones  less
dark.  For,  to  start  with,  they  were  made  up
of  many  tints ;  various  shades  of  blue-green
interspersed  with  glints  of  orange-yellow.  The
gulfs  and  bays  bordering  the  continental  coast
were  the  darkest  of  these  markings;  the  long
straits  between  the  polar  sea  and  the  Syrtis
Major  were  the  next  deepest  in  tone.

The  first  marked  sign  of  change  was  the  re-
appearance of  Hesperia.  Whereas  in  June  it
had  been  practically  non-existent,  by"  August  it
had  become  perfectly  visible  and  in  the  place
where  it  is  usually  depicted.  In  connection
with  its  reappearance  two  points  are  to  be
noted :  first,  the  amount  of  the  change,  for
Hesperia  is  a  stretch  of  land  over  two  hundred
miles  broad  by  six  hundred  miles  long;  and.


Plate  XVI


Fig.  I.     Hesperia  at  June  presentation
Long.  242°.     Lat.  centre  of  disk  24°  South


Fig.  n.     Hesperia  at  August  presentation
Long.  247°.      Lat.  centre  of  disk  17°  South


Fig.  in.     Hesperia  at  October  presentation
Long.  237°.     Lat.  centre  of  disk  21°  South


HESPERIA
Showing  seasonal  change  during  1894


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1894


SEAS  117

secondly,  the  fact  that  its  previous  invisibility
was  not  due  to  any  sort  of  obscuration.  The
persistent  clear-cut  character  of  the  neighbor-
ing coast-line  during  the  whole  transformation
showed  that  nothing  of  the  nature  of  mist  or
cloud  had  at  any  time  hidden  the  peninsula
from  view.  A  something  was  actually  there
in  August  which  had  not  been  there  in  June.

As  yet  nothing  could  be  seen  of  Atlantis.  It
was  not  until  the  30th  of  October  that  I  caught
sight  of  it.  About  the  same  time,  the  straits
between  the  islands,  Xanthus,  Scamander,  Psy-
chrus,  and  Simois,  came  out  saliently  dark,
a  darkness  due  to  contrast.  The  line  of  south
temperate  islands,  with  their  separate  identity,
was  then  for  the  first  time  apparent.

Meanwhile  the  history  of  Hesperia  continued
to  be  instructive.  From  having  been  absent  in
June  and  conspicuous  in  August,  it  returned  in
October  to  a  mid-position  of  visibility.  Vacil-
lating as  these  fluctuations  in  appearance  may
seem  at  first  sight,  they  were  really  quite  con-
sistent \  for  they  were  probably  due  to  progres-
sive change  in  the  one  direction,  a  change  that
was  manifested  first  in  Hesperia  itself,  and  then
in  the  regions  round  about  it.  From  June
to  August,  Hesperia  changed  from  a  previous
blue-green,  indistinguishable  from  its  surround-
ings, to  yellow,  the  parts  adjacent  remaining
much  as  before.     As    a   consequence,  the  pe-


118  MARS

ninsula  stood  out  in  marked  contrast  to  the
still  deep  blue-green  regions  by  its  side.  Later
the  surroundings  themselves  faded,  and  their
bleaching  had  the  effect  of  once  more  partially
obliterating  Hesperia.

While  Hesperia  was  thus  getting  itself  no-
ticed, the  rest  of  the  south  temperate  zone,  as
we  may  call  it  for  identification's  sake,  was  un-
obtrusively pursuing  the  same  course.  Whereas
in  June  all  that  part  of  the  disk  comprising  the
two  Thyle,  Argyre  II.,  and  like  latitudes  was
chiefly  blue-green,  by  October  it  had  become
chiefly  yellow.  Still  further  south,  what  had
been  first  white,  then  blue,  then  brown,  turned
ochre.

Certain  smaller  details  of  the  change  that
came  over  the  face  of  the  dark  regions  at  the
time  were  as  curious  as  they  were  marked.  For
example,  the  Fastigium  Aryn,  the  tip  of  the  tri-
angular cape  which,  by  jutting  out  from  the
continent,  forms  the  forked  bay  called  the  Sa-
baeus  Sinus,  and  which,  because  of  its  easy
identification,  has  been  selected  for  the  zero
meridian  of  Martian  longitudes,  began  in  Oc-
tober to  undergo  strange  metamorphosis.  On
October  15  it  shot  out  a  sort  of  tail  southward.
On  the  16th  this  tail  could  be  followed  all  the
way  to  Deucalionis  Eegio,  to  which  it  made  a
bridge  across  from  the  continent,  thus  cutting
the  Sabaeus  Sinus  completely  in  two.     After  it


SEAS  119

had  thus  appeared,  it  continued  visible  up  to
the  close  of  the  observations  sufficiently  detailed
to  show  it.

Another  curious  causeway  of  the  same  sort
made  its  appearance  in  November,  connecting
the  promontory  known  as  Hammonis  Cornu
with  Hellas.  Both  of  these  necks  of  orange-
ochre  were  of  more  or  less  uniform  breadth
throughout.

The  long,  dark  streaks  that  in  June  had
joined  the  Syrtis  Major  to  the  polar  sea  had
by  October  nearly  disappeared  ;  in  their  south-
ern parts  they  had  vanished  completely,  and
they  had  very  much  faded  in  their  northern
ones.  The  same  process  of  fading  uncovered
certain  curious  rhomboidal  bright  areas  in  the
midst  of  the  Syrtis  Major.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  extent  of  these
changes  was  enormous.  Their  size,  indeed,  was
only  second  in  importance  to  their  character;
for  it  will  also  have  been  noticed  that  the
changes  were  all  in  one  direction.  A  whole-
sale transformation  of  the  blue-green  regions
into  orange-ochre  ones  was  in  progress  upon
that  other  world.

What  can  explain  so  general  and  so  consecu-
tive a  change  in  hue  ?  Water  suggests  itself ;
for  a  vast  transference  of  water  from  the  pole
to  the  equator  might  account  for  it.  But  there
are  facts  connected  with  the  change  which  seem


120  MARS

irreconcilable  with  the  idea  of  water.  In  the  first
place,  Professor  W.  H.  Pickering  found  that  the
light  from  the  great  blue-green  areas  showed  no
trace  of  polarization.  This  tended  to  strengthen
a  theory  put  forth  by  him  some  years  ago,  that
the  greater  part  of  the  blue-green  areas  are  not
water,  but  something  which  at  such  a  distance
would  also  look  blue-green,  namely,  vegetation.
Observations  at  Flagstaff  not  only  confirm  this,
but  limit  the  water  areas  still  further ;  in  fact,
practically  do  away  with  them  entirely.  Not
only  do  the  above  polariscopic  tests  tend  to  this
conclusion,  but  so  does  the  following  observa-
tion of  mine  in  October.

Toward  the  end  of  October,  a  strange,  and,
for  observational  purposes,  a  distressing  phe-
nomenon took  place.  What  remained  of  the
more  southern  dark  regions  showed  a  desire  to
vanish,  so  completely  did  those  regions  proceed
to  fade  in  tint  throughout.  This  was  first  no-
ticeable in  the  Cimmerian  Sea,  then  in  the  Sea
of  the  Sirens,  and  in  November  in  the  Mare
Erythraeum  about  the  Lake  of  the  Sun.  The
fading  steadily  progressed  until  it  had  advanced
so  far  that  in  poor  seeing  the  markings  were
almost  imperceptible,  and  the  planet  presented
a  nearly  uniform  ochre  disk.

This  was  not  a  case  of  obscuration ;  for  in
the  first  place  it  was  general,  and  in  the  second
place  the  coast-lines  were  not  obliterated.     The


SEAS  121

change,  therefore,  was  not  due  to  clouds  or
mist.

What  was  suggestive  about  the  occurrence
was  that  it  was  unaccompanied  by  a  correspond-
ing increase  of  blue-green  elsewhere.  It  was
not  simply  that  portions  of  the  planet's  surface
changed  tint,  but  that,  taking  the  disk  in  its
entirety,  the  whole  amount  of  the  blue-green
upon  it  had  diminished,  and  that  of  the  orange-
yellow  had  proportionally  increased.  Mars
looked  more  Martian  than  he  had  in  June.
The  canals,  indeed,  began  at  the  same  time  to
darken  ;  but,  highly  important  as  this  was  for
other  reasons,  the  whole  area  of  their  fine  lines
and  associated  patches  did  not  begin  to  make
up  for  what  the  dark  regions  lost.

If  the  blue-green  color  was  due  to  water,
where  had  all  the  water  gone  ?  Nowhere  on
the  visible  parts  of  the  planet ;  that  is  certain.
Nor  could  it  very  well  have  gone  to  those  north
circumpolar  regions  hid  from  view  by  the  tilt
of  the  disk  ;  for  there  was  no  sign  of  a  growing
north  polar  cap,  and,  furthermore,  Schiaparelli's
observations  upon  that  cap  show  that  there
should  not  have  been.  At  the  opposition  of
1881,  he  found  that  it  developed  late,  appar-
ently one  month  or  so  after  the  vernal  equinox
of  its  hemisphere,  whereas  at  the  time  the  above
change  occurred  it  was  not  long  after  that  hemi-
sphere's winter  solstice.


122  MARS

But  ifj  instead  of  being  due  to  water,  the
blue-green  tint  had  been  due  to  leaves  and
grasses,  just  such  a  fading  out  as  was  observed
should  have  taken  place  as  autumn  came  on,
and  that  without  proportionate  increase  of  green
elsewhere ;  for  the  great  continental  areas,  be-
ing desert,  are  incapable  of  supporting  vegeta-
tion, and  therefore  of  turning  green.

Thus  we  see  that  several  independent  phe-
nomena all  agree  to  show  that  the  blue-green
regions  of  Mars  are  not  water,  but,  generally
at  least,  areas  of  vegetation ;  from  which  it  fol-
lows that  Mars  is  very  badly  off  for  water,  and
that  the  planet  is  dependent  on  the  melting  of
its  polar  snows  for  practically  its  whole  supply.

Such  scarcity  of  water  on  Mars  is  just  what
theory  would  lead  us  to  expect.  Mars  is  a
smaller  planet  than  the  Earth,  and  therefore  is
relatively  more  advanced  in  his  evolutionary
career.  He  is  older  in  age,  if  not  in  years ;  for
whether  his  birth  as  a  separate  world  antedated
ours  or  not,  his  smaller  size,  by  causing  him  to
cool  more  quickly,  would  necessarily  age  him
faster.  But  as  a  planet  grows  old,  its  oceans,
in  all  probability,  dry  up,  the  water  retreating
through  cracks  and  caverns  into  its  interior.
Water  thus  disappears  from  its  surface,  to  say
nothing  of  what  is  being  continually  imprisoned
by  chemical  combination.  Signs  of  having  thus
parted  with  its  oceans  we  see  in  the  case  of  the


Plate  XVII


Fig.  I.     Sea  of  the  Sirens  at  June  presentation
Long.  141°.     Lat.  centre  of  disk  24°  South

Fig.  II.     Sea  of  the  Sirens  at  November  presentation
Long.  156°.     Lat.  centre  of  disk  22°  South

SEA   OF  THE   SIRENS   AND   ATLANTIS

AT  THE   OPPOSITION   OF   1894

Showing  seasonal  change


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1894


SEAS  123

Moon,  whose  so-called  seas  were  probably  seas
in  their  day,  but  have  now  become  old  sea-
bottoms.  On  Mars  the  same  process  is  going
on,  but  would  seem  not  yet  to  have  progressed
so  far,  the  seas  there  being  midway  in  their
career  from  real  seas  to  arid  depressed  deserts ;
no  longer  water  surfaces,  they  are  still  the  low-
est portions  of  the  planet,  and  therefore  stand
to  receive  what  scant  water  may  yet  travel
over  the  surface.  They  thus  become  fertihzed,
while  higher  regions  escape  the  freshet,  and
remain  permanently  barren.  That  they  were
once  seas  we  have  something  more  than  gen-
eral inference  to  warrant  us  in  believinsf.

There  is  a  certain  peculiarity  about  the  sur-
face markings  of  Mars,  which  is  pretty  sure  to
strike  any  thoughtful  observer  who  examines
the  planet's  disk,  with  a  two-  or  a  three-inch
object-glass, —  their  singular  sameness  night
after  night.  With  quite  disheartening  regu-
larity, each  evening  presents  him  with  the  same
appearance  he  noted  the  evening  before,  —  a
dark  band  obliquely  belting  the  disk,  strangely
keeping  its  place  in  spite  of  the  nightly  pro-
cession of  the  meridians  ten  degrees  to  the  east,
in  consequence  of  our  faster  rotation  gaining
on  the  slower  rotation  of  Mars.  By  attention,
he  will  notice,  however,  that  the  belt  creeps
slowly  upwards  towards  the  pole.  Then  sud-
denly some  night  he  finds  that  it  has  slipped


124  MARS

bodily  down,  to  begin  again  its  Sisyphus-like,
inconclusive  spiral  climb.

Often  as  this  rhumb  line  must  have  been  no-
ticed, no  explanation  of  it  has  ever,  to  my
knowledge,  been  given.  Yet  so  singular  an  ar-
rangement points  to  something  other  than
chance.  Suspicion  of  its  non-fortuitous  charac-
ter is  strengthened  when  it  is  scanned  through
a  bigger  glass.  Increase  of  aperture  discloses
details  that  help  explain  its  significance.  With
sufficient  telescopic  power,  the  continuity  of  the
dark  belt  is  seen  to  be  broken  by  a  series  of
parallel  peninsulas  or  semi-peninsulas  that  jut
out  from  the  lower  edge  of  the  belt,  all  running
with  one  accord  in  a  southeasterly  direction,
and  dividing  the  belt  into  a  similar  series  of
parallel  dark  areas.  Such  oblong  areas  are  the
Mare  Tyrrhenum,  the  Mare  Cimmerium,  the
Mare  Sirenum,  and  those  unnamed  straits  that
stretch  southeasterly  from  the  Aurorae  Sinus,
the  Margaritifer  Sinus,  and  the  Sabaeus  Sinus.
The  islands  and  peninsulas  trending  in  the  same
direction  are  Ausonia,  Hesperia,  Cimmeria,
Atlantis,  Pyrrhae  Kegio,  Deucalionis  Regio,  and
the  two  causeways  from  the  Fastigium  Aryn
and  Hammonis  Cornu.  It  will  further  be  no-
ticed that  these  areas  lie  more  nearly  north
and  south  as  they  lie  nearer  the  pole,  and
curve  in  general  to  the  west  as  they  approach
the  equator.


SEAS  125

With  this  fact  noted,  let  us  return  to  the
water  formed  by  the  melting  of  the  ice-cap,  at
the  time  it  is  produced  around  the  south  pole.
We  may  be  sure  it  would  not  stay  there  long.
No  sooner  liberated  from  its  winter  fetters  than
it  would  begin,  under  the  pull  of  gravity,  to
run  toward  the  equator.  The  reason  why  it
would  flow  away  from  the  pole  is  that  it  would
find  itself  in  unstable  equilibrium  where  it  was.
Successive  depositions  of  frost  would  have  piled
up  a  mound  of  ice  which,  so  long  as  it  remained
solid,  cohesion  would  keep  in  that  unnatural
position  ;  but  the  moment  it  changed  to  a  liquid
this  would  flow  out  on  all  sides,  seeking  its
level.  Once  started,  its  own  withdrawal  would
cause  the  centre  of  gravity  to  shift  away  from
the  pole,  and  this  would  pull  the  particles  of
the  water  yet  more  toward  the  equator.  Each
particle  would  start  due  north ;  but  its  course
would  not  continue  in  that  direction,  for  at  each
mile  it  traveled  it  would  find  itself  in  a  lower
latitude,  where,  owing  to  the  rotation  of  the
planet,  the  surface  would  be  whirling  faster  to-
ward the  east,  inasmuch  as  a  point  on  the  equa-
tor has  to  get  over  much  more  space  in  twenty-
four  hours  than  one  nearer  the  pole.  In  short,
supposing  there  were  no  friction,  the  surface
would  be  constantly  slipping  away  from  under
the  particle  toward  the  east.  As  a  result,  the
northerly  motion  of  the  particle  would  be  con-


126  MAES

tinually  clianging  with  regard  to  the  surface  into
a  more  and  more  westerly  one.  If  the  surface
were  not  frictionless,  friction  would  somewhat
reduce  the  westerly  component,  but  could  never
wholly  destroy  it  without  stopping  the  particle.

We  see,  therefore,  that  any  body,  whether
solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous,  must,  in  traveling  away
from  the  pole  of  a  sphere  or  spheroid,  neces-
sarily deviate  to  the  west  as  it  goes  on,  if  the
spheroid  itself  revolve,  as  Mars  does,  in  the  op-
posite direction.

Now  this  inevitable  trend  induced  in  any-
thing flowing  from  the  pole  to  the  equator  is
precisely  the  one  that  we  notice  stereotyped  so
conspicuously  in  the  Martian  south  temperate
markings.  Here,  then,  we  have  at  once  a
suspiciously  suggestive  hint  that  they  once  held
water,  and  that  that  water  flowed.

Corroborating  this  deduction  is  the  fact  that
the  northern  sides  of  all  the  dark  areas  are  very
perceptibly  darker  than  the  southern  ones ;  for
the  northern  side  is  the  one  which  a  descending
current  would  plough  out,  since  it  is  the  north-
ern coasts  that  would  be  constantly  opposing
the  current's  northerly  inertia.  Consequently,
although  at  present  the  descending  stream  be
quite  inadequate  to  such  task,  it  still  finds  its
way,  from  preference,  to  these  lowest  levels,
and  makes  them  greener  than  the  rest.

Though  seas   no  longer,  we   perceive,  then,


SEAS  127

that  there  is  some  reason  to  believe  the  so-called
seas  of  Mars  to  have  been  seas  in  their  day,  and
to  be  at  the  present  moment  midway  in  evo-
lution from  the  seas  of  Earth  to  the  seas  of  the
Moon.

Now,  if  a  planet  were  at  any  stage  of  its
career  able  to  support  life,  it  is  probable
that  a  diminishing  water  supply  would  be  the
beginning  of  the  end  of  that  life,  for  the  air
would  outlast  the  available  water.  Those  of
its  inhabitants  who  had  succeeded  in  surviving
would  find  themselves  at  last  face  to  face  with
the  relentlessness  of  a  scarcity  of  water  con-
stantly growing  greater,  till  at  last  they  would
all  die  of  thirst,  either  directly  or  indirectly ;
for  either  they  themselves  would  not  have
water  enough  to  drink,  or  the  plants  or  animals
which  constituted  their  diet  would  perish  for
lack  of  it,  —  an  alternative  of  small  choice  to
them,  unless  they  were  conventionally  particular
as  to  their  mode  of  death.  Before  this  lament-
able conclusion  was  reached,  however,  there
would  come  a  time  in  the  course  of  the  planet's
history  when  water  was  not  yet  wanting,  but
simply  scarce  and  requiring  to  be  husbanded  ;
when,  for  the  inhabitants,  the  one  supreme
problem  of  existence  would  be  the  water  prob-
lem, —  how  to  get  water  enough  to  sustain  life,
and  how  best  to  utilize  every  drop  of  water
they  could  get.


128  MAES

Mars  is,  apparently,  in  this  distressing  plight
at  the  present  moment,  the  signs  being  that  its
water  supply  is  now  exceedingly  low.  If,
therefore,  the  planet  possess  inhabitants,  there
is  but  one  course  open  to  them  in  order  to  sup-
port life.  Irrigation,  and  upon  as  vast  a  scale
as  possible,  must  be  the  all-engrossing  Martian
pursuit.  So  much  is  directly  deducible  from
what  we  have  learned  at  Flagstaff  of  the  phy-
sical condition  of  the  planet,  quite  apart  from
any  question  as  to  possible  inhabitants.  What
the  physical  phenomena  assert  is  this  :  if  there
be  inhabitants,  then  irrigation  must  be  the  chief
material  concern  of  their  lives.

At  this  point  in  our  inquiry,  when  direct  de-
duction from  the  general  physical  phenomena
observable  on  the  planet's  surface  shows  that,
were  there  inhabitants  there,  a  system  of  irriga-
tion would  be  an  all-essential  of  their  existence,
the  telescope  presents  us  with  perhaps  the  most
startling  discovery  of  modern  times,  —  the  so-
called  canals  of  Mars.  These  strange  pheno-
mena, together  with  the  inferences  to  be  drawn
from  them,  we  will  now  proceed  to  envisage.


IV

CANALS
I.    FIEST   APPEARANCES

In  the  last  chapter  we  saw  how  badly  off  for
water  Mars,  to  all  appearance,  is ;  so  badly  off
that  inhabitants  of  that  other  world  would  have
to  irrigate  to  live.  As  to  the  actual  presence
there  of  such  folk,  the  broad  physical  character-
istics of  the  planet  express  no  opinion  beyond
the  silence  of  consent,  but  they  have  some-
thing very  vital  to  say  about  the  conditions
under  which  alone  their  life  could  be  led.  They
show  that  these  conditions  must  be  such  that  in
the  Martian  mind  there  would  be  one  question
perpetually  paramount  to  all  the  local  labor,
women's  suffrage,  and  Eastern  questions  put  to-
gether —  the  water  question.  How  to  procure
water  enough  to  support  life  would  be  the  great
communal  problem  of  the  day.

Were  Mars  like  the  Earth,  we  might  well  de-
spair of  detecting  signs  of  any  Martians  for
some  time  yet.  Across  the  gulf  of  space  that
separates  us  from  Mars,  an  area  thirty  miles
wide   w^ould  just   be  perceptible  as  a  dot.     It


130  MARS

would,  in  such  case,  be  hopeless  to  look  for  evi-
dence of  folk.  Anything  like  London  or  New
York,  or  even  Chicago  in  its  own  estimation,
would  be  too  small  to  be  seen,  so  sorry  a  fig-
ure does  man  cut  upon  the  Earth  he  thinks  to
own.  From  the  standpoint  of  forty  millions  of
miles  distance,  probably  the  only  sign  of  his
presence  here  would  be  such  semi-artificialities
as  the  great  grain-fields  of  the  West  when  their
geometric  patches  turned  with  the  changing
seasons  from  ochre  to  green,  and  then  from
green  to  gold.  By  his  crops  we  should  know
him.  A  tell-tale  fact  this,  for  it  would  be  still
more  likely  to  be  the  case  with  Mars.  If  the
surface  of  the  planet  were  cultivated  at  all,  it
would  probably  be  upon  a  much  more  thorough
plan  than  is  the  case  with  the  Earth.  Condi-
tions hold  there  which  would  necessitate  a  much
more  artificial  state  of  things.  If  cultivation
there  be,  it  must  be  cultivation  largely  depend-
ent upon  a  system  of  irrigation,  and  therefore
much  more  systematic  than  any  we  have  as
yet  been  forced  to  adopt.

Now,  at  this  point  in  our  investigation,  when
the  broad  features  of  Mars  disclose  conditions
which  imply  irrigation  as  their  organic  corol-
lary, we  are  suddenly  confronted  on  the  planet's
face  with  phenomena  so  startlingly  suggestive
of  this  very  thing  as  to  seem  its  uncanny  pre-
sentment.    Indeed,  so  amazingly  lifelike  is  their


CANALS  131

appearance  that,  had  we  possessed  our  present
knowledge  of  the  planet's  physical  condition
before,  we  might  almost  have  predicted  what
we  see  as  criterion  of  the  presence  of  living
beings.     What  confronts  us  is  this  :  —

When  the  great  continental  areas,  the  reddish-
ochre  portions  of  the  disk,  are  attentively  ex-
amined in  sufficiently  steady  air,  their  desert-
like ground  is  seen  to  be  traversed  by  a  network
of  fine,  straight,  dark  lines.  The  lines  start
from  points  on  the  coast  of  the  blue-green  re-
gions, commonly  well-marked  bays,  and  proceed
directly  to  what  seem  centres  in  the  middle  of
the  continent,  since  most  surprisingly  they  meet
there  other  lines  that  have  come  to  the  same
spot  with  apparently  a  like  determinate  intent.
And  this  state  of  things  is  not  confined  to  any
one  part  of  the  planet,  but  takes  place  all  over
the  reddish-ochre  regions.

The  lines  appear  either  absolutely  straight
from  one  end  to  the  other,  or  curved  in  an
equally  uniform  manner.  There  is  nothing
haphazard  in  the  look  of  any  of  them.  Plotting
upon  a  globe  betrays  them  to  be  arcs  of  great
circles  almost  invariably,  even  the  few  outstand-
ing exceptions  seeming  to  be  but  polygonal
combinations  of  the  same.  Their  most  instantly
conspicuous  characteristic  is  this  hopeless  lack
of  happy  irregularity.  They  are,  each  and  all,
direct  to  a  degree.


132  MARS

The  lines  are  as  fine  as  they  are  straight.
As  a  rule,  they  are  of  scarcely  any  perceptible
breadth,  seeming  on  the  average  to  be  less  than
a  Martian  degree,  or  about  thirty  miles  wide.
They  differ  slightly  among  themselves,  some
being  a  little  broader  than  this  ;  some  a  trifle
finer,  possibly  not  above  fifteen  miles  across.
Their  length,  not  their  breadth,  renders  them
visible ;  for  though  at  such  a  distance  we  could
not  distinguish  a  dot  less  than  thirty  miles  in
diameter,  we  could  see  a  line  of  much  less
breadth,  because  of  its  length.  Speaking  gen-
erally, however,  the  lines  are  all  of  comparable
width.

Still  greater  uniformity  is  observable  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  same  line  ;  for  each  line
maintains  its  individual  width,  from  one  end  of
its  course  to  the  other.  Although,  at  and  near
the  point  where  it  leaves  the  dark  regions,  some
slight  enlargement  seems  to  occur,  after  it  has
fairly  started  on  its  course,  it  remains  of  substan-
tially the  same  size  throughout.  As  to  whether
the  lines  are  even  on  their  edges  or  not,  I
should  not  like  to  say ;  but  the  better  they  are
seen,  the  more  even  they  look.  It  is  not  possi-
ble to  affirm  positively  on  the  point,  as  they  are
practically  nearer  one  dimension  than  two.

On  the  other  hand,  their  length  is  usually
great,  and  in  cases  enormous.  A  thousand  or
fifteen  hundred  miles  may  be  considered  about


CANALS  133

the  average.  The  Ganges,  for  example,  which
is  not  a  long  one  as  Martian  canals  go,  is  about
1,450  miles  in  length.  The  Brontes,  one  of  the
newly  discovered,  radiating  from  the  Gulf  of
the  Titans,  extends  over  2,400  miles ;  while,
among  really  long  ones,  the  Eumenides,  with
its  continuation  the  Orcus,  the  two  being  in
truth  one  line,  measures  3,540  miles  from  the
point  where  it  leaves  the  Phoenix  Lake  to  the
point  where  it  enters  the  Trivium  Charontis,  —
throughout  this  whole  distance,  nearly  equal  to
the  diameter  of  the  planet,  deviating  neither  to
the  right  nor  to  the  left  from  the  great  circle
upon  which  it  set  out.  On  the  other  hand,  the
shortest  line  is  the  Nectar,  which  is  only  about
250  miles  in  length ;  sweetness  being,  according
to  Schiaparelli  its  christener,  as  short-lived  on
Mars  as  elsewhere.

That,  with  very  few  exceptions,  the  lines  all
follow  arcs  of  great  circles  is  proved,  —  first,  by
the  fact  that,  when  not  too  long,  they  show  as
straight  lines ;  second,  that,  when  seen  near
the  limb,  they  appear  curved,  in  keeping  with
the  curvature  of  a  spherical  surface  viewed
obliquely ;  third,  that,  when  the  several  parts
of  some  of  the  longer  lines  are  plotted  upon  a
globe,  they  turn  out  to  lie  in  one  great  circle.
Apparent  straightness  throughout  is  only  possi-
ble in  comparatively  short  lines.  For  a  very
long  arc  upon  the  surface  of  a  revolving  globe


134  MARS

tilted  toward  the  observer  to  appear  straight  in
its  entirety,  it  must  He  due  north  and  south.
Such,  of  course,  is  rarely  the  case.  It  so  chances,
however,  that  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  by
the  great  canal  called  the  Titan.  The  Titan
starts  from  the  Gulf  of  the  Titans,  in  south  lati-
tude 20°,  and  runs  north  almost  exactly  upon
the  169th  meridian  for  an  immense  distance.  I
have  followed  it  over  2,300  miles  down  the  disk
to  about  43°  north,  as  far  as  the  tilt  of  the
planet's  axis  would  permit.  As  the  rotation  of
the  planet  swings  it  round,  it  passes  the  central
meridian  of  the  disk  simultaneously  throughout
its  length,  and  at  that  moment  comes  out  so
strikingly  straight  it  seems  a  substantialized
meridian  itself.

Although  each  line  is  the  arc  of  a  great  circle,
the  direction  taken  by  this  great  circle  may  be
any  whatsoever.  The  Titan,  as  we  have  seen,
runs  nearly  due  north  and  south.  Certain
canals  crossing  this  run,  on  the  contrary,  al-
most due  east  and  west.  There  are  others,
again,  belting  the  disk  at  well-nigh  every  angle
between  these  two  extremes.  Nor  is  there  any
preponderance,  apparently,  for  one  direction  as
against  any  other.  This  indifference  to  direc-
tion is  important  as  showing  that  the  rotation
of  the  planet  has  no  bearing  upon  the  inclina-
tion of  the  canals.

But,  singular  as  each  line  looks  to  be  by  it-


CANALS  135

self,  it  is  the  systematic  network  of  the  whole
that  is  most  amazing.  Each  line  not  only  goes
with  wonderful  directness  from  one  point  to
another,  but  at  this  latter  spot  it  contrives  to
meet,  exactly,  another  line  which  has  come  with
like  directness  from  quite  a  different  direction.
Nor  do  two  only  manage  thus  to  rendezvous.
Three,  four,  five,  and  even  seven  will  similarly
fall  in  on  the  same  spot,  —  a  gregariousness
which,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  finds  effec-
tive possibility  all  over  the  surface  of  the  planet.
The  disk  is  simply  a  network  of  such  inter-
sections. Sometimes  a  canal  goes  only  from
one  intersection  to  another;  more  commonly
it  starts  with  right  of  continuation,  and,  after
reaching  the  first  rendezvous,  goes  on  in  un-
changed course  to  several  more.

The  result  is  that  the  whole  of  the  great
reddish-ochre  portions  of  the  planet  is  cut  up
into  a  series  of  spherical  triangles  of  all  possible
sizes  and  shapes.  What  their  number  may  be
lies  quite  beyond  the  possibility  of  count  at
present ;  for  the  better  our  own  air,  the  more
of  them  are  visible.  About  four  times  as  many
as  are  down  on  Schiaparelli's  chart  of  the  same
regions  have  been  seen  at  Flagstaff.  But,  be-
fore proceeding  further  with  a  description  of
these  Martian  phenomena,  the  history  of  their
discovery  deserves  to  be  sketched  here,  since  it
is  as  strange  as  the  canals  themselves.


136  MARS

The  first  hint  the  world  had  of  their  exist-
ence was  when  Schiaparelli  saw  some  of  the
lines  in  1877,  now  eighteen  years  ago.  The
world,  however,  was  anything  but  prepared  for
the  revelation,  and,  when  he  announced  what
he  had  seen,  promptly  proceeded  to  disbelieve
him.  Schiaparelli  had  the  misfortune  to  be
ahead  of  his  times,  and  the  yet  greater  misfor-
tune to  remain  so ;  for  not  only  did  no  one  else
see  the  lines  at  that  opposition,  but  no  one
else  succeeded  in  doing  so  at  subsequent  ones.
For  many  years  fate  allowed  Schiaparelli  to
have  them  all  to  himself,  a  confidence  he  amply
repaid.  While  others  doubted,  he  went  from
discovery  to  discovery.  What  he  had  seen  in
1877  was  not  so  very  startling  in  view  of  what
he  afterward  saw.  His  first  observations  might
well  have  been  of  simple  estuaries,  long  natural
creeks  running  up  into  the  continents,  and  even
cutting  them  in  two.  His  later  observations
were  too  peculiar  to  be  explained,  even  by  so  im-
probable a  configuration  of  the  Martian  surface.
In  1879  the  canali,  as  he  called  them  (channels,
or  canals,  the  word  may  be  translated,  and  it  is
in  the  latter  sense  that  he  now  regards  them),
showed  straighter  and  narrower  than  they  had
in  1877 :  this  not  in  consequence  of  any  change
in  them,  but  from  his  own  improved  faculty  of
detection ;  for  what  the  eye  has  once  seen  it
can  always  see  better  a  second  time.     As  he


CANALS  137

gazed  they  appeared  straighter,  and  he  made
out  more.  Lastly,  toward  the  end  of  the  year,
he  observed  one  evening  what  struck  even  him
as  a  most  startUng  phenomenon,  —  the  twin-
ning of  one  of  the  canals:  two  parallel  canals
suddenly  showed  where  but  a  single  one  had
showed  before.  The  paralleling  w^as  so  perfect
that  he  suspected  optical  illusion.  He  could,
however,  discover  none  by  changing  his  tele-
scopes or  eye-pieces.  The  phenomenon,  appar-
ently, was  real.

At  the  next  opposition  he  looked  to  see  if
by  chance  he  should  mark  a  repetition  of  the
strange  event,  and  went,  as  he  tells  us,  from
surprise  to  surprise;  for  one  after  another  of
his  canals  proceeded  startlingly  to  become  two,
until  some  twenty  of  them  had  thus  doubled.
This  capped  the  climax  to  his  own  wonderment,
and,  it  is  needless  to  add,  to  other  people's  in-
credulity ;  for  nobody  else  had  yet  succeeded
in  seeing  the  canals  at  all,  let  alone  seeing  them
double.  Undeterred  by  the  general  skepticism,
he  confirmed  at  each  fresh  opposition  his  pre-
vious discoveries,  which,  in  view  of  the  fact  that
no  one  else  did,  tended  in  astronomical  circles
to  an  opposite  result.

For  nine  years  he  labored  thus  alone,  having
his  visions  all  to  himself.  It  was  not  till  1886
that  any  one  but  he  saw  the  canals.  In  April
of  that  year  Perrotin,  at  Nice,  first  did  so.     The


138  MARS

occasion  was  the  setting  up  of  the  great  Nice
glass  of  twenty-nine  inches  aperture.  In  spite
of  the  great  size  of  the  glass,  however,  a  first
attempt  resulted  in  nothing  but  failure.  So,
later,  did  a  second,  and  Perrotin  was  on  the
point  of  abandoning  the  search  for  good,  when,
on  the  15th  of  the  month,  he  suddenly  detected
one  of  the  canals,  the  Phison.  His  assistant,
M.  Thollon,  saw  it  immediately  afterward.  After
this  they  managed  to  make  out  several  others,
some  single,  some  double,  substantially  as  Schia-
parelli  had  drawn  them ;  the  slight  discrep-
ancies between  their  observations  and  his  being
in  point  of  fact  the  best  of  confirmations.

Since  then,  other  observers  have  contrived  to
detect  the  canals,  the  list  of  the  successful  in-
creasing at  each  opposition,  although  even  now
their  number  might  almost  be  told  on  one's
hands  and  feet.

The  reason  that  so  few  astronomers  have  as
yet  succeeded  in  seeing  these  lines  is  to  be
found  in  our  own  atmosphere.  That  in  ordi-
nary atmosphere  the  lines  are  not  easy  objects
is  certain.  A  moderately  good  air  is  essential
to  their  detection ;  and  unfortunately  the  loca-
tions of  most  of  our  observatories  preclude  this
prerequisite.  Size  of  aperture  of  the  telescope
used  is  a  very  secondary  matter.  That  Schia-
parelli  discovered  the  canals  with  an  8J-inch
glass,  and  that  the  2  6 -inch  glass  at  Washington


Plate   XVIII


FASTIGIUM   ARYN
October,  1894


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1894


CANALS  139

has  refused  to  show  them  to  this  day,  are  facts
that  speak  emphatically  on  the  point.

The  importance  of  atmosphere  in  the  study
of  planetary  detail  is  far  from  being  appre-
ciated. It  is  not  simply  question  of  a  clear
air^  but  of  a  steady  one.  To  detect  fine  detail,
the  atmospheric  strata  must  be  as  evenly  dis-
posed as  possible.

Next  in  importance  to  a  steady  air  comes  at-
tentive perception  on  the  part  of  the  observer.
The  steadiest  air  we  can  find  is  in  a  state  of
almost  constant  fluctuation.  In  consequence,
revelations  of  detail  come  only  to  those  who
patiently  watch  for  the  few  good  moments
among  the  many  poor.  Nor  do  I  believe  even
average  air  to  be  entirely  without  such  happy
exceptions  to  a  general  blur.  In  these  brief
moments  perseverance  will  show  the  canals  as
faint  streaks.  To  see  them  as  they  are,  how-
ever, an  atmosphere  possessing  moments  of
really  distinct  vision  is  imperative.  For  the
canals  to  come  out  in  all  their  fineness  and
geometrical  precision,  the  air  must  be  steady
enough  to  show  the  markings  on  the  planet's
disk  with  the  clear-cut  character  of  a  steel  en-
graving. No  one  who  has  not  seen  the  planet
thus  can  pass  upon  the  character  of  these  lines.

Although  skepticism  as  to  the  existence  of
the  so-called  canals  has  been  now  pretty  well
dispelled  by  these  and  other  observations,  dis-


140  MARS

belief  still  makes  a  desperate  stand  against  their
peculiar  appearance,  dubbing  accounts  of  their
straightness  and  duplication  as  sensational,  what-
ever they  may  mean  in  such  connection;  for
that  they  are  both  straight  and  double,  as  de-
scribed, is  certain,  —  a  statement  I  make  after
having  seen  them,  instead  of  before  doing  so,  as
is  the  case  with  the  gifted  objectors.  Doubt,
however,  will  not  wholly  cease  till  more  peo-
ple have  seen  them,  which  will  not  happen  till
the  importance  of  atmosphere  in  the  study  of
planetary  detail  is  more  generally  appreciated
than  it  is  to-day.  To  look  for  the  canals  with
a  large  instrument  in  poor  air  is  like  trying  to
read  a  page  of  fine  print  kept  dancing  before
one's  eyes,  with  the  additional  disadvantage
that  increase  of  magnification  increases  the  mo-
tion. Advance  in  our  study  of  other  worlds
depends  upon  choosing  the  very  best  atmos-
pheric sites  for  our  observatories.

It  is  interesting  to  recall,  in  connection  with
this  incredulity  about  the  canals,  that  precisely
the  same  thing  happened  in  the  case  of  the  dis-
covery of  Jupiter's  satellites  and  with  Huy-
ghens'  explanation  of  Saturn's  ring.  We  are
apt  to  imagine  that  our  age  of  the  world  has  a
monopoly  of  skepticism.  But  this  is  a  mistake.
The  spirit  that  denies  has  always  been  abroad ;
only  in  early  days  he  was  reputed  to  be  the
devil.


MAP  AND  CATALOGUE         141
II.  MAP  AND  CATALOGUE

As  we  shall  now  have  to  call  these  Martian
things  by  their  names,  —  our  names,  that  is,  —
it  may  be  well  to  consider  cursorily  the  nomen-
clature which  has  been  evolved  on  the  subject.
Unfortunately,  the  planet  has  been  quite  too
much  benamed,  —  benamed,  indeed,  out  of  all
recognition.  There  are  no  less  than  five  or  six
systems  current  for  its  general  topographical
features.  The  result  is  that  it  has  become
something  of  a  specialty  just  to  know  the
names.  The  Syrtis  Major,  for  example,  appears
under  the  following  aliases :  the  Syrtis  Major,
the  Mer  du  Sablier,  the  Kaiser  Sea,  the  North-
ern Sea,  to  say  nothing  of  translations  of  these,
such  as  the  Hourglass  Sea ;  after  which  ample
baptism  it  is  a  trifle  disconcerting  to  have  the
sea  turn  out,  apparently,  not  to  be  a  sea  at  all.
Everybody  has  tried  his  hand  at  naming  the
planet,  first  and  last ;  naming  a  thing  being
man's  nearest  approach  to  creating  it.  Proctor
made  a  chart  of  the  planet,  and  named  it
thoroughly ;  Flammarion  made  another  chart,
and  also  named  it  thoroughly,  but  differently ;
Green  drew  a  third  map,  and  gave  it  a  third  set
of  names ;  Schiaparelli  followed  with  a  fourth,
and  furnished  it  with  a  brand-new  set  of  his
own ;  and  finally  W.  H.  Pickering  found  it
necessary  to  give  a  few  new  names,  just  for


142  MARS

particiilarization.  To  know,  therefore,  what
part  of  the  planet  anybody  means  when  he
mentions  it,  one  has  to  keep  in  his  head  enough
names  for  five  worlds.  To  cap  which,  it  is  to
be  remarked  that  not  one  of  them  is  the  thing's
real  —  that  is,  its  Martian  —  name,  after  all !

Fortunately,  with  the  canals,  matters  are  not
so  desperate,  because  so  few  people  have  seen
them.  Schiaparelli's  monopoly  of  the  sight
pleasingly  prevented,  in  their  case,  christening
competition.  What  is  more,  he  named  them,
very  judiciously  and  most  picturesquely,  after
mythologic  river  names.  Where  he  got  his
names  is  another  matter.  Whether  he  started
by  being  as  learned  in  such  lore  as  he  afterward
became  may  well  be  doubted.  Certainly,  one
of  the  greatest  discoveries  made  at  Flagstaff  has
been  the  discovery  of  the  meaning  of  Schiapa-
relli's names;  some  of  them  still  defying  the
penetrating  power  of  the  ordinary  encyclopae-
dia. Among  them  are  classical  mythologic  ones
of  the  class  known  only  to  that  himself  myth-
ical character,  Macaulay's  every  schoolboy;
which  speaks  conclusively  for  their  recondite-
ness.  Others,  I  firmly  believe,  even  that  om-
niscient schoolboy  can  never  have  heard  of.
Want  of  space  here  precludes  instances  ;  but  as
a  simple  example  I  may  say  that  the  translation
to  Mars  of  the  Phison  and  the  Gihon,  the  two
lost   rivers   of   Mesopotamia,    satisfactorily    ac-


MAP  AND   CATALOGUE  143

counts  for  their  not  being  found  on  earth  by
modern  explorers.

With  due  mental  reservation  as  to  their
meaning,  I  have  adopted  Schiaparelli's  names,
and,  where  it  has  been  necessary  to  name  newly
discovered  canals,  have  conformed  as  closely  as
possible  to  his  general  scheme.  If,  even  in  an
instance  or  two,  I  have  hit  upon  names  that  are
incomprehensible,  I  shall  feel  that  I  have  not  dis-
graced my  illustrious  predecessor.  For  a  brand-
new  thing  no  name  is  so  good  as  one  whose
meaning  nobody  knows,  except  one  that  has  no
meaning  at  all.  In  that  case  the  name  not  only
is  becoming  but  actually  becomes  the  thing.

These  names  will  be  found  affixed  to  their
respective  canals  in  the  map  at  the  end  of  the
book,  a  map  made  upon  what  is  called  Merca-
tor's  projection.  Mercator's  projection  I  take  to
have  been  primarily  an  invention  of  the  devil,
although  commonly  credited  to  Mercator.  It  is
not  simple  to  construct  and  for  popular  purposes
is  eminently  deceitful.  It  is  intended  for  those
at  sea,  whom  we  pray  for  on  Sundays.  It  is  cer-
tainly calculated  to  put  any  one  entirely  at  sea
who  attempts  to  learn  geography  by  means  of  it.
Its  object  is  to  enable  such  as  wish  to  do  so  to  sail
upon  rhumb  lines,  a  rhumb  line  upon  a  sphere
being  one  which  never  changes  its  direction,  —
one,  for  example,  which  runs  perpetually  north-
east  one   quarter   east,   or    south    half    west.


144  MAKS

These  lines,  important  in  navigation,  are  in
reality  diminishing  corkscrew-like  spirals,  but
on  this  projection  become  straight  lines  which
can  be  instantly  laid  down  by  rule  and  compass.
To  make  such  delineation  possible  it  is  neces-
sary to  distort  the  proportions  of  every  part  of
the  map,  in  increasing  divergence  toward  the
poles,  with  the  lamentable  result  that  in  early
life  we  all  believed  Nova  Zembla  to  be  a  place
as  big  as  South  America.  Nevertheless  Merca-
tor's  projection  has  certain  advantages  not  so
obvious  to  the  uninitiated,  nor  requiring  special
mention  here.  In  this  connection  it  is  only
necessary  to  warn  the  reader,  in  the  case  of  a
geography  with  which  he  is  not  familiar,  like
that  of  Mars,  to  remember  that  the  top  and
bottom  of  the  map  are  drawn  upon  a  scale
three  or  four  times  as  large  as  the  middle  ;  and,
furthermore,  that  it  is  a  consequence  of  Merca-
tor's  projection  that  arcs  of  great  circles  appear
upon  it,  not  as  straight  lines,  but  as  curves  al-
ways more  or  less  concave  to  the  equator.  For
relative  size  of  the  various  features,  he  will  find
the  twelve  views  from  the  globe  accurate ;  but
for  the  impressiveness  of  the  great  circle  char-
acter of  the  canals,  nothing  short  of  a  globe  it-
seK  will  give  him  adequate  realization.

The  map  represents  that  part  of  the  planet
lying  between  latitudes  70°  south  and  about
40°  north.     The  south  circumpolar  regions  will


MAP  AND  CATALOGUE


145


be  found  in  the  chart  of  the  south  pole  facing
page  84.  The  northern  ones  were  not  pre-
sented to  view  at  the  last  opposition,  owing  to
the  tilt  toward  us  of  the  Martian  south  pole.
No  canals,  therefore,  north  of  about  40°  north
latitude  were  visible.

The  list  of  the  canals  detected  at  Flagstaff  is
as  follows  :


Name.

No.  of  drawings  in

Name.

No.  of  drawings  in

which  it  appears.

which  it  appears.

Acalandrus

19

Astaboras

7

Acampsis

7

Astapus

29

Acesines

19

Atax

8  (Sus.  1)

Achana

1

Athesis

16

Achates

9

Avernus

14

Achelous

20

Avus

8

Acheron

11

Axius

9

Acis

14

Axon

2

Aeolus

13

Bactrus

2  (Sus.  1)

Aesis

23

Baetis

3

Aethiops

16

Bathys

69

Agathodaemon

127

Bautis

(Sus.  1)

Alpheus

4

(Sus.

3)

Belus

3

Ambrosia

36

Boreas

11

Amenthes

26

Boreosyrtis

4

Amphrysus

1

Brontes

38

Amystis

15

Caicus

8

Anapus

7

Cambyses

34

Antaeus

2

(Sus.

1)

Cantabras

7

Anubis

9

Carpis

3

Araxes

93

(Sus.

1)

Casuentus

21

Arges

2

Catarrhactes

3

Arosis

8

Cayster

3

Arsanias

1

Centrites

27

Artanes

9

Cephissus

35

Asopus

5

Cerberus

44  (Sus.  1)

146


MAES


IVTo-ma

No.  of  drawings  in

Namt>

No.  of  drawings  in

JName.

which  it  appears.

JMame.

which  it  appears.

Oestrus

2

Gaesus

2

Chaboras

4

Galaesus

6

Chretes

14

Galaxias

28

Chrysas

6

Ganges

82

Chrysorrhoas

18

Ganymede

19

Cinyphus

14

Garrhuenus

12

Clitumnus

7

Gehon

11

Clodianus

1

Gigas

60  (Sus.  2)

Cophen

5

Glaucus

2

Coprates

41

Gorgon

33

Corax

33

Gyes

15

Cyaneus

6

Hades

22

Cyrus

3

Halys

4

Daemon

118

Harpasus

2

Daix

2

(Sus.

1)

Hebe

37

Daradax

6

Helisson

12

Dardanus

15

Heratemis

4

Dargamanes

20

Herculis  Columnae  5

Deuteronilus

11

Hiddekel

18

Digentia

2

Hipparis

19

Dosaron

10

Hippus

13

Drahonus

5

Hyctanis

4

Elison

3

Hydaspes

1

Eosphorus

66

(Sus.

3)

Hydraotes

23

Erannoboas

17

Hydriacus

1

Erebus

21

(Sus.

1)

Hylias

7

Erinaeus

16

Hyllus

14

Erymanthus

21

Hyphasis

7  (Sus.  3)

Erynnis

3

(Sus.

1)

Hypsas

6

Eulaeus

1

Hyscus

13

Eumenides

103

Indus

10

Eunostos

12

Iris

7

Euphrates

36

Isis

5

Eurymedon

3

Jamuna

39

Eurypus

9

Jaxartes

23

Evenus

9

Labotas

8

Fortunae

10

Laestrygon

41

MAP  AND  CATALOGUE


147


Tm&THG.

No.  of  drawings  in

Name.

No.  of  drawings  in

which  it  appears.

which  it  appears.

Leontes

2

Palamnus

9

Lethes

19

Parcae

19  (Sus.  1)

Liris

13

Peneus

3  (Sus.  2)

Maeander

6

Phasis

29

Magon

2

Phison

56

Malva

8

Proton  ilus

11

Margus

1

Psychrus

5

Medus

2

Pyriphlegethon

53  (Sus.  1)

Medusa

24

Scamander

21

Mogrus

2

Sesamus

7

Nectar

87

Simois

5

Neda

2

Sirenius

60

Nepenthes

21

Sitacus

3

Nereides

8

Steropes

46

Nestus

5

Styx

7

Neudrus

10

Surius

6

Nilokeras

16

Tartarus

42

Nilosyrtis

21

Tedanius

25

Nilus

6

Thernaodon

2

Nymphaens

4

Thyanis

1

Oceanus

37

Titan

38

Ochus

3

Tithonius

77

Opharus

13

Triton

8

Orcus

35

Tyndis

2

Orontes

33

Typhon

33

Orosines

29

Ulysses

33

Oxus

11

Uranius

8

Pactolus

11

Xanthus

12

Padargus

5

The  number  of  canals  in  this  list  is  183,  and
the  number  opposite  each  denotes  the  number
of  times  each  was  seen  and  drawn ;  (Sus.)  mean-
ing, suspected  in  addition.  There  were  in  all,
therefore,  3240  records  made  of  them,  not
counting  suspicions.


148  MARS

In  the  region  visible  at  this  opposition  Schia-
parelli  has  79  canals.  Of  these  67  appear  in  the
list  given  above.  Of  the  other  12,  the  majority
lie  north  of  the  equator,  and  therefore  were
likely  not  to  be  as  visible  as  the  rest  at  this  last
opposition,  for  two  reasons  connected  with  their
position :  first,  on  account  of  the  tilt  of  the
planet's  axis  at  the  time  ;  and,  secondly,  because
their  northern  situation  would  make  their  de-
velopment late,  as  we  shall  shortly  see.  As  no
attempt  was  made  to  identify  Schiaparelli's  list,
it  will  be  seen  how  close  is  the  accordance.

Of  the  116  canals  not  down  on  Schiaparelli's
map,  44  are  canals  in  the  dark  regions  and  72
canals  in  the  light  ones.  Some  of  these,  too,  he
saw  prior  to  1894.  Both  sets  are,  as  a  rule,
more  difficult  of  detection  than  the  ones  on  his
map;  although  there  are  some  exceptions,  at-
tributable probably  to  difficulty  of  identification.
The  Brontes  and  Steropes,  for  example,  might,
unless  well  seen,  be  confounded  with  the  Gigas
on  the  one  hand,  or  the  Titan  on  the  other.
The  most  peculiar  case,  however,  is  the  relative
conspicuousness  of  the  Ulysses.

III.   ARTIFICIALITY.

It  is  patent  that  here  are  phenomena  that  are
passing  strange.  To  read  their  riddle  we  had
best  begin  by  excluding  what  they  are  not,  as
help  towards  deciphering  what  they  are.


ARTIFICIALITY  149

So  far,  we  have  regarded  the  canals  only
statically,  so  to  speak ;  that  is,  we  have  sketched
them  as  they  would  appear  to  any  one  who  ob-
served them  in  sufficiently  steady  air,  once,  and
once  only.  But  this  is  far  from  all  that  a  sys-
tematic study  of  the  lines  will  disclose.  Before,
however,  entering  upon  this  second  phase  of
their  description,  we  may  pause  to  note  how,
even  statically  regarded,  the  aspect  of  the  lines
is  enough  to  put  to  rest  all  the  theories  of
purely  natural  causation  that  have  so  far  been
advanced  to  account  for  them.  This  negation
is  to  be  found  in  the  supernaturally  regular  ap-
pearance of  the  system,  upon  three  distinct
counts :  first,  the  straightness  of  the  lines ;
second,  their  individually  uniform  width ;  and,
third,  their  systematic  radiation  from  special
points.

On  the  first  two  counts  we  observe  that  the
lines  exceed  in  regularity  any  ordinary  regu-
larity of  purely  natural  contrivance.  Physical
processes  never,  so  far  as  we  know,  end  in  pro-
ducing perfectly  regular  results ;  that  is,  results
in  which  irregularity  is  not  also  discernible.
Disagreement  amid  conformity  is  the  inevitable
outcome  of  the  many  factors  simultaneously  at
work.  From  the  orbits  of  the  heavenly  bodies
to  phyllotaxis  and  human  features,  this  diversity
in  uniformity  is  apparent.  As  a  rule,  the  di-
vergences, though  small,  are  quite  perceptible ;


150  MARS

that  is,  the  lack  of  absolute  uniformity  is  com-
parable to  the  uniformity  itself,  and  not  of  the
negligible  second  order  of  unimportance.  In
fact,  it  is  by  the  very  presence  of  uniformity
and  precision  that  we  suspect  things  of  artifi-
ciality. It  was  the  mathematical  shape  of  the
Ohio  mounds  that  suggested  mound-builders;
and  so  with  the  thousand  objects  of  e very-day
life.  Too  great  regularity  is  in  itself  the  most
suspicious  of  circumstances  that  some  finite  in-
telligence has  been  at  work.

If  it  be  asked  how,  in  the  case  of  a  body  so
far  off  as  Mars,  we  can  assert  sufficient  precision
to  imply  artificiality,  the  answer  is  twofold :
first,  that  the  better  we  see  these  lines,  the
more  regular  they  look ;  and,  second,  that  the
eye  is  quicker  to  perceive  irregularity  than  we
commonly  note.  It  is  indeed  surprising  to  find
what  small  irregularities  will  shock  the  eye.

The  third  count  is,  if  possible,  yet  more  con-
clusive. That  the  lines  form  a  system ;  that,
instead  of  running  any  whither,  they  join  cer-
tain points  to  certain  others,  making  thus,  not  a
simple  network,  but  one  whose  meshes  connect
centres  directly  with  one  another,  —  is  striking
at  first  sight,  and  loses  none  of  its  peculiarity
on  second  thought.  For  the  intrinsic  improb-
ability of  such  a  state  of  things  arising  from
purely  natural  causes  becomes  evident  on  a
moment's  consideration.


AETIFICIALITY  151

If  lines  be  drawn  haphazard  over  the  sur-
face of  a  globe,  the  chances  are  ever  so  many
to  one  against  more  than  two  lines  crossing  each
other  at  any  point.  Simple  crossings  of  two
lines  will  of  course  be  common  in  something  like
factorial  proportion  to  the  number  of  lines ;  but
that  anv  other  line  should  contrive  to  cross  at
the  same  point  would  be  a  coincidence  whose  im-
probability only  a  mathematician  can  properly
appreciate,  so  very  great  is  it.  If  the  lines
were  true  lines,  without  breadth,  the  chances
against  such  a  coincidence  would  be  infinite,
that  is,  it  would  never  happen ;  and,  even  had
the  lines  some  breadth,  the  chances  would  be
enormous  against  a  rendezvous.  In  other  words,
we  might  search  in  vain  for  a  single  instance  of
such  encounter.  On  the  surface  of  Mars,  how-
ever, instead  of  searching  in  vain,  we  find  the
thing  occurring  passim  ;  this  a  priori  most  im-
probable rendezvousing  proving  the  rule,  not
the  exception.  Of  the  crossings  that  are  best
seen,  all  are  meeting-places  for  more  than  two
canals.

To  any  one  who  had  not  seen  the  canals,  it
might  occur  that  something  of  the  same  improb-
ability would  be  fulfilled  by  cracks  radiating
from  centres  of  explosion  or  fissure.  But  such  a
supposition  is  at  once  negatived  by  the  uniform
breadth  of  the  lines,  a  uniformity  impossible  in
cracks,  whose  very  mode  of  production  necessi-


152  MARS

tates  their  being  bigger  at  one  end  than  at  the
other.  We  see  examples  of  what  might  result
from  such  action  in  the  cracks  that  radiate  from
Tycho,  in  the  Moon,  or^  as  we  now  know  from
Professor  W.  H.  Pickering's  observations,  from
the  craterlets  about  it.  These  cracks  bear  no
resemblance  whatever  to  the  lines  on  Mars.
They  look  like  cracks ;  the  lines  on  Mars
do  not.  Indeed,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the
Martian  lines  would  never  so  much  as  suggest
cracks  to  any  one.  Lastly,  the  different  radia-
tions fit  into  one  another  absolutely,  an  utter
impossibility  were  they  radiating  rifts  from  dif-
ferent centres.

In  the  same  way  we  may,  while  we  are  about
it,  show  that  the  lines  cannot  be  several  other
things  which  they  have  more  or  less  gratui-
tously been  taken  to  be.  They  cannot,  for  ex-
ample, be  rivers ;  for  rivers  could  not  be  so  obli-
gingly of  the  same  size  at  source  and  mouth,  nor
would  they  run  from  preference  on  arcs  of  great
circles.  To  do  so,  practically  invariably,  would
imply  a  devotion  to  pure  mathematics  not  com-
mon in  rivers.  They  may,  in  some  few  in-
stances, be  rectified  rivers,  which  is  quite
another  matter.  Glaciation  cracks  are  equally
out  of  the  question,  —  first,  for  the  causes  above
mentioned  touching  cracks  in  general;  and,
second,  because  there  is,  unfortunately,  no  ice
where  they  occur.     Nor  can  the  lines  be  fur-


ARTIFICIALITY  153

rows  ploughed  by  meteorites,  —  another  ingen-
ious suggestion,  —  since,  in  order  to  plough,
invariably,  a  furrow  straight  from  one  centre  to
another,  without  either  missing  the  mark  or
overshooting  it,  the  visitant  meteorite  would
have  to  be  specially  trained  to  the  business.

Such  are  the  chief  purely  natural  theories  of
the  lines,  excluding  the  idea  of  canals,  —  the-
ories advanced  by  persons  who  have  not  seen
them.  No  one  who  has  seen  the  lines  well
could  advance  them,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not
only  disproved  by  consideration  of  the  char-
acter of  the  lines,  but  instantly  confuted  by  the
mere  look  of  them.

Schiaparelli  supposes  the  canals  to  be  canals,
but  of  geologic  construction.  He  suggests,  how-
ever, no  explanation  of  how  this  is  possible ;  so
that  the  suggestion  is  not,  properly  speaking,
a  theory.  That  eminent  astronomer  further
says  of  the  idea  that  they  are  the  work  of  intel-
ligent beings :  "  lo  mi  guardero  bene  dal  com-
battere  questa  supposizione,  la  quale  nulla
include  d'  impossibile."  (I  should  carefully  re-
frain from  combating  this  supposition,  which
involves  no  impossibility.)  In  truth,  no  natural
theory  has  yet  been  advanced  which  will  ex-
plain these  lines.

Their  very  aspect  is  such  as  to  defy  natural
explanation,  and  to  hint  that  in  them  we  are
regarding  something  other  than  the  outcome  of


154  MARS

purely  natural  causes.  Indeed,  such  is  the  first
impression  upon  getting  a  good  view  of  them.
How  instant  this  inference  is  becomes  patent
from  the  way  in  which  drawings  of  the  canals
are  received  by  incredulously  disposed  persons.
The  straightness  of  the  lines  is  unhesitatingly
attributed  to  the  draughtsman.  Now  this  is  a
very  telling  point.  For  it  is  a  case  of  the
double-edged  sword.  Accusation  of  design,  if
it  prove  not  to  be  due  to  the  draughtsman,
devolves  ipso  facto  upon  the  canals.

IV.    DEVELOPMENT

We  have  thus  far  considered  the  aspect  of
the  canals  viewed  at  any  one  time.  We  have
now  to  consider  an  even  more  interesting
branch  of  the  subject,  their  consecutive  appear-
ances. The  "  open  sesame  "  to  our  comprehen-
sion of  the  physical  condition  of  Mars  lies  in
systematic  study  of  the  appearances  the  planet's
surface  presents  night  after  night  and  month
after  month.  For  that  surface  changes ;  and
the  order,  extent,  and  character  of  its  changes
contain  the  key  to  their  explanation.  True  as
this  is  of  the  larger  markings  upon  the  disk,  it
is  if  anything  more  noticeably  the  case  with  the
finer  detail  of  the  canals.

After  the  fundamental  fact  that  such  curious
phenomena  as  the  canals  are  visible,  is  the
scarcely   less   curious   one   that   they   are   not


DEVELOPMENT  155

always  so.  At  times  the  canals  are  invisible,
and  this  invisibility  is  real,  not  apparent;  that
is,  it  is  not  an  invisibility  due  to  distance  or
obscuration  of  any  kind  between  us  and  them,
but  an  actual  invisibility  due  to  the  condition
of  the  canal  itself.  With  our  present  optical
means,  at  certain  seasons  they  cease  to  exist.
For  aught  we  can  see,  they  simply  are  not
there.

That  distance  is  not  responsible  for  the  disap-
pearance of  the  canals  is  shown  by  their  relative
conspicuousness  at  different  times.  It  is  not
always  when  Mars  is  nearest  to  us  that  the
canals  are  best  seen.  On  the  contrary,  their
visibility  bears  no  relation  to  proximity.  This
is  evidenced  both  by  the  changes  in  appear-
ance of  any  one  canal  and  by  the  changes
in  relative  conspicuousness  of  different  canals.
Some  instances  of  the  metamorphosis  will  re-
veal this  conclusively.  For  example,  during
the  end  of  August  and  the  beginning  of  Sep-
tember, at  this  last  opposition,  the  canals  about
the  Lake  of  the  Sun  were  conspicuous,  while
the  canals  to  the  north  of  them  were  almost
invisible.  In  November  the  relative  intensities
of  the  two  sets  had  distinctly  changed :  the
southern  canals  were  much  as  before,  but  the
northern  ones  had  most  perceptibly  darkened.

Another  instance  of  the  same  thing  was
shown  in  the  case  of  the  canals  to  the  north  of


156  MARS

the  Sinus  Titaniim  when  compared  with  those
about  the  Sohs  Lacus.  In  August  the  former
were  but  faintly  visible ;  in  November  they  had
become  evident;  and  yet,  during  this  interval,
little  change  in  conspicuousness  had  taken  place
in  the  canals  in  the  Solis  Lacus  region.

With  like  disregard  of  the  effect  due  to  dis-
tancCj  the  canals  to  the  east  of  the  Ganges
showed  better  at  the  November  presentation^  of
that  region  than  they  had  at  the  October  one,
although  the  planet  was  actually  farther  off  at
the  later  date,  in  the  proportion  of  21  to  18.

A  more  striking  instance  of  the  irrelevancy
of  distance  in  the  matter  was  observed  in  the
same  region  by  Schiaparelli  in  1877.  It  is  ad-
ditionally interesting  as  practically  dating  his
discovery  of  the  canals.  In  early  October  of
that  year,  on  the  evenings  of  the  2d  and  the
4th,  he  tells  us,  under  excellent  definition,  and
with  the  diameter  of  the  planet's  disk  21'^  of
arc,  the  continental  region  between  the  Pearl-
Bearing  Gulf  and  the  Bay  of  the  Dawn  was
quite  uniformly,  nakedly  bright,  and  destitute

^  A  presentation  of  any  part  of  the  planet  is  the  occasion
when  that  part  of  the  disk  is  turned  toward  the  observer.  Many
causes  combine  to  make  the  face  presented  each  night  vary,  but
the  chief  one  is  that  the  Earth  rotates  about  forty-one  minutes
faster  than  Mars,  and  consequently  gains  a  little  less  than  ten  de-
grees on  him  daily.  After  about  thirty-seven  days,  therefore,
the  two  planets  again  present  the  same  face  to  each  other  at  the
same  hour.


DEVELOPMENT  157

of  suspicion  of  markings  of  any  sort.  A  like
state  of  things  was  the  case  with  the  same  re-
gion at  its  next  presentation,  on  the  7th  of
November.  Four  months  later,  when  the  di-
ameter of  the  disk  had  been  reduced  by  dis-
tance to  5''. 7,  or,  in  other  words,  when  the
planet  had  receded  to  four  times  its  previous
distance  from  the  earth,  the  canal  called  the
Indus  appeared,  perfectly  visible,  in  the  region
mentioned.  At  the  next  opposition,  in  1881,
similar  effects  occurred  ;  the  canals  in  this  re-
gion remaining  obstinately  invisible  while  the
planet  was  near  the  earth,  and  then  coming  out
conspicuously  when  it  had  gone  farther  away.
Distance,  therefore,  is  not,  with  the  canals,  the
great  obliterator.

As  to  their  veiling  by  Martian  cloud  or  mist,
there  is  no  evidence  of  any  such  obscuration.
The  coast  line  of  the  dark  areas  appears  as
clear-cut  when  the  canals  are  invisible  as  when
they  become  conspicuous.

A  canal,  then,  alters  in  visibility  for  some
reason  connected  with  itself.  It  grows  into
recognition  from  intrinsic  cause.  But,  during
all  its  metamorphoses,  in  one  thing,  and  in  one
thing  only,  it  remains  fixed,  —  in  position.
Temporary  in  appearance,  the  canals  are  appar-
ently permanent  in  place.  Not  only  do  they
not  change  in  position  during  one  opposition ;
they  seem  not  to  do  so  from  one  opposition  to


158  MARS

another.  The  canals  I  have  observed  this  year
agree  fairly  within  the  errors  of  observation
with  those  figured  on  Schiaparelli's  chart.

The  fact  that  in  all  cases  they  do  not  abso-
lutely agree  with  his  is  the  very  best  of  proofs
that  they  are  substantially  the  same  ;  for  such
slight  discordance  proves  the  absence  of  con-
scious psychic  reproduction.  It  confirms  by
not  conforming.

As,  in  observations  of  minute  detail,  the
psychic  element  insensibly  creeps  in,  it  will  be
well  to  consider  it  for  a  moment.  An  idea  is
a  force,  a  mode  of  motion,  which,  unless  ob-
structed by  other  ideas,  instantly  and  inevitably
produces  its  effect  upon  whatever  mind  it  may
chance  to  impinge,  just  as  light  or  electricity  or
any  other  mode  of  motion  does,  according  to  its
kind.  An  easy  instance  of  this  can  be  got  by
asserting  at  dinner,  before  a  company  of  con-
noisseurs, that  the  wine  is  slightly  corked.
Every  one  not  actuated  by  a  spirit  of  contradic-
tion will  at  once  perceive  that  it  is  so,  and  will
continue  to  believe  it,  in  many  cases,  after  it  is
abundantly  disproved.  This  is  what  takes  place
in  the  normal,  unbiased  —  that  is,  so  far  as  this
idea  goes — vacant  mind.  But  minds  have  their
familiar  ideas,  which  an  incoming  idea  is  pretty
sure  to  rouse,  and  these  react  to  some  extent
upon  the  stranger,  and  color  it  with  something
of  their  own  complexion.     If  we  expect  to  meet


DEVELOPMENT  159

a  certain  person,  an  approaching  figure  will
most  deceitfully  take  on  his  garb.  The  mere
idea  of  a  man  walking  finds  the  expectation
ready  instinctively  to  endow  it  with  the  attri-
butes of  our  friend.  But  this  may  happen
truly  as  well  as  falsely.  The  expert  sees  what
the  tyro  misses,  not  from  better  eyesight  but
from  better  mechanism  in  the  higher  centres.
A  very  slight  hint  from  the  eye  goes  a  long
way  in  the  brain  of  the  one  ;  no  distance  at  all
in  the  brain  of  the  other.

Our  senses  are  our  avenues  of  approach  from
the  outer  world.  Messages  from  them  are
therefore  usually  and  rightly  attributed  to
stimuli  from  without.  But  it  is  possible  for
these  messages  to  be  tampered  with  at  any
stage  of  their  journey.  It  is  even  possible  for
them  to  be  started  in  some  other  part  of  the
brain,  travel  down  to  the  lower  centres  and  be
sent  up  from  them  to  the  higher  ones,  indistin-
guishable from  bona  fide  messages  from  with-
out. Bright  points  in  the  sky  or  a  blow  on  the
head  will  equally  cause  one  to  see  stars.  In  the
first  case  the  eyes  were  duly  affected  from
without ;  in  the  second,  the  nerves  were  tapped
to  the  same  effect  in  mid-route  ;  but  in  each
case  the  subsequent  current  travels  to  the
higher  centres  apparently  as  authentic  the  one
as  the  other.

Hallucinations  of  one  sort  and  another  occur


160  MARS

in  this  way.  More  common,  however,  are  un-
conscious changes  in  an  originally  quite  veridic
message.  We  easily  see  what  we  expect  to  see,
but  with  great  difficulty  what  we  do  not.  This
may  be  due  to  individual  idiosyncrasy,  or  it  may
be  due  to  a  prevailing  idea  of  the  time,  affecting
people  generally,  in  which  we  unwittingly  share.
Fashion  is  as  potent  here  as  elsewhere.  The
very  same  cause  will  show  us  at  one  time  what
we  remain  callously  blind  to  at  another.  A
few  years  ago  it  was  the  fashion  not  to  see  the
canals  of  Mars,  and  nobody  except  Schiaparelli
did.  Now  the  fashion  has  begun  to  set  the
other  way,  and  we  are  beginning  to  have  pre-
sented suspiciously  accurate  f  ac-similes  of  Schia-
parelli's  observations.

In  any  observation,  the  observer  is  likely  to
be  unconsciously  affected  in  some  way  or  other
'pro  or  con,  which,  from  the  fact  that  he  is  un-
conscious of  it,  he  is  unable  to  find  out.  The
only  sure  test,  therefore,  is  the  seeing  what  no
one  else  has  seen,  the  discovery  of  new  detail.
Next  to  that  is  not  too  close  an  agreement  with
others.  Inevitable  errors  of  observation,  to  say
nothing  of  times  and  seasons,  distance  and  tilt,
are  certain  to  produce  differences,  of  which  one
has  ample  proof  in  comparing  his  own  drawings
with  one  another.  Even  too  close  agreement
with  one's  self  is  suspicious.  In  the  matter
of  fine  detail,  absolute  agreement  is  therefore
neither  to  be  expected  nor  to  be  desired.


DEVELOPMENT  161

All  the  changes  so  far  observed  on  the
planet's  disk  are,  I  believe,  capable  of  explana-
tion either  by  errors  of  observation  or  by  sea-
sonal change.  For,  as  is  the  case  with  the
Earth,  not  only  must  vegetation  produce  differ-
ent appearances  according  to  the  time  of  year,
but  its  aspects  would  vary  somewhat  as  between
year  and  year.  This  seasonal  variation  would
affect  not  only  the  visibility  of  any  one  canal  at
any  particular  time,  but  might  easily  produce
apparent  alterations  of  place ;  visibility  of  one
canal,  combined  with  visibility  or  invisibility  in
its  neighbors,  being  competent  to  simulate  any
shift.

The  Araxes  is  a  case  in  point.  On  Schiapa-
relli's  chart  there  is  but  one  original  Araxes
and  one  great  and  only  Phasis.  But  it  turns
out  that  these  do  not  possess  the  land  all  to
themselves.  No  less  than  five  canals  traversing
the  region,  including  the  Phasis  itself,  were  vis-
ible this  year  at  Flagstaff,  and  I  have  no  doubt
there  are  plenty  of  others  waiting  to  be  dis-
covered. These  cross  one  another  at  all  sorts
of  angles.  Unconscious  combination  of  them  is
quite  competent  to  give  a  turn  to  the  Araxes
one  way  or  the  other,  and  make  it  curved  or
straight  at  pleasure.

Unchangeable,  apparently,  in  position,  the
canals  are  otherwise  among  the  most  change-
able features  of  the  Martian  disk.     From  being


162  MARS

invisiblej  they  emerge  gradually,  for  some  rea-
son inherent  in  themselves,  into  conspicuous-
ness.  In  short,  phenomenally  at  least,  they
grow.  The  order  of  their  coming  carries  with
it  a  presumption  of  cause,  for  it  synchronizes
with  the  change  in  the  Martian  seasons.  Their
first  appearance  is  a  matter  of  the  Martian  time
of  year.

To  start  with,  the  visible  development  of  the
canal  system  follows  the  melting  of  the  polar
snows.  Not  until  such  melting  has  progressed
pretty  far  do  any  of  the  canals,  it  would  seem,
become  perceptible.

Secondly,  when  they  do  appear,  it  is,  in  the
case  of  the  southern  hemisphere,  the  most
southern  ones  that  become  visible  first.  Last
June,  when  the  canals  were  first  seen,  those
about  the  Lake  of  the  Sun  and  the  Phoenix
Lake  were  easier  to  make  out  than  any  of  the
others.  Now^,  this  region  is  the  part  of  the
reddish-ochre  continent,  as  we  may  call  it,  that
lies  nearest  the  south  pole.  It  extends  into
the  blue-green  regions  as  far  south  as  40°  of
south  latitude.  Nor  do  any  so-called  islands  —
that  is,  smaller  reddish-ochre  areas  —  stand  be-
tween it  and  the  pole.  It  lies  first  exposed,
therefore,  to  any  water  descending  toward  the
equator  from  the  melting  of  the  polar  cap.

Having  once  become  visible,  these  canals  re-
mained so,  becoming  more  and  more  conspicu-


Plate  XIX


LACUS   PHOENICIS
November,  1894


Lowell  Obsekvatorv
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1894


DEVELOPMENT  163

ous  as  the  season  advanced.  By  August  they
had  darkened  very  perceptibly.  As  yet,  those
in  other  parts  of  the  planet  were  scarcely  more
visible  than  they  had  been  two  months  before.
Gradually,  however,  others  became  evident,  far-
ther and  farther  north,  till  by  October  all  the
canals  bordering  the  north  coast  of  the  dark
regions  were  recognizable  ;  after  which  the  lat-
ter, in  their  turn,  proceeded  to  darken,  —  a  state
of  things  which  continued  up  to  the  close  of
observations.     (Plates  XXI.  and  XXII.)

The  order  in  which  the  canals  came  out
hinted  that  two  factors  were  operative  to  the
result,  —  latitude  and  proximity  to  the  dark  re-
gions. Other  things  equal,  the  most  southern
ones  showed  first ;  beginning  with  the  Solis
Lacus  region,  and  continuing  with  those  about
the  Sea  of  the  Sirens  and  the  Titan  Gulf,  and
so  northward  down  the  disk.  Other  things  were
not,  however,  always  equal  in  the  way  of  topo-
graphical position.  Notably  was  this  the  case
with  the  areas  to  the  west  of  the  Syrtis  Major,
which  developed  canals  earlier  than  their  lati-
tudes would  warrant.  Now,  to  the  Syrtis  Major
descend  from  the  pole  the  great  straits  spoken
of  before,  which,  although  not  in  their  entirety
water,  are  probably  lands  fertilized  by  a  thread
of  water  running  through  them.  They  connect
the  polar  sea  with  the  Syrtis  Major  in  a  toler-
ably straight  line.


164  MAES .

The  direction  of  the  canal  also  affects  its  time
of  appearance,  though  to  a  less  extent.  Canals
running  north  and  south,  such  as  the  Gorgon,
the  Titan,  the  Brontes,  and  the  like,  became
visible,  as  a  rule,  before  those  running  east
and  west.  Especially  was  this  noticeable  in  the
more  northern  portions  of  the  disk.  Time  of
appearance  was  evidently  a  question  of  latitude
tempered  by  ease  of  communication.

After  the  canals  had  appeared,  their  relative
intensities  changed  with  time,  and  the  change
followed  the  same  order  in  which  the  initial
change  from  invisibility  to  visibility  had  taken
place.  A  like  metamorphosis  happened  to  each
in  turn  from  south  to  north,  in  accordance  with,
and  continuance  of,  the  seasonal  change  that
affected  all  the  blue-green  areas.

To  account  for  these  phenomena,  the  expla-
nation that  at  once  suggests  itself  is,  that  a
direct  transference  of  water  takes  place  over
the  face  of  the  planet,  and  that  the  canals  are
so  many  waterways.  This  explanation  labors
under  the  difficulty  of  explaining  nothing.
There  are  two  other  objections  to  it :  an  insuf-
ficiency of  water,  and  a  superabundance  of  time,
for  some  months  elapsed  between  the  apparent
departure  of  the  water  from  the  pole  and  its
apparent  advent  in  the  equatorial  regions ;  fur-
thermore, each  canal  did  not  darken  all  at  once,
but  gradually.     We  must  therefore  seek  some


DEVELOPMENT  165

explanation  which  accounts  for  this  delay.  Now,
when  we  do  so,  we  find  that  the  explanation  ad-
vanced above  for  the  blue-green  areas  explains
also  the  canals,  namely,  that  what  we  see  in  both
is,  not  water,  but  vegetation ;  for  if  the  dark-
ening be  due  to  vegetation,  time  must  elapse
between  the  advent  of  the  water  and  its  per-
ceptible effects,  —  time  sufficient  for  the  flora  to
sprout.  If,  therefore,  we  suppose  what  we  call
a  canal  to  be,  not  the  canal  proper,  but  the
vegetation  along  its  banks,  the  observed  phe-
nomena stand  accounted  for.  This  suggestion
was  first  made  some  years  ago  by  Professor  W.
H.  Pickering.

That  what  we  see  is  not  the  canal  proper,  but
the  line  of  land  it  irrigates,  disposes  incidentally
of  the  difficult}^-  of  conceiving  a  canal  several
miles  wide.  On  the  other  hand,  a  narrow,  fer-
tilized strip  of  country  is  what  we  should  expect
to  find ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  the  general  phys-
ical condition  of  the  planet  leads  us  to  the  con-
ception, not  of  canals  constructed  for  waterways,
—  like  our  Suez  Canal,  —  but  of  canals  dug  for
irrigation  purposes.  We  cannot,  of  course,  be
sure  that  such  is  their  character,  appearances
being  often  highly  deceitful ;  we  can  only  say
that,  so  far,  the  supposition  best  explains  what
we  see.  Further  details  of  their  development
point  to  this  same  conclusion.

In  emerging  from  invisibility  into  evidence.


166  MARS

the  canals  first  make  themselves  suspected,
rather  than  seen,  as  broad,  faint  streaks  smooch-
ing the  disk.  Such  effect,  however,  seems  to  be
an  optical  illusion,  due  to  poor  air  and  the  diffi-
culty inherent  in  detecting  fine  detail ;  for  on
improvement  in  the  seeing  I  have  observed
these  broad  streaks  contract  to  fine  lines,  not
sensibly  different  in  width  from  what  they
eventually  become.

The  parts  of  the  canals  which  are  nearest  the
dark  areas  show  first,  the  line  extending  some-
times for  a  few  hundred  miles  into  the  conti-
nent, sometimes  for  a  thousand  or  more ;  then,
in  course  of  time,  the  canal  becomes  evident
in  its  entirety.  Complete  visibility  takes  place
soon  after  the  canal  has  once  begun  to  show,
although  it  show  but  faintly  throughout.

This  tendency  to  being  seen  in  toto  is  more
strikingly  displayed  after  a  canal  has  attained
its  development.  It  is  then  not  commonly  seen
in  part.  Either  it  is  not  seen  at  all,  owing  to
the  seeing  not  being  good  enough,  or  it  is  visi-
ble throughout  its  length  from  one  junction  to
another.

Apart  from  their  extension,  the  growth  of  the
canals  consists  chiefly  in  depth  of  tint.  They
darken  rather  than  broaden,  —  a  fact  which
tends  to  corroborate  their  vegetal  character;
for  that  long  tracts  of  country  should  be  thus
simultaneously  flooded  all  over  to  a  gradually


DEVELOPMENT  167

deepening  extent  is  highly  iinhkely.  while  a
growth  of  vegetation  would  deepen  in  appear-
ance in  precisely  the  way  in  which  the  darken-
ing takes  place.

As  for  color,  the  lines  would  seem  to  be  of
the  same  tint  as  the  blue-green  areas.  But,
owing  to  their  narrowness,  this  is  only  an  infer-
ence. I  have  never  chanced  to  see  them  of
distinctive  color.

At  this  point  it  is  probable  that  a  certain  ob-
stacle to  such  wholesale  construction  of  canals,
however,  will  arise  in  the  mind  of  the  reader,
namely,  the  thought  of  mountains ;  for  moun-
tains are  by  nature  antagonistic  to  canals.  Only
the  Czar  of  all  the  Kussias  —  if  we  are  to  credit
the  account  of  the  building  of  the  Moscow  rail-
way —  would  be  capable  of  running  a  canal  re-
gardless of  topography.  Nor  will  the  doings
at  our  own  antipodes  help  us  to  conceive  such
construction ;  for  though  the  Japanese  irrigate
hillsides,  the  water  in  the  case  comes  from  slopes
higher  yet,  whereas  on  Mars  it  does  not.

Indeed,  for  the  lines  to  contain  canals  we
must  suppose  either  that  mountains  prove  no
obstacles  to  the  Martians,  or  else  that  there
are  practically  no  mountains  on  Mars.  For  the
system  seems  sublimely  superior  to  possible  ob-
structions in  the  way ;  the  lines  running,  appar-
ently, not  where  they  may,  but  where  they
choose.     The  Eumenides-Orcus,  for   example,


168  MARS

pursues  the  even  tenor  of  its  unswerving  course
for  nearly  3500  miles.  Now,  it  might  be  pos-
sible so  to  select  one's  country  that  one  canal
should  be  able  to  do  this ;  but  that  every
canal  should  be  straight,  and  many  of  them
fairly  comparable  with  the  Eumenides-Orcus  in
length,  seems  to  be  beyond  the  possibility  of
contrivance.

In  this  dilemma  between  mountains  on  the
one  hand  and  canals  on  the  other,  a  certain
class  of  observations  most  opportunely  comes  to
our  aid ;  for,  from  observations  which  have
nothing  to  do  with  the  lines,  it  turns  out
that  the  surface  of  the  planet  is,  in  truth,  most
surprisingly  flat.  How  this  is  known  will  most
easily  be  understood  from  a  word  or  two  upon
the  manner  in  which  astronomers  have  learnt
the  height  of  the  mountains  in  the  Moon.

The  heights  of  the  lunar  mountains  are  found
from  measuring  the  lengths  of  the  shadows  they
cast.  As  the  Moon  makes  her  circuit  of  the
Earth,  a  varying  amount  of  her  illuminated  sur-
face is  presented  to  our  view.  From  a  slender
sickle  she  grows  to  full  moon,  and  then  dimin-
ishes again  to  a  crescent.  The  illuminated  por-
tion is  bounded  by  a  semicircle  on  the  one  side,
and  by  a  semi-ellipse  on  the  other.  The  semi-
circle is  called  her  limb,  the  semi-ellipse  her
terminator.  The  former  is  the  edge  we  see  be-
cause we  can  see  no  farther ;  the  latter,  the


DEVELOPMENT  169

line  upon  her  surface  where  the  sun  is  just  ris-
ing or  setting.  Now,  as  we  know,  the  shadows
cast  at  sunrise  or  sunset  are  very  long,  much
longer  than  the  objects  that  cast  them  are  high.
This  is  due  to  the  obliquity  at  which  the  light
strikes  them ;  the  same  effect  being  produced
by  any  sufficiently  oblique  light,  such  as  an
electric  light  at  a  distance.  Imperceptible  in
themselves,  the  heights  become  perceptible  by
their  shadows.  A  road  illuminated  by  a  distant
arc  light  gives  us  a  startling  instance  of  this;
the  smooth  surface  taking  on  from  its  shadows
the  look  of  a  ploughed  field.

It  is  this  indirect  kind  of  magnification  that
enables  astronomers  to  measure  the  lunar  moun-
tains, and  even  renders  such  vicariously  visible
to  the  naked  eye.  Every  one  has  noticed  how
ragged  and  irregular  the  inner  edge  of  the  Moon
looks,  while  her  outer  edge  seems  perfectly
smooth.  In  one  place  it  will  appear  to  project
beyond  the  perfect  ellipse,  in  another  to  recede
from  it.  The  first  effect  is  due  to  mountain  tops
catching  the  sun's  rays  before  the  plains  about
them ;  the  other,  to  mountain  tops  further  ad-
vanced into  the  lunar  day,  whose  shadows  still
shroud  the  valleys  at  their  feet.  Yet  the  ele-
vations and  depressions  thus  rendered  so  notice-
able vanish  in  profile  on  the  limb.

Much  as  we  see  the  Moon  with  the  naked  eye
do  we  see  Mars  with  the  telescope.     Mars  being


170  MARS

outside  of  us  with  regard  to  the  Sun,  we  never
see  him  less  than  half  illumined,  but  we  do  see
him  with  a  disk  that  lacks  of  being  round,  —
about  what  the  Moon  shows  us  when  two  days
off  from  full.  It  is  when  he  is  in  quadrature  —
that  is,  a  quarter  way  round  the  celestial  circle
from  the  Sun  —  that  he  shows  thus,  and  we
see  him  then  with  the  telescope  at  closer  range
than  we  ever  see  the  Moon  without  it.  So  ob-
served we  notice  at  once  that  his  terminator,  or
inner  edge,  presents  a  very  different  appearance
from  the  lunar  one.  Instead  of  looking  like  a
saw,  it  looks  comparatively  smooth,  like  a  knife.
From  this  we  know  that,  relatively  to  his  size,
he  has  no  elevations  or  depressions  upon  his  sur-
face comparable  to  the  lunar  peaks  and  craters.
His  terminator,  however,  is  not  absolutely
perfect.  Irregularities  are  to  be  detected  in  it,
although  much  less  pronounced  than  those  of
the  Moon.  His  irregularities  are  of  two  kinds.
The  first,  and  by  all  odds  the  commonest  pheno-
menon, consists  in  showing  himself  on  occasions
surprisingly  flat ;  not  in  this  case  an  inferable
flatness,  bilt  a  perfectly  apparent  one.  In  other
words,  his  terminator  does  not  show  as  a  semi-
ellipse,  but  as  an  irregular  polygon.  It  looks
as  if  in  places  the  rind  had  been  pared  off.  The
peel  thus  taken  from  him,  so  to  speak,  is  from
twenty  to  forty  degrees  wide,  according  to  the
particular  part  of  his  surface  that  shows  upon
the  terminator  at  the  time.


Plate  XX


itJi  24>n  13/1  T,ojn       16/1  15W         16/1  23;;/  j6/i  56;«         17/2  ^ovi

TERMINATOR   VIEWS

By  Prof.  W.  H,  Pickering

August  24,  1894

A  series  of  iimistially  marked  elevations  and  depressions  upon  the
terminator  at  the  above  hours


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1894


Plate  XXI


Fig.  I.     Nov.  26.     Long.  cent.  314
Seeing  2  to  6.     Diam.  15".  8


Fig.  II.     Oct.  9.     Long.  cent.  45°
Seeing  5  to  9.     Diam.  2i".7


Fig.  hi.     Feb.  8.     Long.  cent.  295°
Seeing  2  to  5.     Diam.  f.s


Fig.  IV.     Nov.  23.     Long.  cent.  31
Seeing  2  to  7.     Diam.  i6/'.3


Fig.  V.     March  16.     Long.  cent.  312'^
Seeing  2  to  8.     Diam.  6". 4


Fig.  VI.     March  9.     Long.  cent.  26°
Seeing  3  to  7.     Diam.  6" .6


DRAWINGS   AFTER   OPPOSITION  [except  one]
By  a.  E.  Douglass


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


DEVELOPMENT  171

The  other  kind  is  short  and  sharp.  Now  it
will  be  remembered  that  we  considered  both
kinds  under  the  question  of  atmosphere,  and  we
found  both  to  be  explicable  as  the  effect  of
clouds,  but  not  the  effect  of  mountains.  We
may  therefore  feel  tolerably  certain  that  Mars
is  a  flat  world  ;  devoid,  as  we  may  note  inciden-
tally, of  summer  resorts,  since  it  possesses,  ap-
parently, neither  seas  nor  hills.  To  canals  we
will  now  return.

The  canals  so  far  described  all  lie  in  the
bright  reddish-ochre  portions  of  the  disk,  —
those  parts  which  bear  every  appearance  of
being  desert.  But  Mr.  Douglass  has  made  the
discovery  that  they  are  not  the  only  part  of  the
planet  thus  privileged.  He  finds,  in  the  very
midst  of  the  dark  regions  themselves,  straight,
dark  streaks  not  unlike  in  look  to  the  canals,
and  still  more  resembling  them  in  the  systematic
manner  in  which  they  run.  For  they  reproduce
the  same  rectilinear  arrangement  that  is  so
striking  a  characteristic  of  their  bright-area
fellows.  He  has  succeeded,  indeed,  in  thus  tri-
angulating all  the  more  important  dark  areas.

Now  this  is  a  very  interesting  discovery,  from
several  points  of  view.  In  the  first  place,  it
proves  another  tell-tale,  circumstance  as  to  the
true  character  of  the  so-called  seas ;  for  that  the
seas  should  be  traversed  by  permanent  dark  lines
is  incompatible  with  a  fluid  constitution.     But


172  MARS

the  lines  are  even  more  suggestive  from  a  posi-
tive than  they  are  from  a  negative  standpoint.
For  they  make  continuations  of  the  hues  in  the
bright  regions,  showing  that  the  two  are  caus-
ally connected,  and  affording  strong  presump-
tion that  this  causal  relation  is  the  very  one  de-
manded by  the  theory  of  irrigation.  For  if  the
canals  in  the  bright  regions  be  strips  of  vegeta-
tion irrigated  by  a  canal  (too  narrow  to  be  itself
visible  at  our  distance),  and  there  be  a  scarcity
of  water  upon  the  surface  of  the  planet,  the
necessary  water  would  have  to  be  conducted  to
the  mouths  of  the  canals  across  the  more  per-
manent areas  of  vegetation,  thus  causing  bands
of  denser  verdure  athwart  them,  which  we
should  see  as  dark  lines  upon  the  less  dark
background.  Indeed,  it  is  exactly  what  we
should  expect  to  find  if  the  theory  here  ad-
vanced be  true.  For  it  is  the  very  next  logical
step  in  that  theory  made  visible.  If  the  canals
in  the  bright  regions  are  to  be  fed  from  the
melting  of  the  polar  cap,  it  is  altogether  likely
that  they  would  be  connected  with  it  by  other
canals  running  through  the  dark  regions.  We
might,  therefore,  expect  to  see  lines  in  the  dark
regions  not  unlike  the  lines  in  the  bright  ones,
and  if  these  lines  were  of  the  same  character  as
those  in  the  bright  regions  they  would  betray
this  character  by  connecting  directly  with  them.
Now  this  is  precisely  what  he  finds  the  two  sets


Plate  XXII


Fig.  I.     Nov.  14.
Seeing  4  to  8.


Long.  cent.  114°
Diam.  17".  9


Fig.  IL     Nov.  5.     Long.  cent.  184"^
Seeing  i  to  3.     Diam.  ig".5


Fig.  IIL     Dec.  17.     Long.  cent.  100°
Seeing  2  to  6.     Diam.  12'/. 4


Fig.  IV.    Dec.  i.
Seeing  2  to  4.


Long.  cent.  246°
Diam.  14". 9


Fig.  V.     Feb.  21.     Long.  cent.  193^
Seeing  2  to  4.     Diam.  7^.4


Fig.  VI.     Jan.  8.     Long.  cent.  266°
Seeing  i  to  3.     Diam.  9".9


DRAWINGS   AFTER   OPPOSITION
By  a.  E.  Douglass


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


DEVELOPMENT


173


of  lines  do.  His  canals  in  the  dark  regions  end
at  the  very  points  at  which  the  others  begin,
and  they  do  this  invariably.  There  is  no  canal
in  the  dark  areas  which  does  not  so  connect
with  one  in  the  bright  regions.

Finally,  some  of  the  most  southern  appear  to
run  tolerably  straight  toward  the  pole ;  but  of
the  plan  underlying  the  whole  system  of  Martian
canals  we  cannot  at  present  predicate  details,
as,  though  the  system  instantly  suggests  plan,  it
suggests  a  plan  that  does  not  instantly  commend
itself  to  human  comprehension.

Mr.  Douglass  finds  44  of  these  canals,  not
including  the  straits  between  the  islands,  as  is
shown  in  the  following  list :  —


XTnw./^

No.  of  drawings  in

No.  of  drawings  in

Name.

whicli  it  appears.

Name.

which  it  appears.

Acalandrus

19

Dosaron

10

Acesines

19

Drahonus

5

Acis

14

Erannoboas

17

Aeolus

13

Erymanthus

21

Amphrysus

1

Eurypus

9

Athesis

16

Gaesus

2

Caicus

8

Galaesus

6

Carpis

3

Garrhuenus

12

Casuentus

21

Harpasus

2

Cayster

3

Helisson

12

Oestrus

2

Heratemis

4

Chaboras

4

Hipparis

19

Cinyphus

14

Hippus

13

Cyaneus

6

Hyctanis

4

Cyrus

3

Hydriacus

1

Dargamanes

20

Hylias

7

Digentia

2

Hyllus

14

174


MARS


Name.

Leontes

No.  of  drawings  in
which  it  appears.

2

Name.

Oceanus

No.  of  drawings  in
which  it  appears.

37

Malva

8

Opharus

13

Mogrus

Nestus

Neudrus

2

5

10

Orosines

Padargus

Tedanius

29

5

25

All  these  run  either  through  the  dark  regions
proper,  or  through  those  chiaro-oscuro  areas,
such  as  Deucalionis  Regio  and  Pyrrhae  Regio,
which  have  hitherto  been  thought  to  be  amphi-
bious, and  are  probably  half  desert.  They  con-
nect on  the  one  hand  with  the  canals  in  the
bright  regions,  and  on  the  other  with  the  straits
between  the  so-called  islands,  —  such  strait-
canals  as  Scamander,  Xanthus,  and  the  like,  if
we  may  so  designate  without  misunderstanding
what  is  probably  not  water  at  all.

It  is  interesting  thus  to  forestall  objection
about  a  missing  link  by  discovering  that  link
thus  early.

Before  passing  on  to  certain  other  pheno-
mena connected  with  the  canals  of  like  signifi-
cance, we  may  note  here  an  obiter  dictum  of  the
irrigation  theory  of  some  slight  corroborative
worth;  for,  if  a  theory  be  correct,  it  will  not
only  fit  all  the  facts,  but  at  times  go  out  of  its
way  to  answer  questions.  Such  the  present
one  seems  to  do.  If  the  seas  be  seas,  and  the
canals  canals,  we  stand  confronted  by  the  prob-
lem how  to  make  fresh-water  canals  flow  out  of


DEVELOPMENT  175

salt-water  seas.  General  considerations  warrant
us  in  believing  that  the  Martian  seas,  like  our
own,  would  contain  salts  in  solution,  while  irri-
gation ditches,  there  as  here,  should  flow  fresh
water  to  be  most  effective,  and  we  seem  com-
mitted to  the  erection  of  distilleries  upon  a
gigantic  scale.  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the
seas  be  not  seas,  but  areas  of  vegetation,  the
difficulty  vanishes  at  once ;  for,  if  the  planet  be
dependent  upon  the  melting  of  its  polar  snows
for  its  spring  freshet,  the  water  thus  produced
must  necessarily  be  fresh,  and  the  canals  be
directly  provided  with  the  water  they  want.
The  polar  sea  is  a  temporary  body  of  water,
formed  anew  each  year,  not  a  permanent  ocean ;
consequently  there  is  no  chance  for  saline  mat-
ter to  collect  in  it.  From  it,  therefore,  fresh
water  flows,  and,  like  our  rivers,  gathers  nothing
to  speak  of  in  the  way  of  salt  before  it  is  drawn
off  into  the  canals.

We  now  come  to  some  phenomena  connected
with  the  canals,  of  the  utmost  suggestiveness.
I  have  said  that  the  junctions  held,  in  a  twofold
way,  the  key  to  the  unlocking  of  the  mystery
of  the  canals  :  in  the  first  place,  in  the  fact  that
such  junctions  exist.  The  second  and  more  im-
portant reason  remains  to  be  given,  for  it  con-
sists in  what  we  find  at  those  junctions.  This
we  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter.


V

OASES
I.    SPOTS   IN   THE   LIGHT   EEGI0:N'S

Suggestive  of  irrigation  as  the  strange  net-
work of  lines  that  covers  the  surface  of  Mars
appears  to  be,  the  suggestion  takes  on  more
definite  shape  yet  with  the  last  addition  to  our
knowledge  of  the  planet's  surface  detail,  —  the
recognition  of  a  singularly  correlated  system  of
spots.

The  canals,  as  we  have  seen,  are  very  re-
markably attached  to  one  another.  Indeed,  the
manner  with  which  they  manage  to  combine
unde  viating  direction  with  meetings  by  the  way
grows  more  and  more  marvelous,  the  more  one
studies  it.  The  meeting-places,  or  junctions,
are  evidently  for  something  in  the  constitution
of  the  canals.  The  crossings,  in  fact,  seem  to
be  the  end  and  aim  of  the  whole  system ;  the
canals,  but  means  to  that  end.  So  much  is  at
once  inferable  from  the  great  intrinsic  improba-
bility that  such  crossings  can  be  due  to  chance.

This  inference  receives,  apparently,  striking
corroboration  when  the  planet  is  more  minutely


SPOTS  IN  THE  LIGHT  REGIONS  177

scanned.  For  there  turns  out  to  be  something
at  these  junctions.  This  something  shows  itself
as  a  round  or  oval  spot.  To  such  spot,  planted
there  in  the  midst  of  the  desert  at  the  junction,
do  the  neighboring  canals  converge.

Dotted  all  over  the  reddish-ochre  ground  of
the  desert  stretches  of  the  planet,  the  so-called
continents  of  Mars,  are  an  innumerable  number
of  dark  circular  or  oval  spots.  They  appear,
furthermore,  always  in  intimate  association  with
the  canals.  They  constitute  so  many  hubs  to
which  the  canals  make  spokes.  These  spots,
together  with  the  canals  that  lead  to  them,  are
the  only  markings  to  be  seen  anywhere  on  the
continental  regions.  Otherwise  the  great  red-
dish-ochre areas  are  absolutely  bare  ;  of  that
pale  fire-opal  hue  which  marks  our  own  deserts
seen  from  far.

That  these  two  things,  —  straight  lines  and
roundish  spots,  —  should,  with  our  present  tele-
scopic means,  be  the  sole  markings  to  appear
on  the  vast  desert  regions  of  the  planet  is  sug-
gestive in  itself.

Another  significant  fact  as  to  the  character
of  either  marking  is  the  manifest  association  of
the  two.  In  spite  of  the  great  number  of  the
spots,  not  one  of  them  stands  isolate.  There  is
not  a  single  instance  of  a  spot  that  is  not  con-
nected by  a  canal  to  the  rest  of  the  dark  areas.
This  remarkable  inability  to  stand  alone  shows


178  MARS

that  the  spots  and  the  canals  are  not  unrelated
phenomena,  for  were  there  no  tie  between  them
they  must  occasionally  exist  apart.

Nor  is  this  all.  There  is,  apparently,  no  spot
that  is  not  joined  to  the  rest  of  the  system,  not
only  by  a  canal,  but  by  more  than  one;  for
though  some  spots,  such  as  the  Fountain  of
Youth,  have  appeared  at  first  to  be  provided
with  but  a  single  canal  connection,  later  ob-
servation has  revealed  concurrence  in  the  case.
The  spots  are,  therefore,  not  only  part  and  par-
cel of  the  canal  system,  but  terminal  phenomena
of  the  same.

In  the  first  place,  as  I  have  said,  there  ap-
pears to  be  no  spot  that  has  not  two  or  more
canals  running  to  it  -,  in  the  second  place,  I  find,
reversely,  that  apparently  no  canal  junction  is
without  its  spot.  Such  association  is  a  most
tell-tale  circumstance.  I  believe  the  rule  to
have  no  exception.  The  more  prominent  junc-
tions all  show  spots ;  and  with  regard  to  the
less  conspicuous  ones,  it  is  to  be  remembered
that,  as  the  canals  are  more  easy  to  make  out
than  the  spots,  the  relative  invisibility  of  the
latter  is  to  be  expected.  From  which  it  would
seem  that  the  spots  are  fundamental  features  of
the  junctions,  and  that  for  a  junction  to  be  spot-
less is,  from  its  very  nature,  an  impossibility.

Next  to  their  regularity  of  position  is  to  be
remarked  their  regularity  of  form.     Their  typi-


SPOTS  IN  THE  LIGHT  REGIONS  179

cal  shape  seems  to  be  circular ;  for  the  better
the  atmosphere,  the  rounder  they  look.  Under
poor  seeing  they  show  as  irregular  patches
smooching  the  disk,  much  as  the  canals  them-
selves show  as  streaks ;  the  spots  differing  from
the  canals  in  being  thicker  and  not  so  long.  As
the  seeing  improves,  the  patches  differentiate
themselves  into  round  dots  and  connecting  lines.
Such  is  the  shape  of  the  spots  associated  with
single  canals ;  that  is,  canals  not  double.  In  the
case  of  the  double  canals,  the  spots  look  like
rectangles  with  the  corners  rounded  off.  One
of  the  most  striking  of  all  of  them  is  the  Tri-
vium  Charontis,  which  is  nearly  square.

Now  it  will  be  noticed  that  these  shapes  are
as  imnatural  as  they  are  definite,  and  that  they
all  agree  in  one  peculiarity  :  they  are  all  convex,
not  concave,  to  the  entering  canals.  They  are
not,  therefore,  mere  enlargements  of  the  canals,
due  to  natural  causes ;  for,  were  the  spots  en-
largements of  the  canals,  at  their  crossing-points
they  should  be  more  or  less  star-shaped,  or  con-
cave to  the  canals,  whereas  they  are  round,  or
roundish  rectangles,  —  that  is,  convex  to  the
same.  Such  convexity  negatives,  at  the  outset,
their  being  purely  natural  outgrowths  of  the
canals.

The  majority  of  the  spots  are  from  120  to
150  miles  in  diameter;  thus  presenting  a  cer-
tain  uniformity   in   size    as  well  as   in   shape.


180  MARS

There  are  also  smaller  ones,  not  more  than  75
miles  across,  or  less.

To  the  spot  category  belong,  apparently,  all
the  markings  other  than  canals  to  be  seen  any-
where on  the  continental  deserts  of  the  planet,
from  the  great  Lake  of  the  Sun,  which  is  540
miles  long  by  300  miles  broad,  to  the  tiny
Fountain  of  Youth,  which  is  barely  distinguish-
able as  a  dot.  That  all  are  fundamentally  of  a
kind  is  hinted  at  by  their  shape  and  emphasized
by  their  character,  a  point  to  which  we  shall
now  come.

To  this  end,  we  will  start  with  an  account  of
where  and  how  they  begin  to  show;  for,  like
the  canals,  they  are  not  permanent  markings,
but  temporary  phenomena.  It  is  in  the  region
about  the  Solis  Lacus  that  they  appear  first.
The  Solis  Lacus,  or  Lake  of  the  Sun,  is  perhaps
the  most  striking  marking  on  Mars.  It  is  an
oval  spot  in  lat.  28°  S.,  with  its  greater  diameter
nearly  perpendicular  to  the  meridians,  and  en-
circled by  an  elliptical  ring  of  reddish-ochre
land,  which  in  turn  is  bordered  on  the  south  by
the  blue-green  regions  of  the  south  temperate
zone.  The  whole  configuration  is  such  as  to
simulate  a  gigantic  eye  which  uncannily  turns
round  upon  one  as  the  planet  slowly  revolves.
It  is  so  conspicuous  a  feature  of  the  disk  that  it
has  been  recognized  for  a  great  many  years.
The  resemblance  to  an  eye  is  further  borne  out


SPOTS  IN  THE  LIGHT  REGIONS  181

by  a  cordon  of  canals  that  surround  it  on  the
north.  Upon  this  cordon,  composed  of  the
Araxes,  the  Daemon,  and  the  Agathodaamon,
are  beaded  a  number  of  spots,  two  of  them,  the
Phoenix  and  the  Tithonius  lakes,  being  conspic-
uously prominent.  Closer  scrutiny  reveals  sev-
eral more  of  the  same  sort,  only  smaller.  These
are  all  interconnected  by  a  network  of  canals.
Now  just  as  it  is  in  this  region  that  the  canals
first  show,  so  likewise  is  it  here  that  the  spots
first  make  their  appearance.

Although  it  was  here  that  at  this  last  opposi-
tion the  spots  were  first  seen,  it  was  not  here
that  their  character  and  purpose  became  appar-
ent. It  was  not  until  later  in  the  season,  when
the  Eumenides-Orcus  began  to  give  evidence  of
being  yet  more  peculiarly  beaded,  that  the  true
nature  of  the  spots  suggested  itself  to  me.

The  Eumenides-Orcus  is  a  very  long  and  im-
portant canal,  connecting  the  Phoenix  Lake
with  the  Trivium  Charontis.  It  is  so  long  —
3,540  miles  from  one  end  of  it  to  the  other  —
that,  although  it  starts  in  lat.  16°  N.  and  ends
in  lat.  12°  S.,  it  belts  the  disk  not  many  degrees
inclined  to  the  equator.  For  a  great  distance  it
runs  parallel  to  the  northern  coast  of  the  Sea
of  the  Sirens.  From  this  coast  several  canals
strike  down  to  it ;  some  stopping  at  it,  others
continuing  on  down  the  disk.  Especially  is  the
western  end  of  the  sea,  called  the  Gulf  of  the


182  MARS

Titans,  a  point  of  departure  for  canals ;  no  less
than  six  of  them,  and  doubtless  more,  leaving
the  gulf  in  variously  radiating  directions.  At
the  place  where  these  canals  severally  cross  the
Eumenides-Orcus,  I  began  in  November  to  see
spots.  I  also  saw  others  along  the  Pyriphlege-
thon,  an  important  canal  leading  in  a  more
northerly  direction  from  the  Phoenix  Lake ;
along  the  Gigas,  a  great  canal  running  from
the  Gulf  of  the  Titans  all  the  way  to  the  Lake
of  the  Moon ;  and  along  other  canals  in  the
same  region.  I  then  noticed  that  the  spots  to
the  north  of  the  SoHs  Lacus  region  had  dark-
ened, since  August,  relatively  to  the  more
southern  ones.  In  short,  I  became  aware  both
of  a  great  increase  in  the  number  of  spots,  and
of  an  increase  in  tint  in  the  spots  previously
seen.

It  was  apparent  that  the  spots  were  part  and
parcel  of  the  canal  system,  and  that  in  the
matter  of  varying  visibility  they  took  after
the  canals,  —  chronologically,  very  closely  after
them;  for  a  comparison  of  the  two  leads  me
to  believe  that  the  spots  make  their  appearance
subsequent,  although  but  little  subsequent,  to
the  canals  which  conduct  to  them.

Furthermore,  the  spots,  like  the  canals,  grow
in  conspicuousness  with  time.  Now,  when  we
consider  that  nothing,  practically,  has  changed
between   us   and   them   in   the   interval ;  that


SPOTS  IN  THE  LIGHT  REGIONS  183

there  has  been  no  symptom  of  cloud  or  other
obscuration,  before  or  after,  over  the  place
where  they  eventually  appear,  —  we  are  led  to
the  conclusion  that,  like  the  canals,  they  grow.

Indeed,  in  the  history  of  their  development
the  two  features  seem  quite  similar.  Both
grow,  and  both  follow  the  same  order  and
method  in  their  growth.  Both  are  affected  by
one  progressive  change  that  sweeps  over  the
face  of  the  planet  from  the  pole  to  the  equator,
and  then  from  the  equator  toward  the  other
pole.  In  the  case  of  the  southern  hemisphere,
it  is,  as  we  have  just  seen,  the  most  southern
spots,  like  the  most  southern  canals,  that  ap-
pear first  after  the  melting  of  the  polar  snows.
Then  gradually  others  begin  to  show  farther
and  farther  north.  The  quickening  of  the
spots,  like  the  quickening  of  the  canals,  is  a
seasonal  affair.  But  there  is  more  in  it  than
this.  It  takes  place  in  a  manner  to  imply  that
something  more  immediate  than  the  change  in
the  seasons  is  concerned  in  it  -,  immediate  not
in  time,  but  in  relation  to  the  result.  A  com-
parison of  the  behavior  of  three  spots  —  the
Phoenix  Lake,  Ceraunius,  the  spot  at  the  junc-
tion of  the  Iris  and  the  Gigas,  and  the  Cyane
Tons,  a  spot  where  the  Steropes,  a  newly  found
canal,  and  the  Nilus  meet  —  will  serve  to  point
out  what  this  something  is.  The  Phoenix  Lake
lies  in  lat.  17°  S.,  Ceraunius  in  lat.  12°  N.,  and


184  MARS

the  Cyane  Fons  in  lat.  28°  N.  In  August  of
last  year,  the  first  of  these  markings  was  very
conspicuous,  the  second  but  moderately  so,
while  the  third  was  barely  discernible.  By
November,  the  Phoenix  Lake  had  become  less
salient,  Ceraunius  relatively  more  so,  and  the
Cyane  Fons  nearly  as  evident  as  Ceraunius  had
formerly  been.  In  the  Martian  calendar,  the
August  observation  corresponded  to  our  20th  of
June,  the  November  one  to  our  1st  of  August.
All  three  spots  were  practically  within  the
equatorial  regions.  Now,  on  the  Earth,  no  such
marked  progression  in  seasonal  change  occurs
within  the  tropics.  With  us,  it  is  to  all  intents
and  purposes  equally  green  there  the  year
through.  On  Mars  it  is  not.  Clearly,  some
more  definite  factor  than  the  seasons  enters
into  the  matter  upon  our  neighbor  world.

That  this  factor  is  water  seems,  from  the  be-
havior of  the  blue-green  areas  generally,  to  be
pretty  certain.  But  just  as  the  so-called  seas
are  undoubtedly  not  seas,  nor  the  canals  water-
ways, so  the  spots  are  not  lakes.  Their  mode
of  growth,  so  far  as  it  may  be  discerned,  con-
firms this  conclusion.  Apparently,  it  is  not  so
much  by  an  increase  in  size  as  by  a  deepening
in  tint  that  they  gradually  become  recognizable.
They  start,  it  would  seem,  as  big  as  they  are
to  be,  but  faint  in  tone,  premonitory  shades
of  their  future  selves.     They  then  proceed  to


SPOTS  IN  THE  LIGHT  REGIONS  185

substantialize  by  darkening  in  tint  throughout.
N0W5  to  deepen  thus  in  color  with  one  consent
all  over  would  be  a  peculiar  thing  for  a  lake
to  do.  For  had  the  lake  appreciable  depth  to
start  with,  it  should  always  be  visible ;  and  had
it  not,  its  bed  would  have  to  be  phenomenally
level  to  permit  of  its  being  all  flooded  at  once.
If,  however,  the  spots  be  not  bodies  of  water,
but  areas  of  verdure,  their  deepening  in  tint
throughout  is  perfectly  explicable,  since  the
darkening  would  be  the  natural  result  of  a
simultaneous  growth  of  vegetation.  This  in-
ference is  further  borne  out  by  the  fact  that
to  the  spot  class  belong  unquestionably  those
larger  oval  markings  of  which  the  Lake  of  the
Sun  is  the  most  conspicuous  example.  For
both  are  associated  in  precisely  the  same  man-
ner with  the  canal  system.  Each  spot  is  a
centre  of  canal  connections  in  exactly  the  way
in  which  the  Solis  Lacus  or  the  Phoenix  Lake
itself  is.  But  the  light  coming  from  the  Solis
Lacus  and  the  Phoenix  Lake  showed,  in  Profes-
sor W.  H.  Pickering's  observations,  no  sign  of
polarization  such  as  a  sheet  of  water  should
show,  and  such  as  the  polar  sea  actually  did
show.

When  we  put  all  these  phenomena  together,
—  the  presence  of  the  spots  at  the  junctions  of
the  canals,  their  strangely  systematic  shapes,
their  seasonal  darkening,  and,  last  but  not  least,


186  MARS

the  resemblance  of  the  great  continental  regions
of  Mars  to  the  deserts  of  the  earth,  —  a  solution
of  their  character  suggests  itself  at  once ;  to
wit,  that  they  are  oases  in  the  midst  of  that
desert,  and  oases  not  wholly  innocent  of  design ;
for,  in  number,  position,  shape,  and  behavior,
the  oases  turn  out  as  typical  and  peculiar  a
feature  of  Mars  as  the  canals  themselves.

Each  phenomenon  is  highly  suggestive  con-
sidered alone,  but  each  acquires  still  greater
significance  from  its  association  with  the  other  -,
for  here  in  the  oases  we  have  an  end  and  object
for  the  existence  of  canals,  and  the  most  natural
one  in  the  world,  namely,  that  the  canals  are
constructed  for  the  express  purpose  of  fertiliz-
ing the  oases.  Thus  the  mysterious  rendezvous-
ing of  the  canals  at  these  special  points  is  at
once  explicable.  The  canals  rendezvous  so  en-
tirely in  defiance  of  the  doctrine  of  chances
because  they  were  constructed  to  that  end.
They  are  not  purely  natural  developments,  but
cases  of  assisted  nature,  just  as  they  look  to  be
at  first  sight.  This,  at  least,  is  the  only  ex-
planation that  fully  accounts  for  the  facts.  Of
course  all  such  evidence  of  design  may  be
purely  fortuitous,  with  about  as  much  proba-
bility, as  it  has  happily  been  put,  as  that  a
chance  collection  of  numbers  should  take  the
form  of  the  multiplication  table.

In   addition    to  this   general    dovetailing  of


SPOTS  IN  THE  LIGHT  REGIONS  187

detail  to  one  conclusion  is  to  be  noticed  the
strangely  economic  character  of  both  the  canals
and  the  oases  in  the  matter  of  form.  That  the
lines  should  follow  arcs  of  great  circles,  what-
ever their  direction,  is  as  unnatural  from  a
natural  standpoint  as  it  would  be  natural  from
an  artificial  one  j  for  the  arc  of  a  great  circle
is  the  shortest  distance  from  one  point  upon
the  surface  of  a  sphere  to  another.  It  would,
therefore,  if  topographically  possible,  be  the
course  to  take  to  conduct  water,  with  the  least
expenditure  of  time  or  trouble,  from  the  one
to  the  other.

The  circular  shape  of  the  oases  is  as  directly
economic  as  is  the  straightness  of  the  canals ;
for  the  circle  is  the  figure  which  incloses  the
maximum  area  for  the  minimum  average  dis-
tance from  its  centre  to  any  point  situated
within  it.  In  consequence,  if  a  certain  amount
of  country  were  to  be  irrigated,  intelligence
would  suggest  the  circular  form  in  preference
to  all  others,  in  order  thus  to  cover  the  greatest
space  with  the  least  labor.

Following  is  the  list  of  the  oases  so  far  dis-
covered :  —


Acherusia  Palus
Aganippe  Fons
Alcyonia
Ammonium
Aponi  Fons


Aquae  ApoUinares
Aquae  Calidae
Arachoti  Fons
Arduenna
Arethusa  Fons


188


MARS


Arsia  Silva
Arsine
Augila

Bandusiae  Fons
Biblis  Fons
Castalia  Fons
Ceraunius
Clepsydra  Fons
Cyane  Fons
Ferentinae  Lucus
Fons  Juventae
Gallinaria  Silva
Hercynia  Silva
Hibe

Hippocrene  Fons
Hipponitis  Palus
Hypelaeus
Labeatis  Lacus
Lacus  Ismenius
Lacus  Lunae
Lacus  Phoenicis
Lerne


Lucrinus  Lacus
Lucus  Angitiae
Lucus  Feronia
Lucus  Maricae
Maeisia  Silva
Mapharitis
Mariotis
Meroe

Messeis  Fons
Nitriae
Nodus  Gordii
Pallas  Lacus
Propontis
Serapium
Sirbonis  Lacus
Solis  Fons
Solis  Lacus
Tithonius  Lacus
Trinythios
Trivium  Charontis
Utopia


II.  DOUBLE  CANALS

Even  more  markedly  unnatural  is  another
phenomenon  of  this  most  phenomenal  system,
of  which  almost  every  one  has  heard,  and  which
almost  nobody  has  seen,  —  the  double  canals.

To  see  them,  however,  all  that  is  needed  is  a
sufficiently  steady  air,  a  sufficiently  attentive
observer,  and  the  suitable  season  of  the  Mar-
tian year.  When  these  conditions  are  observed,
the  sight  may  be  seen  without  difficulty,  and  is
every  whit  as  strange  as  Schiaparelli,  who  first
saw  it,  has  described  it.


DOUBLE  CANALS  189

So  far  as  the  observer  is  concerned,  what
occurs  is  this :  Upon  a  part  of  the  disk  where
up  to  that  time  a  single  canal  has  been  visible,
of  a  sudden,  some  night,  in  place  of  the  single
canals  he  perceives  twin  canals, — as  like,  in-
deed, as  twins,  if  not  more  so,  similar  both  in
character  and  in  inclination,  running  side  by
side  the  whole  length  of  the  original  canal,
•usually  for  upwards  of  a  thousand  miles,  of  the
same  size  throughout,  and  absolutely  parallel  to
each  other.  The  pair  may  best  be  likened  to
the  twin  rails  of  a  railroad  track.  The  regu-
larity of  the  thing  is  startling.

In  good  air  the  phenomenon  is  quite  unmis-
takable. The  two  lines  are  as  distinct  and  as
distinctly  parallel  as  possible.  No  draughts-
man could  draw  them  better.  They  are  tho-
roughly Martian  in  their  mathematical  preci-
sion. At  the  very  first  glance,  they  convey,
like  all  the  other  details  of  the  canal  system,
the  appearance  of  artificiality.  It  may  be  well
to  state  this  here  definitely,  for  the  benefit  of
such  as,  without  having  seen  the  canals,  in-
dulge in  criticism  about  them.  No  one  who
has  seen  the  canals  well  —  and  the  well  is  all-
important  for  bringing  out  the  characteristics
that  give  the  stamp  of  artificiality,  the  straight-
ness  and  fineness  of  the  lines  —  would  ever
have  any  doubt  as  to  their  seeming  artificial,
however  he  might  choose  to  blind  himseK  to


190  MARS

the  consequences.  An  element  akin  to  the
comic  enters  criticism  based,  not  upon  what  the
critics  have  seen,  but  upon  what  they  have  not.
Books  are  reviewed  without  being  read,  to  pre-
vent prejudice  ;  but  it  is  rash  to  carry  the  same
admirable  broad-mindedness  into  scientific  sub-
jects.

In  detail  the  doubles  vary,  chiefly,  it  would
seem,  in  the  distance  the  twin  lines  lie  apart.
In  the  widest  I  have  seen,  the  Ganges,  six  de-
grees separate  the  two  ;  in  the  narrowest,  the
Phison,  four  degrees  and  a  quarter,  —  not  a
very  great  difference  between  the  extremes.
Four  degrees  and  a  quarter  on  Mars  amount  to
156  miles ;  six  degrees,  to  220.  These,  then,
are  the  distances  between  the  centres  of  the
twin  canals.  Each  canal  seems  a  little  less  than
a  degree  wide,  or  about  30  miles  in  the  nar-
rower instances ;  in  the  broader,  a  little  more
than  a  degree,  or  about  45  miles.  Between  the
two  lines,  in  the  cases  where  the  gemination,
as  it  is  called,  is  complete,  lies  reddish-ochre
ground  similar  to  the  rest  of  the  surface  of  the
bright  regions.  Deducting  the  two  half- widths
of  the  bordering  canals,  we  have,  therefore,  from
120  to  175  miles  of  clear  country  between  the
paralleling  lines.

This  gemination  of  a  canal  is  certainly  a  pass-
ing strange  phenomenon.  Although,  in  steady
air,  the  observation  is  not  a  difficult  one,  to  see


DOUBLE  CANALS  191

the  region  where  it  occurs  minutely  enough  for
a  sufficient  length  of  time  to  mark  the  details
of  the  process  is  another  matter.  I  shall  here
give  what  I  have  been  able  to  gather  at  the
last  opposition,  and  shall  hope  to  add  to  it  at  the
next.  One  element  of  mystery  may  be  elimi-
nated at  the  outset.  The  process  is  not  so  sud-
den as  it  seems.  It  is  perceived  of  a  sudden  by
the  observer  because  of  some  specially  favorable
night.  But  it  has  been  for  some  time  develop-
ing. So  much  is  apparent  from  my  observa-
tions. Suggestions  of  duality  occurred  weeks
before  the  thing  stood  definitely  revealed.  Fur-
thermore, the  gemination  may  lie  concealed
from  the  observer  some  time  after  it  is  quite
complete,  owing  to  lack  of  favorable  atmospheric
conditions.  For  it  takes  emphatically  steady
air  to  see  it  unmistakably.

The  next  point  is,  that  the  phenomenon  is
individual  to  the  particular  canal.  Each  canal
differs  from  its  neighbor  not  only  in  the  dis-
tance the  lines  lie  apart,  but  in  the  time  at
which  duplication  occurs.  The  event  seems  to
depend  both  upon  general  seasonal  laws  govern-
ing all  the  duplications,  and  upon  causes  intrin-
sic to  the  canal  itself.  Within  limits,  each  canal
doubles  at  its  own  good  time  and  after  its  own
fashion.  For  example,  although  it  seems  to  be
a  rule  that  north  and  south  canals  double  before
east  and  west  ones,  nevertheless,  of  two  north


192  MARS

and  soiith  lines,  one  will  double,  the  other  will
not,  synchronously  with  a  doubling  running  east
and  west ;  the  same  is  true  of  those  running  at
any  other  inclination.

Now  this  shows  that  the  duplication  is  not  an
optical  illusion  at  this  end  of  the  line  ;  for,  by
any  double  refraction  here,  all  the  lines  running
in  the  same  direction  over  the  disk  should  be
similarly  affected,  which  they  are  not.  On
the  contrary,  there  will  be,  say,  two  cases  of
doubling  in  quite  different  directions  coexistent
with  several  single  canals  that  run  the  same
way.

Nor  is  there  any  probability  of  its  being  a
case  of  double  refraction  at  the  other  end  of  the
line,  —  that  is,  in  the  atmosphere  of  Mars  ;  for
in  that  case  it  is  hard  to  see  why  all  the  lines
should  not  be  affected,  to  say  nothing  of  the
fact  that,  to  render  such  double  refraction  pos-
sible, we  must  call  upon  a  noumenon  to  help  us
out,  as  we  know  of  no  substance  capable  of  the
quality  upon  so  huge  a  scale.  Furthermore,
what  is  cogent  to  the  observer,  though  of  no
particular  weight  with  his  hearers,  the  pheno-
menon has  no  look  of  double  refraction.  It
looks  to  be,  what  it  undoubtedly  is,  a  double
existence.

Strengthening  this  conclusion  is  the  mode  of
development  of  the  doubling.  This  appears  to
take  place  in  two  ways,  although  it  is  possible


DOUBLE  CANALS  193

that  the  two  are  but  different  instances  of  one
and  the  same  process.  Of  the  first  kind,  during
this  last  opposition,  the  Ganges  was  an  example.

The  Ganges  was  in  an  interesting  proto-
plasmic condition  during  the  whole  of  last  sum-
mer. About  to  multiply  by  fission,  it  was  not
at  first  evident  how  this  would  take  place.
Hints  of  gemination  were  visible  when  I  first
looked  at  it  in  August.  It  showed  then  as  a
very  broad  but  not  dark  swath  of  dusky  color,
of  nearly  uniform  width  from  one  extremity  to
the  other,  with  sides  suggestively  even  through-
out. It  is  probable  that  they  were  then,  as
afterward,  parallel,  and  that  the  slight  conver-
gence apparent  at  the  bottom  was  due  simply
to  foreshortening.  The  swath  ran  thus  north-
northwest  all  the  way  from  the  Gulf  of  the
Dawn  to  the  Lacus  Labeatis.  By  moments  of
better  seeing,  its  two  sides  showed  darker  than
its  middle ;  that  is,  it  was  already  double  in
embryo,  with  a  dusky  middle-ground  between
the  twin  lines.

In  October  the  doubling  had  sensibly  pro-
gressed. The  double  visions  were  more  fre-
quent, and  the  ground  between  the  twin  lines
had  grown  lighter.  By  November  the  doubling
was  unmistakable,  and  the  mid-clarification  had
become  nearly  complete.  It  is  to  be  remarked
that  the  doubling  did  not  involve  the  Fons
Juventae  and  the  canal  leading  to  it,  both  of


194  MARS

which  lay  well  to  the  right  of  the  Ganges.  The
space  included  between  the  East  and  West
Ganges  was  very  wide,  some  six  degrees.  The
canals  themselves  were,  so  far  as  could  be  seen,
quite  similar,  and  about  a  degree,  or  37  miles,
wide.  Both  started  in  the  Gulf  of  the  Dawn,
and  ran  down  to  the  lower  Lake  of  the  Moon,
one  entering  each  side  of  the  lake  or  oasis.  Two
thirds  of  the  way  down,  both  similarly  touched
the  sides  of  another  oasis,  an  upper  Lacus
Lunae  ;  the  other  I  have  called  the  Lacus  La-
beatis.    The  length  of  each  canal  was  1200  miles.

Except  for  fleeting  suspicions  of  gemination,
and  for  possible  doublings  like  the  parallelism  of
the  two  Hades,  the  next  canal  to  show  double
was  the  Nectar,  which  was  so  seen  by  Mr.  Doug-
lass on  October  4,  and  under  still  better  seeing,
a  few  minutes  later,  the  doubling  was  detected
by  him  extending  straight  across  the  Solis
Lacus.  In  the  Solis  Lacus  this  was  evidently
a  case  of  mid-clarification.  What  occurred  in
the  Nectar  seems  more  allied  to  the  second  class
of  manifestations,  such  as  happened  later  with
the  Euphrates  and  the  Phison.

Glimpses  of  a  dual  state  in  these  canals  we
caught  during  the  summer  and  autumn,  but  it
was  not  till  the  November  presentation  of  the
region  that  they  came  out  unmistakably  twinned.
On  the  18th  of  that  month,  just  as  the  twilight
was  fading  away,  the  air  being  very  still  and


Plate  XXIII


PHISON   AND   EUPHRATES

(Both  double)

November  i8,  1894


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1894


DOUBLE  CANALS  195

the  definition  exceptional,  so  soon  as  the  sunset
tremors  subsided,  the  Euphrates  and  its  neigh-
bor the  Phison  I  saw  beautifully  doubled,  ex-
actly like  two  great  railroad  tracks  with  bright
ground  between,  each  set  extending  down  the
disk  for  a  distance  of  1600  miles.

After  that  evening,  whenever  the  seeing  was
good  enough,  they  continued  to  present  the
same  appearance.  Now,  with  them  no  process  of
midway  clarification,  such  as  had  taken  place  in
the  Ganges,  had  previously  made  itself  manifest.
They  had,  indeed,  not  been  very  well  defined
before  duplication  occurred,  but  apparently  suf-
ficiently so  not  to  hide  such  broadening  had  it
taken  place  ;  for,  though  the  twin  canals  were
not  as  far  apart  as  the  two  Ganges,  they  were
quite  comparably  distant,  being,  instead  of  six,
about  four  and  a  quarter  degrees  from  each
other.  Evidently,  the  process  was,  in  the  case
of  the  Euphrates  at  least,  under  way  in  Octo-
ber, and  even  earlier,  but  was  not  well  seen
because  the  twin  canals  were  not  yet  dark
enough.

There  seem,  I  may  remark  parenthetically,
to  be  two  other  double  canals  in  the  region  be-
tween the  Syrtis  Major  and  the  Sabaeus  Sinus,
one  to  the  east  of  the  Phison,  and  another
between  the  Phison  and  the  Euphrates,  both
debouching  at  the  same  points  as  the  Phison
and  the  Euphrates  themselves.


196  MARS

On  the  19th  of  November  I  suspected  dupli-
cation in  the  Typhon,  another  canal  in  the  same
region.  It  looked  to  be  double,  with  dusky
ground  between.

On  the  21st  I  similarly  suspected  the  Jamuna
and  the  Dardanus.  Both  looked  broad  and
dusky,  with  very  ill-defined  condensation  at  the
sides.  But  the  seeing  was  not  good  enough.
On  the  22d  I  brought  my  observations  to  an
end,  in  consequence  of  having  to  return  East.

Exactly  what  takes  place,  therefore,  in  this
curious  process  of  doubling,  I  cannot  pretend  to
say.  It  has  been  suggested  that  a  progressive
ripening  of  vegetation  from  the  centre  to  the
edges  might  cause  a  broad  swath  of  green  to  be-
come seemingly  two.  There  are  facts,  however,
that  do  not  tally  with  this  view.  For  example,
the  Ganges  was  always  broad,  but  fainter,  not
narrower,  earlier  in  the  season.  The  Phison,  on
the  other  hand,  went  through  no  such  process.
Indeed,  we  are  here  very  much  in  the  dark,  cer-
tainly very  far  off  from  what  does  take  place
in  Martian  canal  gemination.  Perhaps  we  may
learn  considerably  more  about  it  at  the  next
opposition.  At  this  the  tendril  end  of  our
knowledge  of  our  neighbor  we  cannot  expect
hard  wood.

From  these  observations,  and  those  of  Schia-
parelli,  I  feel,  however,  tolerably  sure  that  the
phenomenon  is  not  only  seasonal  but  vegetal.


SPOTS  IN  THE  DARK  REGIONS  197

Why  it  should  take  this  form  is  one  of  the  most
pregnant  problems  about  the  planet.  For  it  is
the  most  artificial-looking  phenomenon  of  an
artificial-looking  disk.

III.    SPOTS    IN    THE   DARK   REGIONS.

To  return  now  from  these  outposts  of  inves-
tigation to  our  main  subject-matter,  and  to  an-
other phenomenon  of  more  recent  discovery
than  the  double  canals,  and  yet  more  suggestive
of  interpretation.  We  have  seen  what  shows  at
one  end  of  the  canals,  their  inner  end ;  namely,
the  oasis.  But  it  seems  that  there  is  also  some-
thing exceptional  at  the  other.  At  the  mouth
of  each  canal,  at  the  edge  of  the  so-called  seas,
appears  a  curious  dark  spot,  of  the  form  of  a
half -filled  angle ;  the  sort  of  a  mark  with  which
one  checks  items  on  a  list.  Its  form  is  singularly
appropriate,  according  to  mundane  ideas,  for  it
appears  before  the  canal  itself  is  visible,  as  if  to
mark  the  spot  where  the  canal  will  eventually
be.  It  lies  in  the  so-called  seas,  and  looks  to  be
of  the  same  color  as  they,  but  deeper  in  tint.

All  the  canals  that  debouch  into  the  dark
regions  are  provided  with  these  terminal  tri-
angles, except  those  that  lead  out  of  long  estu-
aries, like  the  Nilosyrtis,  the  Hiddekel,  the
Gihon,  and  so  forth.  The  double  canals  are
provided  with  twin  triangles.  That  the  trian-
gular patches  are  phenomena   connected  with


198  MARS

the  canals  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  they
never  appear  elsewhere.  What  exact  purpose
they  serve  is  not  so  clear,  but  it  would  seem  to
be  that  of  relay  stations  for  the  water  before  it
enters  the  canals  ;  what  we  see,  upon  this  sup-
position, being,  not  the  station  or  reservoir
itself,  but  the  specially  fertile  area  round  it.

That,  in  addition  to  being  in  a  way  oases
themselves,  they  serve  some  such  purpose  as  the
above,  is  further  hinted  at  by  two  facts :  first,
that  whereas  the  oases  develop,  apparently,  after
the  canals  leading  to  them,  the  triangular  spots
develop  before  the  canals  that  lead  out  of  them  ;
second,  Mr.  Douglass  finds  that  it  is  in  them
that  the  canals  in  the  dark  regions  terminate.
They  are  the  end  of  the  one  system  at  the  same
time  that  they  are  the  beginning  of  the  other.
They  would,  therefore,  seem  to  be  way-stations
of  some  sort  on  the  road  taken  by  the  water
from  the  polar  cap  to  the  equator.

Paralleling  in  appearance  the  oases  in  the
bright  regions  are  round  spots  that  occur  at  the
junctions  of  the  canals  in  the  dark  ones.  Speak-
ing figuratively,  these  are  the  heads  of  the  nails
in  the  coffin  of  the  idea  that  the  seas  are  seas ;
since,  if  the  blue-green  color  came  from  water,
there  could  not  be  permanent  darker  dots  upon
it  connected  by  equally  dark  streaks.  Speaking
unfiguratively,  this  shows  that  the  whole  system
of  canals   and   specially  fertilized   spots  is  not


SPOTS   IN  THE  DARK  REGIONS  199

confined  to  the  deserts,  but  extends  in  a  modi-
fied form  over  the  areas  of  more  or  less  vegeta-
tion.

There  are  thus  two  kinds  of  spots  in  the
dark  regions :  those  on  their  borders,  and  those
in  their  midst.  The  position  of  the  former  —
on  the  edge  of  the  great  deserts  —  implies  a
difference  in  kind,  further  emphasized  by  their
shape.  Following  is  the  list  of  both  kinds  de-
tected at  Flagstafi*:  —

SPOTS  IN  THE  DARK  REGIONS.
Astrae  Lacus.
Benaciis  Lacus.
Cynia  Lacus.
Flevo  Lacus.
Hesperidum  Lacus.
Oxia  Palus.
Spot  at  the  mouth  of  the  Phison.

"  Euphrates.

"  Daix  on  the  Mare  Icarium.

Spot  at  the  mouth  of  the  Daix  on  the  Sabaeus  Sinus.
Spot  on  the  Socratis  Promontorium.
Spot  on  the  western  side  of  the  Socratis  Promontorium.

"  Margaritifer  Sinus.

Spot  at  the  mouth  of  the  Jamuna  on  the  Aurorae  Sinus.

"  Ganges  "

"  Hebe  "

"  Agathodaemon        "

"  Ambrosia  on  the  Mare  Australe.

"  Maeander  on  the  Aonius  Sinus.

"  Gorgon  on  the  Mare  Sirenum.

"  Erinaeus.

"  Titan  on  the  Sinus  Titanum.


200  MARS

Spot  at  the  mouth  of  the  Cophen  on  the  Mare  Cimmerium.


a

Laestiygon

a

it

Nereides

a

a

Cerberus

a

«

Chretes

6i

ti

Asopus  on  the

Syrtis  Major.

u

Arosis

u

a

Typhon

((

Spot  south  of  the  mouth  of  the  Typhon

((

We  thus  perceive  that  the  blue-green  areas
are  subjected  to  the  same  engineering  system
as  the  bright  ones.  In  short,  no  part  of  the
planet  is  allowed  to  escape  from  the  all-pervasive
trigonometric  spirit.  If  this  be  Nature's  doing,
she  certainly  here  runs  her  mathematics  into
the  ground.


VI

CONCLUSION

To  review,  now,  the  chain  of  reasoning  by
which  we  have  been  led  to  regard  it  probable
that  upon  the  surface  of  Mars  we  see  the  effects
of  local  intelligence.  We  find,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  broad  physical  conditions  of  the  planet
are  not  antagonistic  to  some  form  of  life ;  sec-
ondly, that  there  is  an  apparent  dearth  of  water
upon  the  planet's  surface,  and  therefore,  if  be-
ings of  sufficient  intelligence  inhabited  it,  they
would  have  to  resort  to  irrigation  to  support
life ;  thirdly,  that  there  turns  out  to  be  a  net-
work of  markings  covering  the  disk  precisely
counterparting  what  a  system  of  irrigation
would  look  like ;  and,  lastly,  that  there  is  a  set
of  spots  placed  where  we  should  expect  to  find
the  lands  thus  artificially  fertilized,  and  behav-
ing as  such  constructed  oases  should.  All  this,
of  course,  may  be  a  set  of  coincidences,  signify-
ing nothing ;  but  the  probability  points  the
other  way.  As  to  details  of  explanation,  any
we  may  adopt  will  undoubtedly  be  found,  on
closer  acquaintance,  to  vary  from  the  actual
Martian  state  of  things;  for  any  Martian  life
must  differ  markedly  from  our  own.


202  MAES

The  fundamental  fact  in  the  matter  is  the
dearth  of  water.  If  we  keep  this  in  mind,  we
shall  see  that  many  of  the  objections  that  spon-
taneously arise  answer  themselves.  The  sup-
posed herculean  task  of  constructing  such  canals
disappears  at  once ;  for,  if  the  canals  be  dug  for
irrigation  purposes,  it  is  evident  that  what  we
see,  and  call  by  ellipsis  the  canal,  is  not  really
the  canal  at  all,  but  the  strip  of  fertilized  land
bordering  it,  —  the  thread  of  water  in  the  midst
of  it,  the  canal  itself,  being  far  too  small  to  be
perceptible.  In  the  case  of  an  irrigation  canal
seen  at  a  distance,  it  is  always  the  strip  of  ver-
dure, not  the  canal,  that  is  visible,  as  we  see  in
looking  from  afar  upon  irrigated  country  on  the
Earth.

We  may,  perhaps,  in  conclusion,  consider  for
a  moment  how  different  in  its  details  existence
on  Mars  must  be  from  existence  on  the  Earth.
One  point  out  of  many  bearing  on  the  subject,
the  simplest  and  most  certain  of  all,  is  the  effect
of  mere  size  of  habitat  upon  the  size  of  the
inhabitant ;  for  geometrical  conditions  alone  are
most  potent  factors  in  the  problem  of  life.
Volume  and  mass  determine  the  force  of  grav-
ity upon  the  surface  of  a  planet,  and  this  is
more  far-reaching  in  its  effects  than  might  at
first  be  thought.  Gravity  on  the  surface  of
Mars  is  only  a  little  more  than  one  third  what
it  is  on  the  surface  of  the  Earth.     This  would


CONCLUSION  203

work  in  two  ways  to  very  different  conditions
of  existence  from  those  to  which  we  are  accus-
tomed. To  begin  with,  three  times  as  much
work,  as  for  example,  in  digging  a  canal,  could
be  done  by  the  same  expenditure  of  muscular
force.  If  we  were  transported  to  Mars,  we
should  be  pleasingly  surprised  to  find  all  our
manual  labor  suddenly  lightened  threefold.
But,  indirectly,  there  might  result  a  yet
greater  gain  to  our  capabilities ;  for  if  Nature
chose  she  could  afford  there  to  build  her  in-
habitants on  three  times  the  scale  she  does  on
Earth  without  their  ever  finding  it  out  except
by  interplanetary  comparison.     Let  us  see  how.

As  we  all  know,  a  large  man  is  more  un-
wieldy than  a  small  one.  An  elephant  refuses
to  hop  like  a  flea ;  not  because  he  considers  the
act  undignified,  but  simply  because  he  cannot
bring  it  about.  If  we  could,  we  should  all
jump  straight  across  the  street,  instead  of  pain-
fully paddling  through  the  mud.  Our  inability
to  do  so  depends  upon  the  size  of  the  Earth,  not
upon  what  it  at  first  seems  to  depend  on,  the
size  of  the  street.

To  see  this,  let  us  consider  the  very  simplest
case,  that  of  standing  erect.  To  this  every-day
feat  opposes  itself  the  weight  of  the  body
simply,  a  thing  of  three  dimensions,  height,
breadth,  and  thickness,  while  the  ability  to
accomplish  it  resides  in  the  cross-section  of  the


204  MARS

muscles  of  the  knee,  a  thing  of  only  two  dimen-
sions, breadth  and  thickness.  Consequently,  a
person  half  as  large  again  as  another  has  about
twice  the  supporting  capacity  of  that  other,  but
about  three  times  as  much  to  support.  Standing
therefore  tires  him  out  more  quickly.  If  his
size  were  to  go  on  increasing,  he  would  at  last
reach  a  stature  at  which  he  would  no  longer  be
able  to  stand  at  all,  but  would  have  to  lie
down.  You  shall  see  the  same  effect  in  quite
inanimate  objects.  Take  two  cylinders  of  paraf-
fine  wax,  one  made  into  an  ordinary  candle,  the
other  into  a  gigantic  facsimile  of  one,  and  then
stand  both  upon  their  bases.  To  the  small  one
nothing  happens.  The  big  one,  however,
begins  to  settle,  the  base  actually  made  viscous
by  the  pressure  of  the  weight  above.

Now  apply  this  principle  to  a  possible  inhabit-
ant of  Mars,  and  suppose  him  to  be  constructed
three  times  as  large  as  a  human  being  in  every
dimension.  If  he  were  on  Earth,  he  would
weigh  twenty-seven  times  as  much,  but  on  the
surface  of  Mars,  since  gravity  there  is  only
about  one  third  of  what  it  is  here,  he  would
weigh  but  nine  times  as  much.  The  cross-sec-
tion of  his  muscles  would  be  nine  times  as
great.  Therefore  the  ratio  of  his  supporting
power  to  the  weight  he  must  support  would  be
the  same  as  ours.  Consequently,  he  would  be
able  to  stand  with  as  little  fatigue  as  we.     Now


CONCLUSION  205

consider  the  work  he  might  be  able  to  do.  His
muscles^  having  length,  breadth,  and  thickness,
would  all  be  twenty-seven  times  as  effective  as
ours.  He  would  prove  twenty-seven  times  as
strong  as  we,  and  could  accomplish  twenty-
seven  times  as  much.  But  he  would  further
work  upon  what  required,  owing  to  decreased
gravity,  but  one  third  the  effort  to  overcome.
His  effective  force,  therefore,  would  be  eighty-
one  times  as  great  as  man's,  whether  in  digging
canals  or  in  other  bodily  occupation.  As  grav-
ity on  the  surface  of  Mars  is  really  a  little  more
than  one  third  that  at  the  surface  of  the  Earth,
the  true  ratio  is  not  eighty-one,  but  about  fifty ;
that  is,  a  Martian  would  be,  physically,  fifty-
fold  more  efficient  than  man.

As  the  reader  will  observe,  there  is  nothing
problematical  about  this  deduction  whatever.
It  expresses  an  abstract  ratio  of  physical  capa-
bilities which  must  exist  between  the  two
planets,  quite  irrespective  of  whether  there  be
denizens  on  either,  or  how  other  conditions
may  further  affect  their  forms.  As  the  reader
must  also  note,  the  deduction  refers  to  the  pos-
sibility, not  to  the  probability,  of  such  giants ;
the  calculation  being  introduced  simply  to  show
how  different  from  us  any  Martians  may  be,  not
how  different  they  are.

It  must  also  be  remembered  that  the  ques-
tion of  their  size  has  nothing  to  do  with  the


206  MAKS

question  of  their  existence.  The  arguments  for
their  presence  are  quite  apart  from  any  consid-
eration of  avoirdupois.  No  Herculean  labors
need  to  be  accounted  for ;  and,  if  they  did,  brain
is  far  more  potent  to  the  task  than  brawn.

Something  more  we  may  deduce  about  the
characteristics  of  possible  Martians,  dependent
upon  Mars  itself,  a  result  of  the  age  of  the
world  they  would  live  in.

A  planet  may  in  a  very  real  sense  be  said  to
have  life  of  its  own,  of  which  what  we  call  life
may  or  may  not  be  a  subsequent  detail.  It  is
born,  has  its  fiery  youth,  sobers  into  middle
age,  and  just  before  this  happens  brings  forth,
if  it  be  going  to  do  so  at  all,  the  creatures  on
its  surface  which  are,  in  a  sense,  its  offspring.
The  speed  with  which  it  runs  through  its
gamut  of  change  prior  to  production  depends
upon  its  size ;  for  the  smaller  the  body  the
quicker  it  cools,  and  with  it  loss  of  heat  means
beginning  of  life  for  its  offspring.  It  cools
quicker  because,  as  we  saw  in  a  previous  chapter,
it  has  relatively  less  inside  for  its  outside,  and  it
is  through  its  outside  that  its  inside  cools.  After
it  has  thus  become  capable  of  bearing  life,  the
Sun  quickens  that  life  and  supports  it  for  we
know  not  how  long.  But  its  duration  is  meas-
ured at  the  most  by  the  Sun's  life.  Now,
inasmuch  as  time  and  space  are  not,  as  some
philosophers  have  from  their  too  mundane  stand-


^^


CONCLUSION  207

point  supposed,  forms  of  our  intellectj  but
essential  attributes  of  the  universe,  the  time
taken  by  any  process  affects  the  character  of
the  process  itself,  as  does  also  the  size  of  the
body  undergoing  it.  The  changes  brought
about  in  a  large  planet  by  its  cooling  are  not,
therefore,  the  same  as  those  brought  about  in  a
small  one.  Physically,  chemically,  and,  to  our
present  end,  organically,  the  two  results  are
quite  diverse.  So  different,  indeed,  are  they
that  unless  the  planet  have  at  least  a  certain
size  it  will  never  produce  what  we  call  life,
meaning  our  particular  chain  of  changes  or
closely  allied  forms  of  it,  at  all.  As  we  saw  in
the  case  of  atmosphere,  it  will  lack  even  the
premise  to  such  conclusion.

Whatever  the  particular  planet's  line  of  devel-
opment, however,  in  its  own  line,  it  proceeds  to
greater  and  greater  degrees  of  evolution,  till
the  process  stops,  dependent,  probably,  upon  the
Sun.  The  point  of  development  attained  is,  as
regards  its  capabilities,  measured  by  the  planet's
own  age,  since  the  one  follows  upon  the  other.

Now,  in  the  special  case  of  Mars,  we  have  be-
fore us  the  spectacle  of  a  world  relatively  well
on  in  years,  a  world  much  older  than  the  Earth.
To  so  much  about  his  age  Mars  bears  evidence
on  his  face.  He  shows  unmistakable  signs  of
being  old.  Advancing  planetary  years  have  left
their  mark  legible  there.     His  continents  are  all


208  MAES

smoothed  down ;  his  oceans  have  all  dried  up.
Teres  atque  rotundus,  he  is  a  steady-going  body
now.  If  once  he  had  a  chaotic  youth,  it  has
long  since  passed  away.  Although  called  after
the  most  turbulent  of  the  gods,  he  is  at  the
present  time,  whatever  he  may  have  been  once,
one  of  the  most  peaceable  of  the  heavenly  host.
His  name  is  a  sad  misnomer;  indeed,  the  an-
cients seem  to  have  been  singularly  unfortunate
in  their  choice  of  planetary  cognomens.  With
Mars  so  peaceful,  Jupiter  so  young,  and  Venus
bashfully  draped  in  cloud,  the  planet's  names
accord  but  ill  with  their  temperaments.

Mars  being  thus  old  himself,  we  know  that
evolution  on  his  surface  must  be  similarly  ad-
vanced. This  only  informs  us  of  its  condition
relative  to  the  planet's  capabilities.  Of  its
actual  state  our  data  are  not  definite  enough  to
furnish  much  deduction.  But  from  the  fact  that
our  own  development  has  been  comparatively
a  recent  thing,  and  that  a  long  time  would  be
needed  to  bring  even  Mars  to  his  present  geolo-
gical condition,  we  may  judge  any  life  he  may
support  to  be  not  only  relatively,  but  really
older  than  our  own.

From  the  little  we  can  see,  such  appears  to
be  the  case.  The  evidence  of  handicraft,  if  such
it  be,  points  to  a  highly  intelligent  mind  behind
it.  Irrigation,  unscientifically  conducted,  would
not  give  us  such  truly  wonderful  mathematical


CONCLUSION  209

fitness  in  the  several  parts  to  the  whole  as  we
there  behold.  A  mind  of  no  mean  order  would
seem  to  have  presided  over  the  system  we  see,
—  a  mind  certainly  of  considerably  more  com-
prehensiveness than  that  which  presides  over
the  various  departments  of  our  own  public
works.  Party  politics,  at  all  events,  have  had
no  part  in  them ;  for  the  system  is  planet  wide.
Quite  possibly,  such  Martian  folk  are  possessed
of  inventions  of  which  we  have  not  dreamed,
and  with  them  electrophones  and  kinetoscopes
are  things  of  a  bygone  past,  preserved  with
veneration  in  museums  as  relics  of  the  clumsy
contrivances  of  the  simple  childhood  of  the  race.
Certainly  what  we  see  hints  at  the  existence  of
beings  who  are  in  advance  of,  not  behind  us,  in
the  journey  of  life.

Startling  as  the  outcome  of  these  observations
may  appear  at  first,  in  truth  there  is  nothing
startling  about  it  whatever.  Such  possibility
has  been  quite  on  the  cards  ever  since  the  ex-
istence of  Mars  itself  was  recognized  by  the
Chaldean  shepherds,  or  whoever  the'  still  more
primeval  astronomers  may  have  been.  Its
strangeness  is  a  purely  subjective  phenomenon,
arising  from  the  instinctive  reluctance  of  man
to  admit  the  possibility  of  peers.  Such  would
be  comic  were  it  not  the  inevitable  consequence
of  the  constitution  of  the  universe.  To  be  shy
of  anything  resembling  himself  is  part  and  par-


210  MARS

eel  of  man's  own  individuality.  Like  the  savage
who  fears  nothing  so  much  as  a  strange  man,
like  Crusoe  who  grows  pale  at  the  sight  of  foot-
prints not  his  own,  the  civilized  thinker  instinc-
tively turns  from  the  thought  of  mind  other
than  the  one  he  himself  knows.  To  admit  into
his  conception  of  the  cosmos  other  finite  minds
as  factors  has  in  it  something  of  the  weird.
Any  hypothesis  to  explain  the  facts,  no  matter
how  improbable  or  even  palpably  absurd  it  be,
is  better  than  this.  Snow-caps  of  solid  carbonic
acid  gas,  a  planet  cracked  in  a  positively  mono-
maniacal  manner,  meteors  ploughing  tracks
across  its  surface  with  such  mathematical  pre-
cision that  they  must  have  been  educated  to
the  performance,  and  so  forth  and  so  on,  in
hypotheses  each  more  astounding  than  its  pre-
decessor, commend  themselves  to  man,  if  only
by  such  means  he  may  escape  the  admission  of
anything  approaching  his  kind.  Surely  all  this
is  puerile,  and  should  as  speedily  as  possible  be
outgrown.  It  is  simply  an  instinct  like  any
other,  the  projection  of  the  instinct  of  self-pre-
servation. We  ought,  therefore,  to  rise  above
it,  and,  where  probability  points  to  other  things,
boldly  accept  the  fact  provisionally,  as  we  should
the  presence  of  oxygen,  or  iron,  or  anything
else.  Let  us  not  cheat  ourselves  with  words.
Conservatism  sounds  finely,  and  covers  any
amount  of  ignorance  and  fear.


CONCLUSION  211

We  must  be  just  as  careful  not  to  run  to  the
other  extreme,  and  draw  deductions  of  purely
local  outgrowth.  To  talk  of  Martian  beings  is
not  to  mean  Martian  men.  Just  as  the  proba-
bilities point  to  the  one,  so  do  they  point  away
from  the  other.  Even  on  this  Earth  man  is  of
the  nature  of  an  accident.  He  is  the  survival
of  by  no  means  the  highest  physical  organism.
He  is  not  even  a  high  form  of  mammal.  Mind
has  been  his  making.  For  aught  we  can  see,
some  lizard  or  batrachian  might  just  as  well
have  popped  into  his  place  early  in  the  race,
and  been  now  the  dominant  creature  of  this
Earth.  Under  different  physical  conditions,  he
would  have  been  certain  to  do  so.  Amid  the
surroundings  that  exist  on  Mars,  surroundings
so  different  from  our  own,  we  may  be  practi-
cally sure  other  organisms  have  been  evolved
of  which  we  have  no  cognizance.  What  man-
ner of  beings  they  may  be  we  lack  the  data
even  to  conceive.

For  answers  to  such  problems  we  must  look
to  th©  future.  That  Mars  seems  to  be  inhabited
is  not  the  last,  but  the  first  word  on  the  sub-
ject. More  important  than  the  mere  fact  of
the  existence  of  living  beings  there,  is  the
question  of  what  they  may  be  like.  Whether
we  ourselves  shall  live  to  learn  this  cannot,  of
course,  be  foretold.  One  thing,  however,  we
can  do,  and  that  speedily  :  look  at  things  from  a
standpoint  raised  above  our  local  point  of  view  ;


212  MARS

free  our  minds  at  least  from  the  shackles  that
of  necessity  tether  our  bodies;  recognize  the
possibility  of  others  in  the  same  light  that
we  do  the  certainty  of  ourselves.  That  we  are
the  sum  and  substance  of  the  capabilities  of  the
cosmos  is  something  so  preposterous  as  to  be
exquisitely  comic.  We  pride  ourselves  upon
being  men  of  the  worlds  forgetting  that  this  is
but  objectionable  singularity,  unless  we  are,  in
some  wise,  men  of  more  worlds  than  one.  For,
after  all,  we  are  but  a  link  in  a  chain.  Man  is
merely  this,  earth's  highest  production  up  to
date.  That  he  in  any  sense  gauges  the  possi-
bilities of  the  universe  is  humorous.  He  does
not,  as  we  can  easily  foresee,  even  gauge  those
of  this  planet.  He  has  been  steadily  bettering
from  an  immemorial  past,  and  will  apparently
continue  to  improve  through  an  incalcul^.ble
future.  Still  less  does  he  gauge  the  universe
about  him.  He  merely  typifies  in  an  imperfect
way  what  is  going  on  elsewhere,  and  what,  to  a
mathematical  certainty,  is  in  some  corners  of
the  cosmos  indefinitely  excelled.

If  astronomy  teaches  anything,  it  teaches
that  man  is  but  a  detail  in  the  evolution  of  the
universe,  and  that  resemblant  though  diverse
details  are  inevitably  to  be  expected  in  the  host
of  orbs  around  him.  He  learns  that,  though  he
will  probably  never  find  his  double  anywhere,
he  is  destined  to  discover  any  number  of  cousins
scattered  through  space.


APPENDIX

Note  I
The  critical  velocity  at  the  surfaces  of  the  planets  is  found
as  follows :  —

Using  the  usual  symbols  we  have  :
fdt  =  dv
.'.  fds  =  vdv.

And  as/  =  ^^,  since  the  force  tends  to  decrease  the  coordi-
nates, this  becomes ^  =:  vdv.

Integrating :
m
s
m      m

Si  $2

Hence,  since  at  infinity  the  velocity  is  0,  the  equation  for  a
fall  to  a  planet's  surface  from  infinity  is

r  being  the  radius  of  the  planet  and  v  the  velocity  acquired  at
its  surface  from  a  fall  from  infinity,  which  is  the  same  as  the
velocity  needed  for  projection  from  its  surface  to  infinity.

To  find  m  we  have  in  the  case  of  the  Earth  g=32  ft.  a  second
at  its  surface  ;  this  gives  us  m  in  terms  of  g,  that  is,/.  For  the
other  planets  we  need  only  to  introduce  their  masses  and  radii  in
terms  of  those  of  the  Earth  and  then  multiply  the  value  for  the
Earth  by  the  square  root  of  the  ratio.

The  result  is  that  we  find  the  critical  velocity  for  the  several
planets  and  for  the  Sun  to  be  as  follows  :  —

Mercury  2.2  miles  a  second  (probable  value).


=r  ^  v"^  -\-  c,  oi  which  the  definite  integral  from  Si  to  s^  is

V?  -  i  vi .


Venus

6.6

Earth

6.9

Moon

1.5

214


APPENDIX

Mars

3.1  miles

a  second.

Jupiter

37.

«

((

tt

(mean  value).

Saturn

22.

((

u

a

((        ((

Uranus

13.

ii

a

u

il              u

Neptune

14.

a

<c

a

11          ((

Sun

382.

a

((

«

While  the  probable  maximum  speed  of  the  molecules  of  some
of  the  commoner  gases  at  0°  Cent,  are  as  follows  :  —
Hydrogen  7.4  miles  a  second.

Water  vapor  2.5      "     "       "

Nitrogen  2.0      «     «       «

Oxygen  1.8      «     "       «

Carbonic  dioxide      1.6      «     «      «


Note  II


The  change  in  the  apparent  size  of  the  equatorial  diam-
eter as  compared  with  the  polar  one  as  the  phase  increased,
suggesting  the  unconscious  measurement  of  a  twilight  upon
the  planet,  becomes  still  more  striking  when,  in  addition  to
the  October-November  measures  mentioned  in  the  text,  the
measures  from  July  to  October  are  considered  in  connection
with  them.  Tabulated  chronologically,  the  whole  are  as  fol-
lows :  —

MEANS

Polar  Diameters

Cor.  for  Cor.  for

ref.  irr.  vmy,  Angle        ref.  irr.

tilt  and  giL" "  of  tilt  and

phase  phase  phase

Irr.  O'MO  Irr.  0'M5

July  (6  to  22  inc.)  9.976  0'M3  0°  9.933

Aug.  (11  to  21  inc.)  9.362  0''.04  0°  9.325

Sept.  (20  to  Oct.  5  inc.)  9.401  0''.012  0°  9.355

Oct.  (12  &  24  to  30  inc.)  9.375  0''.028  1°  9.336

Oct.  (15  to  23  inc.)  9.379  0".011  2°.5  9.339

Oct.  (12  &  24  to  30  inc.)  9.375  0".028  1°  9.336

Nov.  (2  to  21  inc.)  9.390  0''.012  4°  9.350


APPENDIX  215


Equatorial  Diameters
July  (6  to  22  inc.)  9.691  >  O'Ml  )  46°.5       9.672


Aug.  (11  to  21  inc.)  9.666  >  "•"""  0'M5  >  "  *""  41°  9.645

Sept.(20  to  Oct.  5)  9.523               0''.010  20°.5  9.490

Oct.  (12  &  24  to  30  inc.)  9.457               0''.016  7°  9.417

Oct.  (15  to  23  inc.)  9.429               O^'.OIO  1°  9.385

Oct.  (12  &  24  to  30  inc.)  9.457               0".016  7°  9.417

Nov.  (2  to  21  inc.)  9.545               0'^015  19°  9.514

It  will  be  seen  that,  except  for  the  July  value,  the  size  of
the  polar  diameter  comes  out  essentially  the  same  through-
out. Now,  during  July  the  polar  cap  was  very  large,  and
covered  the  southern  part  of  the  disk  at  the  point  where  the
polar  diameter  was  measured.  As  it  was  much  brighter
than  the  rest  of  the  disk,  its  irradiation  must  have  been  cor-
respondingly great,  and  this  would  have  had  the  effect  of
increasing  the  apparent  length  of  the  polar  diameter  beyond
its  true  value.

The  equatorial  measures,  on  the  other  hand,  show  a  sys-
tematic increase  as  the  phase  increased ;  and  they  do  this
on  both  sides  of  opposition.  The  increase,  it  will  be  noticed,
is  much  greater  than  the  probable  errors  of  observation.


Note  III


As  the  statement  has  been  widely  circulated  that  recent
spectroscopic  observations  negative  an  atmosphere  on  Mars,
it  may  be  well  to  mention  in  a  note  that  the  observations  in
question  neither  affirm  nor  deny  its  presence,  as  their  self-
disclosed  measure  of  precision,  i  of  an  atmosphere,  proves
them  incapable  of  it.  They  simply  concur  in  showing  that
atmosphere  to  be  thin.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  spectroscopic
observations  did  deny  the  existence  of  an  atmosphere  on
Mars,  such  assertion  would  be  fatal,  not  to  the  atmosphere,
but  to  the  observer  or  his  instrument,  as  the  existence  of  an
atmosphere  is  demonstrated   by  the   fundamental  laws   of


216  APPENDIX

physics,  inasmuch  as  no  change  could  take  place  on  the  plan-
et's surface  without  it,  and  that  changes  do  take  place  is
undeniable.     (See  page  31  et  seq.)


Note  IV


Mars  has  two  satellites,  discovered  by  Hall  in  1877,  and
known  as  Deimos  (Dread)  and  Phobos  (Fear),  named  in
keeping  with  the  God  of  War.

Deimos,  at  a  distance  of  14,600  miles  from  the  planet's
centre,  makes  his  circuit  in  30  hours  and  18  minutes  ;  Phobos,
at  a  distance  of  5,800,  in  7  hours  and  39  minutes.  As  Mars
himself  rotates  in  24  hours  and  39  minutes,  Phobos  goes
round  the  planet  faster  than  the  planet  turns  upon  itself,
and,  in  consequence,  would  appear  to  any  observers  on  the
planet's  surface  to  break  the  otherwise  universal  conformity
of  stellar  motions  by  rising  in  the  west  and  setting  in  the
east.  Deimos,  too,  is  just  as  unconventional  in  its  way,
for  it  remains  for  two  days  at  a  time  about  the  horizon.
Furthermore,  with  each,  owing  to  its  nearness  to  the  planet,
its  distance  from  any  place  on  the  surface  varies  at  different
times,  and  with  its  distance  varies  its  apparent  size  in  a  some-
what startling  manner.

As  for  themselves,  they  are  very  minute  bodies,  though
not  so  difficult  to  see  as  is  commonly  stated.  In  the  clear
air  of  Arizona,  both  were  conspicuous  objects.  They  appear
as  stars  of  about  the  12th  and  10th  magnitudes  respectively ;
Phobos  being  much  larger,  relatively  to  Deimos,  than  its
hitherto  accepted  value  would  indicate.  Observations  at
Flagstaff  by  both  Mr.  Douglass  and  by  me  agree  in  making
its  relative  brilliancy  such  as  to  give  it  a  diameter  about  3.6
times  that  of  Deimos.  It  is  not  usually  so  conspicuous  as
Deimos,  in  spite  of  its  size,  because  of  its  proximity  to  the
planet,  and  the  consequent  much  greater  illumination  of
the  field  upon  which  it  is  seen.  Considering  their  most
probable  albedoes  as  somewhat  less  than  that  of  our  moon,


APPENDIX  217

we  find  from  their  stellar  magnitudes,  taking  the  stellar
magnitude  found  for  Deimos  by  Pickering  in  1877  as  basis,
their  diameters  to  be,  —

Deimos,  about  10  miles  ;
Phobos,  about  36  miles.
Phobos  would  thus,  at  its  closest  approach  to  the  surface  of
the  planet,  that  is,  when  it  was  in  the  zenith,  just  show  a
disk  like  the  Moon.     Otherwise  both  satellites  would  appear
as  stars.

Neither  satellite  shares  the  red  tint  of  the  planet.


Note  V.


As  the  means  employed  in  any  astronomical  observation
are  of  interest,  I  may  add  that  the  telescope  used  in  these
researches  was  an  18-inch  refractor,  made  by  Brashear,  of
Alleghany,  Pa.,  the  largest  he  has  yet  made.  The  powers
used  varied  from  320  to  1305  diameters,  the  usual  ones  be-
ing, for  visual  purposes,  440  and  617,  and,  for  micrometric
measurements,  862.  There  is,  not  unnaturally,  much  mis-
conception prevalent  as  to  the  magnification  possible  in  a
telescope.  The  highest  powers  of  a  glass  can  never  be  used
on  planetary  detail,  as  the  tremors  of  the  air  blur  the  image.
Thus  we  come  back  again  to  the  question  of  atmosphere,
which  is  indeed  the  crux  ohservationis.  With  regard  to
work  on  the  planets,  the  important  point  about  an  observa-
tory is  not  so  much  what  is  its  lens  as  what  is  its  location.


?


■C)    \     6^


Pla-


Noi


m:ap  oij

on  Mercator'


XXIV


200    '.'10    TIO         2:;0    210    250    2(50    270    2o0   200    .'iOO    310    :J20    330    310    350   3C0

— i \ \ } ] 1 ] ; ] ] 1 c 1 1 1 \ r-


P.L.


'    MARS
s  Projecfcion


Lowell  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1895


INDEX   OF  NAMES   ON  THE  MAP  OF  MAES

ARRANGED   ALPHABETICALLY

REGIONS


No.


Name


No.


Name


100  Aonius  Sinus

7  Argyre
168  Atlantis
15  Aurorae  Sinus
287  Ausonia

4  Deucalionis  Regie
268  Edom  Promontorium
194  Elysium

1  Fastigium  Aryn
229  Hadriaticum  Mare
240  Hammonis  Cornu
275  Hellas
211  Hesperia
205  Isidis  Regie


236  Japygia
225  Leniuria
207  Libya
176  Mare  Chrouium
165  Mare  Cimmerium
285  Mare  Erythraeum
283  Mare  Icarium
173  Mare  Sirenum
210  Mare  Tyrrhenum

20  Margaritifer  Sinus
103  Memnonia

6  Noachis
277  Oenotria

88  Ogygis  Regie


No.       Name
286  Ophir
9  Protei  Regio
5  Pyrrhae  Regio
3  Sabaeus  Sinus
2  Socratis     Promonto-
rium
233  Syrtis  Major
237  Solis  Promontorium
209  Syrtis  Parva
27  Tempe
92  Tliyle  I.
177  Thyle  II.
267  Xisuthri


No.       Name
271  Acalandrus

84  Acampsis

10  Acesines
119  Achana
222  Achates
199  Achelous
284  Acheron

90  Acis
238  Aeolus

76  Aesis
192  Aethiops

43  Agathodaemon
273  Alpheus

87  Ambrosia

203  Amenthes
12  Amphrysus
54  Amystis

61  Anapus

161  Antaeus

242  Anubis
79  Araxes

144  Arges

244  Arosis
250  Arsanias

62  Artanes

243  Asopus

245  Astaboras

204  Astapus
156  Atax
224  Athesis
163  Avernus

73  Avus

162  Axius
148  Axon

57  Bactrus


CANALS


Name


No.
37  Baetis
86  Bathys

159  Bautis
143  Belus
198  Boreas
201  Boreosyrtis
129  Brontes

16  Caicus
189  Cambyses

22  Cantabras
232  Carpis
239  Casuentus

55  Catarrhactes

94  Cayster
221  Centrites
218  Cephissus
186  Cerberus

14  Oestrus
182  Chaboras
184  Chretes

42  Chrysas

49  Chrysorrhoas
212  Cinyphus

47  Clitumnus

64  Clodianus

160  Cophen
44  Coprates
40  Corax

164  Cyaneus

91  Cyrus

77  Daemon
260  Daix
258  Daradax

26  Dardanus

19  Dargamanes


No.        Name

264  Deuteronilus

172  Digentia

235  Dosaron
93  Drahonus

107  Elison
74  Eosphorus
18  Erannoboas

150  Erebus

141  Erinaeus
226  Erymanthus

104  Erynnis
256  Eulaeus
114  Eumenides
193  Eunostos
253  Euphrates
140  Eurymedon
213  Eurypus

142  ETenus
67  Fortunae

179  Gaesus

215  Galaesus

197  Galaxias
36  Ganges
48  Ganymede
13  Garrhuenus

122  Gigas

266  Gihon
63  Glaucus

105  Gorgon
145  Gyes
153  Hades

70  Halys
170  Harpasus

38  Hebe
181  Helisson


220     INDEX  OF  NAMES  ON  THE  MAP  OF  MARS


No.


Name


No.


Name


No.


Name


171  Heratemis

101  Herculis  Columnae
261  Hiddekel

17  Hipparis
231  Hippus
234  Hyctanis

82  Hydaspes

34  Hydraotes
11  Hydriacus

227  Hylias
272  Hyllus
31  Hyphasis

35  Hypsas

102  Hyscus
30  Indus
68  Iris

95  Isis

28  Jamuna

80  Jaxartes
257  Labotas
155  Laestrygon
166  Leontes
202  Lethes

139  Liris

81  Maeander
270  Magon

97  Malya


263  Margus
127  Medus
106  Medusa

99  Mogrus

39  Nectar
135  Neda
206  Nepenthes
183  Nereides
167  Nestus
269  Neudrus

29  Nilokeras
246  Niiosyrtis

51  Nilus
188  Nymphaeus
8  Oceanus

21  Ochus
180  Opharus
149  Orcus
255  Orontes
230  Orosines

24  Oxus
191  Pactolus
169  Padargus

66  Palamnus
108  Parcae
274  Peneus


82  Phasis
247  Phison
251  Protonilus
175  Psychrus
121  Pyriphlegethc
220  Rha
178  Scamander
223  Sesamus
174  Simois

111  Sirenius
254  Sitacus
130  Steropes
196  Styx

89  Surius
157  Tartarus
228  Tedanius

112  Thermodon
133  Thyanis
125  Titan

72  Tithonius
208  Triton
276  Tyndis
241  Typhon
110  Ulysses

56  Uranius
219  Xanthus


OASES


No.


Name


No.


Name


No.


Name


59  Acherusia  Palus
109  Aganippe  Fons
128  Alcyonia

136  Ammonium
195  Aponi  Fons
158  Aquae  Apollinares
200  Aquae  Calidae
131  Arachoti  Fons
115  Arduenna
262  Arethusa  Fons
278  Arsia  Silva
117  Arsine

96  Astrae  Lacus
134  Augila
123  Bandusiae  Fons

98  Benacus  Lacus
120  Biblis  Fons
146  Castalia  Fons

65  Ceraunius
187  Clepsydra  Fons

60  Cyane  Fons
217  Cynia  Lacus


288  Daphne

124  Ferentinae  Lucus

214  Flevo  Lacus

46  Fons  Juventae

83  Gallinaria  Silra
116  Hercynia  Silva
216  Hesperidum  Lacus
147  Hibe

58  Hippocrene  Fons
249  Hipponitis  Palus
151  Hypelaeus

52  Labeatis  Lacus
252  Lacus  Ismenius

50  Lacus  Lunae

78  Lacus  Phoenicis
281  Lausonius  Lacus

75  Lerne
190  Lucrinus  Lacus
185  Lucus  Angitiae

33  Lucus  Feronia
188  Lucus  Maricae


41  Maeisia  Silva

69  Mapharitis
118  Mareotis

53  Meroe

45  Messeis  Fons
132  Nitriae
113  Nodus  Gordii
280  Nessonis  Lacus
282  Nuba  Lacus

23  Oxia  Palus
279  Palicorum  Lacus

25  Pallas  Lacus
152  Propontis
265  Serapium
248  Sirbonis  Lacus
259  Solis  Fons

85  Solis  Lacus

71  Tithonius  Lacus
126  Trinythios
154  Trivium  Charoutis
137  Utopia


mDEX  OF  NAMES   ON  THE  MAP  OF  MARS


ARRANGED   NUMERICALLY


1  Fastigium  Aryn

2  Socratis     Promonto-

rium

3  Sabaeus  Sinus

4  Deucalionis  Regio

5  Pyrrhae  Regio

6  Noachis

7  Argyre

8  Oceanus

9  Protei  Regio

10  Acesines

11  Hydriacus

12  Amphrysus

13  Garrhuenus

14  Cestrus

15  Aurorae  Sinus

16  Caicus

17  Hipparis

18  Erannoboas

19  Dargamanes

20  Margaritifer  Sinus

21  Ochus

22  Cantabras

23  Oxia  Palus

24  Ox  us

25  Pallas  Lacus

26  Dardanus

27  Tempe

28  Jam  una

29  Nilokeras

30  Indus

31  Hyphasis

32  Hydaspes

33  Lucus  Feronia

34  Hydraotes

35  Hypsas

36  Ganges

37  Baetis

38  Hebe

39  Nectar

40  Corax

41  Maeisia  Silra

42  Chrysas

43  Agathodaemon

44  Coprates

45  Messeis  Fens

46  Fens  Juventae

47  Clitumnus

48  Ganymede

49  Chrysorrhoas

50  Lacus  Lunae

51  Nilus

52  Labeatis  Lacus

53  Meroe

54  Amystis

55  Gatarrhactes


56  TJranius

57  Bactrus

58  Hippocrene  Fons

59  Acherusia  Palus

60  Cyane  Fons

61  Anapus

62  Artanes

63  Glaucus

64  Clodianus

65  Ceraunius

66  Palamnus

67  Fortunae

68  Iris

69  Mapharitis

70  Halys

71  Tithonius  Lacus

72  Tithonius

73  Avus

74  Eosphorus

75  Lerne

76  Aesis

77  Daemon

78  Lacus  Phoenicis

79  Araxes

80  Jaxartes

81  Maeander

82  Phasis

83  Gallinaria  Silva

84  Acampsis

85  Soils  Lacus

86  Bathys

87  Ambrosia

88  Ogygis  Regio

89  Surius

90  Acis

91  Cyrus

92  Thyle  L

93  Drahonus

94  Cayster

95  Isis

96  Astrae  Lacus

97  Malva

98  Benacus  Lacus

99  Mogrus

100  Aonius  Sinus

101  Herculis  Columnae

102  Hyscus

103  Memnonia

104  Erynnis

105  Gorgon

106  Medusa

107  Elison

108  Parcae

109  Aganippe  Fons

110  Ulysses'

111  Sirenius


112  Thermodon

113  Nodus  Gordii

114  Eumenides

115  Arduenna

116  Hercynia  Silva

117  Arsine

118  Mareotis

119  Achana

120  BJblis  Fons

121  Pyriphlegetlion

122  Gigas

123  Bandusiae  Fons

124  Ferentinae  Lucus

125  Titan

126  Trinythios

127  Medus

128  Alcyonia

129  Brontes

130  Steropes

131  Arachoti  Fons

132  Nitriae

133  Thyanis

134  Augila

135  Neda

136  Ammonium

137  Utopia

138  Lucus  Maricae

139  Liris

140  Eurymedon

141  Erinaeus

142  Evenus

143  Belus

144  Arges

145  Gyes

146  Castalia  Fons

147  Hibe

148  Axon

149  Orcus

150  Erebus

151  Hypelaeus

152  Propontis

153  Hades

154  Trivium  Charontis

155  Laestrygon

156  Atax

157  Tartarus

158  Aquae  ApoUinares

159  Bautis

160  Cophen

161  Antaeus

162  Axius

163  Avernus

164  Cyaneus

165  Mare  Cimmerium

166  Leontes

167  Nestus


222    INDEX  OF  NAMES  ON  THE  MAP  OF  MARS


168  Atlantis

169  Padargus

170  Harpasus

171  Heratemis

172  Digentia

173  Mare  Sirenum

174  Simois

175  Psychrus

176  Mare  Chronium

177  Thyle  II.

178  Scamander

179  Gaesus

180  Opharus

181  Ilelisson

182  Chaboras

183  Nereides

184  Chretes

185  Lucus  Angitiae

186  Cerberus

187  Clepsydra  Fons

188  Nymphaeus

189  Cambyses

190  Lucrinus  Lacus

191  Pactolus

192  Aethiops

193  Eunostos

194  Elysium

195  Aponi  Fons

196  Styx

197  Galaxias

198  Boreas

199  Achelous

200  Aquae  Calidae

201  Boreosyrtis

202  Lethes

203  Amenthes

204  Astapus

205  Isidis  Regio

206  Nepenthes

207  Libya

208  Triton


209  Syrtis  Parva

210  Mare  Tyrrhenum

211  Hesperia

212  Cinyphus

213  Eurypus

214  Flevo  Lacus

215  Galaesus

216  Hesperidum  Lacus

217  Cynia  Lacus

218  Cephissus

219  Xanthus

220  Rha

221  Centrites

222  Achates

223  Sesamus

224  Athesis

225  Lemuria

226  Erymanthus

227  Hylias

228  Tedanius

229  Hadriaticum  Mare

230  Orosines

231  Hippus

232  Carpis

233  Syrtis  Major

234  Hyctanis

235  Dosaron

236  Japygia

237  Solis  Promontorium

238  Aeolus

239  Casuentus

240  Hammonis  Cornu

241  Typhon

242  Anubis

243  Asopus

244  Arosis

245  Astaboras

246  Mlosyrtis

247  Phison

248  Sirbonis  Lacus


249  Hipponitis  Palus

250  Arsanias

251  Protonilus

252  Lacus  Ismenius

253  Euphrates

254  Sitacus

255  Or  on  tea

256  Eulaeus

257  Labotas

258  Daradax

259  Solis  Fons

260  Daix

261  Hiddekel

262  Arethusa  Fons

263  Margus

264  Deuteronilus

265  Serapium

266  Gihon

267  Xisuthri

268  Edom  Promontorium

269  Neudrus

270  Magon

271  Acalandrus

272  Hyllus

273  Alpheus

274  Peneus

275  Hellas

276  Tyndis

277  Oenotria

278  Arsia  Silva

279  Palicorum  Lacus

280  Nessonis  Lacus

281  Lausonius  Lacus

282  Nuba  Lacus
2^3  Mare  Icarium

284  Acheron

285  Mare  Erythraeum

286  Ophir

287  Ausonia

288  Daphne


INDEX


Age,  of  a  planet,  206  et  seq. ;  of
Mars,  207.

Air.      (See  Atmosphere.)

Aphelion,  of  Mars'  orbit,  12.

Apsides,  line  of  Martian,  22 ;  in-
fluence on  Martian  seasons,  23.

Aqueous  vapor,  49  ;  boiling
point  of,  on  Mars,  59 ;  speed  of
molecules  of,  Appendix,  Note  I.

Araxes,  the,  change  in  shape  ac-
counted for,  161.

Areography,  92  et  seq.

Atmosphere,  importance  of,  31 ;
evidenced  by  change,  31 ;  ab-
sence on  the  Moon,  32  ;  presence
on  Mars,  32  ;  measured  on  Mars
by  Mr.  Douglass,  37 ;  method
of  determination  of,  38  ;  quan-
tity of,  on  Mars,  43  ;  character-
istics of,  on  Mars,  45 ;  veiling
by,  48  ;  density  of,  on  Mars,  50,
52,  75  ;  boiling  point  of  water
in,  59 ;  constitution  of,  75 ;  in
relation  to  seeing,  139 ;  spectro-
scopic observations  on  Martian,
Appendix,  Note  HI.

Ausonia,  strait  between  it  and
HeUas,  115.

Autumn,  length  of  Martian,  24.

Axis,  tilt  of  Martian,  22;  influ-
ence on  Martian  seasons,  23.

Band,  surrounding  polar  cap,  77  ;

composition  of,  80.
Beer  and  Madler,  on  north  polar

cap,  78.
Boreas,  the,  62.


Bright    spots,  on  disk,  60,  61;

variability  of,  62.
Brilliancy,  relative,  of  Mars,  12.
Brontes,  the,  133,  164.

Calendar,  the  Martian,  77.

Canals,  121,  128,  129  et  seq.  ;
straightness  of,  131 ;  breadth  of,
132 ;  length  of,  133,  134 ;  his-
tory of,  136  ;  doubling  of,  137 ;
duplication  of,  140,  187  et  seq. ;
catalogue  of,  145 ;  number  of,
147 ;  not  natural  features,  151,
153 ;  changes  in,  155,  157,  161,
162  ;  constitution  of,  164,  202  ;
in  dark  regions,  97,  148,  171  et
seq. ;  at  times  invisible,  155 ;
list  of,  in  dark  regions,  173.

Carbonic  acid  gas,  theory  of,  as
related  to  polar  cap,  80 ;  char-
acteristics of,  81 ;  objection  to
theory  of,  83 ;  critical  veloc-
ity of  molecules  of.  Appendix,
Note  I.

Carbonic  dioxide.  (See  Carbonic
acid  gas.)

Cassini,  rotation  of  Mars,  21.

Causeways,  118.

Ceraunius,  relative  visibility  of,
183.

Changes,  on  disk,  33,  34 ;  in  tint
of  land  areas,  104,  110  et  seq.,
118 ;  in  canals,  155,  157,  161,
162  ;  seasonal  and  secular,  161 ;
in  spots,  182.

Cimmerian  Sea.  (See  Mare  Cim-
merium.)


224


INDEX


Clerk-Maxwell,  determination  of

molecular  speed,  54.
Climate,  of  Mars,  49.
Cloudlessness,  of  Martian  skies,

45.
Clouds,  45,  62  ;  how  formed,  52 ;

as  seen  on  terminator,  64,  65 ;

kinds,  68;  curious  example  of,

seen  by  Mr.  Douglass,  70  et  seq. ;

height  of  same,  73 ;  movement

of  same,  74 ;  no  trace  of  veiling

of  surface  by,  157.
Color,  of  Mars,  121 ;  of  land  areas,

177.
Comet-tail  peninsulas,  103.
Cooling,    of    the  Earth,    30;    of

Mars,  30.
Cracks,  theory  of  the  canals  as,

152.
Critical  velocity,  defined,  55  ;  of

the  Earth,  56,  Appendix,  Note  I.;

of  Mercury,  58,  Appendix,  Note

I. ;  of  Mars,  58,  Appendix,  Note

I. ;  of  Venus,  of  the   Moon,  of

Jupiter,  of  Saturn,  of  Uranus,  of

Neptune,  of  the  Sun,  Appendix,

Note  I.
Cyane  Fons,  relative  visibility  of,

183.

Dardanus,  the,  double,  196.
Dark  areas,  depressions  over,  69.
Day,  of  Mars,  22.
Deimos,  orbit  and  size,  Appendix,

Note  IV.
Density,  of  Mars,  19.
Denudation,     far    advanced     on

Mars,  171,  207.
Depressions,   on   terminator,  65 ;

on  terminator,  over  dark  areas,

69.
Deserts,  of  Mars,  60,  108.
Deucalionis  Regio,  neck  between

it  and  Fastigium  Aryn,  118.
Development,   seasonal,   in  seas,

122 ;  of  canals,  154  et  seq.


Diameter,  of  Mars,  equatorial,  16,
42  ;  polar,  42  ;  Appendix,  Note  II.

Distance,  relative,  of  Mars  from
Earth,  4,  12.

Double  canals,  on  map,  106 ;  ac-
count of,  188  et  seq. ;  appearance
of,  189;  width  between,  190;
manner  of  doubling,  190,  192.

Douglass,  A.  E.,  measurement  of
diameters,  41 ;  cloud  observa-
tions, 70 ;  rift  in  polar  cap,
87 ;  observations  on  the  Nectar,
194.

Duplication,  of  canals.  (See  Gem-
ination.)

Earth,  ellipticity  of  the,  25  ;  crit-
cal  velocity  of  the,  56,  Appen-
dix, Note  I.

Eccentricity,  of  orbit  of  Mars,  24 ;
of  the  Earth,  24.

Elysium,  60,  61.

Equator,  inclination  of  Martian,
to  orbit,  77.

Equinoxes,  77 ;  vernal  equinox  of
Martian  southern  hemisphere,
114  ;  autumnal  equinox  of  Mar-
tian southern  hemisphere,  114.

Eridania,  60.

Eumenides,  length  of  the,  133;
oases  detected  on  the,  181.

Eunostos,  the,  62.

Euphrates,  the,  shown  double,
106;  doubling  of,  194,

Faraday,  experiments  on  carbonic
acid  gas,  81.

Fastigium  Aryn,  the,  origin  of
Martian  longitudes,  95  ;  neck  be-
tween it  and  Deucalionis  Regio,
118.

Flammarion,  Camille,  "  La  Pla-
n^te  Mars,"  111.

Fons  Juventae,  the,  96,  180,  193.

Frost,  possible  effect  of,  on  Mars,
59,  62.


INDEX


225


Galaxias,  the,  62.

Ganges,  the,  98  ;  length  of,  133 ;

canals  near,  156 ;   double,  190,

193,  194.
Gases,  on  the  Earth,  50 ;  on  Mars,

50 ;  effect  of,  on  atmosphere,  51.
Gemination,  of  canals,  190  et  seq.
Gigas,  oases  on  the,  182.
Gihon,  name  of  the,  142.
Glacial  epochs,  24.
Glaciation  cracks,  theory  of  the

canals  as,  152.
Gorgon,  the,  164.
Gravitation,  law  of,  10.
Gravity,  on  the  Earth,  19;  on  Mars,

19 ;  effect  of,  on  atmosphere,  51.
Green,  N.  E.,  observations  at  Ma-
deira, 87 ;  map  of  Mars,  141.
Gulf  of  tlie  Titans.     (See  Sims

Titanum.)

Hades,  the,  194.

Hammonis  Cornu,  neck  between

it  and  Hellas,  119.
Heat,  on  Mars,  13;  inherent,  of

Mars,  30.
Hellas,  105  ;  strait  between  it  and

Noachis,   115 ;  between  it   and

Ausonia,  115 ;  neck  between  it

and  Hammonis  Cornu,  119.
Hesperia,  change  in,  116, 118.
Hourglass  Sea,  the,  21.
Huyghens,  drawing  of  Mars,  21.
Hydrogen,  speed  of  molecules  of,

54,  Appendix,  Note  I. ;  in  free

state,  56.

Ice,  particles  of,  in  Martian  air,  49,

82.
Ice-cap.      (See    Polar    cap,    and

South  polar  cap.)
Indus,  the,  first  seen,  157.
Inhabitants,   of  Mars,   127,   128,

204  et  seq.
Irregularities,  on  terminator,  not

mountainous,  66.


Irrigation,  necessity  for,  128,  130  ;

theory  of,  supported,  172,  202.
Islands,  south  temperate  chain  of,

115.

Jupiter,  relative  orbit  and  size  of,
5 ;  elliptieity  of  disk  of,  25  ;  ev-
idence of  atmosphere  about,  57  ;
discovery  of  satellites  of,  140 ;
critical  velocity  of.  Appendix,
Note  I.

Kepler,  laws  of  solar  system  of,
10.

Lake  of  the    Sun.      (See    SoU$

Lacus.)
Lakes,  of  Mars,  184.
La  Place,  theory  of  primal  nebula

of,  4.
«  La  Planfete  Mars,"  111,  141.
Libya,  105.

Life,  extra-terrestrial,  5.
Light,  on  Mars,  13.
Limb,  of  Mars,  46.
LimbUght,  46.
Linne,  32.

Madler,  Beer  and,  on  north  polar

cap,  78.
Map,  of  Mars,  92  et  seq.,  141  et

seq.,  and  at  end  of  Appendix.
Maraldi,  study  of  polar  caps,  22.
Mare  Cimmerium,  120.
Mare  Erythraeum,  120.
Markings,   a  peculiarity   of   the

Martian,  123,  124 ;  bluish-green,

108,    133;    reddish-oehre,    108,

133.
Mars,    passim.      (See    particular

headings.)
Martian  life,  202.
Martians,  as  different  from  men,

204  ;  probability  of,  209  et  seq.
Mass,  of  Mars,  how  determined,

16.


226


INDEX


Matter,  as  common  property,  4.

Memnonia,  60.

Mereator,  map  of  Mars  on  projec-
tion, 143,  and  after  Appendix.

Mercury,  ellipticity  of  disk  of,  25 ;
evidence  of  atmosphere  about,
57 ;  cusps  of,  57  ;  critical  veloc-
ity of,  58,  Appendix,  Note  I.

Meteorites,  theory  of  canals  as
made  by,  152.

Micrometric  measures,  of  diam-
eters, by  Mr.  Douglass,  27.

Mind,  universality  of,  4.

Mist,  sunrise,  46 ;  sunset,  46,  157.

Mitchell  Mountains,  87.

Molecules,  kinetic  theory  of,
53 ;  speed  of,  54,  Appendix,
Note  I.

Moon,  cosmically  dead,  2;  rela-
tive orbit  and  size  of,  4  ;  changes
on,  82  ;  atmosphere  of,  57.

Mountains,  66  ;  how  detected  on
a  planet,  43  ;  as  seen  on  termi-
nator, 48,  69, 167  et  seq.

Names,  of  planets,  207.

Nectar,  the,  99  ;  double,  194.

Neptune,  relative  orbit  and  size
of,  5 ;  probable  ellipticity  of  disk
of,  25  ;  evidence  of  atmosphere
about,  57 ;  critical  velocity  of.
Appendix,  Note  I.

Newton,  law  of  gravitation,  10.

Nice,  observatory  of,  138.

Night,  on  Mars,  19.

Nitrogen,  speed  of  molecules  of,
57,  Appendix,  Note  I.

Noachis,  strait  between  it  and
HeUas,  115.

Nomenclature,  of  Martian  mark-
ings, 94,  95,  141,  142 ;  meaning
of  Schiaparelli's,  142.

Oases,  131,  176  et  seq. ;  shape
of,  178,  187  ;  size  of,  179 ;  onEu-
menides-Orcus,   181 ;    on   Pyri-


phlegethon,  182 ;  on  Gigas,  182.

(See  Spots.)
Ophir,  60.

Opposition,  of  Mars,  13.
Orbit,  of  Mars,  8  ;  compared  to  the

Earth's,  10  ;  eccentricity  of,  24.
Oxygen,  speed  of  molecules  of,  53,

Appendix,  Note  I. ;  in  free  state,

57.

Parabolic  velocity,  55.

Pearl-bearing  Gulf,  the,  96,  156.

Peninsulas,  comet-tail,  103.

Perihelion,  of  orbit  of  Mars,  11.

Perrotin,  detection  of  the  Phison,
137,  138 ;  confirmation  of  canals
of  Schiaparelli,  138.

Phase,  of  Mars,  19,  37,  46.

Phasis,  the,  161.

Phison,  the,  shown  double,  106;
name  of,  142  ;  double,  190 ;  dou-
bling of,  195.

Phobos,  orbit  and  size  of.  Appen-
dix, Note  IV.

Phoenix  Lake,  the,  99,  100,  133 ;
canals  near,  162 ;  relative  con-
spieuousness  of,  183 ;  polari-
seopic  observation  of,  185.

Photography,  of  planet,  93.

Pickering,  Prof.  W.  H.,  estimate
of  height  of  cloud,  71 ;  polari-
scope  observations,  80,  185  ;  ob-
servations of  rift  in  polar  cap,
85  ;  an  open  polar  sea,  88,  175 ;
120 ;  names  by,  141.

Planets,  name  of,  1 ;  relative  orbits
and  sizes  of,  4,  5  ;  as  wandering
stars,  9  ;  as  a  solar  family,  10.

Polar  caps,  22,  33,  76.  (See  South
polar  cap.)

Polar  flattening,  25,  27  ;  amount
of,  42.

Polariscope,  observations  on  polar
sea,  80 ;  on  so-called  seas,  109,
120 ;  on  the  Solis  Lacus  and  the
Phoenix  Lake,  185.


INDEX


227


Polar  sea,  79  et  seq.,  92,  114,  119.

Polar  snows,  relation  of,  to  sur-
face activity,  113.

Pole,  south,  of  cold  not  coincident
with  pole  of  rotation,  85.

Poles,  of  Mars,  tilt  of,  22.

Presentation,  meaning  of,  note,
156.

Proctor,  map  of  Mars,  141.

Projections,  on  terminator  of
Mars,  63,  64.

Protei  Regio,  72.

Psychic  effect,  on  seeing,  158-
160.

Pyriphlegethon,  the,  oases  de-
tected on,  182,

Rifts,  in  south  polar  cap,  85,  87.

Rotation,  of  Mars,  time  of,  21, 22,
95,  107.

Satellites,    of    Mars,    Appendix,

Note  IV.
Saturn,  relative  orbit  and  size  of,

5 ;  critical  velocity  of.  Appen-
dix, Note  I.
Schiaparelli,  on  tilt   of   Martian

poles,   77 ;   map   of    Mars,   94 ;

first  detection  of  canals,  136  et

seq.
Sea  of  the  Sirens,  the,  120.
Seas,  of  Mars,  so  called,   96,  107

et  seq.,  123,  126,  127 ;  variation

in  tint  of,  110,  118,  120  ;  of  the

Moon,  123.
Seasons,  of  Mars,  23 ;  length  of,

24  ;  phenomenally  hot  season  in

southern  hemisphere   of    Mars,

91.
Seeing,  conditions   conducive  to,

138,  139.
Shape,  of  Mars,  14 ;  of  oases,  179.
Sinus  Titanum,  101,  134;  canals

near,  156,  182.
Size,  of  Mars,  14 ;  of  oases,  179.
Snow,  on  Mars,  33.
Snow-caps.  (See  South  polar  cap.)


Solar  system,  size  of  the,  4,  14,
15.

Solis  Lacus,  99 ;  canals  near,  155 ;
size  of,  180 ;  polariscope  obser-
vations on,  185 ;  bright  cause-
ways in,  194.

Solstices,  of  Mars,  77 ;  summer
solstice  of  southern  hemisphere,
114.

Southern  hemisphere,  of  Mars,
seasons  in,  24  ;  terminator  of,  64.

South  polar  cap,  irradiation  from,
27 ;  dwindling  of,  33 ;  size  of,  in
June,  76 ;  disappearance  of,  79,
90 ;  constitution  of,  80,  83,  94  ;
history  of,  84  et  seq. ;  eccen-
tricity of,  85  ;  rift  in,  85,  87 ;
starlike  points  in,  86,  87 ;  de-
tached portions  of,  89  ;  different
levels  of,  89  ;  disappearance  of,
90.

South  polar  sea,  94.

South  pole,  of  cold  on  Mars  not
coincident  with  geographical
pole,  85.

Spectroscope,  observations  on
stars,  4  ;  observations  of  atmos-
phere of  Mars  by.  Appendix  III.

Spots,  in  bright  areas  (see  Oases)  ;
on  border  of  dark  areas,  197  ;  as
terminals  to  canals,  197  ;  in  dark
areas,  198 ;  list  of,  199.

Spring,  length  of,  on  Mars,  24.

Stars,  Mars  as  one,  1 ;  relative
distance  of,  5.

Stoney,  G.  Johnstone,  53.

Storms,  on  Mars,  59.

Straits,  in  dark  areas,  114,  115,
117,  163,  173.

Struve,  Hermann,  29.

Summer,  length  of,  on  Mars,  24.

Sun,  relative  size  of,  4  ;  effect  on
planet's  age,  206.

Surface,  of  Mars,  features  of,
93.

Syrtis  Major,  20,  105,  119,  141.


228


INDEX


Tempe,  60.

Terminator,  observations  on,  48,

63,  64 ;  irregularities  on,  63 ;  of

Moon,  169 ;  of  Mars,  170.
Tisserand,  on  polar  flattening  of

Mars,  28.
Titan,  the,  102,  184,  164.
Tithonius  Laeus,  99,  181.
Trivium     Charontis,    103,    ISS,

181 ;  shape  of,  179.
Twiliglit,  on  Mars,  measured  by

Mr.  Douglass,  26.
Twilight  arc,  of  Mars,  42.
Typhon,  the,  double,  195.

Uranus,  relative  orbit  and  size  of,
5  ;  ellipticity  of  disk  of,  25  ;  evi-
dence of  atmosphere  of,  57 ;  crit-
ical velocity  of,  Appendix,
Note  I.


Variations,  of  surface  of  Mars.
(See  Changes.)

Vegetation,  on  Mars,  122, 164 ;  vis-
ibility of,  130, 198.

Velocity,  critical,  of  planets,  Ap-
pendix, Note  I.

Venus,  cloud-covered,  2 ;  ellipti-
city of  disk  of,  25  ;  evidence  of
atmosphere  of,  57  ;  cusps  of,  57 ;
critical  velocity  of,  Appendix,
Note  I.

Water,  79,  83,  92 ;  necessary  to
life,  76,  127 ;  theoretic  reflection
from,  109  ;  amount  of,  on  Mars,
122  ;  direction  of,  when  flowing
from  pole,  125  ;  as  fresh,  175.

"Weather,  on  Mars,  58.

"Winter,  length  of,  on  Mars,  24.

"Worlds,  other  than  our  own,  3.


UEC 131949


Plate  I


MARS

SINUS  TITANUM

November,  1894


LowELi,  Observatory
Flagstaff,  A.  T.  1S94


OEC 131949


^..s^  ^^^


<>


^^


C"  ^


'V         r3^^


-^>".  =  .,^


-.#   ^


■"^^^^.^   -


V


>  ^  ^  * "  /-  ^  \>  ^  ^  ^ « /


%.


%.^^

/  %


*^


,^^°^


*"  '^


>v


'  #  <-^ "' ;.,  s^   A&^     ■    ^  ''


\„>


^t>  \^


G^


\\;^'


^^o^


^>l^^


■i


n::P


-.w)},
