Mars as the Abode of Life (Percival Lowell, 1908)
=================================================
Percival Lowell — Mars as the Abode of Life (New York: Macmillan, 1908). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (marsasabodelife00lowegoog).

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web



at |http : //books . google . com/


^ _ ^ ^„-„.„ Jii^t^KrP?^


Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



Hosted by



Google



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

NEW YORK • BOSTON • CHICAGO
ATLANTA • SAN FRANCISCO

MACMILLAN & CO., Limited

LONDON • BOMBAY • CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd.

TORONTO



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



MARS

AS

THE ABODE OF LIFE



BY
PERCIVAL LOWELL, A.B., LL.D.

AUTHOR OF ''MARS AND ITS CANALS," ETC.

DIRECTOR OF THE OBSERVATORY AT FLAGSTAFF, ARIZONA', NON-RESIDENT PROFESSOR
OF ASTRONOMY AT THE MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY; FELLOW OF
THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES", MEMBRE DE LA SOCI6t6
ASTRONOMIQUE DE FRANCE*, MEMBER OF THE ASTRONOMICAL AND ASTRO-
PHYSICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA; MITGLIED DER ASTRONOMISCHE GE-
SELLSCHAFT; MEMBRE DE LA - SOClfeT^ BELGE d'ASTRONOMIE;
HONORARY MEMBER OF THE SOCIEDAD ASTRONOMICA DE MEX-
ICO; JANSSEN MEDALIST OF THE SOCi6t6 ASTRONOMIQUE DB
FRANCE, 1904, FOR RESEARCHES ON MARS; ETC., ETC.



ILLUSTRATED



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

1908

-^// rights Reserved



Hosted by



Google



Copyright, 1908,
By the MACMILLAN COMPANY.



Set up and electrotyped. Published December, 1908.



J. S. Gushing Co. — Berwick & Smith Co.
J^orwood, Mass., U.S.A.



Hosted by



Googh



MY BROTHER

PROFESSOR ABBOTT LAWRENCE LOWELL, LL.D.

WHO AS TRUSTEE OF THE LOWELL INSTITUTE

PROPOSED THESE LECTURES

THIS PRESENTATION OF THEM

IS AFFECTIONATELY

INSCRIBED



191941



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



PREFACE

In 1906 Professor Lowell was asked by the trustee
of the Lowell Institute to deliver a course of lectures
there upon the planet Mars. Eleven years had elapsed
since, at the invitation of the former trustee, he had
done the like. When the time came for their delivery
unusual interest was manifested, the course proving
the most thronged of any ever given before the Insti-
tute. So great was the demand for seats that the hall
could not contain the crowd, and the lectures had to
be repeated in the afternoons, to audiences almost as
large.

The eight lectures were then published, with slight
changes, in six papers in the Century Magazine^ and
were subsequently wanted by Macmillan and Com-
pany for issuance in book form.

Though dealing specifically with Mars, the theme
of the lectures was that of planetary evolution in gen-
eral, and this book is thus a presentation of something
which Professor Lowell has long had in mind and of
which his studies of Mars form but a part, the re-
search into the genesis and development of what we
call a world ; not the mere aggregating of matter, but



Hosted by



Google



viii PREFACE

what that aggregation inevitably brings forth. The
subject which Unks the Nebular Hypothesis to the
Darwinian theory, bridging the evolutionary gap be-
tween the two, he has called planetology, thus desig-
nating the history of the planet's individual career.
It is in this Hght that Mars is here regarded : how it
came to be what it is and how it came to differ from
the Earth in the process.

The object of the founding of the Observatory at
Flagstaff was the study of the planets of our solar
system ; a subject it has now for fourteen years made
its specialty, the site, chosen for the purpose, en-
abling it to prosecute this study to more advantage
than is possible at any other observatory at present.
From the data thus collected, light has been thrown
upon the evolution of the planets as worlds, resulting
in a thesis of which the present book is a preliminary
presentation.

As in all theses, the cogency of the conclusion hangs
upon the validity of each step in the argument. It is
vital that each of these should be based on all that
we know of natural laws and the general principles
underlying them. Their truth can only be adequately
appreciated by those able to follow the physical and
mathematical processes involved, and for this the gen-
eral reader has not the necessary technical education.
Yet there are many, professional and unprofessional



Hosted by



Google



PREFACE ix

alike, capable of comprehending provided the steps
are made sufficiently explicit. It has seemed, there-
fore, worth the trying to attempt to write for both
classes of the community in a single volume. To do
this, the general text has been printed complete in
itself, while the demonstrations of the several steps
have been collected in a part by themselves with refer-
ence to the places in the text where they severally
should occur. All illustrations of the planet Mars
are by Professor Lowell.

May, 1908.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



CONTENTS



Foreword


PAGE

I


PART I


CHAPTER

I. The Genesis of a World ....


3


Catastrophic origin . . , , . .
Meteorites .......


3
4


Meteorite worship ......

Meteoric constitution of solar system


4

5


Analogy of cataclysm to new stars (Novae)
The meteorites gravitate together, generating heat
Amount of heat depends on the mass of the body
Substances vary with heat and pressure
Mass the fundamental factor ....


6
6

7
8

9


Cooling

Life-history depends on size ....
Planetologic eras .....
Present aspects of the planets our guide .
Geologic part of planetology ....
Landscape the result of cooling
Mountains in proportion to mass .
Volcanic phenomena .....


9
II

II

12

13
H

i6


Relative roughness of Earth, Moon, and Mars .


. i6


Mountains absent on Mars ....

^-^'mmm; ^


. i6


Slant illumination .....


17


Importance to astronomers ....
Applied to Mars .....
Not indicative of mountains ....


17
i8

21


Two or three thousand feet limit of elevation on Mars


22



Hosted by



Google



Xll



CONTENTS



Internal heat ofjhe three bodies

Darwinian theory o£ lunar origin

Confirmed by lunar surface .

Probable comparative internal heat of earth and

Continental and oceanic areas formed

Their distribution determined

True Martian message

Their relative size on diiFerent planets

Earth's oceanic basins permanent

Their flooring attests it . . .

II. The Evolution of Life
The origin of organic life
5/ J.?' Life an inevitable phase of planetary evolution

'^^y Water essential to life ....

|,i^ Seas the earliest home of mundane life

Uniformity of paleozoic fossils
Carboniferous plant life
Light less and heat more then than now .
Effect on the earth ....
Earth itself responsible for paleozoic heat .
Earth, not sun, the motive force in evolution

paleozoic era .
A once clou dy Mars ....
Life outgrows the sea .
Effect of environment upon evolution
Deep-sea life thought impossible fifty years ago
Extinction of light
Deep-sea life

Blindness ....
Phosphorescent organs .
Lesson of the fishing fishes
Cosmic character of life

III. The Sun Dominant

Transition



Mars



in the



PAGE
23
26
26

27
28
28
30
30
32

33

35
35

37

39

42

45
46
48

49
50

52
52
53
54
■57
57
58
60
61
61
64

70
70



Hosted by



Google



CONTENTS



Xlll



The sun asserts itself . . . .

Mars betrayijiifi-sanafi. eyolutjp ii

The thin atmosphere of Mars

The polar caps of Mars

The question of temperature on Mars

The clear skies of Mars

Summer and winter temperatures .

Aspect of Mars corroborative

Summer the life season

Zones of vegetation of the San Francisco Mountains

Summer temperatur e determ inative of life .

Plateaux hotter than peaks at a like elevation

Water-vapor in the air of Mars

Vegetation of Mars ....

Mode of manifestation of life

IV. Mars and the Future of the Earth
Mars has lost its oceans
The oceans of earth are disappearing
Gain of land in North America and Europe
Lowering of the sea-level
Inland seas .....

Terrestriality succeeds terraqueousness
Deserts ......

The petrified forest of Arizona

Egypt and Carthage ....

Palestine ......

Subtropical regions chiefly affected .

Planetary change far advanced on Mars .

The opaline tints of Mars

How the earth will follow Mars

Water present in the Martian atmosphere

The surface of Mars a waterless world

A high type of life probable on Mars

TKe probability of life on Mars at the present time



71
73
78
80

83
85
87

89
90

93

95

98

103

106

107

III
112
118
119
121
121
123
124
126
128
129
129
131
134
135
136
142
142
144



Hosted by



Google



XIV



CONTENTS



CHAPTER

V. The Canals and Oases of Mars .

Schiaparelli and the canals

Lines are straight

Canals in dark regions .

Canals superposed over main features

Oases .....

Width differs for different doubles .

Area of zones ....

The canals are subject to change

New method of research

Search for clew to decipherment

Quickening of canals according to latitude

Quickening starts at polar cap

The earth as witnessed from space .

Melting first necessary on Mars

Speed of spread of vegetation

VI. Proofs of Life on Mars

Discovery of celestial truths similar to detective work

Review of the natural chain of evidence

Aspect of Mars corroborates principles of planetary

evolution ....
Animal life disclosed only by mind
Canals confront the observer .
Not rivers ....

Not cracks ....

Other natural explanations prove impossible
Oases equally inexplicable
Artificiality suggests itself
Great-circle character of the canals .
Circularity of oases . .

Note of water runs through the action
Its locomotion explained
Mars' surface a level surface .
Gravity incapable of water transference
Organisms evolve as a planet ages .



146
146
■48

152
' 55

.56
[60
163
167
168

^74

^75
E76

[78

[81
184
184
186

[86



191
191
192
194

195

[96
197

197
199
200
201
205



Hosted by



Qoo^z



i^UJNill.JNib


XV


PAGE


One species supplants all others , . • . 206


To die of thirst


207


End foreseen ....


208


Further phenomena


. 211


Speculation excluded .


214


Our life not unique


. 215


Martian life nearing its end .


. 216


PART II


Notes

1 . On Moment of Momentum ....

2. The Connection of Meteorites with the Solar System

3. The Heat developed by Planetary Contraction

4. The Heights of Mountains on the Moon

5. Heat acquired by the Moon

6. Surface Heat of Mars

7. The Boiling-point of Water on Mars .

8. The Paleozoic Sun ....

9. Effect on the Earth of the Supposed Paleozoic Sun .
10. On the Influence upon the Climate of Carbon Dioxide

the Air ....

1 1 • Atmosphere of Mars

12. The Mean Temperature of Mars

13. A Dust Storm on Mars

14. Mars on the Cause of an Ice-age

15. Tidal Effects ....

16. On the Visibility of Fine Lines .

1 7. Canals of Mars

18. Position of the Axis of Mars

Index ,..•••



219
220
225
229
230
231
231
232

233

236
238
240
256
265
270
271
279
280

283



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



PLATES
I. On the Road to the Observatory



Frontispiece

OPPOSITE PAGE



11. Mars — 1905

III. Spectrogram of Moon and Mars showing the Water-

vapor Band ......

IV. Two Photographs of London taken from a Balloon
V. At the Telescope — Observing Artificial Planets

VI. The Lowell Observatory in Mexico

VII. Mars in 1905 ......

VIII. A Chinese Translation of Lowell's *^Mars"



74

138
148
172

208
217
282



CUTS APPEARING IN TEXT

Morehouse Comet .......

Meteorite from Canon Diablo, Arizona (pitted by fiision)
Meteorite from Canon Diablo, Arizona (surface polished)
Cloud Effect on Jupiter . . .

An Apple shrunk to show the Effect of Contraction
Phase View of the Moon, Mountainous Surface on the Termi-
nator ..,...,
Phase View of Mars, May, 1 907
View of the Earth for Proportion of Land and Sea
Dust Storm on Mars .....

Two Views of the Earth as seen from Space

Two Views of Mars for Comparison with the Earth

A Part of the Moon's Face showing Ancient Sea-bottoms

View of Mars apportioning Dark and Light Areas .

View of the Moon at the Full, in Like Manner



xvn



PAGE

7

10
II
12
15

19
20
21
22
22

23
26
29
31



Hosted by



Google



XVIU



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



Model of a Brontosaurus ......

Plant Life in the Coal Measures — from a Fossil Specimen
Plant Life of the Upper Devonian — from a Fossil Specimen

A Trilobite

Fossil Footprints of Amphibia

Deep-sea Fishes ; Chalkfiger Expedition

Deep-sea Fish ; Challenger Expedition

Deep-sea Angler Fish ; Challenger Expedition

Deep-sea Fish ; Challenger Expedition

Two Views of the SoHs Lacus Region on Mars, One Hour Apar

The North Polar Cap of Mars at its Least Extent .

The South Polar Cap of Mars at its Greatest Extent

Drawing of Mars with Dark Belt girdhng Snow during its Melting

Early Winter Snow Storm in the Northern Hemisphere of Mars

Merriam's Map of the San Francisco Mountain and Vicinity

The San Francisco Peaks .......

Arizona Desert View .......

The Douglas Fir ....... .

Vertical Distribution of Climate on Mountains, showing how

Land-masses raise Temperature .....
Diagrammatic Profile of the San Francisco and O'Leary Peaks

from Southwest to Northeast .....
Chart of Effect of Plateau on Tree Zones — Less Elevation
Chart of Effect of Plateau on Tree Zones — Greater Elevation
Diagrams of Two Craters with Axis of Greatest Cold N.N. W.
Comparative Sizes of the Earth and Mars with the Polar Caps

of Both in their Springtime .....

Lines in the Dark Areas of Mars, proving that the Latter are

not Seas ........

Two Views of Mars with Parings on the Terminator

Map of North America, showing approximately the Area of Dry

Land at the Close of Archaean Time . . . .

Petrified Forest of Arizona ......

Another View of the Petrified Forest of Arizona .

Effect of the Spring Mist around the North Polar Cap of Mars



35
36
38
40

41
42

59
62

63

79
80
81
82

91

92

93
94

98

99

100

lOI

102



115
116

119
125
126

.36



Hosted by



Google



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



XIX



A Section of the Canal Eumenides-Orcus terminating in the

Junction Trivium Charontis
Canals in Dark Regions connecting with the Polar Cap
Camera of the Lowell Observatory by which the Canals of Mars

were Photographed ....
Ascraeus Lucus, from which radiate Many Canals
Single and Double Canals
A Mass of Double Canals
A Mass of Single Canals about Lucus Phoenicis
Cartouche of the Ceraunius — from a Chart by Lowell .
Time of Vegetation on the Earth — from a Chart by Lowell
Sprouting Time of Vegetation on Mars — from a Chart by Lowell
Luci Ismenii, revealing the Systematic Method in which the

Double Canals enter the Twin Oases ....
The Moon, showing the Straight Wall and Rill to Right of Birt

— from a Drawing by Lowell, May, 1905 .
Mercury — Drawings depicting the Irregular Character of the

Lines on the Planet differing entirely in Look from those on

Mars ......

A Corner of Mars, June 10, 1907

Arethusa Lucus, April 15, 1903, with Converging

the North Polar Cap
Canals from the South Polar Cap of Mars
Djihoun ....••

Differentiation of the Ganges
Northeast Corner of Aeria, July 2-5, 1907 .
The Carets of Mars . . . •

Mouths of Euphrates and Phison , .



Canals from



150
153

154
156
160
160
161

174
180
182

190

191



193

196
197
203
205
209
212
213



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



PART I
PLANETOLOGY



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



MARS AS THE ABODE
OF LIFE

FOREWORD

UP to the middle of the nineteenth century, astron-
omy was busied with motions. The wanderings
of the planets in their courses attracted attention, and
held thought to the practical exclusion of all else con-
cerning them. It was to problems of this character
that the great names of the past — Newton, Huygens,
Laplace — were linked. But when the century that
has gone was halfway through its course, a change
came over the spirit of the investigation; with the
advance in physics celestial searchers began to con-
cern themselves with matter, too. Gravitational as-
tronomy had regarded the planets from the point of
view of how they act; physical astronomy is intent
upon what they are.

One outcome of this more intimate acquaintance
is the new study with which the present papers deal :
the evolution of the planets regarded as worlds. Such
research has to do not merely with the aggregation
of material, but with its subsequent metamorphoses



Hosted by



Google



2 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

after it has come together. Planetology we may call
this science of the making of worlds, since it concerns
itself with the life-history of planetary bodies from
their chemically inert beginning to their final inert
end. It constitutes the connecting link In the long
chain of evolution from nebular hypotheses to the
Darwinian theory. It is itself neither the one nor
the other, but takes up the tale where the one leaves
off, and leaves it for the other to continue.



Hosted by



Google



CHAPTER I

THE GENESIS OF A WORLD

SO far as thought may peer into the past, the epic Catastrophic
of our solar system began with a great catastrophe. ^"^''^*
Two suns met. What had been, ceased ; what was
to be, arose. Fatal to both progenitors, the event
dated a stupendous cosmic birth.

It is more than likely that one or both of the col-
liding masses were dark bodies, dead suns, such as
now circle unseen in space amid the bright ones
we call the stars. Probable this is, for the same
reason that the men who have been far outnumber
the men who are. It is not to be supposed that the
two rovers actually struck, the chances being against
so head-on an encounter ; but the effect was as dis-
astrous. Tides raised in each by the approach tore
both to fragments, the ruptured visitant passing on
and leaving a dismembered body behind in lieu of
what had been the other. That the stranger con-
tinued on its way is shown by the present moment of
momentum of our system. For it is very small, and
the fact can be proved to mean that after the encoun-
ter its matter still lay massed for the most part in a

3



Hosted by



Google



MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



Meteorites.



Meteorite
worship.



single centre."^ Thus, what had been a sun was left
alone, with its wreckage strewn about it. Masses
large and small made up its outlying fragments, scat-
tered through space in its vicinity, while a shattered
nucleus did it for core. So much of its history we
learn from the tiniest of its constituents now: the
meteorites. To meteorites thus attaches a peculiar
importance ; for they are Rosetta stones for the de-
cipherment of w^hat went before.

From time unreckoned, rocks have fallen out of
the sky upon the Earth. Most of them are of stone,
but some are nearly pure iron, mixed with a small
amount of nickel. They are called meteorites.
Twenty-six known elements have been found to occur
in them, and not one element that is new. They
thus betray a constitution cognate to the Earth's.

In size these visitants vary from the grain-like
bodies known as shooting-stars up to ponderous
masses weighing many tons. Coming from space,
they enter our air at speeds of from eleven to forty-
one miles a second, and friction, due to their great
velocities, fuses their exterior, and eats the holes with
which is pitted what remains of them when they strike
the ground.

Recorded meteoric falls date from a far past, and
were deemed miraculous by early men. A stone that
fell in Phrygia in pristine times was adored as Cybele,



Hosted by



Google



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 5

" the mother of the gods," and later, about 204 B.C.,
was carted with gregyt ceremony to Rome. The fa-
mous Diana of the Ephesians was probably none other
than a meteoric stone, enshrined and worshipped as
a goddess. Adoration of such arrivals from heaven
was not of local observance only, but common to
peoples over the whole Earth. There was a stone so
worshipped at Mecca, and another in Tatar, Siberia,
to which homage was paid ; while even in our own
country a large mass of iron found in Wichita County,
Texas, was set up as a fetich by the Indians, who re-
vered it as a body not of the Earth, but sent to it
by the Great Spirit.

A certain poetic justice invests this worship with a Meteoric
grandeur of its own ; for these things are probably the q^^qj^J °"
oldest bits of matter we may ever touch, the material system.
from which our whole solar system was fashioned.
They mark the farthest point in its history to which
we can now mount back. The time of day at which
they commonly fall — the afternoon rather than the
morning — points curiously to their oneness with
the rest of the solar system ; for in the afternoon the
Earth looks backward over its traversed path, and
their descent then proves that they follow and over-
take it, and therefore that their movement has the
same sense as its own. Still more conclusive of their
relationship to ourselves is the speed with which they



Hosted by



Google



MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



Analogy of
cataclysm to
new stars
(Novae),



The meteor-
ites gravitate
together,
generating
heat.



arrive, or, to be precise, the lack of it. For, did they
come from the depths of space, were they ronins of the
sky owing attraction's allegiance to no one lordly sun,
they would have velocities exceeding forty-five miles a
second, and these should often show, not an instance
of which has ever been remarked.^

Just as, chemically and gravitationally, they stand
confessed our kith and kin, so, physically, they betray
the character of their origin ; for they bear in them
occluded gases, which could hav^e come there only
under great pressure, such as would exist in the inte-
rior of a giant sun. Thus they proclaim themselves
clearly fragments of some greater body. To the some-
time dismemberment of this orb, from which disinte-
gration our sun and planets were formed, the little
solitary bits of rock thus mutely witness.

Of the cataclysm that thus occurred far down the
otherwise unrecorded vista of time, we have an ana-
logue in the Novae that now and then blaze forth in
the sky to-day, startling us from out the depths of
space. These new stars, that suddenly appear, grow
in brightness, and then slowly fade to nebulosity,
speak by such action of a like catastrophe by which
they were born again. Not otherwise was our own
birth heralded in heaven.

Strewn thus about the scene of the encounter, the
pieces of the disrupted sun would begin to gravitate



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



8



MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



Substances
vary with
heat and
pressure^



the work done, converted into heat, would be propor-
tionate to the square of the mass divided by the radius
attained. The same would be the case if the body
were heterogeneous and composed of concentric spher-
ical shells, only that the numerical amount would be
greater according to the distribution of the mass.
However the body were constituted, its caloric would
be spread through the mass, and the resulting heat on
each unit of it would therefore be as its mass divided
by its radius. The internal temperature of the par-
ticular planet would therefore depend upon the
amount of material that collected together. Thus
each body was subjected to a different heat as well as
to a differing pressure, according to its mass from the
moment it began to form ; and to its mass alone, for
that determined the radius to which it finally stood
compressed.'^

Now, all substances behave differently according to
the temperature and the pressure under which they
exist, both as to physical state and in their display of
chemical action. Diverse results ensue from diverse
conditions. The same element melts or remains solid,
combines with another eagerly to form a third utterly
unlike both, or coldly stands aloof from all association,
solely as the temperature or the pressure constrains it
to that end. Each, too, is a law unto itself, and acts
unlike its neighbor as these compelling causes change.



Hosted by



Google



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 9

To them, therefore, diversity is due ; and they in their
turn are conditioned by the mass.

Mass, then, is the fundamental factor in the whole Mass the
evolutionary process, the determining departure-point, ^^^^^^^^^
fixing what the subsequent development shall be.
Though the bodies were in essence the same at the
start, their initial quantity would change their very
quality as time went on. What started like would
become different ; for the gathering together of the
particles into a single body was the preface to that
body's planetary career.

Not until the internal heat began to abate did what
we call evolution set in. Up to then the growing
temperature induced a devolution or separating into
simplicity of what had been complex. The time taken
by each planet to reach its maximum bodily heat
differed as between one and another. The larger the
body, the slower it attained the greatest temperature of
which it was capable, both by reason directly of its
mass, and indirectly of the pressure to which that mass
gave rise.

At its heat-acme the picture each planet presented Cooling.
was all its own. Some may have been white-hot,
some certainly were red-hot, some were merely darkly
warm ; for one differed from another in self-endowment
of warmth or light, each with a glory of its own.

Radiation had, of course, been going on from the



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Googh



Hosted by



Google



(T^ MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

l.^ I. The Sun Stage. Hot enough to emit light.
II. The Molten Stage. Hot, but lightless.

III. The Solidifying Stage. Solid surface formed.

Ocean basins determined. Age of Metamor-
phic rocks.

IV. The Terraqueous Stage. Age of sedimentary

rocks.
V. The Terrestrial Stage. Oceans have disappeared.
VI. The Dead Stage. Air has departed.



Present
aspects of the
planets our
guide.


Though we cannot in our own ephemeral life watch
any planet pass through these several phases of its
career, we can get a view of the
process by studying the present
conditions of the various planets
and piecing together the informa-
tion we thus obtain. It is, in the
Cloud Effect on ^^d, as conclusive as in botany
Jupiter would be the studv of a wood

As observed at the Lowell

observatory in 1907, by Carefully noting the condition

indicating that Jupiter r .i • j* * j 1 ^ • ^l *

. . ^, ^ 11. or the individual trees in their

IS m the second planeto-

logic stage. various growths from seedling

to patriarch. Thus, at the present moment, in Stage
n are found Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, and Jupiter;
in Stage IV, the Earth; in Stage V, Mars; and in
Stage VI, the Moon and the larger satellites of the
other planets.



Hosted by



Qoo^z



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 13

Each planet's internal heat was its initial motive-
power, and cooling the mode by which this energy
worked, first, to the fashioning of its surface, and then
to all evolution upon it. While still in the molten
state the mass was a seething chaos but little differen-
tiated from any other equal agglomeration of matter.
Yet even here the several substances had begun to
segregate, the heavier falling to the bottom, the lighter
rising to the top.

With Stage III we enter the part of a planet's Geologic
career with which, on our Earth, geology is concerned. ^IJ^^^^^y^
Though specifically the story only of our Earth, that
science has analogues elsewhere, and to be best under-
stood needs to be generically considered. Local as
many Earth-happenings are, with increasing light from
the heavens it is becoming clear that the main events
are of cosmic occasioning, and that astronomic cause
presides over their manifestations. Initial instance of
planetary action occurs at the first stage of the Earth's
history to which geology mounts back — that in which
a crust began to form over the molten mass. The liq-
uid metal in a furnace upon which the solidifying slag
has begun to float gives us an idea of this early state
of things. Our metamorphic rocks were in action
akin to the furnace slag, rising to the surface because
of their lightness. Proof of this Hes in their present
density, which is only about one-half of the average



Hosted by



Google



14 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

density of the Earth, 2.7 times that of water instead of
5.5. Their constitution furnishes further evidence
that such they were. The gneiss, mica, and horn-
blende of which they are composed show by their
crystalline form that they cooled from a once molten
state, and their foliation indicates that they were crum-
pled and recrystallized in the process.

In Stage III the body first acquires a physiognomy
of its own. Up to then it is a chaotic mass as unstable
and shifting as clouds in the sky ; but at the advent of
surface solidification its features take form — a form
they are in fundamentals ever afterward to keep. Its
face is then modelled once for all ; and its face is the
expression of its character. Our knowledge of this
stage and of the two subsequent stages IV and V is
derived from study of three planets of our system, the
Earth, the Moon, and Mars. The others contribute
nothing to our information of these mid-phases, either
because, like Mercury and Venus, they are too ad-
vanced, or because, like the major planets, Jupiter,.
Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, they are not advanced
enough.
Landscape Landscape is simply the sculpturing due the fash-

ofcooiin loning cause of planet physiognomy. As the sub-
stances composing the mass cool, some of them expand ;
but most of them contract, and in consequence of this
the crust finds itself too large for what it encloses^



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



i6 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Volcanic j^ like manner is volcanic action relatively increased,

phenomena.

and volcanoes arise, violent and widespread, in pro-
portion ; since these are vents by which the molten
matter under pressure within finds exit abroad. This
is shown in their positioning. They occur where the
crust is most permeable, and so are found along the
edges of continents, as these are weakened by dipping
down into the sea.
Relative Thrcc bodics cxist near us in space where the work-

ETrth'^Moon ^^g ^^ ^^^^ inevitable action stands displayed, and its
and Mars. comparative effects may thus be studied : the Earth,
Mars, and the Moon. With the accidented character
of the Earth's surface we are all familiar. Its moun-
tains, its volcanoes, and its hills go to make up its
loveliest and its grandest features. Its mass fashioned
them, and fashioned them as they are because its mass
was large. This mass is nine times that of Mars, and
eighty-one times that of the Moon. Being greater
than that of the Moon or Mars, our globe should
have crumpled more, and those other two bodies
should have smoother contours than the Earth shows.
The general order of their roughness should be
Earth, Mars, Moon.
No mountains Now, whcn wc comc to scan Mars with nicety, we
are gradually made aware of a curious condition of its
surface. It proves singularly devoid ot irregularity.
The more minutely it is viewed, the more its level-



Hosted by



Google



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 17

ness grows apparent. Finally, calculation shows that
heights, even of very moderate elevation, should be
visible if such existed, and none show. Thus we are con-
fronted by the fact that there are no mountains on Mars.

Second only in interest to the fact itself is the siant
method by which that fact has been found out. To ^ "™^"^^'°"-
appreciate the problem, we may recall the appearance
of a road lighted by electric arc-lights placed at such
considerable distances apart that the illumination falls
aslant. All of us who, on dark nights in the country,
have trudged along such pikes, have started at the
mammoth sharp-cut shadows of its ruts, so that we
have lifted our feet to surmount what threatened to
stub our toes, only to find the obstacles not there.
To such delusion were we led by the monstrous
length of the shadows thrown with unexpected vivid-
ness across our path.

Now, the fact of such projection, — as Cowper puts important to
it of his legs under the rays of a rising or a setting
sun, "spindling into longitude immense," — bother-
ing as it is to the midnight pedestrian on arc-lit roads,
proves to the astronomer of inestimable use. For
without its aid he had forever remained incapable of
gaging the inequalities of the terrene of the heavenly
bodies to any fine precision.

When an object stands on the sunrise, or the sun-
set, edge of a planet, the slant illumination it then



astronomers.



Hosted by



Google



1 8 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

receives throws its shadows to a great distance from
its foot. A tapering finger searching the plains as
the sun changes position, it may be a hundredfold the
height of the object casting it. The effect is well seen
in photographs of the moon.

Deprived of this natural kind of magnification, the
astronomer would be forced to measure the object
itself for just what it was, as it showed in profile on
the limb, the fully illuminated rim of the planet where
the sight-line of the observer grazes horizontally the
surface, and shows heights for just what they are.
With shadows he has a vernier to his hand. For the
derived may be any number of times longer than the
original.

On the same principle, by noting the distance off
the general sun-lightened edge at which some fortunate
peak first catches the rays of the rising sun, or holds
latest his setting beams, its loftiness may be found.^

The principle has been employed to determine the
heights of the mountains in the Moon. By the help
of trigonometry the shadows and the star-like tips of
peaks, standing isolate beyond the general edge of
light, have been made to tell their tale of elevation.
In consequence, we know the heights of crater walls
there, to within a few hundred feet, as accurately almost
as we know them on Earth by our aneroids.

Applied to

Mars. The same procedure applied^ to Mars results in a



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google


.f'*" '"■'"'^J

.*•»'« 4.11'


ii>1pf!||^tim^



Hosted by



Google



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 23

we have thus learned, the first thought that strikes us
is the glaring exception seemingly made by it to the
theoretic order of smoothness, Earth, Mars, Moon,
above laid down. The lunar surface is conspicuously
rough, pitted with what are evidently volcanic cones
of enormous girth and of great height, and seamed by
ridges more than the equal of the Earth's in elevation.


Two Views of Mars, about i8o° apart, showing the Polar Caps and
General Features for Comparison with the Earth (as above)

Many lunar craters have ramparts 17,000 feet high,
and some exceed in diameter 100 miles; while the
Leibnitz range of mountains, seen in profile on the
lunar limb, rises nearly 30,000 feet into space.

On the principle that the internal heat to cause internal
contraction wasya^ the body's mass, — and no physical ^^^66 bodies,
deduction is sounder, — this state of things on the
surface of our satellite is unaccountable. The Moon
should have a surfa ce like a frozen sea, and it shows
one t hat surpasses the Earth's in shaggi ness. To per-
ceive this more definitely we will make that not unin-
teresting thing, an evaluation of the heat evolved by



Hosted by



Google



24 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

both the Moon and the Earth, supposing their origin
the same. We will express it in terms, if not in fig-
ures, that are comprehensible. The result is startling.
Unaccountable at a first view, the event proves actually
impossible when we subject the heat evolved by a like
genesis to numerical computation. If the Earth con-
tracted homogeneously from an infinite expansion to its
present state, and none of its heat were lost meanwhile
by radiation, calculation shows that the energy evolved
would be sufficient to raise the temperature of its en-
tire mass to 146,000° F., if that mass were composed
of iron, which represents about its present density and
is probably not far from the fact. If it were com-
posed of other material, the temperature of that
material would be different, according to its capacity,
for heat. Thus quartz has a capacity nearly twice
that of iron (sp. ht. 0.20) and water one of five times
as much (sp. ht. i.oo). The temperatures would be
reduced in proportion.

If, instead of supposing the body homogeneous, we
consider it heterogeneous, as indeed it is, and treat it by
the simplest law consistent with physical principles and
an approach to fact, to wit, that the density increases
from surface to centre and that it resists compression
in proportion as it stands compressed, — the formula
assumed by Laplace, — we get an even greater amount
of heat generated.



Hosted by Google



k



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 25

We do not know the law of parting with this heat>
though the greater portion of it was certainly radiated
away in the process. But we may make some approx-
imation, at least as between the several planets con-
cerned, by assuming the heat near the surface to have
been, at its maximum, what a body contracting from
the density of its constituents, the meteorites, to its own
eventual density would generate. We do this because
the heat thus begotten proves in the case of the Earth
to have been more than sufficient for all the volcanic
and orogenic phenomena displayed. Now, as it is
common physical knowledge that a small body cools
quicker than a large one, we ^hall not err on the side of
making Mars' internal heat too small if we apply the
same principle to it. Whgn we so evaluate th e heat
for the jj^;g^_£ilJ__M^^"/^^^'" g<"^ rpQMJfQ as follows : —
23,000° F. an d So"" F . ,

H-ere,"-i:hen-," we ar c Janded-JiLa q u andary . If the
Moon w as genera ted on its own ac count, as the Earth
and Mars were^thejrit£xnal-- heat it wao able to - a n^ass
was never an ything l i ke the Rmnnnt- «;nfRn>n t ^^ pro-
vide f or the featu reswhich its surface shows. It could
not even have kept itself from freezing amid the
terrible cold of space. Now, it w ill be noticed that
we said_^' if its^^gene sis was like o ur own *!_; that is^
th at it came in to bri ng by itself alone. In this saving
" if„.wilKbe found the explanation_Qf the dilemma.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 27

whkhjrhg ^Moon ra r^tprl ^w^^y ^-w^^^^ M i p i i s! h^ y^ been
that of th e parent body — the amo unt the Karfh-Mnn n
had be en able to n mass. Thus the Moon was en-
dowed from the start of its separate existence with an
amount of heat the falling together of its own mass
could never have generated. Thus its great craters
and huge volcanic cones stand explained. I t did no t
ori^inate-as-a-.aeparate body, but had its birth in a rib
>Qf Earths -

Far from disproving the law, the seeming lunar ex-
ception, therefore, really upholds it.
"" We may now go on to apply the principle to no Probable
less interesting a determination — the case of Mars/ f°"^P^^^^^^^

D internal heat

If, taking into account the radiation which has cease- of earth and

Mars.

lessly gone on from the time when first the matter
started to collect, we allow 10,000° F. for the effective
internal heat of the Earth, we shall be making it a
liberal allowance. Now, c omputation shows that an
internal heat of 10,000° F. for the Earth would cor-
respond to about 2000° F. for Mars. But the melt-
ing-pdin t of iror LJS-Jl2Q,Q° F., sojbhat iron would not
have fused, and we should have in consequence virtu-
ally no volcanic action. F"urthermore,^There could
ha ve been but little crinkli ng of the crust. For, first,
the direct pressure was less, and then the heat, its indirect
e ffect^was correspondingly small ; so that Marscan-
not have contracted much, and so must largely have



Hosted by



Google



28 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

escaped crumpling. What the contraction was may be
inferred from comparison of its density with that of
meteorites. The mean density of meteorites which
are mostly stone with some iron is jrjj^tiiat of Mars
4., and that ofj he Earth 5.5, water being unity. The
planet should show, therefore, a remarkaBIy~^hiooth and
level surface ; and this is precisely what the telescope
reveals.
Continental The crust, to the folding of which a planet's physi-

and oceanic . , ^ . . . 11 i • 1

areas formed ognomy IS duc, was tormmg dunng all the time the
planet took to cool on its surface from the temperature
\\s^ K of the fusion-point of gneiss to the boiling-point of
^^ water, or from about 2000"" F. down to 212° F. In

some places it gathered thicker than in others ; and
inasmuch as it floated, stood up higher, to which height
crumpling contributed. Up to the time when its
liquefaction-point was reached, water existed only in the
form of steam, but on the fall of the temperature to
212° F. the steam fell with it, condensing into water.
Into the troughs already there the water, as soon as it
formed, proceeded to run. Thus the oceans came into
being.
Their distri- We may apply this to the Earth and consider an

determined. important conscqucnt detail. The fashioning cause of
the depressions that gave rise to the distribution of
what we know as continents and seas is of great in-
terest, for it seems to have been determined in a



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



30 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

bathymetric chart reveals the fact that the platform on
which it stands does indeed do so, Tasmania being
really a part of it and making the detached tip.
True Martian Nor docs the Earth alone present us with such
message. curious Conformations, for Mars has a word to say on

the subject. On casting one's eye over a map of that
planet, one is struck by the triangular projections of
the dark areas into the northern hemisphere. The
Syrtis Major is the most conspicuous instance ; but
the Margaritifer Sinus, the Sabseus Sinus, and the
Trivium Charontis exhibit a similar propensity.
Now, when we reflect that the dark regions take the
place of seas on Mars, this apexing of them to the
north stands as the negative aspect of the positive
picture presented by the Earth. Reverse the relative
ratio of depressions to plateaux in order to get the
seas and continents in their earthly proportions, with
the oceans preponderant, as on Earth, instead of, as on
Mars, in abeyance, and the two distributions are seen
to typify the same action.

Their relative The MXlD\mt (^ S\3i^^ any

sizeondif- particular planet was again a consequence of the

ferent planets, r . — ■ — — *=■ " '-^ — — ,.,-., .-X3 — -->--____,;- -^•-- -- — -. .

particul ar plane t's size. If the material forming the
planetary bodies was of the same general character
throughout the fields they severally swept clear, which,
to a certain extent, is probable, and the more so as
the planets stand neighborly near, the amount of



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



32 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

therefore, begin life with larger oceans, even if it were
born with but its share of water ; but, as a fact, it
would have more than its share because of being
better able to hold on to its gaseous elements, and
thus retain more of what was to condense to water
when the time arrived.

Now the three bodies, the Earth, Mars, and the
Moon, have, or had, in all probabiHty, judging from
their present look, oceans in this order of size, the
Earth having the most in amount. Mars the next, and
the Moon the least.

In the case of the Moon the matter is complicated
by the fact that when it left the Earth it took probably
not only a greater amount of light constituents than a
solitary genesis would have permitted, but even a
greater proportion than the Earth retained since it was
born of the outer and therefore lighter layers of
the Earth-Moon mass. It thus started more pro-
fusely endowed with the wherewithal to oceans than
its size warranted.
Earth's On all three planets their primeval topography has

oceanic asms pj-^^gj persistcnt. On both the Moon and Mars the

unchanged. ^ ^

dark areas are apparently the lowest portions of the
surface, while their character points to their having
held seas once upon a time. With Mars it is
their present occupancy, though .by something other
than water, that tells the tale ; with the Moon the fact



Hosted by



Google



THE GENESIS OF A WORLD 33

that rays and rills run athwart them discloses it, be-
speaking their age.

Turning to the Earth, according to the best evidence
we possess, the great ocean basins have remained un-
changed in place from the period when they were laid
down. Not that the areas marked out as land and
water at any epoch have not greatly altered since the
beginning of geologic time ; but the abyssal depths on
the one hand, and the continental platforms on the
other, have not substantially varied during all these
ages. If we examine a bathymetric chart of our
several oceans, giving their body by registering their
depth, instead of a superficial one which marks simply
where the water laps the land, and consider the one
hundred-fathom line, the ocean bottoms and the con-
tinental plateaux stand well differentiated from each
other. It is then seen that each continent is set on a
shelf wider in some places than in others, but at its
edge falling abruptly to the marine abysses, which,
though themselves uneven, stand, with the exception
of a few islands, projecting and submarine, at a gener-
ally much lower level. This indicates that they have
always held such attitude.

But the character of these ocean bottoms furnishes Their floor-
the best testimony that they have not changed during ^"g ^"^^^^^ ^^•
geologic time. Their flooring is organic ooze or inor-
ganic clay, globigerina, radiolarian, or diatom ooze.



Hosted by



Google



34 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

according to locality and depth, and red clay formed of
the decomposition of volcanic stuff. In this ooze and
clay, spherules of metallic iron, identified as similar in
substance to that of falling stars, are still recognizable
in perceptible amount, and as they must accumulate
with exceeding slowness, their patent presence asserts
the absence there of sedimentary silt from any shore.
These abysses, then, have always been abysses from
the start. That astronomy should tell us this is
strikingly suggestive, while of peculiar planetologic in-
terest is it that meteors again should be our inform-
ants of the fact.



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOMTION OS' LIFE


Hosted by Google



Hosted by



Google



©J



m



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE ^y

ical affinity than to doubt that stones did. Spon-
taneous generation is as certain as spontaneous varia-
tion, of which it is, in fact, only an expression.

But it is not spontaneous generation in the popular
sense. By that term many persons think of flies
suddenly born of decaying meat, and this they know
has been shown impossible. But this is simply be-
cause flies are far too advanced a product to be thus
suddenly evolved. For them to be so produced
would as directly controvert all we know of evolution
as that, given the proper conditions, the lowest rudi-
ments of life would not arise. That even the latter
may nowhere be evolved on earth at the present time
does not invalidate such origin for it when the con-
ditions were other than they are to-day.

From all we have learned of its constitution on the Life an in-
one hand, or of its distribution on the other, we know T^! ^^ ^^^

•'or planetary

life to be as inevitable a phase of planetary evolution evolution,
as is quartz or feldspar or nitrogenous soil. Each
and all of them are only manifestations of chemical
affinity resultant on condition, and considering the
oneness of the stuff\, it is the conditions alone we
have to investigate if we would learn what is to come.
Virt ually only six so-c alled elements go to make up
the rno lecule of l ife. It is the number of its constituent
atoms, and the intricacy of their binding together, that
give it the instability to produce the vital actions.



:juuv.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE



39



amount ; and the others follow in the constitution of
life about in the order of their natural abundance.
For proof of the continuity of the processes of both
structure and change in the inorganic and organic alike,
nothing at once more conclusive and more interesting
can be recommended than the books of the great
Haeckel, couched in language every educated person
can understand.

Of all the conditions preparatory to life, the presen ce Water
of water, composed of oxygen and hydrogen, is at once ^^^"^^'^
the most essential and the most world-wide. For if



water be present, the presence of other necessary ele-
ments is probably assured because of its relative light-
ness as a gas. Fu rthermore, if w ater exist, that fact
goes bail for the necessary temperature, the gamut of
life beirng-.~CQ £xtensive with the exisfenre of water as
such. It is so consequentially, Hfe being impossible
without water. Whatever the planet, this is of neces-
sity true. Bu t the absolu te_de grees of temperatu re
within which life can exist vary according to the mass



o f the body, another of the ways in which mere size
tejls. Qnjth^_eaTthjjx?_£ the range

at the top, and 32° F.;(o° C.) at the bottom in the case of
fresh water, 27° F. (— 3° C.) in the case of salt. On a
s maller planet b< ^^h lim^*^^ wnnlH Kp InwprpH^ fh^ fr>p
one the most. On Mar s the boiling-point would prob -
abjj be about iio^ Fo (43° C.).^ Secondly, from the



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



TH£ EVOLUTION OF LIFE 43

only warmer. Their equable temperature for wide locali-
ties and their slow accommodation to climatic change
rendered them places of easy livelihood to simple organ-
isms. In addition to which, food, inorganic at first, was
floated past the baby plants or animals, and as con-
stantly renewed. To its seas and oceans our planet,
then, is actually, if not necessarily, indebted for the
life which now teems everywhere upon its surface.

Life, once started, continued the course of advance-
ment thus aquatically begun just as itself was the
continuance of the inorganic development which had
gone before. And the deus ex machina was the same

— a ffr a d ufil lowering of temperatu re. C oolin gwas
what occasioned incre asinp^ly high forms of life^ aji d in
two ways this was simultaneously brought about — by
preparation of habitat and by prompting of theorgan-
ism to appropriate it.

--T^B fe"c6f3"'wfrtten in the rocks of our own earth
permits us to trace the history of the spread of life.
With the gathering of the waters into their place
began a new stage in the world's physiographic career

— the stage of sedimentary formations. Until the
seas were, no strata could be laid down ; but with
their advent both motive force and suitable sites were
present, and, in consequence, what the welkin-born
torrents tore down of the naked earth was deposited
over the edges of the continents, now here, now there.



Hosted by



Googk



44 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

according as upheaval or subsidence slightly changed
the continental altitude toward the sea-level. One
bed after another was thus made^ until they were sev-
eral thousand feet thick in places, each being tucked into
its long repose by later coverlets superposed upon it.
Entombed in these strata are the skeletons of all
those animals that a not too fliimsv structure permitted
to survive the casualties of flood and commotion or
the long disintegration of time. The softer ones have
necessarily vanished, leaving as a rule no trace. The
rocks are thus vast graveyards ot lite that once inhab-
ited the earth. They give us the only direct record
of the past, and a record which from the necessities of
the case is perforce imperfect. Especially are the
earlier chapters effaced for the gelatinous character ot
primeval protoplasm and the torms it first built up.
Thus the earliest preserved remains of lite are already
somewhat advanced types, Crustacea in the shape ot
trilobites being the most primordial specimens that
have come down to us in unquestionable state. From
this lowlv start the line can be followed upward, un-
folding through the strata, the marvellous thing being
not the paucity, but the fulness, of the record thus
W'ritten by the animals themselves. F^or animals and
plants, too perishable to endure, have left their stamp
behind, and even footprints of past reptiles confront
us, legible still on the hardened sands of time, as if



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 45

made yesterday in the spots they traversed hundreds
of centuries ago.

According to their age, the rocks are designated by Uniformity
geologists as primary, secondary, or tertiary formations, f^g^ig^^^^^^
representing paleozoic, mesozoic, and c?enozoic eras,
meaning the old, the middle, and the new lifetimes, so
called from the remains embedded in them.

For our purpose, the most remarkable characteristic
of the primary rocks consists in the world-wide uni-
formity of their contemporary life as exhibited in these
fossils of the far past. In the earliest beds existent
species prove to have been coevally widespread. In
the Cambrian, the lowest of the primary strata exhibit-
ing unmistakable organic remains, we find identical
species of seaweeds and trilobites appearing, regardless
of latitude, in France and Siberia ; and indifferently on
both sides of the equator, in the Argentine Republic,
as in Europe and North America. In the beds above
these, the Silurian, it is the same story. Some of the
genera and even some identical species have been
found alike in Europe and North America and in Tas-
mania, Australia, and New Zealand. Evidence of a
like latitudinarianism is forthcoming in the Devonian
deposits that followed them and in the early stages of
the succeeding Carboniferous.

The fauna so distnbiiteii-Ava^^
an attribute betrayed by the fact that their nearest



Hosted by



Google



46 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

relatives now extant live wholly within the tropics,
huddled as"~tt ~ weT^e~^t5ijnt"-1^ Coral reefs,

now not found outside oFtRe warm equatorial seas in
a temperature not less than 68° F., were reared then in
spots now covered with perpetual ice, within eight
degrees of the pole. A species of polyp coral, Litho-
strontion by name, has been found as a fossil between
Point Barrow and Kotzebue Sound, and others in
Grinnell Land in latitude 8i° 45' north.

At first the fauna was wholly marine, but gradually
the land grew less impossible. Wings of insects have
been found in the Lower Silurian, and in the Upper,
insects themselves, scorpions both aquatic, apparently,
and terrene. Vestiges of plants in the Devonian fore-
shadowed the superb plant life of the Carboniferous.
Carboniferous The flora of the coal measures corroborates the tes-
^'^"^ ^^' timony of the animals of that day to the climatic
warmth which then existed. Gigantic ferns, fifty feet
high ; others, more lowly, thirty feet in spread ; marsh-
loving calamites, horsetails, and club-mosses, dignified
to the dimensions of trees, spread their incipient leaves
from well-nigh woodless stems, and grew, flourished,
and decayed with almost Jack-and-the-beanstalk rapid-
ity between ^^^^ and 70° of latitude. Only a warm,
humid foothold and lambent air could have given them
such luxuriance and impressed them with such speed.
In the vast marshes which constituted so large a



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 47

portion of the continents this vegetation was singularly
same. Not pretty, but profuse ; dense, but not varied,
cryptogams composed its greater part, attesting by the
habit of the ferns of to-day to the shady half-light in
which they must have lived. Grotesque rather than
beautiful, no flowers touched with color the sombre
stems. No birds made the air about them half sentient
with song. Only shade-aff^ecting insects, May-flies of
mammoth wing, flitted through the gloom of those old
forests, accentuating a heavy stillness they were power-
less to dispel.

\ The twilight their character thus reveals is shown
uv the details of their structure to have been continu-
oiis. No seasons diversified the work of wood-making,
the uniform stems of the few gymnosperms then
isent attest. No annual rings of growth encircle
thfem, witnessing to intermediate times of rest. They
mmded not extraneous things, but grew right on ; not
td delight the world, but to make coal measures their
in iustrietrs-cndx to which intKenTown bhnd way they
extellently cSnformed. Blind in tiieir habit they may
be said to have been, for they were flowerless and
much restricted of leaf.

Two attributes of the climate this sfate of things
attests. First, it was warm everywhere with a warmth



probabljr^ ^u rpassj ng^that o fTKeJ ropics^of to-day^ and,
second, the light was tempered to a half-light known



as
pr



Hosted by



Google



48 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

now only under heavy clouds. And both these con-
ditions were virtually general in locality and continuous
in time. For such vegetation as existed the climate
was ideal. No enforced hiemal torpor brought on by
stalking delegates of frost compelled the w^orkers con-
stantly to stop. It is their less fortunate descendants
only that are limited by nature's imposings to labor
but six months a year.
' Light less and Thus the records of the paleozoic rocks bespeak two
ea more seeminglv incongruous things — both less light and

than now, o . o o o

more heat than is the Earth's lot nowadays.^ JSfony
hypotheses have been invoked to accou n t for this
warm da\\TT^of the "early geologic ages. Some of them
are locally geologic ~ some Broadly astronomic, advanced
by geologists. But of the two kinds all alike fail.

Thus, merely a jdLffex£iiL-4istribution of land and
\ '^ sea will not explain it, because it was general, not local;

^* and, secondly, because this leaves untouched the prob-

lem of less light. Equally impQl£iitJs_a i^hange of
position m the axis of the Earxh ; for were the axis so
far changed as to point directly toward the sun, this
would not do away with the seasons, but would accen-
tuate them. Nor will an altered eccentricity in the
Earth's orbjt,jwJSich has also been suggested, prove
more effective.

Wot less impossible is the suggestion due to M.
Blondet, and to which De Lapparent has lent the



\y



Hosted by Google



*^



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE



49



weighty indorsement of his name, that the sun was
th en so la rge as to be able to look do^n^orTB oltTpQ les
q £ the Earth a^ once, andjojLo give our globe equal
day-andjiight everywhere and, as he ^upposesTa sub-
stantially even temperature in consequence throughout.
Here the beauty of that to many people deterrently
austere and awe-enshrouded subject, mathematics,
comes in. For it enables us to do that most impor-
tant thing for any Hne of investigation — to subject it
not simply to qualitative, but to quantitative, reasoning.
When we thus calculate what this paleozoic sun must
have been and what its effects, we are brought up on
both counts against impossibilities.

The first impossibility relates to the sun itsel£_For
it ^^Q3^..1i.^£gi££J^ it must have filled all the space ^
i nside the orb i t o f Mercury. | For a sun of such stu-
pendous size there is no place in modern cosmogonies.
On the other hand, it would have been of incredible
tenuity, only one-fifth as dense as hydrogen gas.
Nor is this all. It must have been thus uncondensed
at a time when the Earth had already solidified. The
conception evolutionarily is quite incredible.^

Matters are not bettered for the theory if, passing Effect on the
by the results consequent on the Sun, we calculate ^^''^'
those ensuing to the Earth.

We perceive, in the first place, that the exposure to
the Sun's rays in the arctic regions would have been



Hosted by



Google



50 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

by no means uniform, but would have varied greatly
with the time of year. At latitude 82° N., for instance,
the exposure would have been virtually nothing at
midwinter; 25 per cent of what it would be now at
the equator, at the vernal equinox, and- 1.24 per cent
of that, at the summer solstice. So that the play of
the seasons would have been much as now.

Secondly, we find that at the arctic circle the solar
heat in midwinter would equal that at present in lati-
tude 60° N., and even at the equinox 82° N. in those
times would be no more heated than is now 46'' N. in
midwinter. A Quebec winter six months long does
not quite supply an adequate temperature for the
bringing up of a polyp coral family within ten degrees
of the pole.^

So that, when subjected to mathematical treatment,
the supposed paleozoic sun turns out to be quite im-
potent to the work demanded of it. The theory fails
as regards the Earth as much as it does with reference
to the Sun.
Earth itself Planctology, however, can offer us a clew to this be-

responsibie for ^^^^^^ lothous^smte Tjf things. The Earth's own

paleozoic heat. ^ - '^ ..._

heat»_not durectly onjthe_£ rust, but directly o n the
water, and thence^jhrough its atmosphere, might well
be respQnsil3le f or paleozoic cond itions. For consider
the warmth we know must have existed while the re-
cently precipitated seas still were hot. Their temper-



Hosted by



Googlis.^



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 51

ature would furn ish an agreeably heated habitat for
£)rganisms such as even the trop ics fail to supply to-
day^ and one which from its genesis would be much the
same from the equator to the poles. Simultaneously,
a vast steaming must have gon e up fro m the still
warm waters, resulting in a welkin of great density.
This would act In two way s *to explain the phenomena.
>^ First, th e welkin wo uld keep the EarthV. own heat
in; and,^econdly, it would keep the SujOLS^heaL-and
l ight out. We shoul d have ^ sort of perpetual trop-
ical summer in a twilight of cloud; a climate superior
to seasons because screened from direct "dependence
on the"ele vafioh of~riTe~FCTn; — Thi^-4s~p^Tfecll)rm"ac^
cord with the half-light the vegetation vouches for,
while the luxuriance of that vegetation testifies to the
warmth and even suggests a further, though not the
chief, reason for it in the great amount of carbonic
dioxide its existence establishes as then present In the
air.^^ For carbonic dioxide is a great bar to the pas-
sage of heat. So is water-vapor. It was dank and
dark In those old carbonic forests because so seeth-
ingly steamy overhead.

That the oceans should have retained their heat so
long Is not surprising when we reflect upon the great
capacity that water has for heat. Its specific heat,
which means the relative amount needed to raise It one
degree In temperature, is five times that of stone, and



Hosted by



Qoo^z



52



MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



Earth, not

sun, the
motive force
in evolution
in the pale-
ozoic era.



A once
cloudy Mars.



ten times that of iron. So that it would have more to
part with than its surroundings, and would still be
warm and steamy after they had cooled.

In paleozoic times, then, it was the Earth itself, not
the sun, to which plant and animal primarily stood
beholden for existence. This gives us a most instruc-
tive glimpse into one planetologic process. To the
planet's own internal heat is due the chief fostering of
the beginnings of life upon its surface. Thus a. planet
is ca^able__of at least beginnings to develop organisms
without more than a modicum of help from the central
sun. We talk of iRe sun asThe source of life ; and so
it is to-day in the sense of being its sustainer ; but the
real source was the Earth itself, which also raised it
through its babyhood.

^^rn^ Xh i ng '^ f th^ snm e Jiist^^JT-JlJ^'^^^^b^ ^^^^ ^^ ^'^^
lot of Mars. Several circumstances render this likely.
If its initial surface temperature w^as in the neighbor-
hood of 2000° F., it was well above the production-
point of steam. So that a cloud canopy would be
possible when a general volcanic fervor of the surface
was not. Then the apparent presence in those early
days of seas would furnish the wherewithal of clouds.
Thus Mars would seem to have possessed the neces-
sary substance to its veiling, and the requisite con-
ditions to that end. If a planet be Jiig. enough to
bring forth life, it may well provide a set of atmos-



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 53

pherlc swaddling-clothes in which that life goes through
its early days. """

Under such paleozoic conditions life passed the first Life outgrows
eons of its earthly existence. Gradually life outgrew
the need of such careful housing, water within the
organism remaining as necessary as before. Organic
development proceeded from amoeba to fish, attaining
no mean height in the process. Buj:..at_last a better
habitat oflfered ks^lf, and was -speedily - appropriated.
Weathering of the land and constantly changing
chemic processes prepared the continents for organic
use. Plants, as we have seen, at last found foothold,
and insects an abode. Then came the exodus from
the sea. We may picture some adventurous fish,
spurred blindly from within, essaying the shore in
preference to. the main. Tentatively at first he must
have ventured, as became such bold endeavor. Find-
ing the littoral not inhospitable, the pioneer reported
his exploit and was followed by others whom mutation
had specially endowed. Thi s imp ulse toward the new,
from the promptings of altered character, which we call
spo ntaneous variation, is the motive p rinciple of life .
It probably derives from the instability of the plasmic
molecule, forever rearranging its constitution afresh
and finding itself thus adapted to novel relations.
Thus arose the amphibia in the Carboniferous era, vis-
itors only to the solid ground. From them came the



Hosted by



Google



Effect of
environment
upon evolu-
tion.



54 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

reptiles, their descendants, in the Permian, who, from
the temporary sojourners their fathers were, devel-
oped into permanent denizens of the new^ abode.
From this aboriginal crawling out upon terra firma
the organism progressed until finally it came to stand
erect and call itself a man.

Changed habitat made all the later strides in intelli-
gence possible. The very sameness that rendered the
sea so inviting a habitat to simple souls, made evolu-
tion beyond a certain point difficult, if not impossible.
Change might develop in the organism, but it would
find little encouragement to survive in its surround-
ings.

It was the variety of conditions possible on land
that^ve rise to varying environment, and this in turn
that conduced Jo orga nic differen tiation. Life would
have remained forever of a low, cold-blooded order if
it had been constrained to continue in the sea. What
made the broad ocean so excellent a nursery curtailed
it as a field for action later on.

To appreciate how unsuited to high development
of organism the sea was, we need only think how poor
a place it is for bringing up a family. Fishes cast
their spawn upon the waters, and leave the hatching
of the eggs to chance. If one in a milUon survives
this unparental treatment, it is all that nature expects.
The fish has done well, and its tribe increase. This is



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 55

taking but little thought for the morrow. The poor
little egg is homeless as well as parentless from the
start, lacking even that attenuated appreciation of home
surroundings Gallicly expressed as mal du pays, since
one tract of ocean so dishearteningly resembles another.

Very different is the care of their young exhibited
by the higher land inhabitants, the mammaha. With
them the mother begins by carrying the egg in the
safest possible way, as a part of herself, until it has
become to all intents and purposes an animal on its
own account. It then sees the light, but not the limit
of fostering care. She keeps it by her, suckling it till
it is able to procure food for itself. Even then its
guardianship is not in the highest forms foregone. In
man parental help continues up to the point when the
young is full grown, and even after that, on through
life, till the next generation has become the dominant
one of its day.

To say the least, life was an arduous, adventurous
career amid the inhospitable homelessness of the sea.
And this is shown not only by the leaving it at the
first opportunity by those who could, but by only
degenerates returning to it again. Only the poor
relatives of the mammalia — the porpoises, dugongs,
and whales — are now to be found there, having taken
to it through stress of circumstances, elbowed off the
better ground by their stronger associates.



Hosted by



Google



56 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

That the outcasts still exist, however, proves the
tenaci^ and adaptability of life. It goes everywhere,
takes up with what it catTget^ and turns the least pro-
pitious milieu to its own ends. For life is more univer-
sal than is our usual conception of it. Our limited
personal experience we take as measure of the whole,
and say, "Thus far and no farther.'* But nature
knows no such limit to her own possibilities. And
we are gradually, one may almost say reluctantly,
learning them of her. Go where he will upon the
earth, man finds life of some sort there before him.
He discovers new continents or seas merely to find
out that they had been discovered by some poor rela-
tives long ago, and appropriated by them. From
burning Saharas to polar snows no spot is exempt
from colonization, though some teem with immigrants
more than others. In altitude it is the same story as
in latitude. If man ascends, he meets with forms of
life that rise with greater facility than he, and inhabit,,
too, what they explore. In descent it was until re-
cently thought otherwise. One region was supposed
free of such intrusion and to have remained as virginly
azoic as when originally formed — the unstirred abysses
of the vast oceanic basins, all that constitutes the great
deep beyond the immediate vicinity of the shore and
below the hundred-fathom line. No life existed, man
was sure, in the depths of the sea.



Hosted by



Qoo^z



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 57

Fifty years ago the absence of both flora and fauna Deep-sea life
fronTthe deep seas was not only taken for granted, but ^^gg^y^g^'
believe3~orrthe most conHuiive grounds to have been years ago.
proved inevftatte:^^^""T^

mous pressM g to which any organisms resident there
would be subjected. From the weight of the super-
incumbent water the pressure would increase at the
rate of one ton per square inch for every thousand
fathoms of descent.

Consequently, at the bottom of the Atlantic, it would
be from two and a half tons to three and three-quarters
tons per square inch, and in the greater depths of the
Pacific from three and one-half to nearly five tons.
On bodies at the earth's surface, living only under the
ocean of air, it is but fifteen pounds to the square inch.
F'rom fifteen pounds to ten thousand is a far cry, and
one it sta ggers imagin ation to understand. It was
only too easily argued as prohibitive to life. _ Any
orga nism there,_jt was thought, jwould simply be
crushed out of existence.

The s econd bar^ was the tQtal extinction ^ojLJight. Extinction
Below two hundred fathoms no sunlight could pos- ° '^ ^
sibly penetrate. So it was calculated from the rate
at which light is absorbed at lesser depths, and^ the
calculation was amply borne out by observation.
Experiments by Fal and Sarasin have fully demon-
strated the unassailability of this deduction. On a



Hosted by



Google



58 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

sunny day in March they exposed bromo-gelatin
plates for ten minutes at a depth of two hundred
fathoms without a trace of reaction. To those who
know by experience how quickly plates fog in a dark-
room, this immunity speaks for the more than Stygian
darkness which must there prevail.

/ Now, the lack of light is distressing enough to any

I fauna, but to flora it is absolutely preclusive, since

I light is the necessary stimulus to chlorophyl reaction,

I and thus to the growth of the plant. Buijf all plants

be absent, animals, it was confidently concluded, must

be absent, too, since they could not live without plants,

being unable to fashion their food out of inorganic

substances. They must eat plants or other animals

that have eaten plants. Therefore, after the stronger

inhabitants of these abyssal depths, supposing any

there, had eaten the weaker, they must themselves die

of starvation.

Tilgs e_argumen ts seemedjunanswem^
inprjjf jrhe abyssg l^old. For the temperature falls as
the thermometer descends until at a depth of a few
hundred fathoms in the unbarriered ocean basins it
reaches a temperature of 34^ F., whence a slow falling
further brings it to 29° F., or actually below the freez-
ing-point of fresh water.
Deep-sea life. When it had thus been conclusively proved that
no life could exist at the bottom of the sea, deep-



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



6o MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

supposing a pathway to exist, the journey from one
hemisphere to the other involved enduring a shift of
ioo° F. or 150° F. of temperature, made as it would
be from winter in the one to summer in the other.
No such temporahties as seasons disturb the abyssal
pelagic denizens, nor can locality have meaning to
them, even though they be associated with the bot-
tom, which is only ooze or mud — ooze, the burial-
ground of protozoa, and mud, the siftings of volcanic
lava mixed with meteoric dust. One place is like
another, bearing no earmark, and a fish returning to
the very spot of its nativity would not know it again.
Time and space are alike annihilated there, and both to
sense made limitless. If any creatures can feel infinity,
it must be these abyssal denizens of the deep sea.
Blindness. The supposcd impossibilities of their abode Nature

has contrived to surmount. The pressure permeates
them, and t heir parts are constructed to stand the
strain. Ye t_sQ little change has been needed to adapt
them that it is virtually imperceptible to the cursory
eye. In another way l^aTufFhas accommodated them
to the illumination of their habitat. She has let them
get on without seeing or she has provided them with
lamps. Bx^^HEPly^^S senses other than the eye, and
allo wing the animals to become blind, Crustacea and
fishes ^aJike^^he has mid¥^^^m_Jxi^Q^cnA^Bt of the
darkness. Or she has done for them what man has



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 6i

accomplished for himself — supplied artificial illumina-
tion. That a blind fauna should exist in a vast do-
main with not so much as a one-eyed specimen for
king, is interesting and suggestive of what Nature can
contrive to do without, but that she should undertake
to light the region, and that by means of the creatures
themselves, is yet more surprising.

But this is precisely what she does, and with some- Phospho-

I . I . ... , . . . • 1 « rescent organs,

tmng akm to electricity, each animal carrying with it
its own machine. Whole tracts are brilHantly hghted
up by the inhabitants till they must resemble London
or Paris seen by night, only that in these thoroughfares
of the abysses of the sea the passers-by provide the
illumination, each, as it swims about, swinging its own
lantern as in old Japan, though better — a phospho-
rescent arc-light, as one may say. These devices are
evident even when the fish, no longer living, reaches
the surface in the dredge ; much more brilliant they
must be in their native wastes of abysmal water, where
all is cold and dark and silent round about, as impres-
sive as a mountain top at midnight, standing con-
fronted with the stars.

How thoroughly the living by artificial light is now Lesson of the

/- T . 1 . , . -. fishing fishes.

a part or their everyday existence, the occupation or
angling practised as a means of livelihood by certain
of the fish themselves — fish that fish and are known
in consequence as angler-fish — will serve to show.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 63

into the terrestrial one, seems a forthright step in
comparison. The swim-bladder, discarded when the
descendants of the upper relatives of these animals
emerged, leads to some curious experiences at the
bottom of the sea — ones that induce new outlooks
on life, and yet are the result of conditions alone. To
us who live upon the solid crust, pulled downward
constantly by gravity, danger lies in falHng over preci-
pices or down holes. Abyssal fish are exposed to no
less a risk, but of precisely the opposite character —
that of tumbling upward. Within limits, the fish
has control of his
swim-bladder, but
if in the excite-
ment of the chase Specimen of a Deep-sea Fish
he ffetS carried bv Obtained by the Challenger Expedition.

impetuosity farther up than he intended, he may reach
regions where, for the lessened pressure, he can no
longer control its distention, and is swept against his
will higher and higher till his organs burst from the
released strain. The fish tumbles upward, and is
killed by the fall.

As for the flora, it simply does not exist. Never-
theless, the absence of a local food supply is not fatal
to these denizens of the deep. It would seem that
what descends to them from the waters above is
enough, meagre as it may be. They feed off the


Hosted by



Qoo^z



64 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

crumbs that fall from the better-spread table of their
littoral relatives, as is shown by their being the
descendants of emigrants thence. For most of them
have relatives still living in shallow water, the oldest
abysmal species not dating farther back than Cretaceous
times.
Cosmic char- From such woHd-widc distribution of life over the

acter of life. ,

Karth under conditions which are antagonistically
unlike, we realize its essentially cosmic character
experimentally, if we may so put it, as well as
theoretically. Modifications of it follow any and
every change of environment, but nature strives to
the last gasp to bring forth this, her highest
^^--^oduct.

I Earh planet sets a different stage for the play of

/ spontaneous variation. In no two is the scenery the

/ same, but this is not essential to organic origin and

/ growth. Nor are many of the environmental circum-

/ stances prohibitive, though at first they seem fatal to

'- our particular species of life. Because a man, if sud-

^ denly transported to Mars, would gasp and die, is as

beside the point in any inquiry into the existence

of life there as the fact that no woman ever was the

mother of a monkey is irrelevant to a discussion on

yrfie origin of man^ We have here been evolving in

keeping with the shapings of a certain environment.

To suppose that we could instantly prove adapted



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 65

to another quite diverse is to mistake the process
n.^/ upon which life depends.
''f^%S Indeed, our most commonplace actions would there

^(/^seem phantasmagoric. Personal experience of Mars,
on the surface of which gravity is only three-eighths
the Earth's, would take on a character akin to the
grotesque. Everything there would become unnatu-
rally light : lead would weigh no more than stone with
us, stone than water, each substance appearing to be
transmuted into something other than itself. It would
prove at once a world imponderable, etherealized.
Our actions would grow grandific. For with httle
effort we should accomplish the apparently impossible,
endowed with an effectiveness increased sevenfold.
Lastly, everything would take its time. Water would
flow with hesitant and lazy current, and falling bodies
sink with graceful moderation to the ground. After
our first paranoeac wonder, it would certainly impress
us as a world as slow as it was fiat.

Our very senses would seem estranged. Sight,
indeed, and taste would be the only ones not to be
shifted in their point of view. Touch, hearing, even
smell, would all suffer a space-change and prove quite
other than we know them now. W e should be any-
thi ng but at hom e. But this joes not impl y that life
of so me form would not. For consider how our
own world must seem other than we know it to every



Hosted by



Google



66 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

animal upon its face. To the ant it stands a very
different habitat from what the elephant conceives it.
The grass-spires which tower as trees to the one are
trodden unnoticed underfoot by the other. Nor is it
matter of mere magnification alone. The former feels
both strength and limitations the latter quite ignores.
The ant scales his grass-stem with an ease and assur-
ance we should not know on trees, and falls off to the
ground, if need be, completely unscathed from a rela-
tive height that would terminate our careers forthwith.

But though modified in feeling by size of habitant
and modified in fact by size of habitat, life would go
on superior to such detail were the planet only sizable
enough to furnish it with its necessities.

So far as jffie-have^ evidence, life is an inevitable
outcome of the cooling of a globe, provided that
globe be sufficiently large. For^lijfe^ did not reach
this_eai:thrfr-em without, ^cu fanciful meteorite bore
it the seeds which have since sprouted and overrun its
surface. Meteorites gave it life, indeed, but in the
more fundamental way in which all nature's processes
are done, by supplying it with matter only from which
by evolution life arose. Of this we may be absolutely
certain from the fact that while meteors were falling
upon it in any numbers, they were forming its mass,
the full heat of which had not yet been evolved by
their impact and subsequent condensation. The heat



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 67

that thence ensued was excessive, many fold greater
than sufficed to kill any germs that might have come
to it housed in the meteorites themselves. Thus the
action due the meteorites after they came must have
annihilated any organic possibilities they may have
brought with them. Those arriving after the heat
had waned enough to make survival possible found
life already started, since protoplasm formed the mo-
ment cooling permitted of it.

The proof that life was here spontaneously evolved
appearS--at~jeY.ery_stage in its history, not only in its
origin, but at every step of its progress upvv^rd
a marked departure occurs from^ its previous course.
It and th e environment are observed to have changed
to gether. Twji^hort parallel columns, the one show-
ing the changes that have occurred in the habitat, the
other those^supen^e^^^^ in the habitant, will make
this not simply clear, but striking. As effective as
the well-known deadly parallel of oratorical utterances,
this life-giving one reaches the same certainty through
the probabilities disclosed.

Occasion of this vital parallelism occurs at the very
start. Indeed, we may go back of this and note
agreement before the start. For until the condition s
were snrh as cou ld support lifej no life appeared.
This-is^Ae-first coincidence. Another follows on its
heels with the dawn both of conditions fit for some



Hosted by



Google



68 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

existence and of that existence itselfl i The waters
were its birthplace. No other portion of the surface
could then have offered it a home, and nowhere ex-
cept in the sea is it then found. I

(The simultaneity of each new birth and each new
cradle crops up again when a new field arose by the
making of the land/S As soon as this was suitable,
plants appeared to take possession of it, and from
that time on neglected more and more the sea.

The fourth parallel is found in the significant fact
that Hhe edible plants and the plant-eaters made their
debut on the scene together in Miocene times) the
w^orld having got along without both before that
epoch. This entry, hand in hand, so to speak, De
Lapparent, the great French geologist, does not hesi-
tate to link logically, and to regard the one as the
necessary complement of the other. If this were not
the case, there is certainly no reason w^hy they should
appear at the same instant of time. Food evokes its
eater in fact as definitely as in phraseoldgy.

The last of this jprocession of coincidences, man,
came on t he scene ^jLlthe time when the cooling of the
glob^xeudered his own extension possible at the least
expense to„JiiniS€lf. Flis brain allowed him to take
ad va n^age. .--x£.,xQJidiiioiis-^^^ r ab 1 e

than other animals could endure. His mind clothed
his body and gave him fire, and with these two prod-



Hosted by



Google



THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE 69

ucts he sallied forth into a world whe re antagon ists
were chiefly clirnatic^^ withj^^hic^^^^ cope.

[Thus all along the line we perceive that life and
its domicile arose together. The second is necessary
to the first and the first is always sufficient to the
occasion. JiThe coincidqjnce of the possibility and its
seizure, of the posse and the esse^ seems to be a gen-
eral principle of evolution. Endless variation is con-
stantly in progress, and this variation takes advantage
of any opportunity so soon as it occurs. Life but
waits in the wings of existence for its cue, to enter
the scene the moment the stage is set.



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



CHAPTER III



THE SUN DOMINANT



Transition. The passing of the supremacy of its own heat, and

the entrance of the Sun upon the scene as the dom-
inant power in its life, mark the next stage in a
planet's history.

On Earth the transition from self-support to solar
dependence began with the first symptoms of atmos-
pheric clearing in the time of the great reptiles. The
clouds that had veiled the whole Earth in the paleo-
zoic period then began to dissipate ; though it was
probably not until much later that the sky approached
the pellucid character we know. The Earth^V-own
cooling thus first le t in the Sun .

That such must have been our Earth's history we
gather from the other planets ; that it actually was so
we discover from the records of the Earth itself For
from the fossils embedded in its rocks we learn that
when the Triassic strata, more familiarly known as the
New Red Sandstone, were laid down, gymnosperms, Q^^,
cycads, and conifers had replaced the cryptogams of
the primary age. These plants require more Hght

than ferns. Though technically called flowering

70



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 71

plants, they yet lacked flowers to catch the eye. Still,
they demanded more sunshine than their predecessors,
and thus testify to the purifying air caused by the
gradual cooling of the surface and the consequent less
abundant generation of cloud. That the Sun had not
grown more insistent, but the Earth more open-eyed,
the latitudinal character of the cooling shows. For it
was- not the absolute lowering in warmth, but the
zonal differentiation of temperature that then set in,
which is the noticeable thing. The tropics were as
before; the climate was changing slowly toward the
poles. Climatic zones began to belt the Earth.

In the next m^sozoic division, the Jurassic, the
corals, by dropping down the latitudes as time went
on, speak of continued refrigeration. Tropic, tem-
perate, and frigid regions began to belt the Earth.
But zones were not yet well established, as the pres-
ence of the same cycads in Mexico and Franz Josef
Land suffices to attest. Corals still grew in latitude
55° N.

With Tertiary times came in the seasons. Before The sun
this the Earth knew them not, though its axial tilt was ^^^^^^ '^^^ '
the same as now. Their advent is registered for us
in the changed vegetation they induced. For their
presence is witnessed by the coming in of deciduous
trees, which make their first appearance in its preced-
ing strata, the lower Cretaceous, and spread and



Hosted by



Google



72 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

flourished in the Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene eras.
The northern zones had now grown so cold that vege-
tation had to hibernate in the winter months. Mean-
while we mark the palms successively descend the
parallels in search of heat. In the Eocene — the
dawn of the recent — already they are lower than in
earlier epochs ; in the Oligocene, the next age, their
northern limit is the smaller fifties ; they become
rarer there in the Miocene ; and in the Pliocene they
have virtually disappeared from northern Europe.
With increase in light went hand in hand decrease in
warmth, which shows that the Earth had been the
source of the earher torrid climate. Its seas and con-
tinents were both cooling oflF.

/ The Sun was slowly asserting his position as the
great giver of both light and heat, and the world as we
L know it was beginning to be.

This change in dependence from Mother Earth to
distant Sun ushered in the reign of beauty in the
world. We live in the colored supplement of our
globe's history, the time when the pigments were put
on ; and this because as fashioner the Sun has replaced
the Earth. Though they bear no relation to us, the
gorgeous tints of blossom, butterfly, and bird that so
delight the eye were called into being by the sunbeams
themselves ; ^jdajle-thedes^sndaji^
were beholden chiefly to the Earth — the fungi, mosses,.



Hosted by



Google


THE SUN DOMINANT 73

and brakes — are som ,bre_Jnx»¥tts--^i^d:^^:reeTis, and
flourish only in the shade. A few indeed have
adapted themselves to the new conditions, but the
greater part still pathetically cling to the world in
which they were brought up — a world (except in
corners) long since passed away.

Since a general clearing of its sky is a regular step Mars betrays
in a planet's developmentT^wF^ould expect to tind a ^ ^ ^^^^



evolution



cloudless, transparent air in^jjie- c as e of -^-plangt^ as
relatively old as Mars. For thus a body opens its
eyes to the cosmos. Now, this is precisely what we
do find. _ The aspect of Mars shows that it has thus
waked to the universe about it. In fact, such was the
very first of its characteristics to be made known to
the earth, being the one by which the others were re-
vealed. Without it we had never made acquaintance
with this other world in space.

Viewed under suitable condition^, few sights can
compare for instant beauty and growing grandeur with
Mars as pr pf^enf^H hy,^iJi.&-j^1f^<^^npp Framed in the
,blue of space, there floats before the observer's gaze a
I seeming miniature of his own Ear th, yet changed by
g^V translation to the sky. Within its charmed circle of
light he marks ap parent cont in ents and^ eas^jio^^am-
ifying into one another, now stretching in unique ex-
panse over wide tracts of disk, and capped at their
poles by dazzling ovals of white. It recalls to him



Hosted by



Google



74 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

his first lessons in geography, where the Earth was
shown him set ethereally amid the stars, only with an
added sense of reality in the apotheosis. It is the
thing itself, stamped with that all-pervading, indefin-
able hall-mark of authenticity in which the cleverest
reproduction somehow fails.

In color largely lies this awakening touch that im-
bues the picture with the sense of actuality. And
very vivid are the tints, so saHent and so unlike that
their naming in words conveys scant idea of their con-
cord to the eye. Rose ochre dominates the lighter
regions, while a robin's-egg blue colors the darker ;
and both are set off and emphasized by the icy white-
ness of the caps. Nor is either hue uniform; tone
relieves tint to a further heightening of effect. In
some parts of the light expanses the ochre prevails
alone ; in others the rose deepens to a brick-red, suf-
fusing the surface with the glow of a warm, late after-
noon. No less various is the blue, now sinking into
deeps ot shading, now lightening into faint washes that
in places grade off insensibly into ochre itself, thus
making regions of intermediate tint the precise borders
of which are not decipherable by the eye.

Superimposed upon its general opaHne complexion
are now and then to be seen ephemeral effects. At
certain times and in certain places warm chocolate-
brown has been known to supplant the blue. Often,



Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 75

too, cold white dots are scattered over the disk, daz-
zling diamond points that deck the planet's features
to a richness beyond the power of pencil to portray.
So minute are they that good seeing is needed to dis-
close them. It is at such moments that color best
comes out. To those who know the sun only as
golden and the moon as white, even in its color
scheme Mars would stand forth a revelation.

It is easy to travel in thought over the strange
land thus displayed below you. For though you
gaze up into the sky, you still look down upon its
ground, and follow consciously or unconsciously the
configuration of its surface with cartographic eye, now
led by some apparent bay tq jr un with it up into_th^
co ntinent, now witched by the spirit of exploration
toward jorne^ island, as it seems to be, set remote in
the midst of the sea. But whether you purpose it or
not, nature, taking the matter out of your hand, de-
cides it for you. For presently you perceive your
point of view not to be quite what it was. The bay
in question, as well as the island, has slightly changed
its place upon the disk, while the two have kept their
mutual relation unaltered. A few minutes more and
the shift has increased, and then you become aware
of what is taking place : this other world is turning on
itself, as turns our own, rotating from west to east as
it rolls along its orbit about the sun.



Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT ^^

Objects, grown familiar, give place to others that are
new. Sitting alone in midnight vigil in his silent
dome, the astronomer thus mutely circumnavigates
another world.

The^cloudlessness of the planet's sky alone makes
such tr avel pos sible. Were itlTor^for""th^nob^^
view, exploration of the sort would be out of the ques-
tion. Were Mars not an old planet, corroborating by
absence of cloud the general course of planetary devel-
opment, our knowledge of it had been slight. To
begin with, its lack of covering enables us to mark
th e permanency in place of the planet's features, and
from such permanently to time the planet's axial
rotation. This gives us knowledge of the planet's
day and furnishes means to measure it. This day
pro ves to differ in durat ion little from our own,
bei ng 24 h our s, 40 minutes j[ong,__JLn&tead ^--^4r-
hours. In the next place its scantiness of atmos-
pheric apparel discloses the tilt of the axis to
the planet's orbital plane, a relation which causes
the seasons of the year. Now the M artian tilt,
as welL_as^4be-JV[ani an time of rot ation, turns^
QuLJ Q be singularly like our own, being, in fa ct,
24''* as against 23^'' for the Earth. Thus the
Martian seasons counterpart ours. The year of

^ Still later measures at Flagstaff make this even smaller, 23° 13', — or actually a
little less than ours. (See note 18.)



Hosted by



Qoo^z



The thin
atmosphere

of Mars.



78 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Mars, h oweverj is twice ou rs in length, which, joined
to great eccentricity of orbit, gives it divg^sifiedly-Iattg-
seasons. Thus, in th e northern hemispherCj^^^s^^
lasts 1 9Q_day s, summer 183 , autumn 147, and winter
158, while in its sout hern hemisphere the figures stand
reversed. The numbers have more than academic
importance, for absolute length is as vital a factor in a
season's influence as the fact of the season itself
Much mayLb£j),rQii ght to pass in j: wice the time which
could not develQp in the shorter period. And it is
not a little interesting that precisely this posiiBttrty
actually turn^-o^FlolJ^^^y^ ecdrtomy

of the planet's ye ^^^ ^^ ~ ^ — ^^.

Absence of cloud speaks, too, of the thinness of
the planet's air,^^ of which we have other evidence as
well. Perhaps the best proof of a relatively thin air
is the lack of intrinsk_brilli^^

its "albedo," as it is called. This is only 27 per cent of
absolute r^egecHonTaT a gainst Q2 per ce nt for Ven us.
Now, a thick air, even if clear, — indeed, because clear,
— would cast a luminous veil over the planet's face
due to dust or vapor, as it does with Venus, dimming
its features. Such is not the case with Mars.

Of twilight, therefore, there should be less, and
certain observations made at Flagstaff in 1894 seem to
prove this. The refractive medium of air which on
Earth calls the Sun earlier in the morning, and keeps



Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



l^MMh



Ml


Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 83

The stronghold of. doubt as to the habitability of The question

of temperature



Mars Has always^ been the difficulty of accounting for
a temperature there hm^^^e^^nug\} tn support Ijf? _
From its own bodily heat at the present time the
planet it self, li ke our o wn earth, can contribute to the
surface temperature no appre ciable am ount. The
necessary caloric must all cor ng-irnm fhe <^pn. Now,
becaus^~lhe planet was half as far again from the sun
as the earth, and because light and heat diffuse in-
versely as the square of the distance, — a candle two
feet awjiy. giving ^only one-fourth the light of one a
foot off, — it w as su pposed that Mars must receive
o nly four-ninths the warmt h ^that the earth gets, which
would re nder its tern perature terribly low.

But^ the receipt of radiant energy is not so forth-
right as this. T o begin with, the bundle of rays from
the sun st riking the planet is sub jectjo two adventures
^t the very threshold of itsjglanetary C-areer.G^:"Ajarr
of it is at once reflected back into space fromJ;heJK>dy
itjitrikjes — from the air first, then from the planetary
surface. But the reflected li ght or heat does not go " to
warni_the_.body^t all. Strange to say, this important
fact had never been taken into account until the
present investig ation of the subject, whic h led to a
completely differe nt outcome from w hat had previo usly
been supposed. Too technical for exposition here,
one or two points in it may be mentioned. First, the



on Mars.



Hosted by



Google



84 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

proportionate amount of the reflected light-rays which
reach an observer stationed on anather planet measures
the relative brightness of that planet as seen by him.
This per cent per square unit of surface at distance
unity is what is called the planet^s albedo. Now the
albedo of thje different^-pkjiets jT.as been found by more
than one observer from investigations unconcerned
with our present subject, the only gap in the series
being that of our own earth. The latest determina-
tion by Miiller is : —

Mercury . . . . 0.17

Venus 0.92

Mars 0.27—

Jupiter 0.75

Saturn (Struve) 0.78

Uranus 0.73

Neptune 0.63

Our own ea rth/s_ albed p is lacking from the table
because we cannot see ourselves as others see us, and
are consequently somewhat in the dark as to our own
appearance. By suitable deduction, however, from the
brightness of sunlight at different altitudes above the
surface of the earth, it is possible to get some idea of
<it, and from this a modest estimate puts it as at least
^^ .75. S o that we arenot^^ so-^dull.as we thought.

^^lihus we _get the am ount of £ g:diant energy received



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



THE SUN DOMINANT 85

from the visible part of the sun's rays. There are also
raysToo^long to be perceived SjTour eyes, and these
must also be considered in a determination of the
whole. T he b olometer invented by Langley enables
us to do this, an d so to obtain the fraction o f the
total incident energy whjjch goes to warm the body.
In the case of the earth ^il:_prov^s-4oJb^-4X- per-Cgnt
of the whole ; and in the case of Mars, 60 per cent.
Here, then, we have a t^onre ^ f^ennns mprlifirgtjon
of a calculation based o n distance alone .

But this is not all. ©The clearness of the Martian The clear
sky comes in to abet the greater transmission of its
air. Fro m daw n till dusk, day after day in the sum-
mer season, and l^Jgely in winter, the sun shines out
of a heaven innocent of cloud. No shield of the
sort, and only a little screen of air^ tempers its
beams_JjQL„the soil held up to it. Such an exposure
far exceeds anything we have on earth ; for with us,
even in the tropics, clouds gather as soon as the
heating grows excessive, and cool the air by plumps
of rain.

How much this means to_a planet^ as far away

from the ^_sun as Mars, will app^ear if we consider

what in this rj^pecLlSL. jh^^

Over the earth as a whole, the proportion of actu al
to ^possible sunshine for the whole vear is <o per
cent. That is, the sky is such that the sun shines



Hosted by



Google


86 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

only half the tijpe it might were there no clouds to
screen it.

On Mars the spring mistiness at the borders of
the polar cap is the only veiling the surface knows,
with the result that the percentag e of sunshine
throughoutthe_ vear is ^Q ^ er cent of the utmost
possible. VThis is somewhat reduced by the fact
that some light and heat of course is let in by the
clouds — and is kept in better, tooT^

Taking jhgse^ different data, and using the most
recently determined relation of radiation to temper-
ature (that of Stefan, which Tias been independently
deduced theoretically by both Boltzmann and Ga-
litzine), we find that the rneante mperature _Q£ _the
surface_air_of_Mai^_._^^ Jbe abaul.^jj^ F. We
must not place too much credence in the actual fig-
ures, for our knowledge of the kws^of^ atmospheric
retention of heat is very uncertain, but the research
is enough to show that the aboY^ result ^ much
nearer the tr uth th an_the terribly cold ones. That
of tlie---€ardi_js of^ly_6o^^". ; so jthaL..the^ ^^^^ ^^^~
matic warmth of the two pkii^jts. js „aQt very unlike,
0jand far witHinthe" possibilities of life for both.^''*


But the circumstances are ev en more favora ble to

^ ,^^^ Martian_lif e_than ^thjs. For man does not liveby

mean annual temperatures alone. In fact neither

he nor other animals in our temperate zones pay so



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 87

much heed to yearly averages as is sometimes sup-
posed. Much more to the point with them Is the
mean summer warmth they experience. — ~" ~^

Now, in the suinrner-time, — that is, all the way Summer and
from some months after the ~wihTeT~TolsTOe ~^ wmertem-

^...,. - ■• - • peratures.

months after the summer one, — more heat is ab-
sorbed daily from the sun than is radiated out to
the stars at night. The sul^e^ em pgratrti^ 4s^^ e n
const antly risin g; a fact patent when one stops to
think of it in this way, since June is warmer than
March, but thaf^fhk mf^^^ ^1^^^ ^^^ d^y's g?in-^x-
ceeds the night's loss is commonly lost sight o f.
The fact is pertinent to our present inquiry. For
the daily increment continues for half the year, and

the "^ arti an year is twice our own jn lengtL I ts

t otal gain insummer oyer the mea n would.t__other
things equal, rise to sornefhin g liWe^ fw ire onr pum
Instead of a temperature lii LQL-;^^--aa.--Jgd£h j^ on
Mars it rnight^ell be 5(^ iiL_.spite_.oLthe thinner air.
That a thin jnr^js ^'^ mpntibl^ with [^vr^f -'mrf^rf^
heat the lat est an d most authoritative measures of
the heat jpilthejmoon^^

interes tingly corr oborate. These measures are those
of Professor Very. With great care and thorough-
ness this excellent investigator experimented on the
amount of heat radiated by different parts of the
moon at different times of the lunar day. He con-



Hosted by



Google



88 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

tinued the work Langley had begun to a much
finer point of precision. It used to be thought that
even at lunar midday the temperature of the moon's
surface must be below freezing because of its lack of
a retaining blanket of air. Very's latest conclusions
in the matter put a quite different aspect upon it.
k /rTn a letter of his to the writer he sums up his results
fsf^ ..jy" as follows : —

^ When the sun rises, no matter in what latitude, it is cold. I do

not venture to say how cold, but below the freezing-point. Not
until the sua has reached an altitude of I 5° in middle latitudes does
the temperature get above freezing. Then the heat mounts rapidly
until at the end of the first week of sunshine in dry regions near the
equator the rock surface is as hot as boiling water. As midday ap-
proaches at the end of the second week, the scorching rocks attain
a temperature full 80*^ centigrade above the boiling-point of water
in regions under a vertical sun (356° F. ). Having once become
heated, the rocky surface retains itsJieat to a great extent far into the
afternoon, the curve of falling temperature being perhaps a day and
a half of our time out of symmetry. Toward the end ot the lunar
afternoon the fall of temperature is very rapid, and before the sun
sets, frost prevails, or at least temperatures which produce frost
wherever there is water-vapor to make the article which we call
** hoar-frost."

And this great heat occurs where there is virtually
no blanket of air ; and, what is even jmoXje_-^s^^^^
its temperature maximu^n is^.jiQt_at£aiBed till a day
and a half after its greatest receipt of sunshine.



Hosted by



Google


THE SUN DOMINANT
Now, when we turn from deduction to the picture Aspect of

Mars

the planet presents, which, after all, is entitled to corroborative,
some consideration in statements about itself, we
confront what certainly seems a body in fairly easy
circumstances of temperature. In its summer the sur-
face lies fully exposed to our g aze, an d it as sure dl y
is not suffering from wholesale glaciation. On the
contrary, the phenomena point to something quite
the reverse. For weeks its arctic regions up to 86°
and 87° N. latitude are certainly above the free zing-
point, sinc e the snow disappe ars. Probably they are
far above it, for in the polar caps we then behold a
shrinkage much greater than anything we similarly
experience on earth, part of which is due to less
depth of snow, but showing also that it is relatively
warmer there than here. Lower down the disk,
toward the equator, great jiust-storms , like the si-
mooms of our Sahara, sweep over portions of it at
times, hundreds of square miles in extent, convey-
ing to the onlooker anything but a sense of chill.^^
In winter the opposite state of things prevails. A
good sixth of the whole surface goes into winter
quarters as each autumn draws on. It stays so, too,
for some eight of our months on end, not to emerge
till the next Martian spring. A winter on Mars in
high latitudes has a polar complexion to it not wholly I
pleasing to contemplate.



Hosted by



Google



90 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

But the idea that such a winter's counterpane be-
tokens more than hibernation, and in any sense hazards
the existence of life, a moment's thought on our own
conditions of living will suffice to dispel. The great
nations of the earth, with scarce an exception, live half
the year in the earth's north polar cap, buried in snow
and hidden the greater part of the time from visual
communication with outside space. If JVlartian phi-
losoph^s^re of die^^^ earthly ones, they

must incontroyertibly prove to their own satisfaction
the impossibility of our existence. Nevertheless, from
the fairly" gucC^^sfW way in which we manage to sur-
vive in open contravention of philosophy, we see that
it is not necessary even to suppose hibernation, fea-
sible as nature finds that to be with insects, fishes, and
beasts, in order to tide an animal over from one period
of warmth to the next. (An organism with or without
what we are pleased to call human intelligence is quite
capable of submitting to conditions which would, if
permanent, prove destructive to life, and of biding its
time to a more propitious season, j
Summer the For, thanks to rcccnt research, we now know that
with animals generally it is the summer temperature,
not the wmteF'ohe, that decides the q uestion as to



whether life^siialLexist. An able investigation of the
United States Government Zoologist, Dr. Merriam,
made upon the region of the San Francisco peaks, in



life season.



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT



91


Merriam's Map of San Francisco Mountain and Vicinity, Arizona
Published in " North American Fauna, No. 3."



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



The Douglas Fir



Hosted



by Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 95

the needles of which stardingly suggest a fox's brush.
At 10,500 feet these trees dwindle to dwarf specimens
of themselves, until at 12,000 feet they entirely lapse,
and naked rock stretches supreme to the summit. A
climb of 8000 feet from 5000 to 13,000 of elevation
has carried the observer through six zones of absolutely
distinct tree life, counterparts of the tropic, the tem-
perate, the Canadian, the Hudsonian, the Arctic, which
he would have traversed had he journeyed from the
foot of the mountains northward to the pole.

To the higher slopes of the mountain every summer
deer troop from the lower plateaux where they have
passed the winter, to stay at these heights until
October's cold drives them down again ; while upon it
all the year round are to be found bear, which also go
up and down with the change in seasons. In addition
to these are wildcats and mountain lion, besides a
host of smaller mammals, squirrels, gophers, and the
like.

Memam camped upon the peak in July, 1889, and Summer tem
studied the habits of the animals at high elevations
during the summer months, comparing the various ^^^^
genus and species found there with those known
northward in the world. Among other interesting re-
sults he found that the surv ival of s^ ecjes^is determined
not by thj£_jt3ieanjLnnuartem£e £^ of the locali ty or
by the winter minimum, but by the maximum temper-



perature deter-
minative of



Hosted by



Google



96 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

ature prevailing during the short summer months. It
is in this season that the animals bring forth their
young, and his study showed that if they were suffi-
ciently warm during the reproductive season, cold dur-
ing the rest of the year mattered not. At the worst
they hibernated. Herej^^then, the fact of a few warm
weeks made life possible, outweighing the impossibihty
of all the other long, cold, forbidding months. Fur-
thermore, what is important to our present discussion,
Merriam found that temperature wasj 2iQr£j)Qtent than
humidity, sjxJbjag-.-as- A^yJbajd-aii y water at all.

This point in animal history has immediate bearing
upon the habita bility of Mars ; for the Martian sum-
mer is twice as long as ours, an d, as we have seen, the
probable acme of warmt^h aj^^ no means

_small. It is by these attributes of its climate,__and
not by its mean annual temperature, or by the great
cold its surface very_^s^ib4y^__€^
that its ability to support life must be judged.

Another point the presence of the animals on the
San Francisco Mountains serves to brmg out — their
ijidifference to thinjies^ of the air. The creatures
which dwell on the peak, or which visit it as a summer
resort, are members of the same species whose natural
home is at sea-level farther north. The deer are such
as one finds in the northern part of the United States ;
the bear are the same as those inhabiting the forests of



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 97

Canada and Labrador. Altitude takes the place of
latitude in sufficiently cooling the habitat to their ac-
commodation. But it does this at the expense of air.
On the peak they dwell at elevations of 10,000 feet,
where the barometer marks only 18 inches, instead of
the 3QjtQ_which theiFTelatives are ^customed. Yet,
in spite of living in atmospheric penury on the man-
sard roof of the world, — for the mountain here is
steep, — they suffer no inconvenience, and seem totally
unaware that they are doing anything pecu liar. Nor
have they seemingly changed in organic or even in
functional development. With the deer the lack of
special adaptation is equaled only by the lack of con-
scious absence of it, and the animal is as much at home
as in the timber of the Minnesota woods.

That thinning of the air proves no bar to a species,
provided other conditions are the same, is further
shown on the high lands of the western United States.
The meadow-larks of the great plains rise with the
surface into the parks of the Colorado Rockies, with
an altitude of eight thousand feet, and are there as
much acclimated as at two thousand in the Kansas
prairies.

Now^jf_such a barom etric rang e cjji/bejborne semi-
annually without^special modification by the organ ism,
how m«€h: more"Tnay not be accomplished by accom-
modation, given a sufficiency of time ? Men who first



Hosted by



Google



**,:%'»;*•':%


Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 103

ited area of high ground can so far ameliorate the
temperature, how much more would be accom^ished
were it to become world-wide-?

That we do not find animal and vegetable life at
the tops of our highest mountains is due to other
cause than elevation ; namely, to the restricted nature
of the habitat upon the pointed needle of a peak, sep-
arated by impassable gulfs from other equally limited
areas. The animal has no range of forage and no
chance of commerce with its kind. This is one rea-
son for the absence of life upon isolated pinnacles.
Yet even so its presence proves surprising. On the
very pinnacle of the San Francisco peaks, at 12,630 feet,
the tracks of a chipmunk showed clearly in the snow
on the occasion of its ascent upon October 15. Another
exterminating cause is the wind that of necessity always
draws over a peak at the slightest provocation. The
/ consequent drain upon an animai's own heat when
made under low temperatures is fatal to life. Man can
endure 70° below zero F. if the air is still, but perishes
at 40° below under the least wind. Even a breeze, there-
fore, is equivalent to a fall of 30° F. in the temperature.

By both _temperatu reand appearance, then, water-_water-vapor
i>^\ va por proves; aj ^onstituent of the Martian atmospliere. !!l^J
\j\(f^^ N ow, the vapor of w ater is a light ^as, the lightest of
the constituents of our own air, and,nLn co nsequ ence,
by the laws of gases, among the inostdifficult for a



Hosted by



Google



Q^^^OJ



'^



jxfc



^^



104 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

planet to retain. Its presence, therefore, in a planet's
gaseous envelope is of the nature of a guarantee that
less volatile associates are also to be found there.
These, in an increasing order of weight, are nitrogen,
oxygen, and carbonic acid gas. So we may con-
clude that these are probably also to be found on
Mars.

But we are far from having to rely upon such infer-
ence, well founded in principle as it is, for our knowl-
edge of the existence of these important gases in the
atmosphere of the planet. Modern observation of a
quite unrelated class of features puts their presence
there upon a secure footing — a planting on the prem-
ises of both feet instead of one by the logical body of
fact ; and that, too, by reason of a descent from the
air to the solid surface of the ground. It is the now
recognized constitution of one of the two great classes
of markings that diversify the disk which has given us
the necessary information. The blue-gre||LJiegions
have proved themselves the sibyls in the case.

In form first, in color subsequently, the blue-green
areas commended themselves as seas and oceans to the
mind of the early areographers. Even Schiaparelli so
considered them. Nor at that stage of acquaintance
was the characterization at all far-fetched. But as
these seeming seas were better scanned, differ£iices of
tdnt became apparent in them. This should have



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 105

'^hnkgn heliff i n thHr rh ^ racter, hut so tenaciou s is
an ide a when once it has taken root that the d is-
cove ry awoke no doub t. The oceans were merely
spoken of as shallower in some places than in others,
as if thousands of square miles of water so few^feet
deep that the botto m showed throu gh did not of itself
need explanation.

Next, these very differences showed variation.
Areas as large as Great Britain, and often very
much larger, would lighten in the course of a few
.weeks in a perfectly unmistakable manner. Indeed,
me greater part of the whole southern hemisphere of
the planet would thus doff one tone, and even tint,
to don another at surprisingly short notice, and this
without anything approaching a correspondingly sizable
/darkening elsewhere.
^ When we set ourselves to consider the matter In the



light of what was s een^ we perc ei ye^ that .^nrh ab<;pnre
of reciprocity is fatal to the theory of a liquid film.
For were the transformation some subtle shift of sub-
stance, what one part lost, another must have gained.
Either transferred as water elsewhere or wafted away,
to be deposited as snow about the pole, the thing
should still be somewhere in the planet's aqueous
economy. Yet neither of these counterbalancing ef-
fects was perceptible. As water it had vanished, and
the polar caps were not increased.



Hosted by



Google



io6 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Vegetation Left, thus, without a marine character to thejr name,

*^_-^:' we are led to inqwire-w^iftt tii€se patches, which both
In form and color a^ejwater, can in reality be. If the
great blue-green regions be observed at intervals of a
few weeks, and the aspects they successively present
be recorded in drawings, intercomparison suffices to
make evident that the metamorphoses they experience
are periodic, jn^^jhe jperipd_that_pfjt^^ planet^ I^^^-
The changes, then, are seasonal in cause. That is,
they depend upon the sun. And in proof of the
relation, their fading out Js_ found to occur in winter,
when the sun is least operative, and their greatest
evidence in midsummer, when the sun is locally most
potent.

^ Now, there is only one thing, so far as we know,
thus obedient to the_ami_^ ijidicative of its subser-
viency by^a^change^j^^ to^gdhre,
and that is vegetation.* Both colors are self-accusa-



^ tory. The first speaks of verdure in its prime, the

f^ • L, rv. »^ y ^

'^ ^ ^^^ second of the change of the leaf to the sear and yellow
s^'^'^d stage, just as it takes place in our own foliage on the
approach of autumn's frosts, indicating that its course
is run. Not otherwise could we observe it from
space, should we mark our own familiar earth change
color when its season's work was done.

Vegetation thuS- VjOLU^iedr4eiY-the-€aiistitution of the
air becomes more certain. JBssides water-vapor, oxy-



Hosted by



Google



THE SUN DOMINANT 107

gen a nd carbonic acid gas must both be present, and



undoubtedly nitrogen, too, since in the matter of "
density it holds an mtermediate position. To find



that the Martian air Js made up of our old familiar
friends in the matter of gas is an important step to
acquaintance with what goes on upon that other world.
Though we are indebted for our knowledge of its
existence to the vegetation, which is visible while the
air is not, it is in fact the vegetation that is indebted
to it for being able to show at all.

Of organic existence there the main, or natural, fea- Mode of

'r 1 1 r r 11 iiii r manifestation

tures or the planets race could not be looked to for ^^^f^^
more disclosure. Indeed, the surprising thing is that
they should have disclosed so much. That the com-
ing and going of ve getation sh ould be visible across
th'e"TKirty^Sv£ .million -Jiiiks--^ to which a t its

least the^gap^sgparatingjis from is reduced, is

little shor t of marvellou s. As for a directyiew of any
ani mal life the planet might support, it would b e out
of the question. In a very different manner would
this reveal itself. N pt through its body should we
he ware of i t , bnf thrmtFh %t^nmff ^tn.tinn of its mind._
By the mat erial changes in the s ur face of a plane t
wrough t by the dominance of his m ind over matter
would^th*^ othe r world v^ ^ orker stand confessed . This
we shall realize if, from the point we have gained in
establishing the probable existence of such life, we go



Hosted by



Google



io8 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

on to consider its probable character. Such can be
done by reviewing the experience of our own planet.

From what has taken place on earth, we see that
cooling and complexity of organism have advanced to-
gether. Life originated here as soon as the tempera-
ture fell below the boiling-point, and it started in
water, the liquefying of which out of steam gave it at
once an essential factor of its substance and an environ-
ment of the most easily satisfying kind.

An upward step in evolution occurred when life
stepped out upon the land. While less directly
favorable to life, the land was fraught with more pos-
sibilities for organisms capable of turning them to
account. Brain wa s3^£d€dT-ai^d----k:aiiL evolved .

Brain, indeed, now became^ the chief concern of
nature. The character of the habitat undoubtedly
brought this about through the prizes it ofFei-ed the
clever, and the snuffing out to which it consigned the
crass.
qJ^J^- For long the animal remained thus the creature
^ >^ of its environment, its view restricted in both time
and space. Greater possibilities came in with man.
Doubtless his was no very dignified entry, though
something better than on all fours. Brain now finally
distanced brawn, and even in his savage state man
became a being that others feared. From thus stand-
ing primus inter pares^ he soon developed into first.



"^



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



THE SUN DOMINANT 109

" with the rest nowhere." Fire and clothes raised him
to some independence of his surroundings, and slowly
he began to take possession of the earth. His breech-
ing, the putting on by the race of the toga viriliSy was
both an incident of his rise and part cause of it as well,
for it made him superior to climate. But the fertility
of brain, however humble in its beginning, which sug-
gested the means of protecting the body, devised the
mH-lhnrlc; K y whirh ht was tg subju[ ; fitf" thf ^ earth^^^ _^

For some centuries now this has been his goal, un-
conscious or confessed^ The true histofy^of~man has



consisted not m his squabbles with his kind, but in his
steady conquest of al l earth's animals e xcept himself
He has enslaved all that he could ; he is busy m ex-
terminating the rest. From this he has gone on to
tnrnj:ht^ very fr^rc^s of nature to his ow n ends. This
task is recent and is yet in its infancy, but it is destined
to great things. As brain develops, it must take pos-
session of its world.

Subjugation carries its telltale in its train ; for it
alters the face of its habitat to its own ends. Already
man has begun to leave his mark on this his globe in
deforestation, in canalization, in communication. So
far his towns and his tillage are more partial than com-
plete. But the time is coming when the earth will
bear his imprint, and his alone. What he chooses,
will survive ; what he pleases, will lapse, and the land-



Hosted by



Google



no MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

scape Itself become the carved object of his handi-
work.

Equally applicable is this deduction to planets other
than the earth. Instead of its being true, as a recent
writer remarked, that " we cannot expect to see any
signs of the works of inhabitants of Mars if such ex-
ist," precisely the opposite is the case. Until the ani-
mal attain to dominance of his world, his presence on
it would not be seen. Too small in body himself to
show, it would be only when his doings had stamped
themselves there that his existence could with certainty
be known. Then and not til] thejQ.^s:ouJd he stand

disclosed. It would not be by what he was, but

through what he had brought about. His mind would
reveal him by its works — the signs left upon the
world he had fashioned to his will. And this is what
I mean by saying that through mind and mind alone
we on eartJi should first be cognizant of beings on
Mars.



Hosted by



Google



CHAPTER IV

MARS AND THE FUTURE OF THE EARTH

STUDY of Mars proves that planet to occupy
earthwise in some sort the post of prophet. For,
in addition to the side-lights it throws upon our


Comparative Sizes of the Earth and Mars with the Polar Caps
OF Both in their Springtime.

past, it is by way of foretelling our future. It enables
us to no mean extent to foresee what eventually will
overtake the earth in process of time; inasmuch as
from a scrutiny of Mars coming events cast not their
shadows, but their light, before.

It is the planet's size that fits it thus for the role
of seer. I ts smaller bul k has caused it to age quicker
than o ur earth, and in consequen ce it has long since



Hosted by



Google



Its oceans.



112 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

/ passed through that stage of its planetary career which
the earth at present is experiencing, and has advanced
to a further one, to which in time the earth itself must
come, if it be not overwhelmed beforehand by other
catastrophe. In detail, of course, no two planets of
different initial mass repeat each other's evolutionary
history ; but in a general way they severally follow
something of the same road.

Mars has lost It is in the matter of water that Mars stands^ibrth

^ — . — ^-... — _- — — -- --

as a proph et^and this in two ways : as polar ice and as
oceanic expanses.

The first of these has reference to our o wn glacia l
epochs a geologic phenomenon the strangeness and
seerrung unaccoujnt ableness of_ jaJiicli^ h as gr o wji as
scientists Jiav£,j:mitemp1ated -it-wkkgnore care. That
vast areas of the earth's northern hemisphere, and of
the southern, too, were at times covered by a continu-
ous ice-sheet is a fact remarkable enough in itself, but
grown still more curious from the difficulty experi-
enced in assigning it adequate cause. Cosmic cooling
of our planet will not explain it, certain as that cooling
is ; for the refrigeration was partial, and recurrent as
well. Croll tried to account for it, but ingenious as
his idea was, it will not hold water — in the shape of
ice — in the form in which he put it, and it is now
virtually abandoned by geologists, although it contains
considerable truth.



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 113

Now, it is not a little interesting that Mars should
have something to say upon the subject — something
which throws light upon the phenomenon as a general
planetary process, and specifically upon its occurrence
on our earth. It jis bec aus e Ma rs happens to present
precisely the astronomic co nditio ns which form the
basis of CrolFs theory, and at the same time shows
the exact ^JE^^l^-^^ ^^^ prpQrribf^ d resul ts^ that its
evidence is valuable.

The relative length of a planet's seasons are deter-
mined by the elliptic orbit the planet pursues. If the
axis be so tilted that summer of one hemisphere occur
when the planet is nearest to the sun and therefore also
moving swiftest, that summer will be short and hot,
while the corresponding winter will be long and cold.
This hemisphere will have seasons of extremes ; the
other reversely will have long, cool summers and
short, warm winters or seasons of means. The greater
the eccentricity of the orbit the greater the accentua-
tion between the two hemispheres.

Gla ciation w ould result from a greater deposition of
hoar-frost or snow in winter than the succeeding
summer's sun could melt. A le ngthening of winter
at the ex pense of summer would seem, therefore, able
to bring it about . Now, a grea ter eccentricity in t he
orbit of the earth than is the case to- day existe d in the
past, and would ^ochjxe just _this_jefie£L So Cmll



Hosted by



Google



114 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

argued that it had done so. Unfortunately for the
theory, IVTars" movesiiow in an orbit more eccentric
than that of the earth ever can have been, and the
nearest approach of the planet to the sun occurs, too,
not far from the summer solstice of its southern hemi-
sphere, yet that hemisphere which should show gla-
ciation not only does not, but comes farther from
doing so than the other. For while the northern cap
diminishes from 78° across to -6°, the southern
dwindles from 96° to nothing. This shows that
while for various reasons the longer winter results in
a greater deposition, the. shorter but hotter summer
of its hemisphere more than melts it away.

Now, if we increase pro rata the precipitation over
the whole planet, we perceive that the extent of the
southern cap at its greatest will still more outdo the
northern one, and as the melting capacities of the two
summers are approximately constant quantities, a time
will come when the remains of the southern cap will
surpass that of the other, and glaciation ensue.''*

Such passing by one cap of the other in the race
toward glaciation is bound to occur, whatever the eccen-
tricity, if it be anything at all, provided the precipitation
be sufficient. On the other hand, not only no glaci-
ation can result unless the precipitation exceed a certain
quantity, but in want of it the ice-cap is actually less
in the hemisphere where we should expect it, that of



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google


-1


Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 117

this energy, varying, indeed, as the product of the
square of the speed by the mass of the particle. Such
motion it is that causes gases to expand. In their
journeyings the molecules collide, and thus give and
take velocity. In consequence, some are moving
swiftly, some slowly. The molecules are flying about
in all directions, and as long as they do not go too fast,
the planet about which they act as atmosphere con-
tinues to control them by its gravity. This it can
continue to do up to a speed called its critical veloci ty,
which is the velocity the planet can impart to a particle
falling freely to it from infinite space. For the planet
can annul just the speed it is able to cause and no
more. But. if, in their give and take of motion, a
molecule gets to going faster than the criFical velocity,
it will escape into space and s^ar^ Qjf ^^^^
travels of its own. These molecules will never return
to the body they have left, and as such desertion is
constantly going on, it will eventually deplete the
planet of all the gases it once possessed.

Now, from any liquid surface evaporation is perpet-
ually taking place ; so that an ocean is being slowly
and silently lifted into the air. Ordinarily its particles
fall again in the shape of rain, but not those which by
collision gain sufficient speed. These from their tip-
toe vantage-point take final flight into interplanetary
space. The smaller the body, the sooner must it lose



Hosted by



Google



ii8 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Its seas, for the less can it hold on by its lesser gravity
to its water-vapor. Three stages in the inevitable
parting with its hydrosphere are exemplified to-day
by the earth, Mars, and the moon. On the earth
the sea-bottoms still hold seas, on Mars they only
nourish vegetatiim,---£UX---the^jiioorL they contain noth-
ings at all. _

Parity of reasoning points to the road the earth
must follow. Sharpened by science, we actually per-
ceive the progress along it that our world has already
made.
The oceans of Attention shows that loss of water has been going
on through the eons that have passed, and that the

appearing. o i -'

process is taking place under our very eyes to-day.
Once laid down, the earth's oceans have been slowly
disappearing since. Xhe jeaso n they have not wholly
departed is ^art]x _because the re was so much to go,
partly because its greater ma ss hag helped the earth to
hold on t o them the b etter. The speed of departure
the earth can restrain is more than double that for
Mars — 6.9 rniles per sec ojid instead of 3.1 miles.
Thus the way by the skies is less available. On the
other hand, the greater initial J ig at of its inte rior has
kept the water from sinking in to a degree beyond
what is possible in asmaller globe. The earth has
thus lagged in its losings, but it has lost, for all
that.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



120 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

geologic time. A comparison of his charts gives
most interesting and conclusive proof that the land
in North America has been gaining at the expense of
the sea from the time the sea first was."^



But North America was noFTtohe in its natural
territorial aggrandizement. Europe exemplifies the
same generally steady, if temporarily fluctuating, con-
quest of terrain. As in North America, the land
started at the north, and encroached upon the ocean
farther and farther southward. What we commonly
regard as Europe was, in paleozoic times, under the
surface of the sea. Only the north of Scotland and
Scandinavia protruded. Had the present great navies
of the world been in existence then, they would have
found ample scope for their operations, but would
have missed their present bases of supply, since they
could have sailed over the sites of London, Paris, or
Berlin.

Wherever geologists have studied them, the strata
tell the same tale. The land has spread, the ocean
shrunk from the time they first partitioned out the
surface. Now, a general universal gain of the sort can
mean only one of two things. Either the„.oceans have
been deepening or disappearing. If crumplings of
the crust have caused increased depression i^n the
ocean basins, they should have been equally busied in

* See " JVIars and its Canals." Macmillan.



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 121

elevating the continental plateaux. There is no evi-
dence of any widespread raisings of the sort. For
though mountain-chains have been pushed up, they
are effects of local crumpling, not of broad buckler-
Hke embossment. From the very fact that they are
fractures, they relegate long, low uplifts to the past.
We are left, then, with the alternative that the ^sea§
have be en slowly reduce d i" vnlnme.

Testimony to this same effect keeps cropping up. Lowering of
Only the other day the Chagos Archipelago, a little-
known congeries of coral reefs south of the Maldives,
was studied by Mr. Stanley Gardiner, of the Sladen
Expedition, who concluded, from the appearance of
the atolls, which, like oases in the desert, dot the
waste of waters, that an alteration of level has been
universal throughout the Indo-Pacific coral-reef re-
gion, from latitude 30° N. to latitude 25° S. From
the fact that it was so widespread, there being evi-
dence of many local upheavals throughout the zone,
he inferred it to be due to a withdrawal of water rather
than to a change of level in the ocean floor. The
amount required to account for the appearance varied
from five to thirty-five feet. Thirty-five feet may at
first sound small, but occurring over hundreds of
thousands of square miles, it means a good deal of
water lost.

What is exhaling in the oceanic areas may be gauged inland seas.



Hosted by



Google



122 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

by what is transpiring in the smaller cut-ofF bodies
of water, such as the Caspian, the Sea of Aral,
and the Great Salt Lake. For the drainage basins of
these inland seas are not only comparable with, but
actually larger in proportion than, those of the oceans.
Consequently they are fed the better of the two.
Nevertheless, they are all with one consent evaporat-
ing at a very perceptible rate. Most of them are
below the level of the sea, which in itself speaks for
the depletion undergone since they were left behind
by the retreating main body of water. Marine shells,
fishes, and seals, persisting in the Caspian still, testify
to its abandoned character. Seals, indeed, witness to
its now distancing its greater prototype in its haste
to be gone, in spite of the huge fresh-water drainage
it at present receives. For in the great Kara Bugas
Gulf, on the Caspian's eastern side, the evaporation
is so rapid that while a current sets into it from its
narrow opening, with no compensating outward one,
it is becoming so salt that seals can no longer live
there. The Caspian is disappearing before our eyes,
as the remains, some distance from its edge, of what
once were ports mutely inform us.^ Even so is it
with the Great Salt Lake, the very rate of its sub-
sidence being known and measured.

The earth, then, is going the way of Mars. As

*See Huntington, recent examination of the shores of the Caspian.



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 123

there now, so here in time will be ushered in a phase Terrestnaiity

succeeds ter-
raqueousness.



of planetary evolution to which the earth as yet is ®^^"^ ^ ^^'



stranger — the purely terrestrial, as opposed to the
present terraqueous, character of its surface. Much
must surely follow such a change of scene. What
it will be like we must study Mars to know, since
Mars presents us the picture of a world that has
reached that pass. To all of us this cannot but
offer a certain exploratory incentive — one concerned
not with space alone, but with time. For while we
directly scan the planet for what it has to say about
itself, we are indirectly reading a story which has some-
thing to tell of our own future career. If we can
succeed in separating in this the particular from the
generic, what is local to Mars from what is cosmic in
character, we shall do on a broad scale what the early
astrologers thought to do on a narrow one, and in-
stead of reading in the skies the fortunes of individuals,
decipher there the fate of the whole earth.

Something further of this sort we may indeed do,
and this by help of the same principle that led us to
the loss of seas. The drying up which causes their
extinction is no less active on the land. Being a
general deprivation common to the whole planet, the
two kinds of surface must suffer synchronously. The
effects, however, are much less bearable on terra firma.
What in the withdrawal of water lowers oceans to



Hosted by



Google



124 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

affluence^ reduces tracts of vegetation to penury. The
once fertile fields become deserts.
Deserts. Dcserts already exist on the earth, and the name-

_/^" less horror that attaches to the word in the thoughts

of all who have had experience of them, or are gifted
with imagination to conceive, is in truth greater than
we commonly suppose. For the cosmic circumstance
about them which is most terrible is not that deserts
are, but that deserts have begun to be. Not as local,
evitable evils only are they to be j)ictured3 but as the
general unescapable death-grip on our world. They
mark the beginning of the end. For these deserts are
growing. First steps they are in the long retreat of
water. What depauperates the forests to grass-lands,
and thence to wastes, must in turn attack the sea-
bottoms when they shall have parted with their seas.
Last of the fertile spots upon the planet because of the
salts the streams have for ages washed down, and of
the remnant of moisture that would still drain into
them, eventually they must share the fortune of then*
predecessors, and the planet roll a parched orb through
space. The picture is forbidding ; but the fact seems
one to which we are constructivelv pledged and into
which we are in some sort already adventured.

Girdling the earth with what it takes but Httle
personification to liken to the life-extinguishing ser-
pent's coils, run two desert-belts of country. The



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



\:si



Hosted by



Google


MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH

Nowhere near it, except for the rare cottonwoods
along the bank of the Little Colorado, grows anything
to-day. The land which once supported these forests is
incompetent to do so now. Yet nothing has changed
there since, except the decreasing water-supply. Dur-
ing Tertiary and Quaternary time the rainfall has
been growing less and less. Proof of this is offered
by the great pine oasis that caps the plateau of which
these petrified forests form a part, and is kernelled by
the San Francisco peaks. The height above sea-level
of the spot where the chalcedony trunks are strewn is
about 4500 feet ; the lower present limit of the pine
in its full development is 6500 feet. Two thousand
feet upward the verdure-line has retreated since the
former forests were. And this is no local alteration,
for upon the other side of the plateau petrified remains
of trees are similarly found.

The line of perpetual green has risen because in
desert regions the moisture is found most plentiful
nearest to the clouds from which it falls upon a parch-
ing earth. Streams, instead of gathering volume as
they go, are largest near their source, and grow less
and less with each fresh mile of flow. The brooks
descending from the Anti-Lebanon, in Syria, water
the gardens of Damascus, and, thence issuing upon
the plain, lose themselves just beyond the threshold of
its gates. So in the Arizona desert, though in a less



Hosted by



Google



Carthage.



128 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

degree ; and those who Hve there know it but too well.
It is desert craft for Indians or cow-boys to seek water
on the mesas, not at their base. To ascend after it is
one of the footnotes of their trade.
Egypt and The cvidcnce here brought before us of a secular

parching of the land is not wholly confined to western
North America. Crossing to the other side of the
world, we come upon like remains. Upon the plateau
above the Nile, near Cairo, the traveller goes to see
another petrified graveyard of trees. It is prehistoric,
yet contemporaneous with man ; for paleolithic and
neolithic implements have been found not far away,
showing that in the morning of his race man lived and
hunted in these forests, where neither hunter nor
hunted could exist to-day.

Upon the southern coast of the Mediterranean, at
the edges of the great Sahara, are to be seen to-day
the ruins of vast aqueducts stalking silently across the
plains. Fallen into decay now, they attest something
more than the passing of the force of those who built
them from the scene they once made great. Carthage
has crumbled again to earth, and these sentinelling
arches alone remain to show what tentacles of suste-
nance it formerly thrust out. Still architectumlly im-
pressive, they span not space alone, but tirn^BThey
testify to something to be carried as well as to a city
to which to carry it. This, now, has disappeared



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 129

as completely as its drinkers. At the present day the
streams are incompetent to supply the aqueducts, the
very presence of which attests that in the past this was
not so. The land has parched since times so recent
as to be historic, recorded by the monuments of man.

Nor are we left to monuments for sole light upon
the subject. The very fauna has changed. Animals
that once inhabited the land are unable to live there
now because of the increasing aridity of the habitat.
Thus they add their testimony to that of the mute
purveyors of water whose occupation is gone. The
surprising thing is that it should all have happened so
recently. In a startling manner it brings before us the
speed with which the desert is gaining on the habitable
earth.

Palestine tells the same story. The land which Palestine,
once flowed with milk and honey can hardly flow bad
water now. Nor is this because the folk who made
its greatness have since been scattered over the face of
the earth. Much goes to ruin when the master hand
is stilled, but no rich country ever lapsed to desert for
this cause unless its fertility was irrigation-made. Con-
clusive and convincing is here the evidence that the
land itself has changed.

Upon comparing the places where this desertism Subtropical
appears, it will be found that all occur in a band about ^^^^^^^^ ^^ ^
the earth not far from either tropic, and extending



Hosted by



Google



130 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

north or south from it according to the hemisphere
concerned. Now, when we turn to the tables of the
rainfall for different parallels, we find this localization
explained.

It is precisely in these belts that the average rainfall
is least, except, indeed, far north, where the steppes
attest to like aridity. The occurrence of the deserts
is thus an affair of the circulation of the atmosphere,
and from that fact is lifted at once into the region of
general planetary evolution. For atmospheric circula-
tion is a necessary consequence of a body having an
atmosphere and being exposed to the action of the
sun. The general effects of it are as follows : The
equatorial region being the most continuously heated
by the solar beams, the air above it rises and flows
over at the top, necessarily poleward. The air about
the tropics flows in to take its place. Meanwhile the
lower portion of the equatorial emigrant, finding the
space below less occupied, descends to earth in the
forties, causing the prevailing winds in those regions.
The upper part proceeds more or less spirally round
the pole. This general circulation is independent in
its main action of the character of the ground. Areas
of sea and land modify the motions, but do not nega-
tive the results.

Now, keeping this circulation in the mind's eye, we
note that, other things equal, those winds that descend



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 131

from colder regions to warmer ones must be dry.
For, on being heated, air becomes capable of taking
up more moisture than before, and is by this re-
strained from depositing the water it already contains
in the form of rain or snow or dew. It thus keeps
with it such moisture as it has or as it acquires, and
instead of being a bountiful dropper of fatness from
its clouds, courses over the surface a scorching sirocco.
Such is the fundamental, uncomplicated process, and,
in consequence, desert-belts are bound to form in time,
and just where we find those of the earth to-day, bar-
ring exceptions locally explained. For adventitious
bodies of water over which these winds pass may sup-
ply them with water which mountain-chains may pre-
cipitate again on their windward side by the cooling of
the winds due to rising up their flanks. Either of
these accidents of surface may thus modify the effect
without affecting the principle.

Turning now to Mars, we find what is but in its Planetary
infancy on earth, there in full control. Not only are ^^ ^^^^^

•' — "*•-*— —»»^ - advanced on

the desert-belts jn^exjstence^^b ut the whole surface, Mars,
except forjdie_sea-bQi;toms> has gon_e_the sar^ way.
Fij ve-eighths of it all is now an arid waste, unrelieved
from s terility b y surf ace mois ture or covering of cloud.
Bare itself, it is pitilessly held up to a brazen sun, un-
protected by any shield of shade.

Tha-t ^«ch 4s the case jwith our neighbor certain



Hosted by



Google



132 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

points about it indicate. The first of these is hue^
The fiery color from which Mars was named turns out
in the telescope to be an ochre dashed with red. This
is just the tint our own deserts show when one looks
down on them from a mountain peak. The r j ^ g xt
thing is their unalterableness. Except for seeming
ruddier at times^ they change jiot, the seasons that so
transform the blue-green areas passing over them in
vain. Thus both in look and deed they bespeak
themselves vast Saharas, these great ochre stretches of
the disk.

Their^positioning^ tells^ the same story. This we
perceive on considering what their situation is as com-
pared with what it should be for such state.

Absence of moisture should not alter the general
wind circulation sketched above, and we should expect
to find, whatever the planet, the wet and dry zones
much what they are on the earth, if trace of them still
existed. To the Inap of Ivlars we therefore turn to
mark whether this be so. In such envisagement, one
antedating circumstance must be allowed for : the local
positioning of the oceanic basins ; for an ocean, by
reason of its original supply, would outlast its latitu-
dinal time-limit. Its marine constitution would defy
the law.

Now, the oceans of Mara Jay. JlL-^the^^southern hemi-
sphere of the planet. This qu alLfies the. .actiaft4nH:hat



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 133

hemisphere, and makes the southern subtropic zone
one of verdure to-day. This^ therefo re, fs ncTHis-
proof of the geiieraLkjs:^. itJs_.but _an_added argument
that these pr esent b lue-green areas were seas at some
former ejpoch^

Otherwise is it with the surfaceography of the
northern hemisphere, since in the beginning that was
probably fairly free from land-and-water distribution
of a sufficiently pronounced type to hinder the play of
the desert-making tendency. Here, then, we should
look for confirmation of the principle that the sub-
tropic zone should be more arid than the temperate
one, and here we find something which is suggestive.
The southeni_^iAtn)picjzone^ blue-green

areas ---t^hat_js^..jxeas.--Q£ veg^tation-^^^— all round the
planet^ Not so the .temperate. zone abovejt. In the
latter are found all the larger blue-green regions in the
planet's northern hemisphere — the Mare Acidalium,
the Propontis, and the Wedge of Casius. And all
these are approximately upon the same parallel of lati-
tude. The Lucus Niliacus, and the Mare Acidalium
stretch from latitude 29° N. to latitude 55°; the Pro-
pontis from 37" to 48""; and the Wedge of Casius
from 35° to 56°. That such c onsensus in situation can
be d ue to chance is certainly unlikely. Here, then,
linger the last vestiges of vegetation of the northern
, hemispjhere.



Hosted by



Google



134 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

TheopaUne As important is the present great extent of the
Martian deserts. Beautiful as the opaline tints of the
planet look, down the far vista of the telescope-tube,
they represent a really terrible reality. To the bodily
eye, the aspect of the disk is lovely beyond compare ;
but to the mind's eye, its import is horrible. That
rose-ochre enchantment is but a mind mirage. A vast
expanse of arid ground, world-wide in its extent,
girdling the planet completely in circumference, and
stretching in places almost from pole to pole, is what
those opaline glamours signify. All deserts, seen from
a safe distance, have something of this charm of tint.
Their bare rock gives them color, from yellow marl
through ruddy sandstone to blue slate. And color
shows across space for the massing due to great extent.
But this very color, unchanging in its hue, means the
extinction of Hfe. Pitilessly persistent, the opal here
bears out its attributed sinister intent.

To let one's thoughts dwell on these Martian Saharas
is gradually to enter into the spirit of the spot, and so
to gain comprehension of what the essence of Mars con-
sists. Without such background always omnipresent
in the picture, the lesser and more pregnant features fail
of effect in their true value for want of setting off. To
conceive of this great buckler of brazen sand and
rock, level as a polished shield, and stretching to the
far distance, to stand sharp-cut there by the horizon



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 135

of a sky, unrelieved by so much as mountain-notching
of its blue, is to realize in part what life on it must
mean. Where days and months of travel would bring
one no nearer to its edge, despair might well settle on
the mind. And the sun in its daily course rises from
out the stony waste only to set in it again.

Pitiless indeed, yet to this condition the earth itself How the
must come, if it last so long. With steady, if stealthy, ^^^^^'^ ^°^'
stride, Saharas, as we have seen, are even now possess-
ing themselves of its surface. The outcome is doubt-
less yet far off, but it is as fatalistically sure as that to-
morrow's sun will rise, unless some other catastrophe
anticipate the end. It is perhaps not pleasing to learn
the m anner of our death. . „But jsci^ence_is concerned
only with the fact, and Mars we have to thank for its
presentment.

Before the final stage in the long life drama of a
planet is thus brought to its close, there will come
a time when the water, having left the surface, still
lingers for a little in the air. For the atmosphere is
the pathway the water takes to the sky. Insufficient
in amount to leave a surplus on the ground in the
shape of oceans, or even lakes and ponds, a cer tain
quantity will still hover u p_g-bove. From the mode
of its withdrawal, aj)lanet m^^st lose it j^ gurface water
long before it loses the aqueous vapor from ^tsair, so
that the absence of the one argues nothing against the



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 137

last it clears, the cap is seen to be reduced to its least
extent. That it is mist caused by the melting of the
cap there is little doubt.

But there is another instrument of astronomical re-
search the special field of which is the study of the
invisible. To see indirectly what cannot be seen direct
is the province of me ^^ctroscope. The spectroscope
consists of a prism or train of prisms which disperse
white light into a rainbow-tinted ribbon known as the
spectrum, made up of rays of different wave-length from
violet at one end to red at the other. Now it is a
property of a gas, through which light passes, to absorb
certain of the rays peculiar to itself, and so form dark
lines across the spectrum at those points. Most of
the lines thus observed in the solar spectrum come
from gases in the photosphere of the sun, but there
are certain others which arise in our own atmospheric
envelope and are called telluric lines in consequence.
Such are the oxygen and water-vapor bands. If now
another planet, such as Mars, possessed either of these
gases in its atmosphere, the light reflected from it
should disclose the fact by deepening these bands.
Much was hoped from the spectroscope on this
point.

Up to and beyond the time when the lectures were
written, of which this book is the outcome, the sp ec-
trosc ope hadj iQi^ i^ynvRc^ \t^e]f fl si]ffl riently delica te in-



Hosted by



Google



138 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

s^tnent to give other than an uncertain answer on the
presence or absence of water-vapor on Mars. Huggins,
Vogel, Janssen, all thought to see xvidence^afk^
Campbell, with more accurate instruments, could find
none. Nor could any be obtained under still more
favorable conditions of air and instrument at Flagstaff.
The reason for inconclusion, though unsuspected at the
time, lay in the position of the bands in the spectrum
produced by water-vapor. These begin, indeed, in the
yellow, are present in the orange and light red, but are
broadest and darkest in the partially visible deep
red and in the invisible spectrum beyond it. These
strongest bands were beyond the appliances of the day
for purposes of careful comparison, while the others
were not sufficiently salient to make delicate contrasts
unmistakable.

In the spring of iqoS. Mr^V. M. Sliph er succeeded
at Flagstaff in bathing plates to sensitiveness through
the red, and, exposing these plates in the camera of the
spectroscope, photographed the spectrum first of Mars
and then of the moon at the same altitude to well
beyond the point where the great water-vapor band
known as " a " lies. He took in all eight such plates,
with the result that the " a " band showed stronger in
the spectrum of the planet than in that of the moon.
Now in the case of the moon it is through our own
atmosphere only that we are looking ; in the case of



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 139

Mars, through our own plus that of Mars. Any dif-
ference between the two must be due to the Martian
air. A strengthenings fheH j in thg e x pr niinn nf fh r
" ^1 b^ds. denoted^water-Y

-pliere__of_Mars. Here we have the much-desired
spectroscopic proof, and with it the explanation of why
so much uncertainty existed among eminent spectro-
scopists before. To those versed in Mars it is chiefly
of the nature of corroboration. For to the mind's eye
reasoning had already revealed that water-vapor must
be there, but now the bodily eye of any one may see.
The thing is curiously paralleled by the way in which
Clerk Maxwell's analysis showed the rings of Saturn
to be made of discrete particles before the spectroscope
in Keeler's ingenious hands stamped its evidence on a
photographic plate.

That water-vapor exists in the air is cause for its
deposition on the ground. ^^^.Jg^bgP^^gg ip^^^^^d and
ta-Stay_ so are two _ very difF erent things. The only
wa y in which so scant an am ount could remain de-
p osited in any part of the planet would be asfrbzen
moisture about the p ole. RojL^ajs^s now it_ stays
fixed, evaporation at a low temperatur e going so
muc h Tess tast than _JrQj5Ii^^^' ""dpr its appropnate
higherone. A snow-field suitably situated might thus
persist while a pond would speedily disappear. The
polar snows would be the only place where moisture



Hosted by



Google



140 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

could descend to the surface to stay, being brought to
the polar regions by the planetary winds.

With regard to the distribution of the humidity,
what scant moisture the desert-born equatorial winds
might possess would be deposited northward as they
cooled, in part impermanently in the forties, in part
more permanently at the poles. The return flow of
air in winter, being steadily warmed, would not tend to
deposit moisture down the disk ; nor in summer either,
to any extent, although from the melting of the cap
such winds would then be more charged with vapor.
Unlike^^ourjimrueartbb therefore, moisture would pro-
ceed poleward, to remain there. Not only, therefore,
is the water much less in amount on Mars, but what
is there tends to be kept about the poles. The only
available supply lies in the arctic and antarctic regions,
stationary on the ground or else is in process of jour-
neying round to it again.

In this last stage of temporizing, the water that
once as such bespread Mars's face now is. The well-
nigh total disappearance of the one cap, and the entire
extinction of the other, show how ea^chT summer melts
what the winter had deposited7™aridnfhat in both cases
this is nearly the sum total of the cap. Covering as
each does so much territory, one might suppose the
water not scanty, but comparable in quantity to the
earth's supply. If we calculate it, however, we shall



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 141

find this anything but the case. At Point Barrow, in
Alaska, in latitude 71° N., where the temperature is be-
low freezing from September i to June 15, 75 inches
of snow fall during the nine and a half months.
Ten inches of snow are equal to one inch of water.
This quantity, then, measures the amount of the
Earth's impermanent cap, and forms a basis for com-
parison with the depth of the snow-cap melted on
Mars. It seems, too, not an improbable value for
what occurs there ; for though on the one hand it is
likely that day by day the snowfall is greater at Point
Barrow than on Thyle, in Mars, at the same latitude,
on the other, the winter season is there twice as long.
To be lavish, we may estimate that the equivalent of
lOolhcEis^^^ofcs^riQJSii Ml on ThyTe . That would mean
10 inehes-^ef-waten^^N ow , the southern ca p o f Mars,
the 4axg£r_^of the two, covers 96° across at its
greatest, whick.makes its area equal to one-fifth of the
whole surface of the planeEZII^^
the othei ^ cap, s ince it at the time stretches over only



^°' £_v^nis„hing^ quantity in comparison. On earth,
oceans cover 72 per cent of the surface, and are, on
the average, 2100 fathoms deep. C alculation from
t hese data gives t ;hp ^imminf^nfwa^nn the earth as
i8q,ooo times that on Mars. ^ Jj^e said/r^Rtly, then,
that Mars was badly off for water.

In consequence of this state of things, the water-



Hosted by



Google



142 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



The surfece
of Mars a
waterless
world.



A high type
of life probable
on Mars,



supdj^ of tJ]LeL.-.planeLi^^ scant in amount and teth-

ered at that. For it is tied up during the greater part
of the year at one pole or the other. For a few weeks
only of each six months it stands unlocked, first in
the arctic, then in the antarctic, zone. Then, and then
only, may this deposit, meagre as it is, be drawn upon.
Mars is indebted for the staff of life to a polar pittance
sparsely doled out, and that only at appointed times.

Study of the natural features of the planet leaves us,
then, this picture of its present state — a world-wide
desert where fertile spots are the exception, not the
rule, and where water everywhere is scarce. So scanty
is this organic essential, that, over the greater part of
the surface there is none to quicken vegetation or to
supporLiife. Only here and there by nature are pos-
sible those processes which make our earth the habit-
able, homelike place we know. In our survey of
Mars, then, we behold the saddening picture of a
world athirst, where, as in our own Saharas, water is
the one thing needful, and yet where by nature it can-
not be got. Bu t ,.aae^„line_of sal yatig^^n openjo it^
and thatJies in-thc -pct^Qdic. unlocking -o£ the remnant
of water that eachjrear gathers as snow and ice about
its poles.

The evidence of observation thus bears out what
we might suspect from the planet's smaller size : that
it is much^ farther along in its planetary career than is



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 143

our earth. This^aging in its own condition must have
its effect upon any life it may previouslyTiav^"^Brought
forth, _A^^ life at The present moment would be
likely to be of a high order. For whatever its actual
^S^jL anj^ life now existent on Mars must be in thejiand
stage of its development, on the whole jjiuickJugher
one than the marine. But,_more than this^ it should
j)robably have gone much farther if iL^xist at ally for
yi its evo lving of terra firma. Mars has far outstripped
the^eartlu- Mars' s surface is now all land. Its forms
of life must be not only terrestrial as against aquatic,
but even as opposed to terraqueous ones. They must
have reached not simply the stage of land-dwelling,
where the possibilities are greater for those able to em-
brace them, but^a^ fuither^poir^ of pinchin g povert y
where brain is needed to s urvive at alL

The struggle for existence in their planet's decrepi-
tude and decay would tend to evolve intelligence to
cope with circumstances growing momentarily more
and more adverse. But, furthermore, the solidarity
that the conditions prescribed would conduce to a
breadth of understanding sufficient to utilize it. Jnter-
cnmmury\c^f\ni2j2;jTer thc wb^^^p glp be is made not only
pos sible, but obliga tory^ This would lead to the
easier -s pread in g ov€ r~it-X)f_some demiftan4ucreatiire, —
especial]y_vra;ejthis being of an ajjvanced-ordeiL ofjn-^
te llect, — -^able to rise above its bodily limitations to



Hosted by



Google



I The probabil-
I ity of life on

/Mars at the
present time.



144 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

amelioration of the conditions through exercise of
mind. What a bsence of seas would thus entail,
absence of mountains would further. These two ob-
stacles^^^Fo^^Tstribu tion removed^ life_th£rej^_o^ ^^^d
the quicker to r each a hig hly organized stage. Thus
Martian conditions themselves make for intelligence.

Our knowledge of it would likewise have its likeli-
hood increased. Not only could any beings there dis-
close^ jjieir—f^r^seace- only through their works, but
frptn tji e physica l features the planet presents, we are
led to believe that such disclosure would be distinctly
more prgbabk^jJian. ja_tl^ earth. Any

markings made by mind should there be more defi-
nite, more uniform, and more widespread than those
human ones with which we are familiar. More domi-
nant of its domicile, it should so have impressed itself

upon its fraKtatlajs ta impress jus across intervening

space.

What the character of such markings might be, we
shall best conceive by letting the pitiless forbiddingness
of the Martian surface take hold upon our thought.
Between the two polar husbandings of the only water
left, stands the pathless desert — pathless even to the
water semiannually set free. Only overhead does the
moisture find natural passage to its winter sojourn at
the other pole. Untraversable without water to
organic life, and uninhabitable, the Sahara cuts oft'



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND FUTURE OF EARTH 145

completely the planet's hemispheres from each other,
barring surface commerce by sundering ijs supplies.
Thirst — the thirst of the desert — comes to us as we
realize the situation, parching our throat as we think
of a thirst impossible of quenching except in the far-
off and by nature unattainable polar snows.

Turning again to Mars with quickened sense, we
witness an astounding thing, the study of which in its
mien, its moods, and its meaning, the next two chap-
ters will take up.



Hosted by



Google



T



CHAPTER V

THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS

THIRTY years ago what were taken for the con-
tinents of Mars seemed, as one would expect
continents seen at such a distance to appear, virtually
featureless.
S chiapareui In 1 877, howcvcr, a remarkable observer made a

andthecanas. g^jj| j^^j.^ remarkable discovery; for in that year
Schiaparelli, in scanning these . continents, chanced
upon long, narrow markings in them which have
since become famous as the canals of Mars. Sur-
prising as they seemed when first imperfectly made
out, they have grown only more wonderful with
/ study. I t is certainly no e xaggeration to say that
J^SI are the most astounding objects to he viewed in
the heavens. There are celestial sights more dazzling,
spectacles that inspire more awe, ^but to the thoughtful
observer wK'o Ts" prmTeged to see them well there is
nothing in the sky so profoundly impr,essive as these
lals of Mars. Fine lines and little gossamer fila-
ments onTy^^bwebbing the face of the Martian disk,
but threads to draw one's mind after them across the
millions of miles of intervening void.

Although to the observer practised in their detec-
tion they are at certain t not only perfectly dis-

146



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 147

tinct, but are not even difficult objects, — being by no
means at the limit <?^visioli7as^ is often^jt ateH^fro m
ignorance, — to one not used to the subject, and
observing under the average conditions of our trouble-
some air, they are not at first so easy to descry. Had
they been so very facile, they had not escaped detec- /

tion s€) long, nor needed Schiaparelli, the „best observer
of his day, to disco^^erTHem. But it i good air fhfy



stand^out^lu-tlxiigs^ith^st^r^ fflg abru pti t essr — I say



this after having had twelve years' expenenre, in the
subject — almost entitling one to an opinion equal to
that of critics who have had none at all.

How beside the mark it is to credit them to illusion
may at once be appreciated from the fact that experi-
ment shows the main ones to appear through the tele-
scope of the same size as a telegraph wire seen with the
naked eye at a distance of a hundred and fifty feet.
But if the air be not steady, they are blurred almost
out of recognition.

With our air at its best, the first thing to strike one
in thes e stran ge^phen omena is their g eo metefc took.,.
It has impressed every observer who has seen them
well. It would be hard to determine to which of
their peculiar characteristics this effect was specially
due. Indeed, it is probably attributable to their com-
bination ; for distinctive as each trait is alone, their
summation is multiplicitly telling. That the lines run



Hosted by



Google



straight.



148 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

^It^MiMgtitJtJ^mr-femt 4&^(^M. — 4imt is^, on ftrts of
great circles, or else -Curve in aft e^atl^ determinate
manner ; that they^ are of unifonTL.widJ^ ;

that their tenuity is extreme and that they are of
enormous length, are attributes each of which is geo-
metrically startling and which, taken together, enhance
"this in geometric ratig.
Lines are That the Hncs _ are absolutely straight — which

means that on a sphere like Mars they ^ foljow arcs
of great circles -— is shown by t wo fac ts which fay
Into one another. One of these Is that they^4ook
straight to^th^^xihseriijeiijsdieii^og^ not to

have foreshortening tell . This could not happen
unless they were the shortest possible lines between
their terminiJ^ The joth^f-^oo f c o n si sts In -iJi^irJittlng
together to form a self-agreeing w hole when the result
of al^jth g. drawings — hujQ(jUied^_In^^^ n at each

opposition — are p lotted otLJi globe.

In regard to their width, it would be nearest the
mark to say that they had none at all. For they
ave been found narrower and narrower as the con-
ditions of scanning have improved. By^^careful ex-
periments at Flagstaff it has been shown that^ the
smallest appear as they should were they but a mile
a cross. The reason so slender a filament is visible is
due to its length, and this proBably because of the
number of retinal cones that are struck. Were only



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 149

one affected, as would be the case were the object a
point, it certainly could not be detected.^^

So m uch for the smallest canal now visible with our
present means. The larger are much more conspicu-
ous. These look not like gossamers, as the little
ones do, but li ke strong j Q encil-line s. Comp arison
with the thread of the mic ronirtpr (];iv^s for the averagp
canal a breadth of about ten miles. The canals, how-
ev er, are by no m eans of a uniform width. Indeed,
they are of all sizes, from lines it would seem impos-
sible to miss to others it taxes attention to descry.

All the more surprising for their relative diversity
is the remarkably uniform size of each throughout its
course. Sq far as it is possible to make Qut> there i s

ru j perceptibl e, rjifferenre jp y^'ir\th of ^ ^^n^l^ when fully

develo per!^ frnm onp pnd of it to the other Certainly
it takes a well-ruled line on paper to look its peer for
regularity and deportment.

Tlllg.j'h^i^ to i tself^ each ran al differs from its_neigh-
bo r not only in wir|fh| h ut in fxt^nsion For the
canals are of very various length. Some are not above
2^0 miles lonpr^ w hile nfhfrg gf-rpf-r h 2 500 miles from
eji d^to end. Nor is this span by any means the limit.
The Eumenides-Orcus runs 3450 miles from where it
leaves the Phoenix Lake to where it enters the Trivium
Charontis. Enormous as these distances are for lines
which remain straight throughout, they become the



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 151

It should be remembered, however, that it is the
actual, not the relative, length we have really to
consider. But this is surprising enough — more than
sufficient in the Eumenides-Orcus to span the
United States.

Odd as is the look of the individual canal, it is
nothmg to the impTession forced upon~the~observer
by theju jiumber and still m or£L.hy their arfimlafion.
When/Schiaparelli finished his life-work, he had de-
tec ted(iij_canals; this figure has now been increased
t o 437 by those sinr e added at Fla{;stRfF, As with
the discovery of the asteroids, the later found are as
a ru le smaller and in consequence less evident than
the earlier. But not always ; and, unlike asteroid
hunting, it is not because of easy missing in the vast
field of sky. The cause is intrinsic to the canal.

This great number of lines forms jSin^^^lti^nhte
w hole. Each stands jointed to the next ( to the
many next, in fact) i n the most direct and simple
manner — that of - jn cc ting at th e ir cnda ;^ But as
each has its own peculiar length and its special
direction, the result is a sort of jrregi^l^f regularity.
It resembles lace-tracery of an elaborate and elegant
pattern, woven as a whole over the disk, veiling the
planet's face. By this means the surface of the
planet is divided into a great number of polygons,
the areolas of Mars.



Hosted by



Google



152 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Schiaparelli detected the existence of the canals
when engaged in a triangulation of the planet's sur-
face for topographic purpose. What he found was
a triangulation already made. XG-Jm? own words,
the thing " looked to have been laid down by rule
and compass." Indeed, no lines could be more pre-
cisely drawn, or more meticulously adjusted. Not
only do none of them break off in mid-career,'-' to
vanish, as rivers in the desert, in the great void of
ochre ground, but they contrive always in a most
gregarious way to rendezvous at special points, run-
ning into the junctions with the space punctuality
of a train on time. Nor do one or two only man-
age this precision ; all without exception converge
from far points^ accurately upo n their c entres. The
meetings are as definite and direct as is possible to
conceive. None of the large ochre areas escapes
some filament of the mesh. No single secluded spot
upon them could be found, were one inclined to
desert isolation, distant more than three hundred
miles from some great thoroughfare.
Canals in For many years — in fact, throughout the period

of observation of the great Italian — the canals were
supposed to be confined to the bright or reddish
ochre "regions oT the disk. None had been seen by

* Their seeming occasionally to do so is due to their mode of growth seasonally
or to certain latitudes being better shown than others at the time.



dark regions.



Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 155

secure impression of them upon a photographic plate
— has been accomplished by Mr. Lampland. After
great study, patience, and skill he has succeeded in
this remarkable performance, of which Schiaparelli
wrote in wonder to the present writer : " I should
never have believed it possible."

Regard^JbjL4iositi£udng--is one jof the most signifi-
cant characteristics of tjie lines^ They join ^11 the

salie nt po inJ:s„_.Qf-^h^. -surface- to- one-another. If we
take a map of the planet and connect its prominent
landmarks by straight lines, we shall find, to our
surprise, that we have counterfeited the reality. That
they are so regarda nt of top ography on the one hand,
and s o regardless of te rrain-^xax..,±hZ7ryt^^
most telltale insight into their character; it shows
that they are of later origin thanjthe main_ markings
the mselves ^__ For they bear testimony to this without
regard to what they are. Their characteristics and
their attitudes, in short, betray that at some time
subsequent to the fashioning of the planet's general
features the lines were superposed upon them.

But this is not all. S mce the seas probably were canaissuper-
sea s in fiinrtion ^s in name __once upon a time, the ^a^nfeltures
superp osition must have occurred after they ceased
to he- .911 el l ; fo r clearly the lines could not have been
writ on water, and yet be read to-day. We are
thus not only furnished with a datum about the



Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 157

Many years after the detection of the canals, scrutiny
revealed another class of detail upon the planet of
an equally surprising order. T Ms was t he presence
t here of small, round, dark spots dotted over the
surface of the disk. Seen in any number, first by
W. H. Pickering in 1892, they lay at the meeting-
places of the canals. H e cajled them lakes . Some
few had been caught earlier, but were not well
recognized. We now know .186 of them, .anj we



are very certain they are not lakes. In the case of
one of them, th e Ascraeus Lucus, no less than sev-
enteen canals converg^e to it.

It thus appears that the spots make, as it were, the
knots of the canal network. They emphasize the
junctions in look and at the same time indicate their
importance in the system. For just as x\o spot but^
stands at a junction, so, reversely, few prominent junc-
tions are without a spot, and the better the surface is
seen, the more of these junctions prove to be provided .
with them.

Their form is equally demonstrative of their func-
tion. They^r p ?ip p Hrpnf]y <;p] f-contained ^ nd ^If-
centred, being s mall, dark, and, as near , ps (^^^ ^^
made out, round^^Jj: is cer tain that they are not
mere reenforcements of the_ xaxials-~~djije^>^4u3 — cross> -
inQ\_ Jor cr os sings do occur where none are seen ,,
while the lines themselves are perfectly visible, and


Hosted by



Google



158 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

of the same strength at the crossing as before and
after.

We n ow come to a ^ yet more surprising detail.
The existence of the single canals had scarcely been
launched upon a world quite unprepared for their
reception^^and dulj^ distant^ in their welcome in con-
sequence^before jh^tjworld^^^^^^ asjced to admit some-
thing more astounding still ; namely, that at certam
times^ some of these canals apjjearedL mysteriously
p ai re d, the second linejbeing an exact replica of the
first, £}i5£^ihig^by ijts^ide the whole of its course, how-
ever long this might be, an d ke eping,,equidistant from
it thro ughout^ The two looked like the twin rails
of a railway track. (See map opposite page 217.)

To begin by giving an idea of the phenomenon, I
will select a typical example, which happened also to
be one of the very first observed by me — that of the
great Phison. The Phison is a canal that runs for 2250
miles between two important points upon the planet's
surface, the Portus Sigaeus, halfway along the Mare
Icarium, and the Pseboas Lucus, just off the Proto-
nilus. In this long journey it traverses some six
degrees of the southern hemisphere and about forty
degrees of the northern. In 1894 the canal was first
seen as a single, well-defined l ine — not a line that
admitted of haziness or doubt, but which was as
strictly self-contained and slenderly distinguished as



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 159

any other single canal on the planet. A Martian ,
mo nth or more afte r it thus expressed itself, it
sudde nly stood forth an equally self-c onfessed double,
two parallel lines replacing the solitary line of some
months before. Not the slightest difference in the
character, direction, or end served was to be detected
between the two constituents. Just as certainly as a
single line had shown before, a double line now showed
in its stead.

Study of the doubles has been prosecuted for some
years now at Flagstaff, and its prosecution has gradu-
ally revealed more and more of their peculiarities.
The fi rst thing this study of the subject has brou ght
out is that duality, bilateralism, is not a- universal
feat ureof the Martian canals. Quite the contrary*
It cannot be said in any sense to be even a general
attribute of them. The great majority of the canals
n ever show dou ble at any ti me, being persiste nrivand
perpet ually single. O ut of the 4.1, j canals s o far dis-

rnvf-re(;\^ nnly ^i Viqyp f^^TRV chnunrw^nplirif-y From

this we perceive that less than one-eighth of all the
canals visible affect the characteristic, nor are these 51
distinguished in any manner, by size or position, from
those of the other 386 that remain pertinaciously
single. They are neither larger nor smaller, longer
nor shorter, nor anything else which would suffice on
a superficial showing to distinguish their strange in-



Hosted by



Google



i6o xMARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



^'



ry



^



V



A



h^^



Width differs
for different
doubles.



herent potentiality from that of those which do not

possess the property.

Now, this fact directly contradicts every optical

theory of their formation. I f- the^dQ.iihle&.jaLere prod-

ucts of any optical law, that
law should apply to all canals
alike, except so far as posi-
tion, real or relative upon
the disjc,._jniglil^ affect^ their
j^bibilijt;y.^__Now, the double
canals are not distinguished
in any of these ways from
their single sisters. They
run equally at all sorts of

angles to the meridian, and are presented equally at

all sorts of tilts to the observer; and yet the one kind

keeps to its singularity, and the other to its preference

for the paired


Single and Double Canals
In a drawing made July 15, 1905.



estate.

The next point
is that the width



r



-'¥¥



of the gemina tion
— the _ distan^ce,
that is, between
the constituents
of the pair — is^
not the same for



"^*:#



Jk^^.^.



/ffS.:i



A Mass of Doltble Canals, Elysium (see
THE Hemisphere, Page 150)

From a drawing made on June i, 1903.



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS i6i



all the doubles. Indeed, it varies enormously. Thus,
we have at one end of the list the little, n arrow Djihoun ,
th^ c onstituents of which are not separated by more

than two degrees ; while at the other end stands the

■^ ""^ ■■ — ■ — - — ———____

Nilokeras^— mth its — members eleve n degrees am rL

That is, we have a parallelism of seventy-five miles in
one case, and one of four hundred in ano ther. TlTis^
fact disposes again of any optical or illusory production
of the lines ; for were their origin such, they would all
be of the same width.

Position is th e next thing to be considered. A
general investigation of this shows some results which
are highly in-
structive. To
begin with, the

the Hnn hles may
he hrnarlly

looked at from


I



i^jliU



■


two^ ^ints
vje^^,. — that



of



mL



!.>:;



111 ^y^. /if^^



A Mass of Single Canals about Lucus
Phoenicis (see the Hemisphere, Page 156)

From a drawing made in November, 1894.



theirlon^
n al or latitudj naL^
plaging-wpuii the planet.-^ Considering the longitudinal
first, if we cut the planet in halves, the one hemi-
sphere extending from longitude 20° to aoo° and
the other from 200"^ to 20% more than two-thirds of



Hosted by



Google



i62 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

all the double canals turn out to lie in the second
section ; the numbers being fifteen in the one to
thirty-six in the other. It appea rs^ then, that the
doubles- a4^ — net — e^^^dyL^^ilisixiJmtad^^^^^
plaii^t^— ^

We now turn to their partition according to latitude,
and here we are made aware of a significant distribu-
tion affecting them. If we divide the surface into
zones of ten dej^rees each, starting from the equator
and^^lmydlin^in either direction to .±he_£ole, and
count the double canals joccurrin^ in each, we note a
marked fainng_off_m_theii_^
tropic and suhtsjocip^fe^^'zof^

tion of them-^atJa4itud^43'^MrioT^ num=

ber^ ^re as fo llows : —

Between 90° S. and 30° S O

Between 30° S. and 20^ S 3

Between 20° S. and 10° S. .... 9

Between 10° S. and 0° 20

Between o^ and 10° N 29

Between 10° N. and 20° N 26

Between 20° N. and 30° N 23

Between 30° N. and 40° N 20

Between 40° N. and 50° N. . . . . 4

Between 50° N. and 60° N 3

Between 60° N. and 63^ N. . . . . 2

Between 63° N. and 90° N. , . . . o



Hosted by



Google



t



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 163

As a double may pass through more than one zone, it
may be counted n^ore than once, which explains the total
in the table, tKough the doubles number but fifty-one.

Thus the doubles are tropical fea tures of the planet. Area of zones..
not general ones. Decidedly this proclaims again
th eir reality, for were they optical only, tHey couidnnot
show such respect for the equator — a respect worthy
of commendation from Sydney Smith.

Another^ o£ their peculiarities consi sts^in their being
confined to the light regions. For, with one possible
exception, no doubles have been detected in the dark
areas of the disk, whereas plenty of single c anals have
been found there.

Yet to the dark areas they stand somehow beholden.
F or the great majority of th^rajdebeudr- fro m what-wete
on ce thought seas, to traverse the great d eserts. Of the
51 doubles, no fewer than 28 are thus immediately con-
nected with the *seas.' But this is not the end of the
dependence. For the remaining canals, 23 in number,
each connect with one or other of the doubles that per-
sonally connect with these dark regions. In all but two
cases the secondary dependence is direct ; in these two
a smaller dark patch occurs in the line of the connection.

Thus, the double ca nals show a most curious sys-
tematic dependen ce upon the g reat dark areas of t he
southernhe misphere. In this they reproduce again the
general dependability of single canals upon topographic



Hosted by



Google



1 64 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

features ; but with more emphatic particularity, for they
prove that not only are prominent points for much
in their localization, but that different kinds of terrain
are curiously concerned. The relation of one kind of
terrain to another is essential to their existence, "^hce
they are virtually not found irTtHe Blue-green areas, and
yet are fouliHTmrhe lirght only in connection with the
bl ue-green . TiatJ^hfiilue-green is vegetation and the
ochre desettleads_one's thoug ht to co njecture beyond.
To turn, now, to another mode of position, we
will look into the direction in which these doubles run.
To do this, we shall segregate them according to the
compass-points. Any one of them, of course, runs
two ways ; as, for example, N.N.E. and S.S.W., and
we shall therefore have but half the whole number of
compass-points to consider. Taking the direction
two points apart, we shall have eight sets, dividing
the canals into bunches, as follows : —

S. and N. . . .• 7

S.S.E. and N.N.W. . 5

S.E. and N.W 4

E.S.E. and W.N.W 3

E. and W 6

E.N.E. and W.S.W 6

N.E. andS.W. 12



N.N.E. and S.S.W.



51



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 165

At first, to one considering this table, no marked
preponderance for one direction over another mani-
fests itself in the orientation. Still, a certain trend to
the east of north as opposed to the west of north is
discernible. For 25 doubles run within 45"^ of north-
east and southwest, to 1 2 only that do the same thing
for northwest and southeast. Following up the hint
thus given us, we proceed to apportion the canals first
into quadrantal points. The result is a fairly equable
division all around the circle. Now, as a matter of
fact, by lumping the doubles of the two hemispheres
together, we have almost obliterated a striking fact
which lies hidden in the table. If, instead of thus com-
bining them, we separate those exclusively of the north-
ern hemisphere from those of the southern one only,
and now note in each of these what proportion trend to
the west of south as against those that run to the east
of it, and vice versa^ we come out with significant re-
sults. In the northern hemisphere, the proportion of
double canals to show a westward trenJ'U'^opposed
to an eastern is 17 to 4. In the southern hemisphere,
the easterly-trending outnumber the westerly-trending
by I to o ; while for those whose course is common
to both hemispheres we find for the ratio of south-
western to southeastern 8 to 7.

How can this be explaj jied ? Consider a particle
descending from the pole to the equator under the



Hosted by



Google



1 66 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

push of a certain momentum. As the particle (of
water, for example) reaches a lower and lower latitude,
it comes upon a surface which is travelling faster and
faster eastward, because, since all parts of the body,
whether the earth or Mars, rotate in the same time,
those particles where the girth is greatest have the
farthest distance to go.

In consequence of this the particle would con-
stantly be going at a less speed to the east than
the spot upon which it found itself adventured, and
so relatively to that place would move to the west.
From the south pole to the equator, therefore, its
course would always show a deviation southwesterly
from a due north and south direction.

In the southern hemisphere, on the other hand,
since the rotation of the planet is the same, its direc-
tion with regard to the pole is different, for the sur-
face upon which the particle successively comes still
sweeps to the east. It would, therefore, relatively
to the surface, move to the northwest, and we
should have in this hemisphere a northwesterly trend
from the pole equatorward.

This is actually what we see in the doubles of
Mars. The proportion of canals trending to the
west as against those trending to the east in the
northern hemisphere is, as we have seen, 17 to 4 ;
while in the southern hemisphere the proportion



Hosted by



Google



4



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 167

trending to the east is i to o. As for canals occupy-
ing both grounds a compromise is effected, the canals
running according to the hemisphere in which the
greater part of their course is situated. This is cer-
tainly a very curious j:gnclusionj and seems to justify
the name canaU- as^-4y^ifying a coadxiit^qf s^ sort
in which something flowed. ^^

Passing strange as is the mere look of the canals. The canals
study has disclo sej^.somet hing abo ut them stranger ^^^^^^ t^""^ ^^
yet :_ changes in their aspect depend on the time.
Permanent the canals are in place, impermane nt they
prove in character. At o ne epoch they will be con -
spicuous_al:4^atSy~-almost_ i jppossible to miss ; then, a
few months later, acuteness is taxed to discover them



at_alL_ Nor is this the whole story ; some wiU_show
when others remain hid, and others will appear when
the first have become invisible. Whole regions are
affected by such self-effacement or an equal ostenta-
tion ; while neighboring ones are simultaneously
given to -the reverse.

Curi ously enou gh, the canals are most con-
spicuaus- not at the time the pl anet is nearest to
the-eartiian4-4te-~g€iiei:aL features are in c onsequence
bejs i seen ; but as the planet go es away, the canals
cQirieout. The fact is that the orbital position
and^^the s easonal epoch conspire to a masking of
the c anal phenomena. For the planet co mes to its



Hosted by



Google



i68 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

closest approach to the earth a little before it
reaches in its orbit the summer solstice of its south-
ern hemls^her^^ For t wo reason s this epoch of

nearness is an unpropitious date for the canal ex-
hibit If^first, because t he bright areas^ ^^^^^ the

canals are eas iest made out, lie chiefly in the hemi-
sphere then tipped ^WLay^Jfrom „th.e „je^th ; and
(^z^j secondly, because^ Jt is not the Maptiaft -sea§aft-~fer
the ca nals to sli o\v.

Due to this inopportune occurrence of the two
events, approach and seasonableness, the canals lay
longer undetected by man than would otherwise
have been the case. Something of the same in-
felicity of appointment defeats the making of their
acquaintance by many observers to-day. They look
at the wrong time.
New method ^£9"^ their changcs in conspicuousness it was
o researc , evidcnt that the canals, liketRe large blue-green
patches on the disk^. were seasonal in their habit.
To discover with more particularity what their law
of change might be, an investigation to that end
was conceived and undertaken at the opposition of
1903, and in consequence a singular thing was
brought to light. The research in question was the
determination from complete drawings of the disk
of the varying visibility of the several canals statisti-
cally considered during a period of many months.



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 169

For the making of the drawings extended over this
time, and by a comparison of them one might note
how any particular canal had altered in the interval.
Their great number enabled accidental errors to be
largely eliminated, and so assured a more trustworthy
result. Systematic conditions affecting visibility —
such as our own air, the position of the marking,
and the size of the disk — were allowed for, so as
to make the drawings strictly comparable. On the
average, there were for each canal 100 drawings in
which that canal either appeared or might have done
so. And as 109 canals were considered in all, there
resulted 10,900 separate determinations as basis for
the eventual conclusion.

The object now was to adopt some procedure by
which this mass of material might be made to yield
statistical information, not simply qualitative but
quantitative results. Here the planet itself sug-
gested a way. Owing to the rotation of Mars any
region would be carried in and out of sight to an
observer in space once in 24 hours and 40 minutes.
But owing to an analogous rotation of the earth
the observer himself is not always in a position to
see. Furthermore, the two rotations are not quite
synchronous and are besides complicated by the
motions of the two planets in their orbits. The
result is that there takes place a slow falling behind



Hosted by



Google



170 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

in the longitudes of Mars presented centrally to the
earth at the same hour on successive nights. If we
could only see the planet for a minute each night,
we should think it to be slowly rotating backward
at the rate of 9.6° of its own longitude a day. In
consequence any given marking can only be well
observed for about a fortnight consecutively, after
which it passes off the disk at the hours suitable
for observation, not to return again for a month. Its
times of showing are called presentations.

Now in the subject we are considering these
presentations mark epochs six weeks apart at which
the state of any marking may be examined in all
the drawings in which it might then appear, a per-
centage of visibility deduced for it and then the
percentages for its several successive presentations
compared.

By this method results may be got of quantita-
tive value, capable of approaching something like
exactitude from being each the mean of many
observations, and observations made with an eye to
no specific outcome — indeed, incapable of being so
adapted in advance as the result showed.

It is pleasing to note that to no one has the
method commended itself more than to Schiaparelli.
To welcome new procedures is the test of great-
ness, for it betokens breadth of view. Most men's



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 171

knowledge is cut on a bias of early acquisition, and
cannot be adapted to new habits of thought.

The percentages of visibility of the 109 canals at
each of their presentations having thus been obtained,
a tabulation of them showed what had been each
canal's history during the period it was under obser-
vation. From perusal of the table could be learned
the canaFs career, whether it had been a mere un-
changing line upon the planet's disk, or whether for
reason peculiar to itself it had varied during the
interval. To show this the more easily, the per-
centages were plotted upon coordinate paper, in
which the horizontal direction should represent the
time and the vertical the amount of the percentage.
Then the points so found could be joined by a
smooth curve, and the curve would instantly ac-
quaint the eye with the vicissitudes of the canal's
career from start to finish. The curve, in fact,
would be its history graphically represented, and
furthermore, would furnish a sign-manual by which
it might be specifically known. The curve could be
considered the canal's cartouche, — after the manner
of the ideographs of the Egyptian kings, — sym-
bolizing its achievements and distinguishing it at once
from others.

Since the height of the curve from the horizontal
base to which it stood referred denoted the degree of



Hosted by



Google



172 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

visibility of the canal at the moment, any deviation in
this height along the course of the curve showed that
the canal was then changing in conspicuousness from
intrinsic cause. If the height grew greater, the canal
was on the increase ; if less, it was on the decline.
For precautions had already been taken to eliminate
every circumstance, it will be remembered, which
could affect the canal's appearance, except change in
the canal itself

Not only increase or decrease in the canal stood
forth thus manifestly confessed, but any change in
the rate of such wax and wane also lay revealed.
In looking at them, one has only to remember that
the action proceeds from left to right and that the
ups and downs of the curve show exactly what that
action was.

Only one possible form out of them all indicates
that no action at all was going on — the straight
horizontal line. That cartouche signifies that its
canal was a dead, inert, unchanging phenomenon for
the period during which it was observed.

Now, of all the 109 canals examined, only three
cartouches came out as horizontal straight lines, and
even these it is possible to doubt. This is a most
telling bit of information. To begin with, it is an
obiter dictum of the most subtly emphatic sort upon
the reality of the canals. It states that the canals



Hosted by



Qoo^z



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 173

cannot be optical or illusory phenomena of any kind
whatsoever without in the least going out of its way
to do so, as a judge might lay down some quite
indisputable point of law in the course of a more
particular charging of the jury. For an illusi on
could no more exhibit intrinsic change than a ghost

could eat rHnner without e ndangering if^^ rnnQtifnftnn

The mere fact that it is an illusion or optical product
renders it incapable of spontaneous variation. Con-
sequently, its cartouche would be a horizontal straight
line. As the cartouches are not such lines, we have
in them instant disproof of optical or illusory effects
of every kind.

Now, that the cartouches are curves shows that
the action in them is not uniform, but increases or
decreases more at one season than at another.
Furthermore, as the curves both rise and fall in the
course of their career, the action they typify must
consist of alternate wax and wane. It is, there fore,
periodic, which leads jj^- agai n JxL- the fact that it is
seasonal.

Thus, to take the canal C erauniu s^we note that
it dwindl ed from t he time it was first observed, June 5
in the_ Martian calend ar, till ahoi^t the end of Tune.
It then s tarted to increase in conspicuousness intrin-
fi\c^]]j_^_jn <;hnrf t o g^Qg j_-ytitil the early part of
August, subsequently to which it again declm



Hosted by



Google



174 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE
vanishmgjftei^tli^-^&i'^^ — Its cartouche further



shows that its waning was a slow process of""e5mnc^
tion, its wax a relatively sudden one.
Search for clew From the knowledge about the individual canal
which the cartouches thus afford, we advance to what
they prove capable of imparting by collective coor-
dination with one another. To compare them it
was necessary to select some point of the cartouche



to decipher-
ment.


Cartouche of the Ceraunius

From a chart made by Professor Lowell.

adapted to comparison purposes. JTh^ ^^^ ^^^^ ^^S"
gest€d itself was the point where the curve fell to
a minimum. This point denoted the time at which
each eanal began to increase in conspicuousness, the
dead -^loint from which _it^ rose. This dead point
was found for each cartouche, and starred on the
curve. When this had been done and the cartouches
tabled, at a first glance it seemed as if comparison
were hopeless for the detection of any underlying
principle and each cartouche only a law unto itself.
But by recalling that the canals e:5^ist upon the
surface of a globe and that the two directions for



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 175

positioning a place upon a sphere are longitude and
latitude, we are led to try latitude as the more
promising of the two to furnish a clew.

To this end the canals were segregated according
to the zone on the planet in which they lay, and
their separate values for consecutive times combined
into a mean canal cartouche for the zone. This
was done for all the zones, and the mean cartouches
were then placed in a column descending according
to latitude.

T he result was striking. Following dow ruAe Quickening of

canals accord-
ing to latitude.



column, there is evident a delay in the time of ,^^"^^^"°''



occurr ence of the minimum as we d escend the
latitudes. T hi s means that the can als started to in-
cre ase from their de ad point at successively later
ep ochs in propoir tion to their distance from the
pl anet^s polar cap.

Now, before seeking to put this symbolism into
comprehensive terms, — to do which, I may add
parenthetically, is just as scientific and far more
philosophic than to leave the diagram as a cryptic
monument of a remarkable law, which it were
scientifically impious to interpret, — another fact ex-
hibited by the diagram deserves to be brought out.
It appears, if attention be directed to it, that in all
the mean canal cartouches, the gradient is less be-
fore the minimum than after it. What we saw to



Hosted by



Google



176 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



occur in the Ceraunius is the expression of a general
law governing the canals. The curves fall slowly
to their lowest points, and rise sharply from them.
What this betokens will suggest itself on^ moment's
thought. It means that the effects of a previous
motive force were slqwlyTynig^aL-l^^ first part

of the curves, and then a fresh impulse started
in to act. The new impulse was more instant
and of greater strength in its action, and by piec-
ing the two parts of the curve together, we con-
clude that it was in both cases an impulse which
acted fairly q uickly and of which the effects took a
longer ti me t o die o ut. The mean cartouches, then,
assure us of two quickenings and lead us to infer
that both were of the nature of forces speedily ap-
plied and then withdrawn.
Quickening To interpret now the successive growth of the

canals laZtu dinall^ dow n the disk -m -B%3^^^j3.e^t con-
cern. We_ saw t hat it sorted at t ne edges of the
polar cap. Now, such an origin in place at once
suggests an_^orIgija>^f.^causation as well, and further-
more precludes all other. For the origm__of time
was afite^ the — m el ti ng,_ofthe cap. First the^cap
melte^ andnrirerr- thc canals Hjcgatt^4xij^pear. Those
nea&&st-4ii_tbj£--4:ap^-^td---s^ ^ am i then the otKers
in their or der of dis tance Jrom it, progressing in a
stately marcb_.jiowft-- o^z^ei::^ the face of the disk.



starts at polar
cap



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 177

Thus we reach the deduction that water liberated
fro m the polar cap and thenc e carried down the disk
i n regular progression is the cause of the latitudinal
quickening of the canals. A certain delay in the
action, together with ^the amoun t of darkening _ that
t akes place, seems to negative the supposition that
what we see is the water itself.



^



On the other hand, veget ation would respond only
after a lapse of time necessary for it to ^ sprout, — a
p eriod of, say, two week s, — and such tarrying wou ld

account fnir^jhe n\}fif^rveA df1?iy.

Vegetation, then, explains the behavior of the
canals. Not transference of watermerely, but trans-
formati on consequent upon transference, furnishes
the key to the meaning of the cartouches. Not
the body of water, but the quickened spirit to which
it gives rise, produces the result we see. Set free
from its winter storage by the unlocking of the
bonds of its solid state, th e water, accumulated as
snow, begins to flow and starts vegetation, which
be comea„j'_esponsible for the incr eased. jdsiHIity-of-the
_carials;_
"^Waked in this manner, the vegetal quickening,
following the water with equal step, but only after
due delay, passes down the disk, giving rise to those
resuscitations we mark through the telescope, and
attribute not without reason to seasonal change.



Hosted by



Google



178 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Change it is, and seasonal as well, yet it is not what

we know by the name in one important particular.

For it is a vernal quickening peculiar to Mars which

knows no counterpart on earth.
The earth as To rcalizc this, wc must try to see ourselves as
finesse othcrs might see us. If we could do away with the

from space. o J

cloud-envelope which must to a great extent shield
our earth's domestic matters from prying astronomers
upon other orbs, and selecting some coign of vantage,
as, for example, Venus, scan the face of our familiar
abode from a distance sufficient to merge the local
in the general aspect, we should at intervals of six
months notice a most interesting and beautiful trans-
formation spread over it. It is the vernal flush of
the earth*s awakening from its winter's sleep that we
should then perceive. Starting from near the line
of the tropic, we should mark the surface turn
slowly virescent. As the tint deepened, we should
see it also spread, creeping gradually up the latitudes
until it stood within the Arctic Circle and actually
bordered the perpetual snow.

W£_shojald.-.ja dtne6s >^^ much what

we mark^on Mri rs at intervals twice as long, because
th£r^e_dmed_jto__jdie_^^ Martian

year. But one striking difference would be patent
to the observer's eye : on earth the w ave of
wakening would travel from equator^ to pole j^ on



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 179

Mars it journ eys fro m pole to equator. So much
aFike m their general detail, the two would thus be
parted by the opposite sense of the action to a di-
versity which at first would seem to deny any like-
ness in cause. To us the very meaning of seasonal
change hinges on the return of the sun due to our
change of aspect toward it. That the reverse could
by any reason be ascribed to the same means might
appear at first impossible.

Not so when we consider it with care. Apart
from the all-important matter of the seed, two fac-
tors are concerned in the vegetal process, the absence
of either of which is equally fatal to the result. The
raw material, represented by oxygen, nitrogen, a few
salts, and water, is one of these ; the sun's rays
constitute the other. Unless it be called by the sun,
vegetation never wakes. But, furthermore, unless it
have water, it remains deaf to the call. Now, on
the earth water is, except in deserts, omnipresent.
The sun, on the other hand, is not always there.
After its departure south in the autumn, vegetation
must wait until its return in the spring.

Mars is otherwise circumstanced. Dependent like Melting first
us upon the periodic presence of the sun directly, it
is further dependent upon the same source indirectly
for its water-supply. Not having any surface water
except such as comes from the annual unlocking of



necessary on
Mars.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS i8i

it starts, it must do so at the north, where the water
arises, and then follow the frugal flood down the
disk. Thus, if it is to traverse the surface at all
with vegetation in its train, the showing must begin
at the pole and travel to the equator.

This, to us, inverse manner of vernal progression
is precisely what the cartouches exhiHtr~ Their curves
of visibility show that t he verdure wave is _ timed
not primarily to the simple return of the sun, but
to the subsequent advent of the water, and follow s,
n ot the former n p th^ p^rallplg^ hut the latter do wn
thedisk^..-

It is possible to gauge the speed of the latitudi- Speed of
nal sprouting of the vegetation, and therefore of the ^^^^\ ?

1 o D ' vegetation.

advent of the water down the canals, by the differ-
ence in time between the successive darkenings of
the canals of the several zones. Thus it appears
th at it takes the water fifty-two days to descen d
from latitude 72° N.^jLo jjie equator, a distance ^
of 2650 miles. This means a speed nf ^1 miles
a day, or ^ t i^i^eQ p^^ hnnr



So, from our study, it appears that a definite law
governs the wax and wane of these strange things.
Quickened by the water let loose on the melting of
the polar c^p. the y~"rise rapidlY_ --tCL,-4irominence, to
stay so T orsome m onths, and ^jbhen slowly proceed
to die out again. Each in turn is thus affected, the



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



THE CANALS AND OASES OF MARS 183

and the advance invades the territory of the other
side. Following in its steps afar, comes its slower
wane. But already, from the other cap, has started
an impulse of like character that sweeps reversely
back again, travelling northward as the first went
south. Twice each Martian year is the main body
of the planet traversed by these antistrophic waves
of vegetal awakening, grandly oblivious to everything
but their own advance. Two seasons of growth it
therefore has, one coming from it^ arctic,_Qne from
its antarcric, zon e, "Its equator standing curiously be -
holden semestrally jto_2ts^^oles.^^

There is something stirring to thought in this
solidarity of movement, timed in cadence to the
passage of the year. Silent as it is, the eye seems
half to catch the measured tread of its advance as
the darkening of the canals sweeps on in progressive
unison of march. That it means life, not death, de-
tracts no jot from the moving quality of its effect.
For all its peaceful purpose, the rhythmic majesty
of the action imposes a sense of power on the mind,
seeming in some better way to justify the planet's
name in its wholly Martian character. Called after
the god of war, the globe is true to its character in
the orderly precision of its stately processional change.



Hosted by



Google



CHAPTER VI



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS



Discovery of
truths similar
to detective
work.



ASTRONOMICAL discovery is of two kinds. If
it consist simply in adding another asteroid or
satellite to those already listed, obedience to the law of
gravitation, with subsequent corroboration of place,
alone is needed for belief. But if it relate to the detec-
tion of an underlying truth as yet unrecognized, then
it is only to be unearthed by reasoning on facts after
they are obtained, and effects credence according to
one's capacity for weighing evidence. Breadth of mind
must match breadth of subject. For to plodders along
prescribed paths a far view fails of appeal ; conserva-
tive settlers in a land differ in quality from pioneers.

Discovery of a truth in the heavens varies in
nothing, except the subject, from discovery of a crime
on earth. The forcing of the secrets of the sky is,
like the forcing of man's, simply a piece of detective
work. It is the finding of a cause in place of a cul-
prit ; but the process is quite similar. Causa criminis
and causa discriminis differ only by a syllable.

Like, too, are, or should be, the methods em-

184



Hosted by



Qoo^z



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 185

ployed. In astronomy, as in criminal investigation,
two kinds of testimony require to be secured. Cir-
cumstantial evidence must first be marshalled, and then
a motive must be found. To omit the purpose as
irrelevant, and rest content with gathering the facts, is
really as inconclusive a procedure in science as in law,
and rarely ends in convincing, any more than in
properly convicting, anybody. For motive is just as
all-pervading a preliminary to cosmic as to human
events, only for lack of fully comprehending it we call
the one a motive and the other a cause. Unless we
can succeed in assigning a sufficient reason for a given
set of observed phenomena, we have not greatly fur-
thered the ends of knowledge and have done no more
than the clerkage of science. A theory is just as
necessary to give a working value to any body of facts
as a backbone is to higher animal locomotion. It
affords the data vertebrate support, fitting them for
the pursuit of what had otherwise eluded search.

Coordinati on is the end of science, the aim of all
attempt at learning what this universe may mean.
And coordination is only another name for theory, as
the law of gravitation witnesses. Now, t o be valid, a
theorv must fulfil two conditions : it must not be con-



t radicted by any fact within its purvie w, and it must
assign a n underlying th read of reason to explain a lT
±he phenomena observed. Circumstantial evidence



Hosted by



Google



1 86 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

must first lead to a suspect, and then this suspect
must prove equal to accounting for the facts.

This method we shall pursue in the case before us ;

and it will conduce to understanding of the evidence

to keep its order of presentation to the detective in

presenting it at the bar of reason.

:\ Review of the Starting with the known physical laws applicable to

j natura c am ^^^ concentration of matter, we found that though in

/ or evidence. ■' o

V^ — -'-' general the course of evolution of the earth and Mars

,- was similar, the s maller mass of Mars should have

z:^st^ v ^ caused it to differ eventually from the earth in some
"^^ importa nt respec ts.

Three of these are noteworthy: (i) its surface
should^^e^s^moother than the earth's^ (2) its oceans
relatively less, (3) its air scan tier. On turning to Mars
itself we then saw that th ese thre e attributes of the
planet were precisely those t he telesco pe disclosed,
(i) The planet's surface was singularly flat, being
quite devoid of mountains ; (2 ) its oceans in the past
covered at most three-eighths of its surface instead of
three-quarters, as with us ; (3) its air was relatively
thin.
Aspect of We next showed that physical loss should, from

arscorroo- j^^ smaller mass, ha ve caused it to age quicker, and

rates principles "^ ~ """•' — - — '—- ' -^■^ -1- • -'

o^^ Planetar y that this„ aging shouldrey eal itself by the rn org^Jiom--

e volution. . - r i

— « plete aeparture^-a^-wfta ^ ocean s 4^-ett€e-^oss€gsad^nQ

by the wider spread of deserts.



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 187

Telescopic observation we then found asserted these
t wo peculiaritie s : (i) no oceans now exist on the
plan^tV_^jLirfac e ; (2) desert occupies l i ve =£igtlths ot it

From such confirmation of the principles of planet-
ary evolution from the present aspect of the planet
Mars, we went on to consider the vt go most essen-
t ial prerequisites to habitability : water and warmth.
Wa ter we songhf fir<;t- - nnri wp faun ( ] if i n fh e-pr^lar
caps. The phenomena of the polar caps proved ex-
plicable as consisting of water, and not as of anything
else. Still more important was the question o f tem-
perature. We took this up with particularity. We
foun ds several factors to th^ pr oblem not hitherto
rec koned with, and that ^when these were t aken in to
account the result came out entirely different from
whaj^ jiad previo usly been supposed. Instead of a
temperatiire prohibitive to Ufe, one emerged from our
research enjj ^ely suitable for it. And thi<^ even more
for an imals than plan ts. For a climate of extremes
was what that of Mars appeared to be, with the
summers warm. Now, investigations on earth have
shown that it is the temperature of the hottest season
that determines the existence of animals, cold much
more adversely affecting plant s. Yet to the presence
of the latter the look of the disk conformed. Scan-
ning it, we marked effects which could o nly be ex-
plained as vegetation. Tfhus thj e^c onditions on M ars



Hosted by



Google



Animal life
disclosed only
bv mind.



Canals con-
front the
observer.



i88 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

showed themselves hospitable to both great orders of
life, the latter actually revealing its presence by its
seasonal changes of tint.

Here we reached the end of what might directly be
disclosed in the organic economy of the planet. For
at this point we brought up before a most significant
fact: that vegetable li fe could thus^ reveal itself directly,
but that animal life could not. Not by its boBy,^^But
bylts mind, woul d it be know n. Across the gulf of
space it could be recognized only by the imprint
it had made on the face of Mars.

Turning to the planet, we witnessed a surprising
thing. There^ on the Martian disk were just such
markings as inte lligence mig;h t have made. Seen even
with the unthinking eye, they appear strange beyond
belief, but viewed thus, in the light of deduction, they
seem positively startHng, like a prophecy come true.

Confronting the observer are lines and spots that
but impress him the more, as his study goes on, with
their non-natural look. S o uncommonly r eQ;ular are
th ey, a nd o n such a^s cale, as to rai se suspicion whetKer
they^ can be by nature regularly produ ced. Next to
one*s own eyesight the best proof of this is the un-
solicited indorsement it has received in the scepticism
their depiction invariably evokes. Those who have
not been privileged to see them find it well-nigh im-
possible to believe that such things can be. Nor is



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 189

this in the least surprising. But however consonant
with nescience to doubt the existence of the lines on
this score, to do so commits it to witness against itself
of the most damaging character the moment their exist-
ence is proved. Now, assurance of actuality no longer
jieeds defence. T hg line s have not only, heen -amply
pro ved to ex ist, but h ave act ually b een photographed,
and doubt has shifted its ground from existence to
character, a half retreat tantamount to a complete sur-
render. For without equal investigation, to admit a
discovery and deny its description is like voting for a
bill and against its appropriation. It reminds one of
the advice of the old lawyer to a junior counsel;
"When you have no case, abuse the plaintiff's
attorney."

JLJnnatural regularity, the observations showed,
be trays itself in everything to do with the Hnes : in
their sur prising straig htness , their a mazing uniformity
through out^ their exceeding ^ tenuity, and their im-
m ense length. These traits, instead of disappearing,
the better the canals have been seen, as was confidently
prophesied, have only come out with greater insistence.
With Increased study not only the assurance gains that
they are as described, but a mass of detail has been
added about them impossible to reconcile with any
natural known process.

A single instance of the methodism that confronts



Hosted by



Google



1 90 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE


us will serve to make this plain. The Lucus Ismenius
is a case in point. The marking so called consists"or~
two round spots each about seventy-five miles in

diameter. Thev lie close
together, not more than
fifty miles of ochre ground
parting their peripheries.
Into them converge a
number of canals — seven
doubles and five singles.
Now, the manner of these
meetings is curiously de-
Luci isMENiT, REVEALING THE Sys- tailed. Thrcc of thc

TEMATIC :MeTHOD IN WHICH THE

Double Canals enter the Twin doubles embrace the oases,

just enclosing them be-
tween their two arms. The
four other doubles send a
line to each oasis to enter
it centrally. Which con-
nection the double shall
adopt apparently depends
upon the angle at which
the approach is made. If the direction be nearly
vertical to the line of the tw^o oases, the entrance
is central ; if parallel, it is an embrace. As for the
singles, they connect with one or the other oasis,
as the case may be. Such precise and methodical



1. Euphrates, double.

2. Hiddekel, double.

3. Protonilus, double.

4. Deuteronilus, double.

5. Astaboras, double.

6. Djihoun, douVjle.

7. Arnon, convergent double.

8. Aroeris. 9. Sados.
10. Pallacopas. 11. Phthuth.

12. Naarmalcha, double.

13. Naarsares.



Hosted by



Qoo^z



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS



191



arrangement, thus marvellously articulated and de-
tailed, discloses an orderliness so surprising, if on



nature's part, as to throw us at once into the arms of™
the alternative as the least aston ishing of th e two.

Before passing on Not rivers.

to reason upon the
fact, we note that
the characters men-
tioned are them-
selves enough to
negative all sup-
positions of natural
cause. First, the
lines cannot


be



rivers, smce rivers
are never straight^



__«-__»«.«_«^ From a drawing by Professor Lowell.

and never unif orm j^^ moon, showing the straight wall

AND Rill to the Right of Birt, May,
1905

These are palpable cracks like those in a ceiling,
and quite unlike the uniform canal lines of
Mars.



in width. Now, we



see the canals so
well as to be quite
certain of their even-
ness. The best proof of this is that, though each is
uniform, some are at least ten times the size of others.
If one of them dwindled en route, we should have
ample measure of the fact.

Nor can th ^ ? lines be crac 4eg-4ft->tlig^j urface, because Not cracks.
cracks also are not straight, and because cracks end



Hosted by



Google



192 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

^efore finishing. We have examples of undoubted
cracks in more than one heavenly body, and their
appearance is quite unlike the look of the lines of
Mars. The moon offers such in many, if not all, of
her so-called rills.

To the most superficial view these suggest their
nature, but when carefully examined at Flagstaff,
corroboration of the fact came out in certain definite
characteristics. For the rills proved to be made of
parts which overlapped at their ends, one fractional
line taking up the course before the other had given
out, thus exactly reproducing the composition of the
cracks in any plaster ceiling.

Mercury bears testimony to the same effect. Its
lines, more difficult than the canals of Mars, — for
we see Mercury four times as far off when best
placed as we do Mars, — though roughly linear, are
not unnatural in appearance even at that great dis-
tance, and show irregularities suggestive of cracks."*^
In the markings on Venus, too, there is nothing
unnatural.
Other natural Rivcrs and cracks are the two most plausible sup-
expanations positions made to account for the lines on any theory

prove impos- a j J

sibie. of natural causation. O ther guesses have been in-

^ Lately, at least two critics have stated that the descriptions of the spoke-like
markings seen on Venus at Flagstaff in 1897 and later, are inconsistent. The seeming
inconsistency is due to our own air, which sometimes defines them, sometimes not.
The important point about them is that the Venusian lines are irregular. — P. L.



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



Hosted by



Google



194 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

dujged_.jn5._.such as that meteors by their passing
^^^^^^^^^^h^^^^iS^-^^ i sed.-^..the^.Ui£i£a, as^ welts u£on the
surface — welts easily allayed by a22lication of the
fact that the lines change with the^seasons^ actually
disappearing at certain epochs^ to revive again at
.others. Such suggestions there are, but none have
been advanced to my knowledge that bear the most
cursory inspection.

Still more inexpUcable on any natural hypothesis
is the systematized arrangement of the lines to form
a network over the whole planet. That the lines
should go directly from certain points to certain
others in an absolutely unswerving direction ; that
they should there meet lines that have come with
like directness from quite different points of depar-
ture ; that sometimes more than ten of them should
thus rendezvous, and rarely less than six ; and that,
lastly, this state of intercommunication should be
true all over the disk, are phenomena that no natural
physical process that I can conceive of — and no
one else seems to_ have been abi e_Ia^.^th£r-r=^„£an
intji£jeast explain. Yet this arrangement cannot
be due to chance, the probabilities against the lines
meeting one another In this orderly manner being
millions to one.

Oases equally But the canals are not all that is wonderful ;

inexplicable. ^^ |^^^^ ^^ rcckoH With the oascs as well. These



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS



195



are remarkable, both in themselves and in their re-
lation to_th£__sY^tem__o£^ for they occur at the
junctions — onl y at the junctions^ and virtually al-
w ays at the jun ctio ns. T hey are thus of the nature
of knots to the network. No explanation can be
given of this by purely physical laws.

So we might go on, with the enigma of the double
canals more and more mysterious the more one learns
about them — with
their strange posi- W: '''^)$'.'y"
tioning on the planet
in the tropical belts;
with the curious
phenomenon of con-
verging or wedge-
shaped doubles de-
scending to join
them from the pole ;
and with other facts
equally odd.

But long before the catalogue of geometric Artificiality
curiosities had drawn to its close, — for it were
wearisome to count them all, and where even one
is so cogent, numbers do not add, — it becomes
apparent to any one capable of weighing evidence
that these things which so palpably imply artificiality
on their face cannot be natural products at all, but


A Corner of Mars, June 10, 1907



suggests itself.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS



197



s pots ^^ hat hiiff pn the ^^^^^ — together. For they circularity
show round. Now, a solid circle has the peculiar
prope rty that the average distance f rom its centre
to all points in it is less than for any figure enclos-
ing a like area. It would be the part of mteTli-
gence, then, to construct this figure whenever the
greatest amount ot ground was to be reachedr br
ti llage or any other purpose at the least expend i-
t ure of force.

No less telltale is their behavior ; and now not
only of the bare fact of artificiality, but of the
manner in which it came to be.

The extreme threads of the world-wide network Note of water
of canals stand connected with the dark-blue patches ^he^^^^tiTn^


Canals from the South Polar
Cap, the White Bonnet at
THE Top of the Picture,
June 6, 1907
Martian date, September 22,



Canals from the South Polar
Cap, Shown at the Top of
THE Picture, Oci^ober 25,
1907

Martian date, December 18.



at the edge of one or the other of the polar caps.
But they are not always visible. In the winter
season they fail to show. Not till the cap has



Hosted by



Google



198 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

begun to melt, do they make their appearance, and
then they come out dark and strong. Now, the
cap in winter is formed of snow and ice that melts
as summer comes on. Here, then, the attentive
ear seems to catch the note of running water.

From their jpoleward origin the Hnes begin to
darken down the disk. One after the other takes
up the thread of visibility, to hand it on to the next
in place. So the strange communication travels,
carried from the arctic zone through the temperate
and the tropic ones on to the equator, and then be-
yond it over into the planet's other hemisphere. A
flow is here apparent, journeying with measured
progress over the surface of this globe. Here, again,
the mental ear detects the sound of water percolat-
ing down the latitudes.

Across what once were seas, but are seas no more,
the darkening of fhe~"4i^i^s~advam:es, with the same
forthrightness as over the ochre continental tracts.
Blue-green afea^~~af"Vegetation and arid wastes alike
are threaded by the silent deepening of tint. Lati-
tude bars it not, nor character of country. It
great-circles the old sea bottoms as cheerfully as it
caravans the desert steppes. This persistency made
possible by the loss of what the seas once held, the
thought of water is once more thrust upon the
sense, its absence now as telling as its presence was



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 199

before. One hears it in the very stillness the lack
of it promotes.

Then, as with quickened sense one listens, the
mind is aware of antiphonal response in the unlock-
ing of the other cap to send its scanty hoardings
in similar rilling over the long-parched land. The
note of water confronts us thus at every turn of
this strange action. Water, then, jnust be the
word of the enigm^LL-lhe clew- that ivitt lead us to
the unloosening of the riddle.

But though water it be, this is not the complete its locomo-
solution of the problem; for, as one ponders, the ^^^"^^p^^"^*
unnatural character of the action dawns on one.
That a wave of progression passes through the
canals down the disk ; that something, then, pro-
ceeds from the pole to the equator ; and that this
something can be none other than water, giving rise
to vegetation, sounds simple and forthright. The
startling character of the action is not at once
apparent. It becomes so only when we try to
account ior-tbe- - locomotton^ When—we-sa envisage
it, the„ transference turns_out,lo he a most^astound-
i ng_anj,J jistruct i ve thing ;

To understand wherein lies its peculiarity, we must
consider the shape of the planet. For the planet is
flattened at the poles by j^ of its diameter. This, to
begin with, will make the action seem even stranger



Hosted by



Google



200 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

than it is. It might seem at first as if the water in
going to the equator had to run twenty-one miles
uphill.
Mars' surface If Mars did not rotate, its figure would be a

in fluid equi- i • i i i r

librium. sphere, except for such tidal deformation as outside

bodies might give it, because its own gravity would
pull it into a shape similar in all directions. As
Mars rotates, its rotatory momentum bulges it at
the equator, changing the sphere into what is called
an oblate spheroid of the general form of an
orange. The eUipticity of a rotating mass is affected
not only by the size of the body and by the speed
of rotation, but by the. distribution of the matter
composing it. Thus it is different for a homo-
geneous body than for a heterogeneous one, and
differs according to the law of density from surface
to centre. Now it is an interesting fact that the
oblateness of Mars— ty^q-J found by two indepen-
dent methods quite independently applied ; one
from measurements of the planet made in 1894 at
FlagstaflF by Mr. Douglass, reduced and discussed
by the director ; the other from the motions of the
satellites by Hermann Struve — should fall between
the value it would have, were it homogeneous, and
that which it would show did the density increase from
surface to centre in the same manner as on earth.
But we can see from theory that it should lie be-



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 201

tween these two extremes. For the compression
there is not so great as with the earth because of
Mars' smaller mass. In this we find another proof,
were any needed, that the evolution of both planets
was as sketched in our opening chapter. A rapidly
rotated mass of putty will take on the same shape.
In the case of Mars the stresses are so enormous
that for a long acting force, such as is here con-
cerned, the planet, although probably as rigid as
steel, behaves as if its mass were plastic. The
result is that the direction of gravity is always per-

peridicular to the surface ar"everv po jnLl- or, in

other words, the surface is in stable equilibrium.

Now, the fact that every po int of the surface is Gravity in-
in e quilibrium means that anv part icle of a hauid ^^^^^^^^^

*•' * ' — ' ~" — * ^ — — — * water trans-

t here — as, for example, a drop of wat er — would ference.
not move, but would stay where it was. For all
the forces being exactly balanced to rest, their
resultant cannot solicit it to stir. Just as on the
surface of the earth, ^ater upon a level stretch of
ground shows no tendency to move)

Consequently, ^^m^jmX&iL...^^
by the melting jof the ^olar cap would stay where
it was liberated without the least inclination to go y
elsewKere. The only force which would have the
slightest effect upon it might be its own head, if it
had any. Were the melting ice or snow that gave



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



202 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

birth to it ten feet thick, and it is more likely to be
less, it woul.d^ giv e rise to a n average jjead of water
of five Jfeet. N0W3 ^ head of five feet could not
urge the water against surface friction more than a
few miles at most. So that any such impulse is
quite impotent to th^ eflfects we see.

Face to face, then, we find ourselves with a mo-
tion of great magnitude occurring without visible or
'^^ physically imaginable cause. A body of water travels
3300 miles at the rate of^_^£2_mil^ a JJ4^. u^ no
material compulsion whatever.

It leaves the neighborhood of the pole, where it
was gravitationally at home, and wanders to the
equator, where gravitationally it was not wanted,
without the slightest prompting on the part of any

f natural force. Thejdeduction is inevkaWe; it must
have been artificially^ conducted -Qver^the face of the
planet. We are left no alternative but to suppose
it intelligently carried to its end..

Nor is this the limit of the extraordinary per-
formances shown by the progressive darkening of
the canals down the disk. Were they actuated by
natural forces, what they next do would be simply
incredible. For, not content with descending to the
equator without visible means of propulsion, once
arrived there, they promptly proceed to cross It into
the planet's other hemisphere and run up the lati-



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



204 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

As the water leaves a planet, departing into space,
so much of it as does not sink out of sight into its
interior stands for a while a-tiptoe in its air before
taking final flight into the sky. In the planet's
economy it has ceased to be water, and become that
more ethereal thing, water- vapor. In one way and
place only does it ever in any amount descend to
earth again and take on even transiently its liquid
state. This is in the polar caps. The general mete-
orologic_circu^ of the planet deposits it there
thx^QiJghaut the w^inter months. From the cold of
the arctic latitudes its deposition takes the form of
snow or ice, and in consequence of this solid state
is largely tethered to the spot where it falls, remain-
ing in situ until the returning sun melts it in the
spring. This is the state of things on Mars.

When this unlockij2g;_o^ccuxSj»„and j^ile^ the water
is^ m its jnjermediate liquid state, between not^easily
transportable ice and ungatherable vapor, k is in a
condition to be moved, and may^ be dra wn upon for
cojisiumiplion. Then, and then only, is it readily
available for use, and then, if ever, it must be
tapped.

Now, in the struggle for existence, water must be
got, and in the advanced condition of the planet this
is the only place where it is in storage and whence,
therefore, it may be had. Round the semestral release



Hosted by



Qoo^<^


PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 205

of this naturally garnered store everything in the

planet's organic, econoniy niust-^Jturn, There is no

other source ofsu£ply. Tts prnrnnng Hepends npnn

tKe intelligence of the organisms that stand in need

of it^ If these be of a high

enough order of mind to divert

it to their ends, its using, from

a necessity, wijl bec ome a fact.

H ere, then, is a motive of th e

most compelling kind for the

tapping of the polar caps and the

leading of tRe"~water they "contaTn The Ganges is the double

"1 "" r ""' — ~~7* — "TV — ' 1 ^ canal going upward, a

over _the surface of the pk net :
the p rimal motive of self-preser -

Vation. No incentive could be right-hand line is stronger

.^^ T"!^ ^ than the left-hand one.

Stronger than this.

Our motive found being of the most drastic kind,
it remains now to examine whether it can be put
into execution.

As a planet ages, any organisms upon it would organisms
^har e in its development. TTie y musF^voIve"'^ m^^ phnetages
it, indee d, or perish. At first they change only as
environment offers opportunity, in a lowly, uncon-
scious way. But, as brain develops, they rise su-
geri or to such occa sioning. Originally the organism
is the creature of its surroundings ; later it learns to
make them subservient to itself. In this way the



Differentiation of the
Ganges



little to the left from the
centre of the disk. It
will be noticed that the



Hosted by



Qoo^z



One species
supplants all
others.



206 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

organism avoids unfavorableness in the environment,
or turns unpropitious fortune to good use. Man
has acquired something of the art here on the earth,
and what with clothing himself in the first place, and
yoking natural forces in the second, lives in comfort
now where, in a state of nature, he would inconti-
nently perish.

Such adaptation in rnind, making it superior to
adaptation in body^, is bound to ocgjrinu the organic
hfe on any planet, if it is to survive at all. For
conditions are in the end sure to reach a pass where
something more potent than body is required to cope
with them.

It is possible to apply a test to tell whether
such life existed or not. For certain signs would be
forthcoming were such intellect there. Lticrease of

intelligence wouldl^tausje xuoe specLes^un the end to

pre vail over all others, as it had prevailed over its
env ironmen t. What it found inconvenient or un-
necessary to enslave, it would exterminate, as we have
obliterated the bison and domesticated the dog. This
species will thus become lord of the planet and
spread completely over its face. Any action it might
take w^ould, in consequence, be planet-wide in its
showing.

Now, such is precisely what appears in the world-
spread system of canals. That it joins the surface



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 207

from pole to pole and girdles it at the equator be-
trays a single purpose there at work. Not only does^
one species £ossess_ the planet, but eve n its subdivi- ^

sionVlnust labor harrnoniously to a common a im.

Nations must have sunk their local patriotisms in a
wider breadth of view and the planet be a unit to the
general good.

As the being has conquered all others, so will it at To die of
last be threatened itself. In the growing scarcity of ^ '^^^*
j^ater will arise the premonitions of its doom. To
secure what may yet be got will thus become the
forefront of its endeavor, to which all other questions
are secondary. Thuj, if these beings are capable of
making their presence noticeable at all, their great
occupation shouTd be that of" water-getting~and'^
should be the first, because the most Fundamental,
trace of thSrnexIstence "alt"outsider would be privi-
leged to catch.

The last stage in the expression of life upon a
planet's surface must be that just antecedent to its
dying of thirst. Whether it came to this pass by
simple exhaustion, as is the case with Mars, or by
rotary retardation, as is the case with Mercury and
Venus, the result would be all one to the planet
itself. Failure of its water-supply would be the
cause. To proc ure this indispensable would be^ts
iast-eenscious effort.



Hosted by



Google



2o8 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

End foreseen. With an intelligent population this inevitable end
would be long foreseen. Before it was upon the
denizens of the globe, preparations would have been
made to meet it. And this would be possible, for
the intelligence attained would be of an order to cor-
respond. A planet's water-supply does not depart
in a moment. Long previous to any wholesale im-
minence of default, local necessity must have begun
the reaching out to distant supply. Just as all our
large cities to-day go far to tap a stream or a lake,
so it must have been on Mars. Probably the be-
ginnings were small and inconspicuous, as the water
at first locally gave out. From this it was a step
to greater distances, until necessity lured them even to
the pole. The very process, one of addition, in-
stead of one of total synchronous construction, seems
to show stereotyped to us in the canals. These run
in their fashioning rather with partial than with tele-
ologic intent, giving as much concern to halfway
points as to the goal itself, although in their action
now they are totally involved. The thing was not
done in a day, and by that very fact stamps the
more conclusively its artificial origin.

The ability^ pf — bd4^» -lli£L€.„_to _ construe t su ch
a rteries of sus t enance, two consideratians will help
to make compr ehensible T^^bne of these minifies the
work, J:he other magnifies the workexsC-- in the first



Hosted by



Google


Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 209

place, it is not what we see that would have to be
constmcte4. Th£_o.ye£t.jQ£_£ndeavorisjiQt_Qt^^
water_ jtself, but the proH n cts that water makes po s-
sibl e. It is vegetation which is matter of imm e-
diate concern, water being of mediat e employment .
This, then, is what would probably show. Just as


Northeast Corner of Aeria, July 2-5, 1907

on the earth it is the irrigated strip of reclaimed
desert, and not the Nile itself, which would make
its presence evident across interplanetary space. If
these lines are irr igated ba nds of plajriting^jji£_3[£r
teb ral c a nal would be a mere invisible threadjn the
midsJ_of ^that to which it gave growth. This alone
would have to be made, and indeed it would prob-
ably be covered to prevent evaporation.



Hosted by



Qoo^z



210 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Now, we have evidence that the canals are thus
composed of nerve and body. When they lie down,
they do not entirely vanish. Under the visual con-
ditions of Flagstaff they may still be made out in
their dead season, the mere skeletons of themselves
as they later fill out. And even so we do not ac-
tually see the nerve itself

For the constru£ti£La-i3f---thes^ r
we have a plethora of capabili ^ties_t Q draw upon: in
the first place, beings on a small planet cou M be
both b ig;g;er and more effective than on a lar ger one,
because of the lesser gravity on the smaller body.
An elephant on Mars could jump like a gazelle.
In the second place, a^ means intelligence, enabling
th em to yoke nature to their__tasl^j^we^i£_yQking
el ectric ity:^ Finally, th e task itself wouId_be seven
times^^_as__light. For^_gravity on the surface of
Mars _is only about 38 per cent of what it is on
^^^ ,s u^'face o f the earth ; and the work which can
be done against a force like gravity with the same
expenditure of energy is inversely as the square of
that force. A ditch, then, seven times the length
of one on earth could be dug as easily on Mars.

With this motive of self-preservation for cJew, and
with a race equal to the emergency, we should ex-
pect to note certain general phenomena. Both polar
caps would be pressed into service in order to utilize



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 211

the whole available supply and also to accommodate
most easily the inhabitants of each hemisphere. We
should thus expect to find a system of conduits of
some sort world-wide in its distribution and running
at its northern and southern ends to termini in the
caps. This is precisely what the telescope reveals.
These means of communication should be, if possible,
straight, both for economy of space and of time, it
being especially necessary to avoid any wasteful
evaporation on the road. Construction of such would
needs be very difficult, if not impracticable, on earth,
owing to the often mountainous character of its sur-
face. But on Mars this is not the case. As we have
seen, there are fortunately no mountains on Mars.
Thus the great obstacle to canals, and, in conse-
quence, the great obstacle to their acceptance, is
providentially removed. Terrain oflfers the least of
objections, terror the greatest of spurs, to their con-
struction.

Thus we see that not only should the execution
be possible, but that it should exhibit precisely the
phenomena we see.

It would be interesting, doubtless, to learn how Further
are bodied these inhabitants that analysis reaches out ^ ^"°'"^"^*
to touch. But body is the last thing we are likely
to know of them. Of their mind as embodied in
their works, we may learn much more ; and, after all.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS



213


certainly well placed. We have seen that the blue-
green regions and the ochre ones lie undoubtedly
at different levels, the former standing much lower
than the latter.

Here, then, should occur difficulties in canalization
which would have to be overcome. Are these, then,
the evidence of their
surmounting ? They
certainly suggest the
fact.

Then the oases
themselves lure our
thoughts afield. Im-
portant centres to the
canal system they are
on their face. But, if centres to that, they should
bear a like relation to what fashioned the canals.
That they dilate and dwindle seasonally points to
vegetation as their chief constituent, whence their
name. But behind, and informing this, must be the
bodied spirit of the whole. ^We are certainly justi-
fied in regarding them as^Jthe apple of the eye of
^artian life- — what corresponds withjus to centres
of populatim L



Mouths of Euphrates and Phison

The drawing shows the way in which each
branch of the two double canals enters the
desert from a common point of departure.



An- interesting phenome non about the oases m akes
this the more probable. Observation discloses that
the oases are given to change both of size and tone.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



214 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

They fade at certain seasons, retaining only a rela-
tively^diminutive dark kernel. They are thus formed
of two parts, pulp and core. The pulp itself^ndi-
cates vegetation, since it follows the s amg iaws as the^
canals ; the core m ay well be the evidence of the
permanent population. That the largest are some
75 miles across, seems to give sufficient space
for living and the means to live. If our cities
had to be their own sources of supply, they might
well be of this size. As it is, Tokio is ten miles by
ten, and London yet larger. But we must in this
be careful to part surmise from deduction.
Speculation In our exposition of what we have gleaned about

Mars, w e have b egii._j::arefiiL^aijidiud^ in no specula-
tion. The laws of physics and the present knowl-
edge of geology and biology, affected by what
astronomy has to say of the former subject, have
conducted us, starting from the observations, to the
recognition of other intelligent life. We have care-
fully considered the circumstantial evidence in the
case, and we have found that it points to intelli-
gence acting on that other globe, and is incompatible
with anything else. We have, then, searched for
motive and have lighted on one which thoroughly
explains the evidence that observation offers. We
are justified, therefore, in believing that we have un-
earthed the cause and our conclusion is this : that we



exc)uciei.



Hosted by



Google



PROOFS OF LIFE ON MARS 215

have in these strange features, which the telescope
reveals^ t o us, witness that Hfe, and life o f no mean _
or der, at present inhab its the planet.

Part and parcel of this information is the order of
intelligence involved in the beings thus disclosed.
Peculiarly impressive is the thought that life on an-
other world should thus have made its presence
known by its exercise of mind. That intelligence
should thus mutely communicate its existence to us
across the far stretches of space, itself remaining hid,
appeals to all that is highest and most far-reaching
in man himself. More satisfactory than strange this;
for in no other way could the habitation of the
planet have been revealed. It simply shows again
the supremacy of mind. Men live after they are
dead by what they have written while they were alive,
and the inhabitants of a planet tell of themselves
across space as do individuals athwart time, by the
same imprinting of their mind.

Thus, not only do the observations we have Our life not
scanned lead us to the conclusion that Mars at this ""^^"^*
moment is inhabited, but they land us at the further
one that these denizens are of an order whose ac-
quaintance was worth the making. Whether we
ever shall come to converse with them in any more
instant way is a question upon which science at
present has no data to decide. More important to



Hosted by



Google



2i6 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

us is the fact that they exist, made all the more
interesting by their precedence of us in the path of
evolution. Their presence certainly ousts us from
any unique or self-centred position in the solar sys-
tem, but so with the world did the Copernican
system the Ptolemaic, and the world survived this
deposing change. So may man. To all who have
a cosmoplanetary breadth of view it cannot but be
pregnant to contemplate extra-mundane life and to
realize that we have warrant for believing that such
Ijie^ now inhabits the planet Mars.
Martian life J A saddcr interest attaches to such existence : that
it is, cosmically speaking, soon to pass away. To
our eventual descendants life on Mars will no longer
be something to scan and interpret. It will have
lapsed beyond the hope of study or recall. Thus to
us it takes on an added glamour from the fact that
it has not long to last. For the process that
brought it to its present pass must go on to the
bitter end, until the last spark of Martian life goes
out.") The drying up of the planet is certain to
proceed until its surface can support no life at all.
Slowly but surely time will snuff it out. When the
last ember is thus extinguished, the planet will roll
a dead world through space, its evolutionary career
forever ended.



nearing its
end.



Hosted by



Google


PART II
NOTES



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



PART 11. NOTES



On Moment of Momentum

The momentum of a body is the quantity of motion it
contains, which is its mass multiplied by its velocity, i.e.
the sum of the motions of all the particles composing it. *
Its moment of momentum about any point is this quantity
into the perpendicular from the point upon its instanta-
neous course. It is thus

where m is its mass ;

V its velocity at right angles to the shortest distance

to the point ;
r its perpendicular distance from the point.
Suppose, now, two bodies, one x times the mass of the
other, to be revolving round each other in circles and, for
simplification, that both are homogeneous and non-rotating.
If m be their united mass, the relative velocity of one
about the other is

\r aj r

for a circular orbit, k^ being the unit force at unit distance.
Then the moment of momentum of the system round its
centre of gravity is

m r^ m m r^ m

since the velocities of the bodies about their centre of
gravity and their distances from it are inversely as their
masses.

219



Hosted by



Google



220 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

To find what partition renders this quantity a maximum,
we must differentiate it with regard to x and put the deriv-
ative equal to zero. Thus

dx dx

whence x — | , or the masses must be equal. That this
gives a maximum is shown by the second derivative,

d{\~-2x) ^ _^
dx

Applying this to Jupiter and the Sun, we see that the
moment of momentum of the two is only -^\-^ of what it
might be were the mass otherwise distributed to get the
greatest effect. In other words, the quantity of motion in
the solar system is almost the least possible ; and from the
principle of the conservation of the moment of momentum
of a system of bodies by their mutual action, this has
always been so.

For the system a Centauri, though the mass of its two
suns is only 2.14 that of the Sun's, the moment of momen-
tum is about 2000 times as great.



The Connection of Meteorites with the Solar
System

The speed with which meteorites are observed to enter
the Earth's atmosphere is telltale of their relationship to
the solar system. For the velocity of a body moving on a
paraboHc orbit with regard to the Sun, the greatest he can
control, may be calculated, and this velocity compared with
the observed ones. A solution of it by the writer by a
method of interest in itself, that of a rotating field of force,



Hosted by



Qoo^z



NOTES



221



has been published in the Astronomical Journal for April
17, 1908, and is here reproduced.

Consider a system of axes ^, ?;, f, of which | and 77 rotate
about ^ with a uniform angular spin n. Take the origin
at the Sun, and let the | axis continually pass through the
Earth supposed to travel in a circle. Then the space
velocities //, v^ and w expressed in the moving axes |, 77,
and f respectively, or the space rates of change of |, 97, S*,
are

^/ = I' — ;^>?,

z; = 77' -f ;/|,

where the accents denote the derivatives with respect to
the time. Similarly the accelerations or the forces which
they measure, X, F, and Z expressed in the same axes, are

X—ti'— nVy

Y=z v' — nUf

Z = w'.

Substituting for u, v, and n in the last equations their
values from the first, we have

Let U be the potential of the forces,

d[/ „ dU ^ , dU 7



Hosted by



Qoo^z



222 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

In the rotating field of force 6^ is a function of ^, t], and
^ only, since the time has been eliminated by the rotation.
Therefore

d^ d^ dt drj dt d^ dt

If the equations of motion be multiplied by

d^ ^dv -J d^

2-f-, 2—', and 2-^

dt dt dt

respectively, and added, they admit of an integral first
found by Jacobi,

in which v^ — velocity of the particle relatively to the mov-
ing axes, its relative not its space rate,
and r= its distance from the origin reckoned by the

same.
We shall suppose the particle to be moving in the plane
of the planet's motion, that of f, rj. The velocity of en-
counter with the planet is thus made the greatest or the
least possible, according as the particle overtakes the
planet or meets it head on.

Calling V the space velocity of the particle, that is the
velocity with regard to fixed axes, and A the moment of
momentum with regard to the same at the moment, we
have

F^ = v^ -\-2 nr cos av^ + ;/V^,

in which a is the angle between z\ and nr— hence
r cos a =/i, the perpendicular from the origin upon the
particle's line of motion in space, but A = v^p + m^ by
taking moments about the origin, of the particle's motion
in the rotating plane plus that of the plane itself,

whence V'^ — 2nA = 2 U -^ C,



Hosted by



Qoo^z



c^



NOTES 223

We determine C by the consideration that for a parabola
at infinity,

F= and U=^ 0,

whence — since n = — — and A = VJ/+ m* V7,

C= — 2nA=-'

where /is the parameter of the parabola and c the radius
of the planet's orbit.

Suppose now the particle to be just overtaking the
planet from behind, / will very approximately be 2 r, while

A = z\p + nr^

will = V— v^'p-^ nr^y

in which v^ is the velocity of the planet in its orbit,

then VqP =nr'^

and A^r • V.

2 nA =2nr ' V.

Let M=^ mass of the Sun,

m = mass of the planet,

r= c= radius of the planet's orbit,

p = distance from the Earth's centre to where the

meteor enters the atmosphere, which for round numbers
we may take at 3958.8 +41 miles, or 4000 miles.
Then the attraction of the Sun on the particle is

— - very approximately,
that of the planet on the particle

^2'



Hosted by



Google



224 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

and that of the planet on the Sun which is to be applied
reversed to bring the Sun to rest,



This latter force acts only in the line |.
Consequently, since X and Y are functions of ^ and t]
only, not involving t,

T^ M , m mP dU ,i. -rr /*- dU ■, x^,
r p r^ a^ arj

our equation becomes

V^-~2nr V= 2 \ ^ — 2 !r

\r p r^ J yi

Completing the square on the left-hand side and extract-
ing the square root, we have



\r p r"^ j r

Letting J/= i and r= i and determining k, the coef-
ficient of proportionality, so that F comes out in miles per
second, — for k enters with the masses as /^^ J/ unless the
unit of time be canonically chosen, we find, since v^ ~ nr^
V— v^ = the velocity relative to the Earth

= 10.321 miles a second when the particle
overtakes the Earth.

The Earth's effect in increasing the velocity which in
this case is the greatest possible is

28.822 -- 26.163 = 2.659 miles a second.

In the other case, when the Earth encounters the particle
head on, v^ becomes negative and C negative.
^ = - v^p + 7ir^

— 2 nA = -\- 2 nrV



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 225
and

and

\r p r^J r

whence F+ ^0 = 45. 197 miles a second, and the effect of
the Earth in increasing the meteor's velocity

= 26.696 — 26.163 = 0.533 i^ile a second.

The geometric explanation why the velocities cannot be
directly added is that when each body is supposed to act
alone the times involved in their actions are different,
while when they act together these are naturally the same.
In the latter case the velocity due the Sun hurries the
particle through the space faster than the Earth's pull
alone could, and so gives the Earth less time to act.

Now if, instead of moving in a parabolic or controlled
orbit, the meteor were travelling in a hyperbolic or uncon-
trolled one, its speed of encountering the earth would be
greatly increased.

But there are no instances of meteors meeting the Earth
at speeds exceeding or even equalling 45.1 miles a second.
From this we perceive that they are not visitants from
outer space, travellers from other suns, but are all part
and parcel of the Sun's retinue, kin to Jupiter and the
Earth, the remains, indeed, of those from which the
planets were built up.

3

The Heat developed by Planetary Contraction

To find the heat evolved by the aggregation of particles
into a planetary mass and the subsequent shrinking of
that mass upon itself, we first find the work done by the
contraction and then evaluate it in terms of heat.



Hosted by



Google



226 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Let M^ = mass within a radius r ;

then the work done by a shell dM- contracting under the
pull of M\ the mass inside it, from infinity to the radius
r is


^



where P is the force between unit masses at unit distance.
If the sphere be supposed homogeneous and M be the
mass of the nebula of radius a at any time,

M^=M'^. dM'^iM-dr.

. rm^dW_^ rilMlr^dr^U^^. (I)

' ' Jo r J^ a^ 5 ^ '

the work done.

But the sphere is really heterogeneous, and to determine
the function of the density we proceed as follows :

The attraction, Ay of the mass M^ upon the shell dM^ is:



A==



— _i^



2 rr



where p == the density. Let / = the pressure at the point.
Then dp = —pA dr,

whence ^^ = - 4^^VJo P^^^ ^^.

Now, as Laplace says, both solids and liquids resist com-
pression more the more they are compressed. The most
simple expression of this fact is :

dp = hpdpy

which is Laplace's formula.

The Roche formula hardly gains in exactness enough to
offset its greater complexity, as Tisserand has shown.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 227

Whence, substituting Laplace's value for dp above,


^pr^dr h



Differentiating this, we have

The solution of this equation is, calling ^ — = m,

h

pr^c sin mr + ^1 cos mr\

but since the density p must remain finite at the centre

, J ^ sin mr , .

where r = o, ^^ = o ; and p = • (2)

To find the two unknown parameters c and nty and thus
hy we have for the Earth, if p^ denote the density at the sur-
face where r= i,

p^^ c %vsxm ^ 2.74, supposed all rock, (3)

or 2.5, allowing for the ocean;
and also since the mean density = 5.53,

- - 4 C^ o ^ sin mr , / x

5-53 •77r=) 4 77^2.— dr. (4)

In the determination of the work done, we must write

r

c sm m-

a



a

Then dM^ = 4 irr^dr sin m —

r a



M' = 4 irac j r sin m-' dr
Jq a

ahV . r r r"l

= 4 TT -— sm ;;^ m- cos m -

m^l_ a a a J



Hosted by



Google



228 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



r r r

sin m m- cos m -

whence M^ ^ M r— ^

sm m — m cos m

am' = -; — — sin m ~ • dr



sm m — m cos m a^ a



X



"k^M' dM' /^iI/2



r (sin m — m cos mf



s:[



mr



n^r . o mr m^r^ . mr

—r- sm^ sm — cos

^^ a a^ a a



dr

r



___ m\m{^ — sin^;;g) — f sin 2m\ BA'P ,
2 (sin m — m cos m^ a

Since the work done by a mass J/ in cooling t degrees is

Marjt, where <t is the specific heat of the body,

and y the mechanical equivalent of heat,

in the case of a homogeneous body

/ = ^ . —^ for contraction from oc to the
5 or/<^

radius ^,

% k^M a

and therefore ^ = ^ — — (i ) for contraction from the

5 Gja a

radius a! to a. In the case of heterogeneity, the right-
hand members of the equations should be multiplied by
the ratio of (s) to (i).

During the evolution of the heat, radiation was steadily
draining it away, according to the fourth power of the sur-
face temperature (Stefan^s law). Convection meanwhile
was going on from the inside out, the quantity delivered
from one layer to the next being proportionate to their
differences of temperature dT, while this difference was
itself dependent on the areas involved, which were as

-^,and therefore their increase in the ratio ^. If we

ri r.



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



NOTES



229



assume in consequence that the surface was never hotter
than 10,000° F. or 5556° C, we shall have a heat sufficient
to explain all the metamorphic and volcanic phenomena
exhibited by geology.

Energy let Loose during Contraction. Evaluated in Heat



Contraction from Infinity
TO Present State



Body supposed Homoge-
neous.
Degrees Fahrenheit



Stone



Iron



Body supposed Hetero-
geneous according to
Laplace's Assumption.
Degrees Fahrenheit



Stone



Iron



Earth .
Mars .
Moon .



Contraction from Meteoric
Density to Present State



Earth 3.5 to 5.5
Mars 3.5 to 0.71 x 5.5
Moon 3.5 to 0.66 X 5.5



80,520

16,303

3,665



11,262
584

44



146,400

29,642

6,664



20,476

1,062

80



89,377

17,118

3,812



12,501

613

46



162,504

31,124

6,931



22,728

1,115

83



4

The Heights of Mountains on the Moon

For simplification consider a mountain on the apparent
lunar equator near the sunrise or sunset edge of the disk
when the Moon shows half-full. Then, if / = the apparent
distance its star-like summit seems off the terminator, —
the general dividing line between sunlight and shade :

r = the radius of the Moon ;

h = the height of the peak ;
we have

/2 + ^2 = (r + h)\



Hosted by



Qoo^z



230 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

The lunar diameter being 2160 miles, this gives for a
mountain four miles high an apparent isolation from the
terminator of 93 miles, or 23 times its height. For one a
mile high, the distance is 46 miles or 46 times its height.
Thus the principle affords an indirect kind of magnifica-
tion, relatively greater and greater inversely as the square
root of the height.



Heat acquired by the Moon

In the expression (5) for the work done by contraction
in the case of heterogeneity, m will vary with each planet,
since its determination depends upon both the surface and
the mean density of the contracting body. For the surface
density of the Moon we have a ground surface entirely ;
that is, one of rock. In consequence, we may perhaps
estimate it as being that of the rocky exterior of the Earth,
or 2.7, water being unity. The mean lunar density is 3.65.
Putting these values in place of those of the Earth in (3)
and (4), we get from the new (5) with the new m^ the value
for the Moon's contracted heat given in the table.

Since the rate of changes of the concentric shells is as

!1, while dr is taken constant, the gradient of temperature

from the inside out will be greater, the smaller the body,
and convection in it be more rapid. Also its surface being
larger relatively to its volume, it would on that account
radiate more. That surface, therefore, could never attain
the degree of warmth of the other's in spite of the greater
radiation at higher temperatures. We shall probably be
within the mark if we take the surface temperature at its
maximum as proportionate to the total heat evolved. This
would give on the supposition of 10,000° F. for the Earth,



Hosted by



Qoo^z



NOTES 231

400° F. Abs. for the Moon, or — 59° below the freezing-point, a
temperature quite incompatible with volcanic phenomena.



Surface Heat of Mars

For Mars, where again the surface is wholly ground,
we have /o, = 2.7, while the mean density of the planet is
3.93. With these data we obtain a new wJ^ and the
value for the heat evolved given in the table under
heterogeneity.

Following the same course as with the Moon, we get a
surface temperature for Mars at its maximum of 2000*^ F.
This is just below the melting-point of (cast) iron, which
is 2160° F. Such a temperature is insufficient for the dis-
play of metamorphic or of volcanic action such as oc-
curred on Earth. For the like reason the crumpling of
the crust in consequence of the planet* s parting with its
internal heat must have been much less pronounced.



7
The Boiling-point of Water on Mars

The boiling-points of liquids are functions both of the
temperature and the pressure ; a lower temperature being
sufficient to cause ebullition if the pressure be less. On
the kinetic theory of gases the cause of this is at once
comprehensible. Boiling means that the particles of the
liquid generally have attained speed enough to throw off
the restraint of their neighbors and leave the surface.
Release may come about through increase of velocity, or,
in other words, increase of temperature, since temperature
is only another expression for the mean velocity-square



Hosted by



Google



232 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

of the particles ; or by decrease of restraint, which means
decrease of the pressure upon them.

Gravity on the surface of Mars is only 38 per cent of
that at the surface of the Earth, and if the amount of
Martian air per unit of surface be | that of the Earth, as
later we shall see to be probable, the pressure there
would be

/ = J/;^; = 0.09i/^,

where the unaccented letters refer to the Earth, the ac-
cented to Mars. Whence the boiling-point would be

44° C or iii°F.



The Paleozoic Sun

M. Blondet's explanation of the greater warmth of
paleozoic times was that the Sun then occupied a space
large enough to be able to shine on the pole even in mid-
winter. To do this, the semidiameter of the Sun must
have subtended at the centre of the Earth an angle equal
to the tilt of the pole away from the Sun, or an angle of
23° 2f, This would give it a semidiameter of 37,000,000
miles, or a million miles larger than the mean distance of
Mercury.

Its present mean density is 1.39 times that of water.
The density of hydrogen, the lightest known gas, is
0.0000895 that of water at 0° C. and under a pressure of
760 mm. at Lat. 45°. The present diameter of the Sun
is 866,000 miles. Its density then must therefore have
been

7 866000^ o

d=z 1.39. _r_ - = 0.0000178,

37000000^



or \ that of hydrogen.



Hosted by



Qoo^z



NOTES 233

Such tenuous matter could hardly have given out any
heat at all. This is one insuperable objection. A second
is that to suppose that the Earth can have condensed to
a solid state while the Sun still remained of such gaseous
tenuity, its material more sparse than that of any known
gas, is to violate every conception of evolution. The
thing is mechanically impossible.

When we reflect that so eminent a geologist as M. de
Lapparent* espoused M. Blondet's hypothesis, we see how
necessary to geologic conceptions is a foundation for
them in astronomy.

9

Effect on the Earth of the Supposed Paleozoic Sun

As impossible the supposed paleozoic Sun proves from
the point of view of the Earth. For on critical examination
it turns out quite incapable of the climatic effect attributed
to it, even supposing it emitted heat enough to have any
effect at all.

To calculate its zonal influence we proceed as follows :
li a = coaltitude of the Sun, its insolation at the moment
at the confines of the atmosphere is as cos a. The relative
amount of the total insolation at a given latitude and for a
given declination during twenty-four hours, supposing the
Sun a point, and calling the insolation at the equator at the
equinox unity, is expressible by spherical triangles as :

/»cos"*(- cot b . cot c) /»co8~^^- cot b - cot c)

1 = 2) cos^ 'dA = 2 J cosbcosC'dA + sin ^sin^cos^ -dA

/ r J, . 7 . • >i\ C08-*(-C0tfc'C0tc)

= 2(cos cos ^ • -^ + sin ^ sm ^ • sm A) ,

where b = the colatitude of the place,

c = the codeclination of the sun,
A == the hour angle from noon ;

* " Traite Elementaire de Geologic," par De Lapparent.



Hosted by



Google



234 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

the limits of the integration being the meridian, where A = o
and the horizon where a = 90° and its cosine o, whence

o = cos d cos ^ + sin ^ sin c cos A^
or A = cos"i(— cot d cot c).

But the area of the supposed paleozoic Sun cannot be
considered a point because of its size. To deduce its effect
each bit of it which rises above the horizon of the place
must be taken into account and given weight inversely as
the square of its distance off.

For our purpose, however, a sufficiently accurate ap-
proximation may be got by taking in each determination
what would be the centre of mass of the solar zone above
the latitude of the lowest central point visible supposing
the Sun a flat surface. The point whose codeclination is
considered then becomes

„ &ixfi0 cos edB

/•cos g

2r^j silled d0

where = the angle from the pole of the ecliptic toward
its equator ;

and tan(23°.5-^).

^ tan 23^.5

Something is omitted by this process because the visible
zone really descends lower at the sides than in the centre,
but on the other hand the effect on the tropical belt of the
Earth is relatively greater than on the polar ones because
of the less distance of the centre of the Sun. The result
is to understate the case against the supposed paleozoic
Sun and thus to increase the force of the reasoning.

From the table it appears that the climate in the polar
regions would be unaffected in midwinter and midsummer,
the only seasonal difference being that spring would come



Hosted by



Google



NOTES



235



on somewhat earlier than now. Thus the seasons would
still exist and the polar climate not be tropical at all.

The heat due the insolation at the equator at the equinox
is taken as unity in both cases because no greater heat
there is to be accounted for then than now.



Insolation

Equator at Equinox = i.oo in both cases.


Latitude


Effective Declina-
tion OF Sun


Insolation Paleozoic

Sun


Insolation Present

Sun


N.



S.


Midwinter


90


0.00


0.00


82


4.6


0.00


0.00


66.5


13.0


0.06


0.00


50


21. 1


0.21


0.19


40


23-5


0.35


0-35


30


23-5


0.51


0.51


20


23-5

N.


0.66

Equinox


0.66


90


10.5


0.29


0.00


82


6.3


0.25


0.14


66.5


0.0


0.40


0.40


50


0.0


0.64


0.64


40


0.0


0.77


0.77


30


0.0


0.87


0.87


20


0.0


0.94

Midsummer


0.94


90


23-5


I.2S


1.25


82


23-5


1.24


1.24


66.5


235


I.I5-


I-I5-


50


23s


1. 15


1.15


40


235


I.IS+


1.1S+


30


23-5


I-I3


I-I3


20


23-5


1.09


1.09


Hosted by



Google



236 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

10

On the Influence upon the Climate of Carbon
Dioxide in the Air

From some careful and elaborate calculations of Profes-
sor Arrhenius it appears that an increase of carbonic acid
in our air to thrice its present amount would raise the tem-
perature as follows :

Carbonic Acid = 3
Increase in Temperature over Carbonic Acid = i



Latitude


Dec. -Feb.


March-May


JUNE-AUG.


Sept.-Nov.


Year


70-60


+ 9.1 c.


+ 9-3C.


+ 94 C.


+ 94 C.


+ 9-3 C.


50-40


+ 9-5


+ 94


+ 8.6


+ 9-2


+ 9-2


30-20


+ 8.7


+ 8.3


+ 7.5


+ 7.9


+ 8.1


1 0-0


+ 74


+ 7-3


+ 7.2


+ 7-5


+ 7-3



We shall assume these figures to be correct and combine
with them a table showing the present temperature at
different latitudes in every month taken by him from
Dr. Buchan and here abbreviated.

Carbonic Acid = i



Latitude


Dec.-Feb.


March-May


JUNE-AuG.


Sept.-Nov.


Year


70-60


- 21. 1 C.


- 8.3 c.


+ 7-5 C.


- 6.0 c.


- 70 c.


50-40


- 14


+ 7-8


+ 18.7


+ 9-7


+ 8.7


30-20


+ 17-0


+ 21.5


+ 26.0


+ 23.0


+ 21.9


1 0-0


+ 25.5


+ 25.8


+ 25.4


+ 25.5


+ 25.5



From these two tables it appears that the increase of
temperature from increase of carbon dioxide in the air from



Hosted by



Google



NOTES



237



I to 3 would be only two degrees centigrade greater at 65"* N.
than at the equator ; the mean for the year at the upper
latitude being still only + 2°. 3 C. while it would be 32^.8 C.
at latitude 5° N. In the second place the seasons in the
polar regions would remain substantially what they are
now. For at latitude 70°-6o° we should have :

Temperature with Carbonic Acid = 3


Latitude


Dec.-Feb.


March-May


JUNE-AUG.


Sept.-Nov.


70-60 N.



- 12.0 C.


+ i.o C.


+ 16.9 c.


+ 34 c.


Such cold in winter would be prohibitive to tropic vege-
tation, and polyp corals could certainly not flourish on it
seventeen degrees still farther north toward the pole.

Effect of Increased Carbon Dioxide upon Plants

Quite apart from the question of warmth it by no
means follows that an increase of carbon dioxide in the air
to three or four times its present amount would conduce
to vegetation. With common plants and under otherwise
present normal conditions it certainly does not. To de-
termine what effect upon plants a greater percentage of
it than the present one would have, careful experiments
were performed in 1902 by Dr. Horace T. Brown, LL.D.,
F.R.S., and Mr. F. Escombe, B.Sc, F.L.S.* The plants
selected were ordinary flowering plants or angiosperms.
They found that an increase of carbonic acid in the at-
mosphere to 11.4 parts in 10,000 from the normal amount
of 2.8 to 3 not only hurt the growth of the plants but pre-

* Proceedings of the Royal Society, 1902, Vol, LXX.



Hosted by



Google



238 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

vented reproduction. The plants became sickly and were
unable to flower and seed. The experiment, of course,
does not show that a different effect might not be pro-
duced on cryptogams such as constituted the flora of Car-
boniferous times, nor does it demonstrate that with time
enough adaptation to such changed surroundings might
not result in a positive gain to the plants concerned ; but it
certainly affords no evidence in favor of either supposition.

II

Atmosphere of Mars

Amount. — Of the amount of the Martian atmosphere
we have no certain knowledge. From its effects we know
that such an atmosphere exists and these effects are com-
patible with an air thinner than our own. With regard
to its density the best determination at present is to be
got from the planet's albedo, the albedo of a body being
its intrinsic brightness. Now from the albedo of various
rocks, of forests, and of snow, and from the relative
amounts of each that appear upon the Martian disk, we
may calculate, taken in connection with the whole albedo
of the planet, the proportionate albedoes of its surface
and its air. Nearly five-eighths of the surface is desert
which has an albedo of about .16, three-eighths a blue-green
with an albedo of .07, while less than one-sixth is of a
gHstening white of roughly .75. These would combine to
give an albedo of .13. This, however, is illuminated by
so much only of sunlight as penetrates the air, about three-
quarters of the whole. Whence the apparent albedo of
the surface seen from without must be .10. Now as the
total albedo of the planet is .27, and .10 is from the sur-
face, the remaining .17 must be the albedo of the air.

Assuming the densities of the mundane and of the
Martian atmospheres to be proportionate to their brilliancy,



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 239

or as 75 to 17, which would seem something like the fact,
since the denser the air the more dust it would buoy up,
and it is chiefly by what it holds in suspension that we see
it, we have for the Martian air a density about two-ninths
of our own over each square unit of surface.

But, if the original mass of air on each planet was as
that planet's mass, we should have for the initial amounts
9.3 for the Earth to i.o for Mars. This would be dis-
tributed as their respective surfaces, or in the ratio of 7919^
to 4220^, or as 3.5 to i ; which would give 2.7 times as
much air for the Earth per unit of surface. The differ-
ence between — and — , or the amount the albedo im-
2.7 4.5

plies now present mid the amount the planet would have
had, assuming proportionate masses to start with, may per-
haps be attributed to the greater relative loss of air Mars
has sustained because of parting more quickly with its air
envelope.

Surface density of its air. — To get the density of the
Martian air at the surface of the planet, which is of course
a very different thing from the amount of air above that
surface, we must divide the amount by the relative gravity
there. For the density of an atmosphere at any height
being proportionate to its own decrease — if the density be
taken as proportional to the pressure, which is practically
true for gases at the atmospheric pressures considered, and
if the temperature be considered constant — then if D
denote the density at any point,

where g- denotes the force of gravity at the surface of
the Earth and is constant for the distance concerned, and
X is reckoned outward from the surface.

Whence D = Ae'^^,

A being the density at the surface.



Hosted by



Google



240 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE
Correspondingly, we have for Mars

A^ being the density of its air at its surface and^j gravity
there. For the whole mass of air over a given point we
have for the Earth

0^0 ^ '



and similarly for Mars



\D.dx^'

'



Taking ^= i and therefore^! = .38, we have, since the
whole mass of air above a point on Earth is 4.5 what it is
on Mars,

^ = 4.5-^-
.38

Whence as ^ = 30 inches or 760 'mm. barometric pressure,
^j = 2.5 inches, or 64 mm.

12

The Mean Temperature of Mars
Division of Radiant Energy

So soon as a radiant ray strikes matter it suffers division
of its energy. Part of it is reflected, part absorbed, and
part transmitted. What is reflected is sent off again into
space, performing no work in the way of heating the body.
Now the amount reflected is not the same in all cases, de-
pending for its proportion upon the character of the matter
the ray strikes.

If the surface of a planet be itself exposed unblanketed
by air, the absorbed and transmitted portions go to heat
the planet, directly or indirectly.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 241

If the planet be surrounded by air, the portion trans-
mitted by this air, plus what is radiated or reflected from
it to the solid surface, must first be considered. Then,
upon this quota as a basis, must secondly be determined
how much the surface in its turn reflects. The balance
alone goes to warm the ground or ocean.



Light and Heat

Radiant energy is light, heat, or actinism, merely accord-
ing to the effect we take note of. If our eyes were sensi-
tive equally to all wave-lengths, we could gauge the amount
of heat eceived by a body by the amount of light it re-
flected, — that is, by its intrinsic brightness, or albedo.
For this percentage deducted from unity would leave the
percentage of heat received. This procedure may still be
applied, provided account be also taken of the heat deple-
tion suffered by the invisible rays. Two problems, then,
confront us.

We must find the albedoes of the several planets in
order to compare one with another in its reception of heat,
and we must find the relation borne by the visible and in-
visible rays to the subject. The latter problem may best
be attacked first.

Actinometers and pyrheliometers are instruments for
measuring in toto the heat received from the Sun; and
they have been used by Violle, Crova, Hansky, and others
to the determination of this quantity at given places, and
so to a conclusion as to the amount of heat outside our air,
or the Solar Constant. Langley*s great contribution to the
subject was the pointing out that the several wave-lengths
of the different rays were not of homogeneous action or
modification, and that to an exact determination of the
Solar Constant it is necessary to consider the action of



Hosted by



Google



242 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

each separately, and then to sum them together. To this
end he invented his spectro-bolometer.

By means of this instrument Langley mapped the solar
radiation to an extension of the heat spectrum unsuspected
before. He then carried it up Mt. Whitney in California, and
discovered two important facts : one, that the loss in the visi-
ble part of the spectrum was much greater, not only actually,
but relatively to the rest, than had been supposed ; and the
other, that the greater the altitude at which the observations
were made, the larger the value obtained for the Solar Con-
stant. Both of these are pertinent to our present inquiry.

With a rock-salt prism, instead of a glass one, he next
extended still farther the limits of the heat spectrum toward
the red, the effect of the solar radiation proving not neg-
ligible as far as X = 15 fi.

In 1 90 1 Professor Very, who had been his assistant
earlier, published an important memoir on the Solar Con-
stant, based upon these bolometric observations, but with
a value for it got from spectral curves derived from simul-
taneous actinometric and bolometric determinations at
Camp Whitney and Lone Pine, and extended from them
outside the atmosphere by taking both air and dust effects
into account in selectively reflecting and diffracting the
energy waves. The air effect is proportionate to the air
mass, but the dust effect increases in greater ratio as one
nears the surface of the ground. The formulas he used
were adaptations of those by Rayleigh for accounting for
the selective reflection and diffraction of small particles.*

Energy of Visible and Invisible Spectrum

Planimetrical measurement of the area enclosed by the
curve deduced for outside our atmosphere gives the follow-
ing results :

* U. S. Department of Agriculture, Weather Bureau, No. 254.



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



NOTES

Distribution of Heat in the Spectrum



243


Wave-lengths


Percentage


Invisible

Visible

Invisible


X = 0.2 /A-0.393 fi
^ = 0-393 /^-o-76 fi
A = o.76/x-i5 fi


2.5

32-

65.5

100.


giving for the
of the whole.



Visible portion, 32 per cent,
Invisible portion, 6S per cent,



Loss OF Heat in Traverse of the Air

Turning, now, from the question of the initial heat for
different parts of the spectrum at the time the solar radia-
tion enters the air, we come next to consider the loss the
several rays sustain in their traverse of it.

From Very's curves for the radiation at the confines of
the atmosphere at Camp Whitney and at Lone Pine,
18 X = 1.2 /x, we get the amount transmitted at these two
stations, employing planimetric measurement as before,
and introducing with him the absorption in the red and
infra-red from the Alleghany measures, which he considers
the same at Lone Pine.

From Very's measures we have, calling the whole heat
at the confines of the atmosphere unity, —

Transmission


A=o.2 fi-1.2 fl


A=i.2fx-i5^


Outside

Camp Whitney

Lone Pine


50.

31-3

24.3


50.
25.1


Hosted by



Google



244 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

To get that for sea-level we shall take Crova's actinometric
measures at Montpellier (height 40 m.), made on August
13, 1888, at I2^'30"\ under a barometer of 761 mm. Simul-
taneously with these, other self-registering ones were taken
by him on Mt. Ventoux (height 2000 m.). The respective
calories he obtained were, —



Montpellier



Aug. 13, 12I1 30m, 1888



0.975 calory,
bar. 761. 1 mm.



Mt. Ventoux



1.360 calories,
bar. 613.5 ^^*



We shall reduce these to the same scale as the Lone
Pine results, made with the pyrheUometer and used by
Very, to wit : —

Lone Pine
Aug. II, 12, 14, I2h-i2h 3oni, 1 88 1. 1.533 calories, bar. 663 mm.

giving for



Montpellier
1. 1 80 calories



Mt. Ventoux
1.643 calories



This value of 1. 180 is one which is probably about the
average of clear days in our latitude, the day in question
being registered by Crova as "very clear.'*

From these several data we find the following values
for the solar radiation received at the respective posts, in
calories in one column, in percentage of that entering the
atmosphere in another.

Solar Radiation


Bar.


Calories


Percentage


Outside the atmosphere . .

Camp Whitney

Lone Pine

Montpellier



500 mm.
663 mm.
761 mm.


3-127
1.896

1-533
1. 180


1. 000
.606
.490
.377



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 245

The loss in the visible spectrum is almost wholly from
selective or general reflection and from diffraction, that in
the invisible one from selective absorption. The absorp-
tive loss by bands in the former is only about i per cent
of the whole, and the loss by reflection in the latter prob-
ably not over 7 per cent of its depletion.

In view of the fact that the absorption is known to take
place high up in the air, Very adopted the Alleghany
amount for Lone Pine, the difference being insensible;
but when it comes to Camp Whitney it is clear from the
above that 9 per cent of it is got rid of between \ = 1.2 /i
and = 10 /A by rising the 11,700 ft. from sea-level.

Depletion in Visible Rays

We may now find the depletion in the visible part of the
spectrum which is not in general the same as that for the
invisible part, decreasing relatively with the altitude and
reversely increasing as the air envelope becomes thicker.
It does this at a greater rate than the increase of the air
mass, because the particles suspended in the air — dust,
water globules, and ice — augment more rapidly than the air
mass as one approaches the ground.

Drawing the curve for transmission at the sea-level on
the same principles as those for outside the atmosphere at
Camp Whitney and at Lone Pine, and then measuring the
amounts of transmission of each within the limits of the
visual rays, from X = .393 fi the K line to X = .76 /a
the A band, we get the following table : —



Hosted by



Google



246 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



Transmission of Solar Radiation in the Visible Spectrum



Outside the atmosphere
Camp Whitney . . .

Lone Pine

Sea-level



Calories received

FROM THE

Whole Spectrum



3-127

1.896

1-533
1. 180



Visible Portion
transmitted



1. 000

.664
.482

.210



The relative loss in the regions I, X. = .393 /a to

X = .76 iJL, and II, X = .76 /^ to X = 1.2 /a, between the
several stations is as follows: —

I II

Outside to Camp Whitney 0.105 0.029

Camp Whitney to Lone Pine .... 0.055 o.oio

Lone Pine to sea-level 0.086 0.027



Light received from the Day Sky

To these transmissions must be added that part of the
solar radiation which is lost by reflection and diffraction
in the atmosphere before reaching the ground, but is re-
flected again upon it, causing the brightness of the day
sky. This amount is sufficient to obliterate the stars.
Compared with direct sunlight, its ratio as determined by
Langley* is



Illumination



Sun
80



Sky
19



or 24 per cent of the sun's light.

We must therefore increase the energy transmitted by
24 per cent of itself. This gives finally : —

* "Professional Papers 'of the Signal Service," Vol. 15.



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



NOTES



247


Transmission


Portions reflected
INTO Space


Outside

Sea-level ....


1. 00
0.21


100
26


74


Albedo of the Earth

Now the fraction of the incident energy in the visible
spectrum is that by which we see the body and is called
its albedo. The albedo of our air, then, comes out .74.
To get the whole albedo of the Earth we must add to it
the albedo of the surface.

The albedo of various rocks and of the ocean is as
follows :



0.09
0.075



Ocean
Forest



White quartzite . . 0.25 Dark slate .

Clay shale .... 0.16 Ocean . .

For forest we may perhaps take . 0.07
and snow according to purity . . 0.50-0.78

The percentages of distribution of surfaces being about

. . 72 per cent Steppes and desert . 10 per cent
. . 10 per cent Polar caps .... 6 per cent

we deduce 11 for the albedo of the surface. But this
being illuminated by only 25 per cent of the light outside
the air gives about 3 for its quota to the planet's illumina-
tion. When finally the Earth's whole albedo to one view-
ing it from space becomes .74 + .03 = ,JJ albedo of the
Earth for a clear sky.

As the Earth's is about 50 per cent cloud-covered (see
the researches of Teisserenc de Bort on Nebulosity) and
the albedo of cloud is .72, we get .75 for the mean albedo
of the Earth.



Hosted by



Google



248 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Value of Loss of Light a Minimal One

That the value above found for the percentage trans-
mission of solar radiation to the Earth's surface is a maxi-
mal rather than a minimal amount, and the albedo a
minimal rather than a maximal one, is hinted by the fact
that the higher the observer ascends above the surface,
the greater his estimate of the solar constant becomes.
Thus Langley in his memoir on the Mt. Whitney expedi-
tion says : —

*Tn accordance with the results of previous observers,
then, and of our own with other instruments, we find a
larger value for the Solar Constant as we deduce it from
observations through a smaller air mass,'' The italics are
his.*

Depletion by Water-vapor on Mars

We are now in position to estimate the heat actually
received respectively at the surfaces of Mars and the
Earth. The visual part of the spectrum containing 32 per
cent of the incident solar radiation gives us its quota di-
rectly from the albedo, since the heat received = i albedo.
The infra-red portion containing 65 per cent of the whole
depends upon the character of the air and of what it holds
in suspension. The greater bulk of the depletion in this
part of the spectrum comes from the absorption by water-
vapor, water itself, or ice and carbon dioxide. At the
Earth's surface the transmission in consequence is about
50 per cent ; at Camp Whitney it was about 59 per cent.
We might, therefore, suppose it still greater through the
air of Mars, which is very thin, and if we did so we should
find a still larger fraction of solar heat to be received by
the planet's surface ; so that such a supposition would
actually increase the cogency of the present argument.

* " Researches on Solar Heat," p. 68.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES



249



But the very thinness of the air joined to the lesser gravity
at the surface of the planet would lower the boiling-point
of water to something like 110° F. The sublimation at
lower temperatures would be correspondingly increased.
Consequently the amount of water-vapor in the Martian
air must on that score be relatively greater than in our
own.

Depletion by Carbon Dioxide

Carbon dioxide, because of its greater specific gravity,
would also be in relatively greater amount, so far as that
cause is considered. For the planet would part, ccBteris
paribus^ with its lighter gases the quickest.

Whence, as regards both water-vapor and carbon
dioxide we have reason to think them in relatively greater
quantity than in our own air at corresponding barometric
pressure. We may therefore assume provisionally that
the absorption due this cause is what it is with us at
Camp Whitney, or about 40 per cent of the whole, leaving
60 per cent of the heat transmitted.

It is distinctly to be noted that though this estimate
lowers the determination of the heat received at the sur-
face of Mars, what is thus lost in reception goes to make
the retention of the heat received all the greater.



Albedoes of the Planets

The albedoes of the several planets, according to the
latest determinations, those by Miiller at Potsdam, together
with that found above for the Earth and that obtained for
the Moon by ZoUner, stand thus : —

Jupiter . . 0.75 ["(using Struve's

Saturn . . 0.88 1 latest diametral

Uranus . . 0.73 [ measures, .78)

(ZoUner) Neptune . 0.63



Mercury


. 0.17


Venus.


. 0.92


Earth .


. 0.75


Moon .


. 0.17


Mars .


. 0.27



Hosted by



Google



250 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Heat received by Earth and Mars
We will now apply the argument from the albedo.

Heat received at the Surfaces of Mars and the Earth


Per cent of
Whole Energy


Per cent of Heat re-
ceived TO Whole Energy


Mars


Earth


Visual spectrum ....

Infra-red

Total


32
65


60
64


23
41.5


The ultra-violet rays slightly increase the depletion by
selective dispersion for both planets, and probably the
more for Mars.

Insolation

But this is not all. The above deduction applies only
to such sky as is clear. Now the Earth is cloud-covered
to the extent of 50 per cent of its surface on the average ;
Mars, except for about six Martian weeks, at the time of
the melting of the polar cap and over an area extending
some fifteen degrees from the pole, stands perpetually
unveiled. The surface thus fog-enveloped is .034 of its
hemisphere, and the time .23 per cent of the half year,
whence the total ratio of cloud to clear the whole year
through over the whole surface is less than i per cent.

The albedo of cloud being .72, its transmission, includ-
ing absorption re-given out, cannot exceed .28 for the visi-
ble spectrum, and may be taken as .20 for the whole.*
Consequently the effective heat received on this score by

* This agrees with Arrhenius' estimate of the heat transmissibility of cloud.



Hosted by



Qoo^z



NOTES 251

the Earth is about as .20 x .50+ i. 00 x .50= .60, and for
Mars .99, giving the ratio between the two planets that
of .60 to .99.

Taking now Stefan's law that the radiation of a body
is as the fourth power of its temperature, and remember-
ing that, since the two planets maintain their respective
mean annual temperatures, they must radiate as much
heat as they receive, we have the following equation
from which to find the mean annual temperature of Mars,
X, in which 459.4° + 60° or 519.4° F. on the absolute
scale denotes the mean annual temperature of the
Earth : —

x\ 519.4° : : ^/i^ X .64 X .99 : -^1,^2^ x .415 x .60

or ^=5194° Hi

giving ;r= 5314** Abs. =72° F. or 22** C.

Heat received and Heat retained

Such, then, would be the mean annual temperature of
the planet, were the heat retained as well there as here.
I am far from saying that ^^uch is the temperature. For
the retention is not the same on the two planets, being, on
account of its denser air, much better on the Earth. But
that such is the amount received is enough to suggest
very different ideas as to the climatic warmth from those
hitherto entertained.

Temperature deduced from Heat Retained

To obtain some idea of the heat retained and of the
temperature in consequence we may proceed in this way :
Let 7 = the radiant energy received at the surface of the
Earth.



Hosted by



Google



252 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

v-^ = that similarly received on Mars.

e = the relative emissivity or the coefficient of radia-
tion from the surface of the Earth, giving the
ratio of the loss in twenty-four hours to the
amount received in the same time, due to
factors other than the transmissibility of the
air, which is separately considered.

e^ = the same coefficient for Mars.

Clouds transmit approximately 20 per cent of the heat
reaching them; a clear sky at sea-level, 50 per cent.
Consequently as the sky is half the time cloudy, the mean
transmission through its air envelope for the Earth is

■35^'
For Mars it is .60 e^.

To get, then, the mean temperature of the planet in
degrees, x, from the heat retained, which is the daily
mean receipt less the mean loss, we have the follow-
ing equation, the mean temperature of the Earth being
[519.4° F. Abs.] 288° C. above absolute zero: —



X ^ ^ J' -^ i I -- .60 c\ ) ^

288.5 v3^(r^":3s ^)

Determination of e

To find e we have the data that the fall in temperature
toward morning on the Earth under a clear night sky is
about 18° F. or 10° C. ; under a cloudy one, about 7° F,
or 4° C. Taking the average day temperature from these
data at 292° Abs. on the centigrade scale, or 19° C, and
considering an average day sky and a clear night, we have
the transmission or loss

K-SS + .5o)6'or .425.-



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 253

while for an average day and a cloudy night it is

J(.35 + .20> or .27s e.
We form the following equation to determine e : —

292° — 10° _ '^ y{ I — .425 e)
292° - 4° v>(i--275 e)
whence e = .47.

Since the radiation by day is greater by about 1.15 than

by night, being as -^-jy

282*

we have more approximately

K40+.5o>or .45 e
for a clear night and average day and

J(.40 + .20> or .30 e

for a cloudy night under the same conditions.

This gives e = .46,

or substantially what it was before. It changes the final
result for the mean temperature of Mars by less than two-
tenths of a'degree.

Determination of e^

Since in the mean the planet radiates as much heat as it
receives and

^^ = 1.10,

the radiation must be in the same ratio. Whence, the loss
by radiation in twenty-four hours on Mars, so far as it
depends on the heat received, is

^1 = I.I ^
= .51,



Hosted by



Google



254 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

or by the more approximate calculation in the paragraph
above, it still

= .51.

Substituting these values in our equation (page 250), we
find Xy the mean temperature of Mars,

= 8°.7C.

or =47°.; F.,

taking into account the heat radiated away as well as the
heat received and gauging the temperature by the heat
retained ; by the net, instead of the gross, amount of the
radiant energy received.

If we assume clouds to transmit less heat than 20 per
cent, we diminish y and increase (i — .35^), so that the
ultimate result is not greatly altered.

If we take Arrhenius^ formula for the temperature T of the Earth's
surface as affected by the air-envelope, we have as determined in his
paper on the effect of carbon dioxide in the air : —



T^^



aA +M-\- (I ~a)A(l 4- v) + nIi + - j



where a = atmospheric absorption for solar heat,

P = atmospheric absorption for earth-surface heat,
A = Solar Constant, less loss by selective reflection by the air,
M = heat conveyed to the air from other points,
JV = heat conveyed to the surface from other points,
V = I ~ albedo of the surface,
y = radiation constant.

The values for these quantities found bolometrically for a clear sky
are a = .50,

yi = I - .79 X .32 = .747 = whole spectrum — albedo of the air x

visible portion,
P = a approximately,
V = I — .11 = .89



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 255



For the Earth in its entirety M —o and iV= o, since what is lost by con-
vection in one place is gained in another.

Applying this same formula to the case of Mars, we have similarly

a^ = 40 approximately,

A^ = (i — .17 X .32) = whole spectrum ~ albedo of its air x

1.5242

visible portion
^ -946

1.5242

jSj = ttj approximately.

vj = I - .13 = .87.

Whence for the Earth under a clear sky

7^4 ^ ^(i + V- yg)
y(i + V - ^v)'

and similarly for Mars, substituting its values for A^ a, and j8.

Since in both a = ^ and yi = y approximately, we have for 7\ for Mars,

T^ A

But the Earth is .50 cloud-covered, and the transmission of cloud
being not more than .20 (the value he takes), we have finally

T.'^ A, .99

r* A .60'

whence

7; = .974 T,

and T being 519.4^ Abs. on the Fahrenheit,

7; = 505.7°, that is, 46.3° F. or 8° C,

a result substantially the same as we have deduced.

Had we assumed ^ to be .70 and to be in like proportion to a for
Mars, we should have had

r*= 1.140-
7

and r* =1.101^,

Vi

which gives not far from what we had before, since it lowers the result-
ing temperature for Mars by only about 4° F. or 2° C.



Hosted by



Google



256 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

13

A Dust Storm on Mars*

On May 2Sth at 15^^ 34"' G. M. T., Mr. V. M. Slipher
noticed a large projection about halfway down the ter-
minator of the planet. He at once notified me and we
then proceeded to observe it by turns.

What first impressed me was its size. This, both in
length and height, was excessive. The projection con-
sisted of a long band of light, a little north of the centre
of the arc of the phase ellipse, lying parallel to the termi-
nator but parted from it by a dark line half the band's own
width. To this effect I made a sketch of it at 15^ 37'^
The next thing to strike the eye was its color. This was
not white nor whitish but ochre-orange, closely assimilated
in tint to the subjacent parts of the disk, the region to the
north and west of the western end of the Deuteronilus.
Such distinctive complexion it kept throughout the time
it was visible. Coincidentally Baltia, then close on the
terminator and north of the projection, showed white.
The seeing was 5 on a scale of 10 — sufficiently good to
disclose the Phison and Euphrates double — the power
310 and the aperture that of the 24-inch.

As soon as possible micrometric measures were begun
of its position and length, the position angle taken being
that of the tangent to the terminator at the point directly
under the projection. For such tangent, together with the
projection's distance from the disk, furnishes all the data
necessary to determine its location. Measures of this angle
were repeated at intervals during the time of visibility.

At 15*" 41"^ the separation of the projection from the
terminator seemed to have sensibly lessened and I recorded
it in another sketch. The whole projection appeared to

* Reprint of Lowell Observatory Bulletin, No. i, June 9, 1903.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 257

have moved bodily in. At Si"", however, it seemed higher
again but then advanced rapidly toward the disk, for by 55™
only the tip of it could be seen. Thus it showed for some
minutes, being last seen for certain at 16^ S^ and vanish-
ing completely after 16*^ lo"".

My measures and notes were as follows, where P. A.
denotes 4he position angle of the tangent to the terminator
as above described : —

jjh 27m Projection on terminator — found about five min-
utes before by Mr. Slipher. The projection is
long and is separated from the terminator by a
dark line. (Drawing.)

41 P. A. 200.°4 along terminator.

44 Projection less separated from terminator.

(Drawing.)
48 P. A. Projection i99.°9.

51 Length projection 0.^^92 ; now seems higher again.

55 Just about gone ; only the tip showing apparently.
No striking separation now.

16*" 10°" P. A. Projection I99.°8; only suspected by
glimpses ; surely seen last at 16*^ 8"*.

Impression that projection had moved toward north as
regards Deuteronilus.

During the course of the observation a 12-in. diaphragm
was tried once but in this case without gain. At the same
time Mr. Slipher's measures were these : —

15^ 42°" (?) P. A. Projection 203.°/.

45 P. A. Projection 204.^0.
Length i.''s8.

52 P. A. Projection 20i.°o.



Hosted by



Google



258 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Of the apparent perpendicular distance of the top of
the projection from the terminator our respective estimates
were : —

By Mr. Slipher, .067 of the radius of the disk.

By me, .075 of the radius of the disk.

These estimates were got from measurements of our
drawings and from remembrance of the size of the pro-
jection as compared with the size of the disk.

To find from these data the position of the projection
upon the planet we may proceed as follows: We shall
first determine the height of the highest point of the pro-
jection above the planet's surface.

Taking the centre of the disk for origin and the minor
axis of the phase ellipse for the axis of x,
let d= perpendicular from the projection upon the ter-
minator.

d^ = distance to the terminator perpendicular to the
phase axis.

r = distance from the centre of the disk to the foot of
the perpendicular d.

/= distance of the projection from the centre.
yjr = angle between r and /.
X = exterior angle between d and r.
A = phase latitude of the tip, or its latitude in the aux-
iliary circle to the phase ellipse.
(j) = angle between the tangent to the terminator under

the projection and the major axis of the ellipse.
a = radius of the disk, in seconds of arc.
a^ = radius of the disk in miles.
/i^ = height of the projection in the plane of the circle

of its phase latitude.
/i = its true height.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 259

li = angle in the plane of the phase latitude circle be-
tween the tip of the projection and the point on
the terminator.

I = same in the plane passing through the origin, the
observer, and the tip.

= angle between r and the axis of x.

X and y the coordinates of the foot of d.

jTj and /i those of the foot of d^.

E = angle of the phase.

P = position angle of the polar axis.

Q = position angle of the phase equator.

B = latitude of the centre of the disk.

\ = longitude of the centre of the disk.

By a property of the ellipse we have

. /) tan i>

tan e = r^,

cos-^ii



also



sin^ Q + sec^ E cos^ &
Then in the triangle made by r, d, and t we have
^2 = ^2 _|_ ^ ^ 2 ^r cos Xy
and ;j^ = ^ — <^,

whence we can findj;/i, d^ and then A^ since

sin-4=^-



a

Now tanfi= . ^ -,

sm jfe • ^ cos A

and ^i=(sec|i— i)<3:q- cos-4,

then since

a^z=i{a-{- Kf -\-k^-2{a-\- k)k^ cos A,

we find k.



Hosted by



Qoo^<^



26o MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Since the height of the projection is always small with
regard to the radius of the disk, we may take

d = approx.,

cos <^

and tan I, = ■—-, — approx.,

cos 9 sm j^ • a • cos A

and h = (sec |j — i)^q • cos^ A approx.

If, as in the present case, the projection is nearly on the
phase equator, the process admits of still greater simplifi-
cation. For then both ^ and A become small and

tan ^ = — -, — - approx.,
asm^

and h = (sec ^ — \)a^ approx.

In the present instance the height distance, from my

estimate, is

k= ly miles.

From Mr. Slipher's,

k= 14 miles.

We can now find the position. Were the body causing
the projection upon the surface of the sphere, with radius
unity, we should have / equal to the sine of the angle from
the centre of the disk to the tip of the projection. Since
in reality the projection is raised above the surface, it may
be considered to be upon the surface of another sphere
concentric with the first and of radius a + h. The point
directly under it will not, therefore, be where the tip ap-
pears. But since codirectional lines from the same point,
in this case the common centre of the two spheres, are
altered in the ratio of their length, however projected, we
have for the point upon the planet's surface directly under
the projection a distance which we will call/.

a-\- h



Hosted by



Google



NOTES



261



The angle between its direction and that to the planet's
pole.or,.is ^^^_^_,^^^

while the distance in angular measure to that pole is the
colatitude of the centre. We thus have two sides and the
included angle of a spherical triangle given from which to
find the colatitude of the point or the third side and the
lower angle or the longitude of the point from the centre
of the disk.

Thus calculated the positions of the projection at the
several moments when the measures were taken prove to
be as subjoined.


G. M. Time


Latitude


Longitude


May 26, 15'^ 41^
48
16 10


i8°3i'N.

19 44 N.
21 24 N.


39° 45'

39 59

40 33


From the successive positions of the centre of the pro-
jection it appears that that centre changed its place during
the time of its visibility. It was three degrees farther
north and three-quarters of a degree farther west at the
end of the observations than it had been at their begin-
ning. Such shift could be due to either of two causes.
Bodily transference over the planef s surface would account
for it ; or obliquity of tilt of the projection's medial line to
the terminator would produce a like effect. To which of
the two possible causes the result was to be attributed was
conclusively shown by the observations of the next day.
It is worth noticing that the shift was recorded in the
notes as impressing itself upon the eye apart from the
measures and confirmatory of them.

At 15*" 51™ I measured the length of the projection
along the terminator and found it to be o."92. If we



Hosted by



Google



262 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

allow 0/^15 for irradiation, this makes it 0/^77. Now the
diameter of the disk at the time was 10/^76 according to
Mr. Crommelin's ephemeris which takes the value to be
9/^30 at distance unity. Mr. Slipher's measure makes it
greater, but as his estimates from his drawing make it
less we may, perhaps, consider the above as a fair meas-
ure. We have, then, for its value in degrees upon the
planet's surface and in miles respectively : —

Length of projection = 8.°2 = 300 miles.

On the next evening, May 27th, the return of the pro-
jection's longitudes off the terminator was duly awaited.
They were due about 38^^ later than on the preceding
night, but in order that if the projection had moved to the
eastward in the interval it might also be caught, observa-
tions were begun some time beforehand. My notes and
measures read as follows : —

1 5^ 40'" Cannot certainly see anything on terminator,
though I can suspect at times something at
its centre but cannot be sure. Seeing 3.

44 J Suspect something just below centre of termi-
nator.
52 Distinctly suspicious.

58 Certainly have seen a small projection. P. A.
195.^8. Seeing 4.

16 3 Thought to see it again.

5 P. A. I96.°6, had previously thought it higher
(up terminator). Were it anything like that
of last night, it must certainly have been seen.

17 Can see nothing on terminator. Seeing a good 5.

27 Suspect projection again but cannot be sure.
P. A. i96.°2. Have been observing about
half the time.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 263

16 39 No projection visible. Seeing 3.

40 No projection visible. Seeing 4.

41 No projection visible. Seeing 4.
44 No projection visible.

At 16^ 15^^ I made a drawing of the whole planet under
seeing as good as on the night before, using an 18-inch
diaphragm upon the 24-inch objective, which diaphragm
was also employed throughout the observations recorded
above.

Mr. Slipher, who observed with me by turns, could not
detect any projection.

From these observations it is at once evident that the
something which caused the projection of May 26th, had
ceased to exist in situ and in size on May 27th. It had
changed its place as the position angles show, and
had greatly diminished in extent during the twenty-four
hours elapsed. For the position of the terminator with
regard to the surface was substantially the same as on the
day before. Q-P having changed in the interval only
-1-0°. 1 3, 5 — o.°02, and £'4-o.°29. The chief effect of
these slight alterations of phase aspect would have been
to delay the advent of the projection by about one minute
of time.

If we take now the mean of the two measures of the
position angle at 15^ 58"^ and 16^ 5°", we find for the posi-
tion of the tip of the projection at 16^ 3"^



G. M. T.


Latitude


Longitude


May 27, 1 61^ 3«^
and 16 27


25° 29' N.
25 45 N.


31° 43'
36 51


Comparing these positions with those of May 26th, we
see that the object causing the projection shifted its place



Hosted by



Qoo^z



264 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

over the surface of the planet from

latitude 18° 31^ N., longitude 39° 45^ on May 26th,

to latitude 25° 29^ N., longitude 31° 43^, on May 27th,

taking the time of greatest apparition on both occasions.
It, therefore, moved 7° in latitude to 8° in longitude in the
twenty-four hours, or 390 miles, at the rate of sixteen miles
an hour. From this we infer : First, that it was not a
mountain or mountains illuminated by the sun ; and,
second, that it was what alone fits the observations, an
enormous cloud travelling northeast and dissipating as it
went.

Turning now from the observations of May 27th to those
of May 26th, with the recognition of the rate of shift de-
duced from this comparison of the two sets, we see that
the change of place recorded by the first night's observa-
tions is to be ascribed to the second of the two possible
suppositions mentioned in their discussion, or to the form
and orientation of the cloud. Its longer axis lay E. by S.
and W. by N. Its axis lay, then, roughly speaking, at
right angles to the direction of its motion. This is further
made evident by the measures of May 27th in which the
same tilt of the cloud's axis to the meridians is disclosed.

We shall now see that Mr. Slipher's observations tell
the same tale. If we deduce from his measures, as has
been done by Mr. Lampland, the resulting positions of the
apparent centre of the projection at different times on
May 26th, we find as follows : —


G. M. T.


Latitude


Longitude


15^ 42"^

45
52


14° 52' N.
14 58 N.
19 8 N.


38° 2'

36 55
38 21


Hosted by



Google



NOTES 265

Here again is evident a tilt of the axis of the projection
to the meridians, such that the following end lay farther
north and farther west than the preceding end.

It is of interest to inquire under what conditions, diurnal
and seasonal, the cloud came into being. As to the time
of day, the terminator in question was the sunrise one.
The cloud, therefore, was first seen when it was half an
hour before sunrise upon its part of the planet, and con-
tinued to be visible up to the rising of the sun. The place
was within the tropics, in the desert region to the south
of the Lacus Niliacus. With regard to the Martian season
of the year it was, in this the northern hemisphere of the
planet, at the time, according to the data of Crommelin's
excellent ephemeris, what corresponds to the first of
August with us and the sun was overhead in latitude
18° 7' N. The cloud, then, when first seen was almost
exactly under the sun. It then travelled north, dissipating
as it went, and was practically dissolved again by the time
it had reached 25° N. latitude.

Finally, its color leads me to believe it not a cloud of
water-vapor, but a cloud of dust. Other phenomena of the
planet bear out this supposition.

On May 28th no trace of it could be perceived by Mr.
Slipher.

14
Mars on the Cause of an Ice-Age

In a paper read some years ago before the American
Philosophical Society * the writer showed that Mars was at
present in the condition to offer a crucial criterion on the
correctness of CrolFs ingenious theory as to the cause of
our own Glacial Epochs, and that the evidence presented by
the planet on the subject did not wholly support the theory.

* " Mars on Glacial Epochs." Proceedings Amer. Phil. Soc, Vol. XXXIX,
No. 164.



Hosted by



Google



266 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

CrolFs idea was that increased eccentricity of orbit such as
was true of the Earth in the past brought effects in its
train, — change of ocean currents, increased precipitation,
and so forth, — which caused a glaciation of the hemisphere
possessing the long cold winters and the short hot sum-
mers. Study of Mars showed that this was putting the
cart before the horse ; that increased precipitation from
whatever cause, and not increased eccentricity, was the
true primiim mobile in the matter.

The evidence offered by Mars consisted in the greatest
and least size of its two polar caps. The minima were
known ; of the maxima that of the northern cap had been
determined in 1897 at the Lowell Observatory. But for
the southern cap only seasonal comparisons with the north-
ern at corresponding dates enabled its maximum to be
inferred.

Since then the actual maxima of the southern cap
have been observed for the first time, and their direct data
more than support the deductions of the previous paper.
We may, therefore, conveniently review the subject
again.

The eccentricity of the Earth's orbit at present is .0168.
In the past it has been greater, fluctuating up and down
between values whose extreme upper limit is .0747, ac-
cording to Leverrier's calculations. Its highest amounts
are those invoked to account for glacial epochs. At the
present time the orbit of Mars is possessed of an eccen-
tricity about five and a half times our own, or .0933. It is,
therefore, now in a more favorable condition for eccen-
tricity to tell than our Earth ever can have been.

The planet's axial tilt, too, upon which the differential
action of the eccentricity in the two hemispheres depends,
is about that of the Earth, being, according to the latest
measures, those at Flagstaff in 1907, 23° 13' against the
Earth's 23'' 27'.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 267

Furthermore, these two quantities in the two orbits are
circumstanced much the same, the line of apsides and that
of the solstices falling in both not far apart With Mars
the aphelion of the orbit lies in longitude 153° 19', the
summer solstice of the northern hemisphere in longitude
176° 48' ; with our Earth the aphelion is in longitude 280**
21', the summer solstice of the northern hemisphere in
longitude 270°. Thus both planets pass the points of
which the near coincidence is vital to the effective working
of the eccentricity, in fairly close succession. With Mars
the summer solstices follow perihelion and aphelion ; with
the Earth they precede them. This has the effect in the
northern hemisphere of Mars of curtailing the end of sum-
mer as compared with its beginning, and of prolonging it
in the case of the Earth ; similarly affecting winter in the
other hemisphere. On the other hand, in the southern
hemisphere of Mars summer is delayed into the autumn,
while on the Earth it is clipped.

On Mars, then, at present eccentricity and tilt are such
as to counterpart what the Earth has had in the past, only
accentuated, while their positioning is not very different at
the moment in the two.

It becomes now of interest to note what the result of
such increased eccentricity is on Mars. It betrays itself
of course in the maxima and minima of the two caps.
For a glacial epoch means that the minimum of that hemi-
sphere's cap is a maximum. What has been learned on
this score, then, is given in the following table : —



Hosted by



Google



268 iMARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE



Mars
north polar cap

Minima



Date


Observer


Time, 3;


Size Mean


1886 .


Schiaparelli


78^-123


3- 5


1888 .


Schiaparelli


128-172' ?


7.


I90I .


. Lowell


93-114


3-


1903 .


Lowell


124-150-^


5-


1905 .


Lowell


iio°-i49^


4.6


1907 .


Lowell


145=


7. 7_ 5- I



Maxima



1897 . =
1907 . .


. : Lowell
Lowell


16 days after Aut.
8~


Equi.


17'

90^ 84^


SOUTH POLAR CAP

Minima


1862 . .

1879 • •
1894 . ^


Lass ell

. \ Schiaparelli
Douglass and
Lowell


70 days after solstice

313'

318^-335°

299'


5 -'5

y^ i

o."o j 3.°!


Maxima


1903 . .

1905 . .
1907 . ■


Lowell
Lowell
Lowell


142'


104" j

IOC

103° i 104^



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 269

Perusal of the figures proves startling to the theory that
eccentricity of orbit is responsible for glacial epochs. For
they show that at its minimum the southern cap, which is
the cap of the hemisphere of extremes where glaciation
should appear, is not only not larger than the northern but
is actually the smaller of the two. And this in face of a
greater precipitation in that hemisphere betrayed by the
cap itself. For at its maximum it surpasses, as the table
shows, the northern cap at its corresponding season.
Eccentricity, therefore, in the case of Mars, far from caus-
ing even a relative glacial epoch, produces exactly the
reverse.

From the respective maxima and minima of the Martian
caps it appears that the short hot summer of the hemi-
sphere of extremes is able to dispose of the greater deposit
of snow of that hemisphere's long cold winter. Secondly,
that that hemisphere's precipitation is greater than that of
the short mild winter of the hemisphere of means; and
thirdly, that its short summer because hot is more effective
in melting the accumulated ice and snow than the long
but cooler summer of its antipodes. For it reduces a
larger maximum to start with to a smaller minimum in
the end.

With a certain amount of precipitation, then, to wit that
existent at the moment on Mars, eccentricity is powerless
to cause even an incipient glacial epoch. Suppose, now,
the precipitation to be increased generally over the planet.
The melting powers of the summers remain unchanged,
approximately, except that with more deposit more fog or
cloud would be raised which might tend to handicap the
hotter. With precipitation equally increased the deposit
would be more in the long cold winter in the climate of
extremes. Its maximum would be raised and relatively
to a greater extent than in the other hemisphere. But
since the quantity melted in the short hot summer re-



Hosted by



Google



270 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

mained as before or even diminished, the minimum would
be correspondingly raised until with increase of precipita-
tion the minimum of the climate of extremes actually sur-
passed the minimum of means and glaciation set in.

Here, then, we see that by altering the amount of the
precipitation, from any cause whatsoever^ an anti-glacial
condition is changed into a glacial one. No such upsetting
of state follows a change in the eccentricity, but merely a
greater or less accentuation of the phenomena. Eccen-
tricity affects the degree, precipitation the very sign of the
resulting action. Although, therefore, both are essential
to any distinction between the condition of the two hemi-
spheres, it is the amount of the precipitation that really
settles the matter. And the cause of the amount need
have nothing to do with the eccentricity. Whatever con-
duces to sufficient increase of precipitation will cause a
glacial epoch irrespective of a large or a small eccentricity.
Furthermore, as no planet at any time is without some
eccentricity of orbit, it is precipitation that determines a
glacial epoch or the reverse. Mars, then, throws this light
upon the problem : it teaches us that glaciation need not
result from eccentricity, and never will do so unaided by
a factor which has no necessary dependence on eccen-
tricity at all.

IS

Tidal Effects

By * unhampered age' may be denoted that placid course
of evolution by which a planet goes to its death from in-
trinsic cause alone. For a planet, like a man, may end its
life for other reason than senility. Like him it is subject
to many vicissitudes in the course of its career. One cause
of world-extinction, perhaps the commonest of all, is the
tidal action due the Sun. For every planet that rotates



Hosted by



Qoo^z



NOTES 271

angularly faster or slower than it revolves is perforce sub-
jected to enormous pai:titive strains. Since its body is not
absolutely rigid these strains become tides, superficial or
bodily, which act as brakes to bring the rotation and the
revolution to coincide. Eventually such synchronousness
must result ; it is only a question of time. When it befalls
the planet that body ever after turns in perpetuity the
same face to the Sun. This fate has already befallen
Mercury and Venus, and must in time overtake the rest.
One side of the planet is thenceforward forever baked;
the other forever frozen. Whatever water originally ex-
isted there will have circulated, caught up by the heated
currents of the sunward side, to the hemisphere that is
turned away, there to be deposited as ice. This alone
would terminate all possibility of life, and the planet roll
a mummified mass through space.

16

On the Visibility of Fine Lines

The minimtim visibile of the normal human eye is com-
monly taken at i' of arc. In other words, the separating
power of the eye by which two objects may be distin-
guished as distinct has this for its minimum distance of
effectibility. The limit is not, however, the same for all
eyes, varying from individual to individual, and depends
upon what is known to oculists as acuteness of vision. It
is something quite apart from near-sight or far-sight and
resides apparently in the fineness of the retinal rods, some
eyes having these much coarser than others. Nor is it the
same thing as sensitiveness to impression, though the one
ability is often taken erroneously as guarantee for the
other. Eyes, however, have two quite distinct capabilities,
sensitiveness or the power of distinguishing faint contrasts



Hosted by



Qoo^z



272 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

such as detecting faint stars, and acuteness or the power
of resolution of parts to which is due the detection of plan-
etary detail The existence of the one faculty does not in
the least vouch for the presence of the other. Indeed,
experience with many observers has shown me that the
two are rarely, if ever, found in a high degree together.

Although points may not be distinguished as a rule if
they lie closer together than i' of arc, it is an interesting
and, at first, curious fact that a line, having a breadth
much less than the minimum visibile and much less even
than what would enable it to be seen were it a point, can
be distinctly and easily perceived. Michelson has shown
theoretically that this must be so, and has further experi-
mented practically to the same conclusion. Before know-
ing of Michelson's work some experiments of my own had
shown me that such was the case, as indeed every one un-
consciously evidences w^hen he sees a spider-web. My
first experiments sufficed to show me a line whose breadth
was less than 2!^ 6 of arc. It was a telegraph wire, seen
against the sky, whose distance away was then measured.
Recently I repeated the experiment with more care and
with the results which follow.

On May 6 of this year a wire was stretched by Mr.
Lampland and the writer from the top of the dome to the
top of the anemometer stand near it in such a manner that
it could be seen against the sky down a vista of half a
mile to the west. The wire was an iron wire of the usual
kind, .0726 inch in diameter, brownish and somewhat
rusty. In color, therefore, it was not very dark. We be-
gan to observe it from a distance of 500 feet, at which it
was instantly unmistakable, up to 2100 feet, where it wholly
ceased to be visible. The distances at which it became
less and less perceptible, the character of that perception,
and the angular width of the wire at the several distances
are given in the subjoined table. The remarks are mine.



Hosted by



Googk



NOTES



273



from my observations, but they were almost exactly con-
curred in by Mr. Lampland.

Visibility of a Wire .0726 Inch in Diameter


Angular


Distance


Width


Remarks


500 feet


2/^50


Evident at first glance.


600 feet


2/'o8


Evident at first glance.


700 feet


1/^78


Evident at first glance.


800 feet


i/'56


Evident at first glance.


900 feet


I.-39


Evident at first glance.


1000 feet


l/'25


Easily evident.


II 00 feet


i.'^iS


Perfectly visible.


1200 feet


1/^03


Distinctly visible.


1300 feet


o/'96


Visible but not easy.


1400 feet


o."89


Visible but not difficult.


1500 feet


0/^83


Visible but difficult.


1600 feet


0/^78


Glimpses only.


1700 feet


o/'73


f Well glimpsed. Imaginary wires glimpsed
[ but not surely.


1800 feet


0/^69


1 Well glimpsed. Imaginary wires glimpsed
\ but not surely.


1900 feet


0/^66


Glimpses not sure.


2000 feet


0/'62


It and imaginary lines of equal impression.


2100 feet


0.-59


Not visible.



It is interesting to note the fact that at a certain stage
of difficulty in detection, imaginary wires or impressions
of wires which did not exist were reported by the eyes or
the optic lobes to the brain and that such could be distin-
guished from the true, not, be it understood, from their
position, but from direct subconsciousness of the impres-
sions they made. The sight of a wire carried with it at
once a sense either of certainty or of doubt, and this as
the table shows was a concomitant of the strength of the
impression. Up to 1800 feet the eye or brain could dis-



, Hosted by



Google



274 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

tinguish of itself, apart from position, the reality or ques-
tionableness of the impression. At igoo feet and still
more at 2000 feet consciousness was unable to part the
false from the true.

To apply this now to those tenuous lines upon the sur-
face of Mars known as the *' canals" of the planet. It
may be well to say in premise that, when seen under good
conditions of air and observer, they are not bands or
washes or separating shades, but perfectly definite lines
which range all the way from such as might be made by
a pen and india-ink to gossamers like spider-webs seen to
the naked eye. As a mean case of distance we may take
the planet to subtend in diameter an arc of I4^^ Suppose
also that a power of 310 be used, which is also a mean
power. If the telescope lost no light and the definition
through it were as good as to the naked eye, it should be
possible to observe a line on the planet whose width was

o "6q I

■ ■^ X of the planet's diameter.

14/^0 310

Now the planet's diameter in miles is 4220 ±. In miles

then the width would be

oJ'6g I

4220 X ;7^ X ,

14.^0 310

or II of a mile. Say | of a mile.

Were the planet at a near opposition when its apparent
diameter is over 24'' and a power of 450 were used, we
should have about one-quarter of this for the width which
might be seen, or

^Q of a mile.

As the telescope does lose both in light and in definition
over the naked eye, it would not be possible to reach this
limit. If, however, we suppose the naked eye to be three
times as effective, it would seem not to favor the telescope.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 275

At this estimate J mile would be the limiting perceptible
width.

Why a line can be seen when its width is but -^q of the
minimum visibile seems to be due to summation of sensa-
tions. What would be far too minute an effect upon any
one retinal rod to produce an impression becomes quite
recognizable in consciousness when many in a row are sim-
ilarly excited. Psychologically it is of interest to note that
there are stimuli perceptible so faint and so fleeting as to
be even below this limit, and that, unable to rise into direct
consciousness, leave only an indefinite subconsciousness
of their presence which the brain is unable to part from
its own internal reverberations. It is a narrow limbo, this
twilight of doubt, since, as we see in the present instance,
below o."59 the object produced no effect, and above o."69
the brain was cognizant of objectivity as such.



Notes on Visual Experiment

The following visual experiment was performed at the
request of Director Lowell, and the notes may be con-
sidered as supplementary to those of the experiment on
the visibility of a wire * — the experiments being identical,
except that in the last instance a disk, having a fine line
of same width as wire ruled across its face, was observed
along with the wire.

As a check against any influence that a knowledge of
the positions of the wire and line might introduce, the ob-
server V. M. S. had nothing to do with the preparation and
arrangement of the experiment, and made his observations
going toward the disk and wire, the observations being
begun at the extreme limit of visibility for the line and
wire.

* Lowell Observatory, Bulletin No. 2.



Hosted by



Google



276 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

For each series the results are practically the same for
the two observers — the one having no knowledge as to
the positions of the objects and making his observations
going towards them, the other beginning observations near
the objects and going away from them.

V. M. Slipher.
C. O. Lampland.
December, 1903.

Wooden disk eight feet in diameter, covered with white
paper, with fine blue line, .07 inch wide, ruled across its
face. Line on disk makes about same angle with hori-
zontal as wire stretched above it. Disk suspended from
cable, stretched from top of dome to a pine to the south-
west. Plane of disk nearly in the meridian. Wire same
width (.07 in.) and color as that used in the original ex-
periment. (Lowell Observatory Bulletin No. 2.)

FIRST SERIES

Station
TOO ft. Wire and lines on disk very distinct. — c. O. L.
Angular width : disk, 4"^ 35' ; lines, I2."48.

200 ft. Line stronger than wire. — v. m. s.

About the same as the 100 ft. station. — c. o. L.

Angular width : disk, 2"* ly/^ ; Unes, 6. "24.
300 ft. Line stronger than wire. — v. m. s.

Both wire and line on disk strong and well seen. Perhaps
line the stronger. — c. o. l.

Angular width : disk, 1° 3i.'7 ; lines, 4.'' 16.
400 ft. Line the stronger. Probably due to background offering
greater contrast. — v. M.S.

About as well seen and as evident as at 300 ft. station. — c. O. l.

Angular width : disk, 1° 8. '8 ; Knes, 3/' 12.
500 ft. Wire and line equally sharp and evident. — v. m. s.

Wire and line evident and distinct at first glance. — c. O. L.

Angular width : disk, 55'; lines, 2/^50.
600 ft. Disk in shadow, yet line well seen, as is also wire. Line more
permanently visible, perhaps. — v. m. s.



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 277

Line on disk distinct and evident, but becoming more difficult.
Illumination very bright and glaring. Wire distinct and
evident first glance. — c. o. l.
Angular v^^idth : disk, 45.^8 ; lines, 2. ''08.
700 ft. Inaccessible. — v. m. s.

Poor station for observation. — c. o. L.
Angular width : disk, ^g/^ ; lines, i/'yS.
800 ft. Inaccessible. — v. m. s.

Wire comes out very distinctly — stronger at times. Line on
disk becoming more difficult — somewhat difficult at times
from this station, but perfectly evident with good illumina-
tion. — c. o. L.
Angular width : disk, 34/4; lines, I. "56.
900 ft. Can see wire. Disk in shadow of tree. — v. M. s.

Angular width : disk, 30/6; lines, i."39.
1000 ft. Wire more difficult but perfectly evident. Line on disk also
becoming difficult, but glimpse it definitely with good illumi-
nation. — c. o. L.
Angular width : disk, 27.^5 ; lines, i.''25.
1 100 ft. Can see wire and line. Shadow is on disk. — v. M. s.

Both wire and line on disk perfectly and distinctly seen. —

c. o. L.
Angular width : disk, 2$' ; lines, i.''i4.
1200 ft. Certainly glimpse line; poor glimpses of wire. — v. m. s.

Wire rather difficult and at times not seen, but glimpsed per-
fectly at intervals. Line on disk glimpsed distinctly at
times when angle of illumination changes. — c. o. l.
Angular width : disk, 22.^9; lines, i. "04.
1300 ft. Certainly glimpse line and wire. — v. M. s.

Wire difficult now, but glimpsed at times. Line on disk fairly
well glimpsed as wind swings disk, but becoming difficult —
somewhat faint. — c. O. L.
Angular width : disk, 21.^2 ; lines, 0.^96.
1400 ft. Do not glimpse either wire or line. Hasty observations. —
V. M. s.
Line on disk glimpsed at times as disk swings, but faint, diffuse,

and difficult. Wire glimpsed but difficult. — c. o. l.
Angular width : disk, 19/6 ; lines, 0/^89.
1450 ft. Certainly glimpsed wire. Cannot certainly glimpse line. I
get glimpses of a fictitious as well as what I take to be a
real line. It is (if glimpsed) illy defined. — v. m. s.
Angular width : disk, 19' ; lines, o.''86.



Hosted by



Google



278 MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

1500 ft. Wire at this station extremely difficult. Not certain that I
glimpse it. Line on disk seen at times, but now faint and
diffuse. Shadow of tree on part of disk. — c. o. l.
Angular width : disk, 18. '3 ; lines, o.''83.
1600 ft. Wire not certainly glimpsed : imaginary wires seem about
equally strong. Shadow of tree on disk, obscuring line. —
c. o. L.
Angular width : disk, I7.'2 ; lines, o."73.

SECOND SERIES

Same disk, and wire for comparison, as used in the first
series of these observations.
Station.

100 ft. Wire and line on disk very distinct and clear cut. — c. o. l.
200 ft. 300 ft. station remarks hold. — v. M. s. (Observations made
going towards wire and disk.)
About the same as at 100 ft. station. Line the stronger. —
c. o. L.
300 ft. 400 ft. station remarks hold. — v. m. s.

Well defined at first glance — both wire and line on disk, line
perhaps the stronger, — c. o. l.
400 ft. Line easier than wire and more definite. (Due to back-
grounds ?) — V. M. s.
Distinct and well seen at first glance. (Line appears the
stronger). — c. o. l.
500 ft. Line more definite than wire. (Some telephone wires pass
before the disk ; these are easier and more definite than
wire.) — V. M. s.
Distinct and well seen at first glance. No appreciable difference
from 400 ft. station. — c. o. L.
600 ft. Line easier than wire, except where the latter crosses cables.
(Cables from which disk is suspended.) — v. m. s.
Wire and line on disk seen with perfect ease and distinctly,
but fainter than at 500 ft. station — seen at first glance. —
c. o. L.
700 ft. Line easier than wire. — v. M. s.
800 ft. Disk inaccessible. Wire seen. — v. M. s.

Poor station. Trees interfere with observations. — c. o. L.
900 ft. Wire and line only fairly seen. — v. m. s.

Wire quite well seen but somewhat faint and diffuse. Line on
disk glimpsed at times but difficult. Disk very bright —



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 279



illumination not the best for seeing line. Later : Line seen
quite well when the disk was swung by the wind. Faint. —
c. O.L.

1000 ft. Inaccessible. — v. m. s.

Wire glimpsed at instants. Disk obscured by trees. — c. o. L,

1 100 ft. Line well glimpsed : wire doubtfully. — v. m. s.

Wire glimpsed, but faint and diffuse and not visible all the
time. Line on disk distinctly seen when disk swings around
for favorable illumination. — c. o. l.

1200 ft. Glimpse wire rather doubtful. Line and wire glimpsed some-
what more certainly than at 1300 ft. station. — v. M. s.
Wire very difficult — ghmpsed but faint and diffuse. Line on
disk glimpsed but faint. — c. o. l.

1300 ft. See some markings on disk as before, i,e.y in second and fourth
quadrant. Perhaps glimpse wire. Line more definitely
glimpsed. — v. m. s.
Wire very difficult — glimpsed at intervals — diffiise and some-
what uncertain. Line on disk also very difficult most of the
time ; very faint and diifuse. As disk swings from wind it
is distinctly glimpsed at times. — c. o. l.

1400 ft. Glimpse line and have occasional glimpses of fictitious markings
(on disk) . I once imagined I glimpsed wire. There is a
dark spot in second quadrant, and glimpse line from 0° to
290°. — V. M. s.
Cannot certainly say that I glimpse wire — now of about same
strength as imaginary wires. Line on disk fairly well
glimpsed at times, as disk swings, but faint and diffuse. —

C. O. L.

1500 ft. Cannot see wire. Suspect it and line on disk at times, but
uncertain. — c. o. l.

Canals of Mars

At the opposition of 1907, 264 canals were seen and
drawn by the writer; a large number also by Mr. C. O.
Lampland ; and many, including some new ones, by Mr.
E. C. Slipher in South America, not yet catalogued and
mapped.



Hosted by



Google



28o MARS AS THE ABODE OF LIFE

Of the 264 canals mapped, 85 were new. Owing to the
tilt of the axis and to the Martian season of the year, these
were mostly not only in the southern hemisphere but in the
more southern part of it. The position of the new canals
was as follows : —

i) 32 in the light regions.

2) 34 in the dark regions or in those of intermediate tints.

3) 12 in or through the southern * islands.'

4) __7 at the edges of dark regions.

85 in all.

Added to those already recorded these make : —

336 4- 32 = 368 in the light regions. (i

loi + 53 = i^ in the dark ones. (2, 3, 4

522 in all.

Of the canals seen 28 were double or about ^ of the whole
number showing. Those not hitherto so seen were the

Cyclops II

Cambyses (?)

Ambrosia

Glaucus

Bias
making 56 doubles in all.

18

Position of the Axis of Mars

WHICH DETERMINES THE SEASONS ON THE PLANET

The position of the pole of Mars, determined by Lowell
in 1905 from a synthesis of his own observations on the
polar caps and of previous ones of the same, was : —

R.A. 3i7-°S Dec. 54.^5



Hosted by



Google



NOTES 281

This gave for the tilt of the Martian equator to the Martian
ecliptic

23° 59'.

This position of the axis of Mars was adopted by the British
Nautical Almanac. The same is to be incorporated in the
American Ephemeris.

In 1907 two very full series of observations on the south
cap were obtained at Flagstaff which confirmed the several
previous series taken there, suggesting that still greater
weight should be given them in the synthesis than had
previously been assigned. The resulting inclination of the
Martian equator upon the Martian ecliptic is

23'' 13'.



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



» V.,,;: ' .: V;||| |^pr«^^^



'#3M», .i;||:; '"t%|j,^,



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



INDEX



Aeriaj 209.
Air, 12.

thinning of, no bar to a species, 96,
97.

on mountain tops, 98.

of Mars, 139, 186.

density at Martian surface, Notes
239-240.
Albedo,

of Mars, 78, 84.

of Venus, 78.

of each planet, 84, Notes 249.

of Earth, Notes 247.
Amphibia, 53.
Animal life,

on peaks, 103.

dependent on temperature, 103.
Antarctic zones, 183.
Aqueducts of Carthage, 128.
Arabia, 125.

Arctic zones of Mars, 183.
Areolas of Mars, 151.
Arequipa, 153.
Arethusa LuctiSy 196.
Artificiality,

of Martian markings, 195.

of canals, 211.
Ascraeiis Luctis^ 157.
Asia, deserts of, 125.
Asteroids,

later found less evident than earlier,

Astronomy,

gravitational, i.

physical, i.
Atmosphere,

of Mars, 77, Notes 238.

shown by cloud, 78.

evidence from albedo, 78.

proved by limblight, 79.

by changes in siurface features, 80.

polar caps first to betray, 80.

circulation of, 130.

amount of. Notes 238.



Axial tilt,

of Earth, 71, Notes 266.

of Mars, 77, Notes 266.
Axis of Mars, Notes 280.

Beer, 81.

Blondet, M., 48, Notes 232.

Blue band,

surrounding polar caps of Mars, 81-82.
Blue-green areas of Mars, 104-106, 133,

164.
Bolometer,

use in surface temperature deter-
mination, 85.
Boltzmann, 86.

Caenozoic time, 45.
Cambrian era, 45.
Campbell, 138.
Canals,

discovery of, 146.

geometric look of, 147.

as straight lines, 148.

breadth of, 149, 160.

length of, 149.

in dark regions, 152-153.

rendezvous at special points, 152.

photographed, 154.

superposed over main features, 155.

double, 159-167, 190.

direction of, 164-165.

subject to change, 167.

research, new method of, 168.

career of, 171.

cartouches of, 172-175, Notes 249.

quickening according to latitude, 175.

quickening starts at polar caps, 176.

vegetation explains behavior, 177.

advent of water down "the, 181.

not cracks, 191.

not rivers, 191.

nerve and body, 210.

artificiality, 211.

number of. Notes 279-280.



283



Hosted by



Google



284



INDEX



Carbon dioxide,

amount in atmosphere in paleozoic
times, 51.

a bar to the passage of heat, 51.

on Mars, 104, 107.

influence on climate. Notes 236-237.

effect of, on planets. Notes 27,^^.
Carboniferous periods, 45, 53.

heat of, 47-48.

little light in, 47-48.
Carets of Mars, 212.
Carthage,

aqueducts of, 128.

desert character now, 129.
Cartouches, of canals, 172-175, Notes

249.
Casius, wedge of, 133.
Ceraunius, 173, 176.
Chagos Archipelago, 121.
Chalcedony,

tree trunks changed to, 127.
Challenger expedition, 42, 59, 62-63.
Chart,

bathymetric, t,^'
Chemical afiinity,

relation to plants, 36.

relation to stones, 37.

life a manifestation of, 37.
Clouds,

on Mars, 22, 52, 77-78, 85-86.

on Earth, 85.
Conifers, 70.
Continents of Mars, 146.
Coral reefs,

found only in warm seas, 46.

in past ages, 71.
Cowper, 17.

Cretaceous period, 64, 71.
Croll, 1 1 2-1 13, Notes 265.
Crommelin, Notes 262.
Crova, Notes 244.
Crusts of planet,

formed over molten mass, 13-14.

crinkling of, result of cooling, 14-15.

crinkling of, where most pronounced,

15-
knowledge of, derived from Earth,

Moon, Mars, 14, 16.
Crustacea, 60.
Cryptogams, 47, 70.
Cycads, 70-71.

Dana, Professor, 119,
Darwin, Sir George, 26.



Day,

length of Martian, 77.
Dead stage,

of planetary career, 12.

Moon and larger satellites in, 12.
Density,

Lapiacian law of, 24,

meteoric, 28,

of the Earth, 14.

of the Earth's surface rocks, 14.
Desert-belts,

girdling Earth, 124, 129.

on Mars, 131.
Deserts,

on Earth, 124.

on Mars, 134,
Devonian era,

plants found in, 46.
Djihoun, 161, 203.
Douglass, A. E., 153, 200.
Dust storms on Mars, 22, 89, Notes
256-265.

Earth, planetary career of, 13.
Eccentricity,

of Earth's orbit. Notes 266.

of Mars' orbit, Notes 266.
Elements,

existing if Vvater be present, 39-40.
Elysium, 160.
Eocene period, 72.
Eumenides-Orcus, 149, 151, 156.
Euphrates, 213, Notes 256.
Europe,

gain of land in, 120.
Evolution,

planetary, i, 3-34.

of life, 35-69.

Earth not Sun the motive force of,
52, 72.

effect of environment upon, 54.

general principle of, 69.

steps of, 108-110.

of Earth and Mars, 73, 186,

Fal, 57.
Fauna, 45, 58.
Fossils,

evidencing planetologic eras, 44-46,

70-71.

Galitzine, 86.
Ganges, 205.
Gardiner, Stanley, 121.



Hosted by



Google



INDEX



285



Generation, spontaneous, 37, 67.
Geology, a part of planetology, 13.
Glaciation,

Mars not suffering from wholesale, 89.
Gravity, on Mars, 210, Notes 232.
Gymnosperms, 70.

Habitability of Mars, 96-97.
Habitat, of animals, 129.
Habitation,

of Mars, 215.

destined to pass away, 216.
Haeckel, 39.
Heat,

substances vary with, 8.

radiation of, in planetary evolution,
9-10, 25.

of paleozoic times excessive, 48-51.

acquired by the Moon, Notes 230.

of Martian surface. Notes 231.

received by Earth and Mars, Notes
250.

retained by Earth and Mars, Notes

251-255-
Heat of condensation,

dependent on mass, 7-8, 23.
for homogeneous body, 7-8, 24.
for heterogeneous body, 8, 24.
evaluated for Earth and Moon sup-
posing origin the same, 24-25.
compared for Earth and Mars, 27.
developed by planetary contraction.
Notes 225-229.
Hibernation, 90, 96.
Himalaya,

snow line and timber line on, 99.
Huygens, r, 138.

Icarii Lttci, 212.
Ice-age,

Mars on the cause of, Notes 265.
Illumination, slant, 17.

heights of mountains measured by, 18.
Indo-Pacific, coral-reef region, 121.
Isoflors in Arizona, 100.

Janssen, 138.
Jurassic period, 71.

Lampland, CO., 154-155, Notes 264,

272, 276-279.
Landscape, the result of cooling, 14.
Langley, 85, 88, Notes 241.
Laplace, i, 24.



Lapparent, de, 48, 68, Notes 233.
Life,

origin of, 35.

an inevitable phase of planetary
evolution, 37, 66.

a manifestation of chemical affinity,

37, 38.

water essential to, 39.

outgrows the sea, 53, 55, 68.

adaptability of, 56, 96, 97.

deep-sea, 57-64.

cosmic character of, 64.

did not reach Earth from without, 66.

the outcome of planetary cooling, 66.

mode of manifestation, 107.

types of, 142.

chemical constituents of, 179.
Limblight,

proves existence of atmosphere on
Mars, 79.
Little Colorado, 127.
London, size of, 214.
Lower Silurian era,

wings of insects found in, 46.
Lucus PhoeniciSj 161.

Madler, 81.

Man, first appearance of, 68.

Mare Acidaliumj 133.

Mare Icariunij 158.

Mass, 15, 16, 31, 39.

the fundamental factor of planetary
evolution, 9.

comparative, of Earth, Moon, Mars,
16.
Maxwell, Clerk, 139.
May-flies, of Carboniferous era, 47.
Mercury, markings of, 192-193.

rotary retardation of, 207.
Merriam, Dr., 90, 95, 99.
Mesozoic time, 45, 71.
Metamorphic rocks, 12.

age of, 12.

akin to furnace slag, 13, 14.
Meteoric swarms,

gravitational heat of, 7, 8, 67.
Meteorites, 4, 34.

constitution of, 4, 6.

size of, 4.

velocity of, 4, 5, Notes 220-225.

fused by friction with atmosphere, 4.

worship of, 4, 5.

relation to solar system, 4-6.

oldest bits of matter, 5.



Hosted by



Google



286



INDEX



Meteorites — Continued.

occluded gases in, 6.

density of, 28.

members of solar system, Notes 225.
Michelson, Notes 272.
Mind,

beings revealed by, no.

evidence of, 143-144.

effect on planetary markings, 215.
Miocene period, 68, 72.

edible plants and plant eaters in, 68.
Molecule, organic, 35-36,

six elements of the, 37-38.

relation of atoms to, producing vital
actions, 37.
Molten stage, 12.

Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, and Jupiter
in, 12.
Moment of momentum,

of solar system, 3, Notes 219.

of Alpha Centauri, Notes 220.
Mountains,

proportional to mass of planet, 15.

none on Mars, 16, 19, 20-22.

heights measured by slant illumina-
tion, 18.

on Moon, 19, 23, 27, Notes 229-230.
Mt. Whitney,

bolometer investigations at, Notes
242,
Miiller, 84.

Newton, 1.

Nilokeras, 161.

Nitrogen, on Mars, 104, 107.

connection with life, 179.
North America, gain of land in, 119.
Novae,

an analogue of prehistoric cataclysms,
6.

Oases,

first seen, 157.

form, demonstration of function, 157,

195-

shape of, 197.

behavior of, 197.

probable meaning of, 213-214.
Oblateness of Mars, 199-
Obliquity of Martian ecliptic. Notes 281.
Oceans, 12.

origin of, 28.

distribution of, on Earth and Mars,
28-30.



Oceans, relative size on different
planets, 30-32.
Moon more profusely endowed with,

basins of, unchanged, 32-34.

basins of, on Mars, 132.

character of bottoms of, t,^, 34.

cooling of, occasioned development of
higher forms of life, 43.

of Earth, disappearing, 118.

on Earth, 141.

absent on Mars, 112, 187.
Oligocene period, 72.
Orbit,

eccentricity of Earth's, Notes 266.

eccentricity of Mars', Notes 266.
Organisms,

evolution of, 205.
Origin of Moon, 25.

Darwinian theory of, 26.

explained by heat investigation, 25-27.
Oxygen,

the chief factor in all organisms, ^8.

one-half the substance of the Earth's
surface, 38.

on Mars, 104, 107, 137.

connection with life, 179.

Paleozoic time, 45.
light less and heat more than now,

48, SI-
light and heat of, not explained by

Sun, 49-50.
Earth itself responsible for heat of,
50, 52-
Palestine, 129,
Permean period, 54.
Petrified forests of Arizona, 125, 126.
Phison, 158, 213, Notes 256.
Phcenix Lake, 149.
Pickering, W. H., 153, 157.
Pigments, put on by the Sun, 72.
Planet,

life history of, dependent on size, ir.
internal heat of, its initial motive

power, 13.
cooling the mode by which its energy
worked, 9-10, 13, 28.
Planetology,

the connecting link between nebular
hypotheses and the Darwinian
theory, 2.
six eras of, 11 -12.
geologic part of, 13-14.



Hosted by



Google



INDEX



287



Plant life.

Carboniferous, 46-48, 51.

light a necessity to, 58.

not existent in deep seas, 63.

entrance of plant eaters with, 68.
Plateau,

temperature of, as compared with
peaks, 99.

Pliocene period, 72.
Polar caps,

of Mars, 80, 204.

constitution of, 81-82.

not solid carbonic acid, 81-82.

of Earth, ourselves dwellers in, 90.

diminish, 114.

snows of, 180.

canals from, 197.

water of, 204.

Notes, 268.
Portus Sigaeus, 158.
Precipitation,

of snow. Notes 269-280.
Pressure,

substances vary with, 8.
Projections,

on Martian terminator, 20.

not indicative of mountains, 21.

due to dust clouds, 22.
PropontiSf 133.
ProtonUus, 158.
Protoplasm,

first possible with formation of water,

35.

nine- tenths water, 41.

first existed in water at a high tem-
perature, 42.

formed, the moment cooling per-
mitted, 67.
Psehoas Luctcs, 158.

Radiant energy,

reflection of, from atmosphere and
surface of planet, 83-84.
Rainfall,

on Earth, 130.
Reptiles, advent of, 54.
Rills, of the Moon, 191.
• Rotation of Mars, 75-76.
Roughness,

relative, of Earth, Moon, Mars, 16.

exception to theoretic order, 23.

Sabaeus Sinus, 212.
Sahara, the, 125.



San Francisco Peaks, 90, 127.

zones of vegetation on, 93-94.

animal life on, 95-97.

life on, 103.
Sarasin, 57.
Schiaparelli, 104, 146, 147, 151, 152,

170.
Sea-bottoms,

on Earth, 118.

on Mars, 118.
Sea-level, lowering of, 121.
Seas,

the earliest home of mundane life,
41-42, 68.

sedimentary formations dependent on,
43-44-

inland, 121.

drying up of, 123.
Seasons,

absence of, when Earth was screened
from Sun, 51.

advent registered in changed vegeta-
tion, 71-72.

long on Mars, 78.

two, of Martian growth, 183.

relative length of, determined, 113.
Seaweeds, 45.
Sedimentary formations,

fourth evolutionary stage, 12, 43,

dependent on seas, 43, 44.
Silicon, ^S.
Silurian era, 45.

Sky, light of, by day. Notes 246.
Sladen expedition, 121.
Slipher, E. C, Notes 279.
Slipher, V. M., 138, Notes 256, 276.
Slope exposure, 102.
Snow,

of polar caps, 180.

precipitation of. Notes 269-270.
Snow-fall,

in Alaska, 141.

on Mars, 141.
Solar constant. Notes 242.
Solar system,

catastrophic origin of, 3.

moment of momentum of, 3, Notes 219.

meteoric constitution of, 5.

meteorites, members of. Notes 225.
Species,

supplanting of others by one, 206.

unification of, 207.
Spectroscope, the, 137.
Spectrum, energy of. Notes 242.



Hosted by



Google



288



INDEX



Stefan, 86.

Struggle for existence, 204-205.

Struve, Hermann, 200.

Summer,

the life season, 90, 95, 96.

investigation on, by Dr. Merriam,
90-91, 95.

bearing upon the habitability of Mars,
96.
Sun,

paleozoic, 49, Notes 232-235.

causes seasons, 50-

not the source of Earth's early heat,

50-

becomes dominant, 70.

first let in by Earth's cooling, 70.
Sun stage, the, 12.
Surface features of Mars visible, 73.

permanent in place, 77.

changes in, 80.

smoother than Earth's, 186-187.
Surface heat,

of Moon, 87, ^S.

of Mars, 89.

their air compatible with great, 87.
Surface of equilibrium, 201.

Teisserenc de Bort, Notes 247.
Telluric lines in spectrum, 137.
Temperature,

of Mars, 89.

due to the Sun, 83.

new determination of, 83-86.

in summer and winter, 87.

mean, Notes 240-255.

within which life can exist, 39, 90.
Terraqueous stage, 12.

Earth in, 12, 13.
Terrestrial stage, 12; Mars in, 12.
Tertiary era, 71.

Thirst, planetary mode of death, 207.
Tibetan table-lands,

effect on climate, 99.
Tidal effects. Notes 270.
Tokio, size of, 214.
Trees, deciduous,

first appearance of, 71.
Triassic period,

(new red sandstone), 70.
Trilobites, 45.
Trivium Charontis, 149.
Tropic of Cancer, 125.
Tropic of Capricorn, 125.



Twilight,

short on Mars,



78.



Upper Silurian era,
insects found in, 46.

Variation, spontaneous,

the motive principle of life, 53.

each planet sets a different stage for.
64-65-
Vegetal life,

effect of plateaux upon, 99, 102.

blue-green and ochre color suggest
it, 106,

on peaks, 103.
Vegetal quickening, 177,
Vegetation,

luxuriance of, in paleozoic times, 51.

explains behavior of canals, 177.

sprouting time, on Earth, 180.

speed of, 181.

spread of, 181.

sprouting time on Mars, 182,
Venus, 178.

markings on, 192-193.

rotary retardation of, 207,

visibility of fine lines, Notes 269-279.
Vernal quickening, 178.
Very, Professor, 87, 88, Notes 242, 243.
Vogel, 138.
Volcanic phenomena,

proportional to mass of planet, 16.

occur where crust is most permeable,
16.

Water,

in proportion to mass of planet, 31.

essential to life, 39.

boiling points of, on Earth and Mars,
39, Notes 231-232.

specific heat of, 51.

relative amounts on Earth and Mars,
141.

the answer to the riddle, 198-203.

of polar caps, 204,

loss of supply, 208.
Water-vapor,

in the air of Mars, 103, 135, 139.

effect on spectrum. Notes 248.

Year, length of Martian, 78.
Zones, area of, 163.



Hosted by



Google



MARS AND ITS CANALS

By PERCIVAL LOWELL

Director of the Observatory at Flagstaff", Arizona; Non-Resident Professor of Astronomy at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences; Membre de la Soci^td Astronomique de France; Member of the Astronomical
and Astro-Physical Society of America; Mitglied der Astronomische Gesellschaft; Membre
de la Society Beige d' Astronomic ; Honorary Member of the Socied.ad Astronomica dc
Mexico; Janssen Medalist of the Soci^t^ Astronomique de France, 1904, for Researches on
Mars; etc., etc.

Cloth ^ 8vOy illustrated f -$2,^0 net; by mail, $2,y^

" The question whether Mars is inhabited has not been taken up very seriously by
the great body of astronomers. . . . The latest, and we are inclined to think the fullest
and best, contribution to its solution is this remarkable volume, written in a very clear
style, free from scientific technicalities, and illustrated by maps and diagrams, so that
the non-expert layman can understand it. , . . Mr. Lowell's investigattons, coupled
with those of other earlier investigators, indicate that the inhabitants of Mars are
carrying on a system of irrigation for agricultural purposes on an immeasurably larger
scale than has ever been dreamed of on our planet, that they possess a high degree of
agricultural and mechanical intelligence, and a degree of moral development so far in
advance of any we have yet reached that in all probability war is among them wholly
unknown." — Outlook,

" The book makes fascinating reading, and is intended for the average man of
intelligence and scientific curiosity. It represents mature reflection, patient investiga-
tion and observation, and eleven years* additional work and verification. ... It is
the work of a scientist who has found inspiration and joy in his work ; it is full of
enthusiasm, but the enthusiasm is not allowed to influence unduly a single conclusion.
. . . The book is full of quotable sayings and delightful things. . . . We have here
science, reality, that is infinitely stranger and more thrilling than the most imaginative
fiction." — Chicago Evening Post.

" Mr. Lowell's book embodies such a wealth of observation and reasoning that it is
not possible to do it justice within the space of the present review. How widely soever
one may dissent from his conclusions, one must concede that among all the observers
of the planet, he easily takes first place, both with respect to the favorable conditions
under which he has worked, the energy and enthusiasm which he has displayed, and
the care he has taken to avoid every source of error. The most adverse critic cannot
but admire the tireless industry with which the planet has been scanned night after
night, every noteworthy appearance regarded, and the mass of facts thus acquired
jnoulded into a consistent whole. . . . There is no heavenly body, except the sun, in
which so many complex and variable phenomena have been found as Mr. Lowell has
found in Mars, and no work upon the physical constitution of a heavenly body has
surpassed his in the quantity and ingenuity of its reasoning." — N. Y. Evening Post.

"It seems impossible that Mr. Lowell can raise another girder more grandly
impressive and expressive of the whole fabric, or take another step in his scientific
syllogism that will hold us any tighter in his logic. He has practically reached already
his ' Q. E. D.' The thing is done, apparently, except for filling in the detail. But
with his racy, epigrammatic brilliancy of style, his delicate, quiet humor, his daring
scientific imagination — all held in check by instinctive modesty of good breeding,
gayly throwing to the winds all professional airs and mere rhetorical bounce — his
course will be no doubt as charming to the end as it has been steadily illuminating
even for the illuminati." — Boston Transcript.



PUBLISHED BY

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

64-66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YOEK



Hosted by



Qoo^z



A COMPENDIUM OF SPHERICAL ASTRONOMY

With its applications to the determination and reduction of positions of the fixed stars

By SIMON NEWCOMB

Cloth 8vo $3.00 net



CONTHNXS

PART I. PRELIMINARY SUBJECTS

Chapter I. Introductory. Notes and References.

Chapter II. Differences, Interpolation, and Development. Notes
AND References.

Chapter III. The Method of Least Squares. Section I. Mean Values of
Quantities. II. Determination of Probable Errors. III. Equations of Condi-
tion. Notes and References.

PART n. THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OP SPHERICAL
ASTRONOMY

Chapter IV. Spherical Coordinates. Section I . General Theory. II. Prob-
lems and Applications of the Theory of Spherical Coordinates.

Chafier V. The Measure of Time and Related Problems. Section I.
Solar and Sidereal Time. II. The General Measure of Time. III. Problems
Involving Time.

Chapter VI. Parallax and Related Subjects. Section I. Figure and
Dimensions of the Earth. II. Parallax and Semi-diameter.

Chapter VII. Aberration.

Chapter VIII. Astronomical Refraction. Section I. The Atmosphere as a
Refracting Medium. II. Elementary Exposition of Atmospheric Refraction.
III. General Investigation of Astronomical Refraction. Notes and Refer-
ences TO Refraction.

Chapter IX. Precession and Nutation. Section I. Laws of the Precessional
Motion. II. Relative Positions of the Equator and Equinox at Widely Sepa-
rated Epochs. III. Nutation. Notes and References to Precession
and Nutation.

PART m. REDUCTION AND DETERMINATION OP POSITIONS OF THE

FIXED STARS

Chapter X. Reduction of Mean Places of the Fixed Stars from one
Epoch to Another. Section I. The Proper Motions of the Stars. II. Trig-
onometric Reduction for Precession. III. Development of the Coordinates in
the Powers of the Time. Notes and References.

Chapter XI. Reduction to Apparent Place. Section I. Reduction to Terms
of the First Order. II. Rigorous Reduction for Close Polar Stars. III. Prac-
tical Methods of Reduction. IV. Construction of Tables of the Apparent Places
of Fundamental Stars. Notes and References.

Chapi'er XII. Method of Determining the Positions of Stars by Merid-
ian Observations. Section I. Method of Determining Right Ascensions.
II. The Determination of Declinations.

Chaffer XIII. Methods of Deriving the Positions and Proper Motions
of the Stars from Published Results of Observations. Section I.
Historical Review. II. Reduction of Catalogue Positions of Stars to a Homo-
geneous System. III. Methods of Combining Star Catalogues.

NOTES AND REFERENCES

List of Independent Star Catalogues.

Catalogues made at Northern Observatories.

Catalogues made at Tropical and Southern Observatories.

APPENDIX

Explanation of the Tables of the Appendix. — I. Constants and Formulae
in Frequent Use. II. Tables Relating to Time and Arguments for Star Reduc-
tions. III. Centennial Rates of the Precessional Motions. IV. Tables and
Formulae for the Trigonometric Reduction of Mean Places of Stars. V. Reduc-
tion of the Struve-Peters Precessions to the Adopted Values. VI. Conversion
of Longitude and Latitude into R. A. and Dec. VII. Refractions. VIII. Co-
efficients of Solar and Lunar Nutation. IX. Three-place Logarithms and
Trigonometrical Functions.

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, 64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google



Hosted by



Google
