Primitive Religion (Robert Harry Lowie, 1924)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/primitivereligio0000robe_v3g4). Lowie's systematic survey of religious belief among stateless peoples - the founding textbook of the anthropology of religion.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ARR 
Re 
cS ~ 2 

PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

BY THE SAME AUTHOR 

PRIMITIVE SOCIETY (5TH EDITION) 

CULTURE AND ETHNOLOGY 

PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

BY 
ROBERT H.~ALOWIE, Pu. D. 

ASSOCIATE se ak aig OF ANTHROPOLOGY, UNIVERSITY - CALIFORNIA ; 
DITOR OF THE American Anthro opologis 

( 

al 

BONI AND LIVERIGHT 
PUBLISHERS NEW YORK 
1924 

Copyright, 1924, by 
Bonr AnD Livericut, Inc. 

All Rights Reserved 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

PREFACE 

Tuts work does not purport to be a handbook of either the 
theories broached on the subject of primitive religion or of the 
ethnographic data described in hundreds of accessible mono- 
graphs. My purpose is to provide an introduction to further 
study in which other than the traditional topics shall assume a 
place of honor. On the other hand I have taken pains to re- 
duce to a minimum the discussion of theories that have been 
more than amply treated by previous writers. 

The mode of approach will be found to differ fundamentally 
from that of my book on Primitive Society. The reason lies in 
the quite different status of the two subjects at the present 
time. In the field of primitive sociology it seemed desirable to 
marshal the evidence against the indefensible neglect of histori- 
cal considerations that persists in some quarters. In the study 
of comparative religion it is the psychological point of view that 
requires emphasis; and however important history may be for 
an elucidation of psychology, its part is ancillary. By con- 
sistently stressing the psychological aspects of primitive religion 
I hope to have contributed something to a closer alliance of 
two sister sciences that too frequently have pursued their 
paths in mutual neglect. 

Several friends have been good enough to read or listen to 
portions of the book—above all, Dr. Leslie Spier and Mrs. 
Erna Gunther Spier of the University of Washington; Pro- 
fessors A. L. Kroeber and Erasmo Buceta of the University 
of California; Mr. E. W. Gifford of the same institution ; 
and my friends Mr. Donald B. Clark and Dr. Jaime de An- 
gulo y Mayo. I take this opportunity to thank them for their en- 
couragement and their comments. To Mr. Gifford I am also in- 

Vi 

40948 

vi PREFACE 

debted for the orthography of proper names in Mariner’s ac- 
count, which is brought into accord with approved Tongan 
usage and thus comes closer to phonetic spelling. 

My manuscript was completed when I received a copy of 
Father Wilhelm Koppers’s book on the Fuegians. It was no 
longer possible to utilize it as I should otherwise have done, 
but I took pains to incorporate some of the interesting data 
presented there and to include the work in my bibliography. 
On the other hand, a paper on some basic religious concepts by 
Dr. John R. Swanton, which is to appear in a forthcoming issue 
of the American Anthropologist, reached me too late to be used 
in any way, so that I must content myself with this meager 
reference. 

Rosert H, Lowi. 
BERKELEY, CAL., 
May, 1924. 

CONTENTS 

PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION 

Paki VesYNTMETIC SKETCHES 

CHAPTER 
I Crow REticiIon . 

fliEKOI RELIGION . 
IIl BuxKava RELIGION 
IV PotynesiaAn RELIGION 

PART II: CRITIQUE OF THEORIES 

V ANIMISM 
VI Maacric 
VII COoLLECTIVISM 

PAK ail HISTORICAL AND PSYGHO- 
LOGICAL ASPECTS 

VIII HustortcaL SCHEMES AND REGIONAL CHARAC- 
TERIZATION . ‘ 

IX History AND PsyCHOLOGY 

X WoMAN AND RELIGION 

XI InpivipuaL VARIABILITY . 

XII ReLicion AND ART . 
XIII AssocraTion 
XIV CoNncLusIoNn 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

INDEX . 
vii 

PAGE 

136 
153 

167 
185 
205 
221 
259 
277 
227 
331 
343 

PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

INTRODUCTION 

A work on “Primitive Religion” may well begin with a 
definition of the terms in its title, for neither unfortunately 
is unambiguous. The word “primitive” by its etymology 
suggests “primeval,” but when the anthropologist speaks de- 
scriptively of “primitive peoples’ he means no more—at 
least, he has no right to mean more—than peoples of a rela- 
tively simple culture; or, to be more specific, the illiterate 
peoples of the world. To be sure, it is impossible to sup- 
press the inference that what is shared by the illiterate 
peoples of rudest culture in contrast to those possessing a 
more complex civilization dates back to a relatively great 
antiquity; but this 7s an inference, not an immediate datum 
of experience. Moreover, it is certain that, no matter how 
simple a particular culture may be, it has had a long history. 
Human civilization may be roughly said to be 100,000 years 
old. It is inconceivable that any distinct subdivision of man- 
kind, even if separated from others for only one-tenth of 
that immense span of time, should have remained in an abso- 
lutely static condition. There are two cogent reasons to the 
contrary. First, isolation has never been more than relative 
when very great periods are considered. In other words, in- 
fluences from without have everywhere produced some 
changes in custom, belief, and the material arts of life. Sec- 
ondly, such alterations occur, though more slowly, even in 
the absence of extraneous stimulation because of the social 

1x 

x INTRODUCTION 

results of individual variation, that is, of innovations suc- 
cessfully impressed on each generation by some able individ- 
uals of sufficiently powerful personality. Both determinants 
of change can be detected in so isolated and so simple a peo- 
ple as the Andaman Islanders of the Bay of Bengal. Their 
remoteness did not prevent them from borrowing the device 
of the outrigger canoe, presumably from some Malaysian 
tribe; and the local variations found within their islands, 
both in language and social heritage, prove the occurrence of 
novel ideas even in a population ignorant of metals and every 
form of husbandry, nay, lacking even the dog and the art of 
fire-making. In other words, the Andamanese culture of 
fifty years ago is not the culture of their ancestors five hun- 
dred years ago, or in still earlier periods; and, so far as di- 
rect observation goes, we cannot select any one feature of 
their social life as of hoary antiquity. “Primitive,” then, 
for our purposes shall be devoid of chronological import. 

It is far more difficult to explain what shall be designated 
by the word “religion.”” Of course, a formal definition of 
religion would be as futile at the outset as a corresponding 
definition of consciousness in a textbook of psychology, or 
of electricity in a treatise on physics. The rich content of 
these comprehensive concepts can be appreciated only after a 
survey of the relevant data is completed. Yet some circum- 
scription of what is to be included is not only possible but 
necessary, and it will be convenient to begin by illustrating 
the wrong approach to a definition by two extreme instances 
gleaned from Fielding’s novels. Says Parson Thwackum 
in Tom Jones, 

When I mention religion, I mean the Christian religion; and 
not only the Christian religion but the Protestant religion ; and 
not only the Protestant religion, but the Church of England. 

INTRODUCTION xi 

And Parson Adams, in Joseph Andrews, is equally ex- 
plicit : 

The first care I always take is of a boy’s morals; I had rather 
he should be a blockhead than an atheist or a Presbyterian. 

Why do utterances such as these strike us as ineffably 
parochial? From one angle it might seem that a man has 
the right to define his terms as he will, provided only he ad- 
here to the usage once established; and if to embrace the 
Anglican Church means salvation, while Calvinism spells 
perdition, then from that particular point of view there is 
nothing to choose between being a Presbyterian and being 
an atheist. This position is indeed inexpugnable so long as 
it is avowedly no more than a personal evaluation; it is 
shattered as soon as it pretends to give an objective classifi- 
cation of the pertinent data. In this second role it recalls 
that comical classification of some aboriginal language by 
which male adult members of the tribe are of one gender, 
while all other persons are lumped in a vast complementary 
category together with animals, plants, and objects. We re- 
quire no proof that a boy or a woman or a foreigner is nearer 
to a tribesman than to a tree or a rock; and so we see at 
once that it is arbitrary to dichotomize the religious universe 
after the manner of Fielding’s parsons, that such division 
wrests the phenomena out of their true context and does 
violence to their true inwardness. 

But when once committed to this moderately tolerant at- 
titude, we are still without guidance as to where the line 
shall be drawn. Working our way backwards from a par- 
ticular branch of Christianity, we are still able to recognize 
some kinship between our faith and that of other monothe- 
istic creeds. When we come to Buddhism, with its theoreti- 
cal atheism, many of us will be inclined to deny that any 

xii INTRODUCTION 

doctrine dispensing with the notion of a personal deity can 
fairly be brought under the same heading with familiar re- 
ligions. Yet William James, our greatest psychologist, has 
espoused the view that Buddhism, like Emersonian transcen- 
dentalism, makes to the individual votary an appeal and 
evokes a response “in fact indistinguishable from, and in 
many respects identical with, the best Christian appeal and 
response.” * James may conceivably err in this particular 
judgment, but anthropologically speaking there can be no 
doubt of the correctness of his test: if Buddhism satisfies 
that part of the Buddhist’s nature which corresponds to the 
devout Christian’s longing for acceptance by the deity, then 
it is a veritable religion, just as polygyny is anthropologi- 
cally no less a form of marriage than monogamy, and an 
oral tradition must be reckoned, despite etymology, a speci- 
men of literature. What we should determine is wherein 
such satisfaction essentially lies. Confronted with beliefs 
and practices divorced from an organized priesthood, lack- 
ing congregational worship and a standardized cosmogony, 
we must ask not whether this or that objective feature shall 
be counted as essential but whether the subjective condition 
of the believers and worshipers corresponds to that of an 
unequivocally religious frame of mind. 

That the mere presence of some objective feature is wholly 
irrelevant may be illustrated by citing the opening para- 
graphs of Leibniz’s Metaphysics: 

The conception of God which is the most common and the 
most full of meaning is expressed well enough in the words: 
God is an absolutely perfect being. The implications, however, 
of these words fail to receive sufficient consideration. For in- 
stance, there are many different kinds of perfection, all of 
which God possesses, and each one of them pertains to him in 
the highest degree. 

INTRODUCTION Xiii 

We must also know what perfection is. One thing which 
can surely be affirmed about it is that those forms or natures 
which are not susceptible of it to the highest degree, say the 
nature of numbers or of figures, do not permit of perfection. 
This is because the number which is the greatest of all (that 
is, the sum of all the numbers), and likewise the greatest of all 
figures, imply contradictions. The greatest knowledge, how- 
ever, and omnipotence contain no impossibility. Consequently, 
power and knowledge do admit of perfection, and in so far as 
they pertain to God they have no limits. 

Whence it follows that God, who possesses supreme and in- 
finite wisdom, acts in the most perfect manner not only meta- 
physically, but also from the moral standpoint. And with re- 
spect to ourselves it can be said that the more we are enlightened 
and informed in regard to the works of God the more will we 
be disposed to find them excellent and conforming entirely to 
that which we might desire. 

Is this passage an expression of religious sentiment? Of 
course it is in thorough harmony with traditional religion, 
yet it belongs to a different compartment. It shares with 
monotheistic religion its subject-matter as an artist and a 
scientist may share a bit of landscape, the one for depiction, 
the other for a study of the flora. In Leibniz the religious 
flavor is singularly absent, because his abstract propositions 
leave the religious consciousness cold. Whatever disagree- 
ment may exist on the subject, the dominance of the emo- 
tional side of consciousness in religion is universally ac- 
cepted, and where that phase of mental life is in relative 
abeyance religion must be considered wanting. 

It is the insufficient consideration given to the emotional 
factor of religion that makes it necessary to qualify and re- 
vise the views enunciated by the greatest of comparative 
students in this field. When, in 1871, Edward B. Tylor pub- 
lished the first edition of his Primitive Culture, he was above 

XIV INTRODUCTION 

all interested in the problem of evolution. Darwin’s Origin 
of Species had begun to stimulate historical thinking in 
other than biological lines, and the investigator of culture 
naturally sought to parallel the paleontologist’s and embryolo- 
gist’s record by corresponding sequences in industrial arts, 
social organization and belief. As to the last-mentioned 
branch of culture, it was clear that if evolution were ac- 
cepted at all there must have been some stage in the develop- 
ment of man, whether corresponding to a human or pre- 
human level, at which religion had not yet evolved. Then 
there inevitably arose the query, whether that stage was 
represented by any people still living. It was this prob- 
lem, among others, that Tylor set out to solve. But in 
order to solve it he was obliged to frame a “minimum def- 
inition” of religion. Rejecting as too exclusive, as express- 
ing rather special developments than the basic nature of re- 
ligion, various current definitions, he found its essence to 
lie in animism, that is, in “the belief in Spiritual Beings” ; 
and because such a belief had been reported from all ade- 
quately described tribes on the face of the globe, Tylor in- 
ferred the universality of religion.? 

What more recent scholars reject is not this conclusion it- 
self, which stands practically unchallenged, but its motiva- 
tion. In Tylor’s discussion the belief in spiritual beings, 
that is, religion in his sense, is made to arise in response to 
an intellectual need,—the desire of an explanation for the 
physiological phenomena of life, sleep, dream, and death. 
This rationalistic bias appears clearly from the very phrases 
used in referring to primitive animism, which is again and 
again alluded to as a philosophy, a doctrine, “the theory of 
dreams,” “a perfectly rational and intelligible product of 
early science,” “the theory of souls.”* It is conceivable 
that the craving for a causal explanation might lead to the 

INTRODUCTION XV 

notion of spirits as suggested by Tylor without the slight- 
est consequent or associated emotional reaction essential to 
religion; indeed, not a few examples might be cited of 
spiritual beings postulated by primitive tribes for, so far 
as one can see, an exclusive satisfaction of their metaphysi- 
cal demands. 

In this way, then, Tylor’s formulation is not exacting 
enough, for it omits an essential determinant of the phe- 
nomenon to be defined. Yet in another sense, meager as it 
may appear at first sight, it demands more than is required. 
For we have already seen that even a system of belief de- 
void of animistic conceptions, like Buddhism, may function 
as the psychological equivalent of Christianity or any other 
of the faiths of Western civilization. What, then, is the 
bond that unites beliefs which on the surface are so di- 
vergent? The essentially correct answer seems to me to 
have been given by Dr. R. R. Marett and Dr. N. Séder- 
blom, the Archbishop of Upsala, and I will try to set forth 
in a few words the most significant points involved. In 
every society, no matter how simple it may be, there is a 
spontaneous division of the sphere of experience into the 
ordinary and the extraordinary. Some writers, notably 
Lévy-Bruhl, impressed with the fantastic theoretical no- 
tions obtaining among unlettered peoples in regard to the 
constitution and origin of the universe, have broached the 
view that such odd fancies must be rooted in a mental 
condition radically different from our own. Yet closer at- 
tention to the usages of savage life demonstrates beyond 
the possibility of doubt that in grappling with the problems 
of everyday life primitive man often employs precisely the 
same psychological processes of association, observation, 
and inference as our own farmers, engineers, or craftsmen. 
When a Hopi Indian in Arizona raises corn where a white 

Xvi INTRODUCTION 

tiller fails, when a Papuan boatwright constructs elaborate 
buildings without nails or metal implements, when a Poly- 
nesian carves the most esthetic patterns with a shark’s tooth, 
he is solving his everyday problems not only competently 
but with elegance. All these activities, however, though 
sometimes curiously associated with (to our mind) irrele- 
vant considerations, belong in the main to what Dr. Marett 
would call the workaday world, i. e., the domain of reason, 
of normal experience, of an empirical correspondence of 
cause and effect. But everywhere there is, in addition to 
such practical rationalism, a sense of something transcend- 
ing the expected or natural, a sense of the Extraordinary, 
Mysterious, or Supernatural. Certainly that sense is very 
frequently, and conceivably might be always, linked with 
the recognition of spiritual beings; but to what extent such 
a correlation obtains is a matter for empirical inquiry and 
should not be prejudged. But even were this association 
of spirit-belief with a sense of mystery an invariable phe- 
nomenon, it would still be legitimate to argue that it is the 
latter which is indispensable to religion, that the belief in 
spirits derives its religious value solely from this association 
instead of being religious in its own right. The fact that 
subjective states indistinguishable from religious ones are 
indifferently found with and without animistic notions defi- 
nitely settles the matter. We shall therefore recognize as 
the differentia of religion what Drs. Marett and Golden- 
weiser have called “supernaturalism.”’ * 

Reverting to the problem that engaged Tylor’s attention, 
we shall say: Religion is verily a universal feature of hu- 
man culture, not because all societies foster a belief in 
spirits, but because all recognize in some form or other 
awe-inspiring, extraordinary manifestations of reality. 
The present treatise is accordingly dedicated to the discus- 

INTRODUCTION xvii 

sion of those cultural phenomena of the simpler societies 
which center about or are somehow connected with the 
sense of mystery or weirdness. Owing to the many ramifi- 
cations of such supernaturalism, this definition leads not 
to a rigid exclusion but merely to a somewhat different ap- 
praisal of features commonly treated under the head of re- 
ligion. . 

For the colorless terms employed above Dr. Séderblom 
substitutes the concept of the Holy or the Sacred. It is un- 
doubtedly true that in a great many instances that which is 
set over in contrast to everyday experience is invested with 
a halo of sanctity that justifies the use of the terms cited. 
However, if I correctly interpret the data, the Supernatural 
is Janus-headed, and its more sinister aspect is not ade- 
quately rendered by our word “holy” with its traditional 
connotations. I therefore prefer to use noncommittal ex- 
pressions when groping for a minimum definition of reli- 
gion, though I am the last to deny the great frequency with 
which the Extraordinary or Supernatural assumes the as- 
pect of the Holy. 

In studying alien religions the same precaution must be 
observed as in the study of comparative linguistics. 
Pioneer investigators of primitive languages were wont to 
pattern their descriptions on the Latin grammar. Indeed, 
many of us were taught English grammar on the same 
plan,—obliged to recite the non-existent datives and ac- 
cusatives of nouns and the equally chimerical imperfect sub- 
junctives of verbs. Gradually, however, philologists came 
to realize that Latin grammar, thus used, was a Procrus- 
tean bed and that each tongue must be viewed according to 
its own genius. The application is obvious. When we 
approach an alien faith, we have no right to impose our 
received categories. Because our sacred Book contains an 

XVili INTRODUCTION 

account of cosmogony, it does not follow that a given primi- 
tive cosmogony comes within the scope of religion. Though 
immortality has played an enormous part in the history of 
Christianity, it need not occupy the center of the stage in 
- other forms of belief. 

The only legitimate mode of approach will then corre- 
spond to the modern linguist’s: considering each religion 
from the point of view of its votaries, let us ascertain what 
are their concepts of the Supernatural, how they are inter- 
related and weighted with reference to one another. For 
reasons of space it is manifestly impracticable to sketch 
more than a limited number of distinct aboriginal religions, 
even were it possible to gain a sympathetic insight into the 
essentials of many more. Hence, I have made a selection 
of four representative samples. 

I begin with the Crow Indians of eastern Montana be- 
cause I am here able to offer the results of personal inquiries 
in the field; and because this tribe exemplifies one particu- 
lar conception of the Extraordinary, a conception, more- 
over, typical of many other North American aborigines. 

From this group of Plains Indian hunters I pass to the 
horticultural Ekoi of Kamerun and Southern Nigeria be- 
cause these West Africans represent a wholly different at- 
titude toward the Supernatural and neatly set off some of 
the features that distinguish Old World from New World 
belief and ritual. 

The Bukaua and their neighbors, the Jabim and Tami, 
about the shores of Huon Gulf, New Guinea, while shar- 
ing some of the African notions, exhibit and stress still 
other methods of reaction toward the Extraordinary and 
exhibit one form of widespread ceremonial with great 
clarity. 

Finally, the Polynesians display an incomparable elabora- 

INTRODUCTION xix 

tion of what exists in germ not only among the Bukaua but, 
in a wider sense, in the primitive world at large. 

In all four cases my choice has been determined in part 
by the availability of ample and trustworthy material. 

Lest there be any misunderstanding on the subject, I 
take pains to point out that the general statements made in 
these synthetic sketches will not be found in that form in 
the descriptive monographs laid under contribution,—not 
even when these happen to be by myself. What I have 
tried to do is to saturate myself with the material and to 
interpret it as far as possible from the natives’ point of 
view ; and in this attempt I have sometimes turned the ob- 
servers’ data inside out. That accordingly a subjective ele- 
ment attaches to these pictures, is undeniable: to be fore- 
warned is to be forearmed. Nevertheless, the compensa- 
tory advantages seem to me sufficient to justify the under- 
taking from a pedagogical, and not merely from a peda- 
gogical, point of view. 

REFERENCES 

All titles are fully quoted in the terminal Bibliography, where 
authors. are listed alphabetically and their several publications 
chronologically ; titles of the same author are distinguished by 
letters. The chapter references cite the author’s name if he is 
represented by a single title; his name and the date if two or 
more papers or books are listed; and if there are two in the 
same year, the letter is added. The pages are set off by colons. 

Examples. James: 34. Tylor, 1877: I, 424. Lowie, 1915 
(a) : 62. 

1 James: 34. 

2 Tylor, 1913: I, 424. 

8 Tylor, 1913: I, 440, 447; id., 1881: 371. 
4Marett, 11, 101-121. Goldenweiser, 1922: 231. 

x 

} oa 
— 7 re 
eo , 
. neg - xee 

Part I: Synthetic Sketches. 

Pt 

ACagG 
i iW 

Ny 

mh 
net 

CHAPTER i 

CROW RELIGION 4 
THE VISION 

As a young Crow Indian approached adolescence, he 
could not fail to observe the differences among his tribes- 
men in point of social position. Though hereditary distinc- 
tions of rank were wholly lacking, some individuals were 
regarded with far more respect than others, possibly be- 
cause of their wealth and wisdom but especially because of 
their great exploits in war. When a father wanted his 
newborn babe named, Bell-rock would be summoned to dub 
it after one of his own deeds of valor; and he might re- 
ceive a horse by way of compensation. At the time of the 
great Sun festival brave men—and only such—were enter- 
tained with that prized delicacy, buffalo tongues. Warriors 
about to raid a hostile camp would go to Sore-tail for in- 
structions, and when they returned laden with spoils the 
choicest of the booty went to Sore-tail’s lodge till he ranked 
as the wealthiest Crow within the memory of man. Why 
had he become rich while Small-back remained horseless ex- 
cept for the little nag a generous brave had in sheer pity 
donated to him? Why was Bell-rock the greatest of all 
chiefs and Yellow-crane rated a good-for-nothing poltroon? 
The young man knew, for from a boy he had had the an- 
swer dinned into his ears: to become great, to make sure 
of success in any of life’s critical situations, one must gain 
the blessing of some supernatural power. A few favored 

3 

4 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

persons were lucky enough to be visited by the spirits in 
their sleep or in some other way that involved no effort; 
but the majority had to earn their vision through pain and 
hardship. The ambitious warrior, the mourner filled with 
the lust for vengeance, the spurned lover, and the youth 
chafing from a sense of his family’s poverty, must mortify 
their flesh and thus rouse the compassion of the supernat- 
ural powers. 

The procedure was fairly fixed. A would-be visionary 
would go to a lonely spot, preferably to the summit of a 
mountain. Naked except for a breechclout and the buffalo 
robe to cover him at night, he abstained from food and 
drink for four days or more if necessary, wailing and in- 
voking the spirits. Usually some form of bodily torture or 
disfigurement was practised as an offering to the super- 
natural beings. Most commonly, perhaps, men would hack 
off a finger joint of the left hand, so that during the period 
of my visits to the Crow (1907-1916) I saw few old men 
with left hands intact. The Sun was generally the being 
supplicated, and the following may serve as an example of 
a typical prayer: 

Hallo, Old Man, I am poor! You see me, give me something 
good. Give me long life; grant that I may own a horse, that I 
capture a gun, that I strike a blow against the enemy! Let me 
become a chief, let me own plenty of property! 

But although the Sun was called, he rarely appeared. The 
actual visitants are occasionally connected with the Sun as 
his messengers or symbols, but in general they are con- 
ceived as in no way related to him. According to a usual 
pattern, they present themselves in human guise but before 
they leave their true nature is revealed, either by the words 
of their song or their re-transformation or by some special 

CROW RELIGION 5 

instruction, The visitant adopts the suppliant as his child 
and proceeds to give him specific directions. If martial 
glory is sought, the spirit may give a dramatic performance 
of combat, himself equipped in sharply defined fashion, 
defying the hostile darts and laying low the enemy. The 
implication is that if the spirit’s newly adopted child shall 
scrupulously imitate his patron’s appearance and follow any 
special admonitions conveyed to him, he will gain his ends. 

An illustration or two of visions actually reported by my 
informants will make the matter clearer. 

When Medicine-crow was a young man, he fasted for 
four days, offered a finger joint to the Sun, and prayed for 
horses. A young man and a young woman suddenly came 
towards him, each holding a hoop with feathers in one 
hand and a hoop with strawberries in the other. The 
woman said, ‘““We have come here to let him hear some- 
thing.” While Medicine-crow was wondering what she had 
in mind, her companion went to the other side of the ridge 
and soon reappeared, driving a herd of horses. The 
woman followed suit, also returning with horses. Both 
wore crowns of a certain kind. One of them said, “I have 
shown you all these horses. I am the sacred Tobacco. I 
want you to join the Tobacco society with these crowns.” 
The young woman told him not to allow guns at the tobacco 
planting. 

As a result of this experience Medicine-crow not only 
came to own a great many horses but also founded a new 
chapter of the great ceremonial organization known as the 
Tobacco society, making all his followers wear such crowns 
as had been revealed to him and forbidding the use of fire- 
arms in connection with the ritual. 

While Medicine-crow’s experience is typical of communi- 
cations that lead to ceremonial prominence and wealth, that 

6 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

of Scratches-face represents a popular form of war vision. 
He, too, fasted and cut off a finger joint, which he offered 
to a mythical character called Old-woman’s-grandson, who 
is sometimes identified with the Morning-star. This was 
the prayer uttered on this occasion: 

Old-woman’s-grandson, I give you this (joint), give me 
something good in exchange. . . . I am poor, give me a good 
horse. I want to strike one of the enemies and . . . I want to 
marry a good-natured woman. I want a tent of my own to 
live in. 

After his sacrifice he heard footsteps but could not see any 
one. He fell asleep and heard a voice: “What are you 
doing? You wanted him to come. Now he has come.” 
Then he saw six men riding horses, one of them seated on 
a bobtail, and this one said, ““You have been poor, so I'll 
give you what you want ... I am going to run.” The 
trees around there suddenly turned into enemies and began 
to shoot at the horsemen, who rode away but returned un- 
scathed. The rider of the bobtail said to Scratches-face, 
“If you want to fight all the people on the earth, do as I 
do, and you will be able to fight for three or four days and 
yet not be shot.” The horsemen began to ride east... 
The enemies attacked them once more, but the rider of the 
bobtail knocked them down with a spear. A storm came 
up (explained as the Thunder), and hailstones big as a fist 
knocked down the enemies. 

In consequence of his blessing Scratches-face struck and 
killed an enemy without ever getting wounded. He also 
obtained horses and married a good-tempered and indus- 
trious woman. 

The character of a vision could determine the whole of 
a man’s career, If he was promised invulnerability, as in 

CROW RELIGION 7 

the case of Scratches-face, his confidence in the super- 
natural patron’s aid might lead him to snap his fingers at 
danger and to establish a reputation for reckless daring. 
If, on the other hand, the visitant demonstrated the use 
of some medicinal herb, the seer would set up as a prac- 
titioner in some branch of medicine and, if fortune favored 
him, might become rich from his patients’ fees. Medicine- 
crow, through a variety of revelations, was equally famous 
as a leader in war and in ritualistic activity. 

A keen sense for melodramatic tension and climax is 
sometimes displayed by the narrator of such experiences. 
More particularly, there is a desire to stress the demonstra- 
tion of the vision’s potency. Just as in the conversion 
stories familiar to our culture a sharp cleavage is made to 
divide the convert’s sinful existence before his regeneration 
from his virtuous mode of life when reborn, so the Crow 
loves to contrast his destitute condition or lack of distinc- 
tion before his revelation with the material benefits or ex- 
alted position that followed. Says One-blue-bead: 

When I was a boy, I was poor. I saw war parties come back 
with leaders in front and having a procession. I used to envy 
them and made up my mind to fast and become like them. 
When I saw the vision I got what I had longed for... . I 
killed eight enemies. 

Similarly, Gray-bull in narrating his grandfather’s experi- 
ence is careful to point out that until then his hero had 
achieved nothing in war, was indeed the butt of his joking 
relatives’ mirth because he had never taken part in raids; 
after the revelation, however, he charged a group of en- 
trenched enemies, wrested a gun from one, a bow from 
another, and escaped unhurt. “The people then knew his 
medicine to be true.” Again, Sore-tail is represented as the 

8 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

poorest of all Crow Indians before going out for a vision,— 
so poor that he was even without a horse to ride; after his 
revelation he became the wealthiest man in the tribe, own- 
ing a herd of from seventy to a hundred horses, 

Some dreams are rated equivalent to a vision, apparently 
because of the profound impression they create. Religious 
value is also attached to the dreams of the officers of the 
Tobacco society before the planting of this sacred plant, 
and the site of the garden is chosen accordingly. Very 
commonly a dream in which the conventional symbols of 
the seasons figure is interpreted as a promise that the 
dreamer shall live in safety until the next return of the 
division of the year seen: the leaves turning yellow, for 
instance, would indicate a lease of life at least until autumn. 
In dreams as in visions the craving for demonstration is 
clear. Little-rump said that he often dreamt indoors or 
outdoors, night or day, and that he generally heard songs: 
“Some of them I consider sacred. When I hear a song and 
have good luck immediately after that, then I consider the 
song sacred,” 

THE VISIONARY’S Goop FaItH 

At this point a query naturally obtrudes itself on the lay- 
man that is likely to be raised by almost every account of 
primitive religion. Is there not in all these reports of 
spiritual adventures a deliberate attempt to deceive? What 
prevents a man from returning to camp with a lying tale 
of wondrous happenings in order to gain honor and pelf? 
Is it not the old story of an unscrupulous priesthood hood- 
winking the stupid mob into blind submission? 

Few questions of theoretic import can be so decisively 
answered as the one here propounded; and the answer is 

CROW RELIGION 9 

negative. To turn first of all to the Crow, there neither 
exists nor ever existed a priesthood whose selfish interests 
might be served by the maintenance of traditional usage. 
Any Crow, no matter how humble his status, might seek 
a vision on a perfect plane of equality with the remainder 
of his people. As for the veracity of the accounts, not a 
few of the Indians admit their failure to receive a com- 
munication, Thus, one witness repeatedly tried to get a 
vision, but without success. His retrospective comment is 
interesting: “All who had visions became well-to-do; I was 
destined to be poor, that is why I had no visions.” This 
view of the vision leads to another consideration. Mani- 
festly distinction in wealth or war or anything else must be 
rare; the really potent supernatural experiences must there- 
fore be correspondingly rare, and the natives fully realized 
the fact. Hence they were by no means prone to being 
duped. When an untried captain claimed an. inspiration 
that would enable him to kill a hostile camp and return with 
raided horses, he was by no means sure of an enthusiastic 
response; indeed, he often found difficulty in rallying men 
to his standards. Only by the test of success could the 
validity. of his claim be established to the satisfaction of 
the tribe at large. The varying reactions to the report of 
a vision are well illustrated in a legendary tale, which may 
be cited in abstract. An Indian was nearly blind, so that 
he and his wife became quite destitute. Then the Moon 
appeared unbidden and showed the woman where horses 
could be captured. Because of her husband’s condition, 
the visionary invited four braves to undertake the expedi- 
tion on his behalf. Two of them declined, arguing that if 
the poor couple had really had a spiritual blessing they 
would not be reduced to their present penury. The other 
pair accepted the invitation: “Though they are poor, it may 

10 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

come true.” Of course their confidence was justified by 
ensuing events, and the doubting Thomases were put to 
scorn. But on the basis of Crow psychology, one attitude 
could be as abundantly propped up with evidence as the 
other. Sometimes a vision was deceptive; sometimes it was 
only partly prophetic; and no man was wise before the 
event. Hence the two skeptics, apart from the author’s 
sympathy with his characters, were hardly culpable. On 
the other hand, the two other warriors cannot be accused 
of undue credulity, for one of the strongest holds of the 
vision on the native mind is precisely that it can raise up 
the abased. 

To revert to the visionary’s frame of mind, his whole 
conduct bears the stamp of sincerity. He gashes and dis- 
figures himself to earn the coveted revelation, yet confesses 
his disappointment and tries again. He observes with 
mincing care the regulations laid down by his monitor, how- 
ever disturbing to his personal comfort. Even in recent 
times he will abstain from some delicacy in order to main- 
tain a quite irrational taboo imposed at the time of his fast. 
He will unwrap the memento of his sacred experience with 
every sign of profound emotion and sentimental regard. 
He will recount the happenings not merely to impress a 
crowd of gaping outsiders but in the bosom of his family. 
His essential truthfulness is beyond cavil. As a half-sophis- 
ticated convert to Catholicism once told me, “When you 
listen to the old men telling their experiences, you have 
just got to believe them.” 

PsycHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE VISION 

But though the visionary’s good faith is vindicated, this 
hardly solves the psychological problem. It leaves us in 

CROW RELIGION II 

the dark as to what really happened when Scratches-face’s 
trees turned into enemies and attacked the mysterious horse- 
men, for we shall hardly believe with some early mission- 
aries that such shapes and sounds are conjured up by the 
devil. A wholly adequate interpretation is indeed impossi- 
ble, but we can at least formulate some conception of these 
weird happenings. 

In the first place, let it be noted that in the majority of 
cases there is either a prolonged fast with abstention from 
drink or at least a condition of unusual nervous strain. 
Under these abnormal circumstances, physiological and 
psychological, the critical sense may well fall into abeyance, 
leaving the field clear for dream fantasies. The phenom- 
enon involved is, in other words, generically that of a hal- 
lucination. Its particular character is molded by a variety 
of causes. 

There is obviously some correspondence between the need 
felt by the petitioner and the blessing vouchsafed to him. 
The vision of a grief-crazed father thirsting to avenge his 
son’s death at the hands of the Cheyenne cannot be identical 
with that of a youthful aspirant to military renown; and 
different again must be the experience of the poverty- 
stricken man praying for relief from his distress. A cer- 
tain scope will still remain for individual fancy. Thus, in 
the last-mentioned contingency, desire may be satisfied in 
more than one way: a man may become wealthy through 
raiding a hostile camp or by administering a newly revealed 
herb to rheumatics or by initiating people into a ceremonial 
secret divulged to him. Obviously a very important fact 
in the hallucination is the fulfillment through auto-sugges- 
tion of the visionary’s wishes: it embodies a promise that 
he shall attain his heart’s desire. But clearly the wish alone 
does not suffice: Little-rump fails again and again while 

12 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Medicine-crow as regularly succeeds. That is to say, we 
must assume that some people experience visions because 
of a temperamental predisposition, which their envious 
copyists lack. 

Individual peculiarities may manifest themselves in other 
ways. Though in accordance with customary usage I have 
hitherto spoken of “‘visions,” visual images are by no means 
the only ones reported. Apart from the speeches of the 
beings seen, voices are heard and other forms of auditory 
sensation occur. Motor imagery is sometimes prominent, 
as when the Stars appearing to an Indian throw arrows, 
one of which comes wiggling back. Again, a peculiar sus- 
ceptibility to kinesthetic and tactile impressions is displayed 
by a number of persons, all of whom pretend to harbor 
animals of some sort inside their bodies. Thus, Muskrat 
asserts that once while she was half awake she felt things 
running all over; lifting her blanket, she caught sight of 
two weasels looking at her, and on another occasion a weasel 
came to her neck, causing a curious sensation, and then 
entered her stomach. 

This subject of sensory types requires further investiga- 
tion and will be treated under another head. Here it suffices 
to point out that the experiences of the Crow Indians under 
the abnormal conditions of the vision-quest reflect individ- 
ual differences in mental constitution parallel to those found 
among ourselves. 

But though the visions were determined by individual 
psychology and by individual exigency or desire, they are 
very far from being wholly intelligible on that basis. Both 
in a general way and in detail the social atmosphere distinc- 
tive of Crow culture and specifically Crow conceptions 
affect the texture of the hallucinations. As for general pur- 
port, the frequency of military visions corresponds pre- 

CROW RELIGION 13 

cisely to the high regard in which these Indians hold brav- 
ery, and it is only natural that those deeds conventionally 
rated as precminently brave, such as the capture of a gun 
or the touching of an enemy, should figure conspicuously. 

This infiuence of tribal idealism seems plausible enough. 
But what shall we say when one faster after another states 
that he gained his end on the fourth day? This is of 
course incredible as a coincidence. Unless there is a more 
or less unconscious reinterpretation of the experience to fit 
a tribal norm, the sameness must be due to the overpower- 
ing influence of the mystic number of the Crow, which 
might actually lead to a postponement of the thrill sought 
until the fourth day. In either case cultural suggestion 
operates as the dynamic agent. Another significant feature 
is the acquisition of a sacred song. Were this restricted to 
a few people, we should not be warranted in singling out 
this feature from other auditory hallucinations. But when 
practically every visionary mentions the singing of some 
song, we are plainly dealing with an accepted model. The 
faster hears a song because that is an integral part of a 
trance: again the cultural tradition predetermines his experi- 
ence. Equally common is the faster’s adoption by the ap- 
parition; and here once more it is inconceivable to suppose 
that dozens of visionaries would independently of one an- 
other hear themselves greeted with the reassuring words, 
“T will adopt you as my child.” To turn to a particular 
category of revelations, those imparting invulnerability, a 
frequent incident is the transformation of trees or rocks 
into enemies, who vainly shoot at the vicariously invulner- 
able spirit being. This type of experience occurs not only 
in the narratives of recent visions but also in traditional 
tales, and nothing can be more obvious than the suggestion 
exercised on the individual faster’s imagery by the cultural 

14 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

pattern. He sees and hears not merely what any faster, 
say in British Columbia or South Africa, would see and 
hear under like conditions of physiological exhaustion and 
under the urge of generally human desires, but what the 
social tradition of the Crow tribe imperatively suggests. 

Before leaving the psychological characterization of the 
Crow vision, still another factor, though less frequently in 
operation, should be mentioned. In the Sun Dance, which 
will be described below, the principal performer was not 
always able to secure the coveted communication unaided. 
In that case the master of ceremonies resorted to what can 
only be described as hypnotism. He made the faster dance 
before an effigy suspended in the rear of the lodge and rivet 
his gaze on this figure, while the conductor of the rite him- 
self was chanting a song. After a while the doll was seen 
to paint its face black in token of a promise that the vision- 
ary should do likewise as the sign of having killed an enemy. 
Suddenly the dancer fell down in a swoon, his eyes still 
fixed on the doll. 

The phenomenon of the Crow vision is thus not wholly 
mysterious on the assumption of good faith, but can be 
described in familiar psychological terms, such as individual 
variability, suggestion, and hypnotism. 

PRIESTHOOD AND LAITY 

‘Since any tribesman might become a shaman, to use a 
convenient Siberian term, that is, might acquire a spiritual 
communication, regardless of his antecedents or prepara- 
tory training, there was no priestly caste but a fairly large 
number of people with visionary experiences. The greater 
or lesser dignity of these depended solely on the pragmatic 
test of their efficacy. Thus there were several distinct Sun 

CROW RELIGION 15 

Dance effigies, but because one of them had proved espe- 
cially potent in bringing about the destruction of enemies 
it came to take precedence of all the rest, while another 
was interpreted as based on a pretended revelation because 
its use was accompanied by the death of the chief dancer’s 
wife. Again, there is the historic case of Wraps-up-his-tail 
who declared in 1887 that he had received power to drive 
the whites out of the country with the aid of a magic 
sword. He failed, hence One-blue-bead thinks that his 
vision was partly false; in part it was true because Indians 
had seen the “prophet” cut down pines by a wave of his 
sword. 

Corresponding, then, to the cogency of their demonstra- 
tion was the rank informally assumed by the visionaries. 
Men conspicuously fortunate in war parties would come to 
be regarded as favorites of some powerful being and as 
themselves “extraordinary” (marpé). Yet even they were 
not generic intermediaries between the laity and the Super- 
natural but had functions definitely circumscribed by the 
character of their visions. For example, among physicians 
some were specialists for childbirth cases, while some de- 
voted themselves exclusively to the doctoring of wounds. 
Of visionaries blessed with non-therapeutic gifts, some 
could defy missiles, others could locate a hostile camp, still 
others were inspired to found a new ritualistic body or to 
introduce a new type of shield decoration. 

Given this religious separatism, there was no universally 
acknow!edged set of dogmas nor any ecclesiastical organiza- 
tion that handed down laws for the guidance of the reli- 
gious consciousness. No one insisted that a Crow should 
believe in the creation myth or subscribe to some accepted 
conception of the hereafter; nor did a youth require any 
external prompting to go out in search of a vision. The 

16 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

functions of the shaman, in other words, however impor- 
tant for the public weal, were in their essence private. The 
Sun Dance pledger, the parents of a sick child, the am- 
bitious brave, all hired a renowned shamanistic specialist 
according to the exigencies of the occasion. In such cases 
the shaman naturally assumed complete control as well as 
complete responsibility. 

But the relationship between a shaman and his client was 
not a purely commercial one. In many cases there was a 
transfer of power from the original visionary to the man 
seeking his aid. A revelation could be shared provided 
proper compensation was offered, and thus the considerable 
number of people not favored by a direct message from 
the spirits could at least share in its blessings through a 
go-between. Thus, a man might impart to others the gift 
of invulnerability by teaching them what to wear and what 
songs:to sing in battle; another who had seen a vision of 
horses might send out warriors instead of going himself 
to capture them. If the client succeeded in his ventures, a 
definitely sentimental relationship was established between 
him and the shaman} just as the latter had been adopted 
by his supernatural patron, so he in turn made a “son”’ of 
his protégé. Sometimes the adopted person would at first 
receive a sacred symbol of the primary revelation, but was 
subsequently empowered to gain a vision of his own. 
Thus, Flat-head-woman prevailed upon the owners of a 
sacred arrow bundle to prepare a replica for him, and for 
some time they would send him out on raids in accordance 
with their inspirations. But later they bade him get visions 
of his own, and consequently he saw a grass stalk flying 
through the air, with the implication that he should set out 
for the spot where it alighted. Thereafter he had various 
revelations and came to send out warriors on his own au- 

‘CROW RELIGION 17 

thority. In this instance a principle is applied that finds 
still clearer expression among the closely related Hidatsa 
Indians of North Dakota: the sacred token of a revelation 
may itself become the stimulation for new visions. 

Another similarity between the two sister tribes may be 
cited as of psychological interest. As a rule, the property 
rights involved in a vision not only can be bought, but they 
cannot be conveyed in any other way. A ceremonial mode 
of painting the face was purchased by a Crow informant 
from his own mother; and among the Hidatsa certain hered- 
itary bundles must be bought by the children from their 
father. It is plausible to apply to such cases the principle 
of rationalization. The notion that a visionary could sell 
a share in his “patent”? was manifestly of material benefit 
to him, and in the more or less conscious recognition of this 
fact lay the basis of the usage. But when the rule had 
once been firmly established it acquired a sacrosanctity 
through the mere force of conservatism and was applied as 
rigorously to the nearest blood-kin as to outsiders. 

The powerful shamans, then, were not official representa- 
tives of religion acting on behalf of the whole community, 
but fortunate visionaries who, with small groups of follow- 
ers, formed diminutive congregational units independent of 
one another, though tied together by an unformulated com- 
mon world-view. Under these conditions there was noth- 
ing to prevent animosities from bursting forth between 
rival shamans, each relying on the support of his spiritual 
patron. Several feuds of varying degrees of intensity are 
recollected, and I have myself known one of the principals 
in the most dramatic of all, Big-ox, a man generally reputed 
to have smitten his adversary with blindness. Big-ox had 
seduced a tribesman’s wife, and the wronged man asked 
White-thigh to avenge the grievance by means of his super- 

18 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

natural power, of which a sacred rock was the chief symbol, 
while Big-ox relied on the support of the Thunder. The 
next time Big-ox went on the warpath he failed because the 
other shaman had prayed against him. For a while each 
of the two medicine-men thwarted the other’s undertakings ; 
finally Big-ox cursed his rival and made him blind, but 
White-thigh retaliated by making Big-ox lose all his next 
of kin, s0 that he was obliged to wander from one camp 
to another in his old age. In these contests it is of course 
at bottom not the human competitors but their supernatural 
monitors that are pitted against each other, as when in a 
mythological tale the hero overcomes the Morning-star’s 
beneficiary through the aid of friendly birds. 

SUPERNATURAL BEINGS 

But who are these mysterious beings that appear to fa- 
vored believers? And why did I not begin the account of 
Crow religion with a systematic exposition of the native 
pantheon? The postponement of this task was not due to 
inadvertency: I have relegated the individual spirits to the 
background because in my view of the Crow religious con- 
sciousness that is where they belong. 

The Crow Indian approached the universe with a sincere 
humility that contrasted sharply with his personal pride 
towards fellow-tribesmen. He evinced that sense of abso- 
lute dependence on something not himself, which Schleier- 
macher and Feuerbach postulate as the root of the religious 
sentiment. By himself man was nothing, but somewhere 
in the world there were mysterious beings greater than he, 
by whose good-will he might rise. The significant fact to 
an individual was that during a spell of ecstasy he had 
come into contact with something supernatural, and that 

CROW RELIGION 19 

something was his God while everything else sank into a 
relatively subordinate position. Other men had gods of 
their own who perchance figured prominently in tribal myth 
or were intimately linked with an important ritual; that 
might matter to them, but not to him. For his religious 
consciousness the chicken-hawk or bear through whose in- 
structions he had cured a dying child or come unhurt out 
of battle was the primary religious fact. The emotional 
thrill of his vision, reénforced by its tried potency, gave 
the apparition a unique value beside which everything else 
faded into nothingness. Even the trivial feather or claw 
shown by the visitant partook of the awe-inspiring quality 
of its revealer, or rather of the occasion on which it was 
revealed. It is easy to speak of the veneration extended to 
such badges of the individual’s covenant with the super- 
natural as fetishism, but that label with its popular meaning 
is monstrously inadequate to express the psychology of the 
situation. For to the Indian the material object is nothing 
apart from its sacred associations; and the sacredness lies 
not in the preéstablished glory of the particular spirit but 
in the affective correlate of the vision. That is to say, the 
Thunderbird is not first revered as divine and then sheds 
the luster of his godhead upon the accompanying circum- 
stances, but his appearance under special emotional condi- 
tions constitutes his apotheosis, which extends to the whole 
experience. Never shall I forget how an Indian once 
prodded my curiosiiy by offering to show me “the greatest 
thing in the world”; how he reverently uncovered one cloth 
wrapper after another; and how at length there lay exposed 
a simple bunch of feathers,—a mere nothing to the alien 
onlooker but to the owner a badge of his covenant with the 
supernatural world. 
In short, the central fact of Crow religion is not a generic 

20 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

worship of Nature or of some dominant natural force, but 
the extraordinary subjective emotional experience with all 
its ramifications. 

This statement, however, requires modification with ref- 
erence to one striking phenomenon in the universe. The 
Sun was to a marked degree the recipient of offerings and 
the object of supplication. Before setting out on a raid, 
men would vow to give him eagle feathers or fox skins; 
the hide of an albino buffalo was invariably consecrated 
to the Sun with a prayer for longevity and wealth; and to 
erect a little booth for sweating oneself was considered a 
‘ritual in his honor. It is therefore not at all remarkable 
that the Sun should be the first being normally addressed 
by the seeker of a vision. The remarkable thing is rather 
that he so rarely came. “Sometimes,” said White-arm, 
“the Sun himself appeared to the visionary, but mostly 
animals came. These I do not think are related to the Sun 
at all. When men are praying, the Sun is first thought of, 
but generally other beings appear.” The only plausible 
explanation for this anomaly that occurs to me is that Sun 
worship and vision concepts may belong to two distinct 
compartments or layers of Crow belief. Nothing is more 
characteristic of the Crow than a deficiency in systematic 
thinking: it was possible for the Crow mind to be deeply 
influenced by two quite distinct idea-systems without at- 
tempting to bring them into harmony. Nevertheless, in 
relatively recent times the need may have been felt for 
somehow correlating the two, with the result observed: the 
Sun was supplicated for a revelation, but because of his 
comparatively recent association with the vision he could 
not normally oust the older type of visitants from their 
position of vantage. And as regards any individual Crow, 

CROW RELIGION 21 

this personal patron remained a more important factor in 
his religious life than the Sun himself. 

The Sun, to be sure, means more to a greater number of 
persons than any one other spirit; he approaches more 
nearly than any other our notion of a Supreme Being. Yet 
what astonishing conceptions cluster about him, and in 
what chaos is Crow theology concerning the most elemen- 
tary definition of his identity! The most trustworthy wit- 
nesses cannot agree as to whether he is identical with Old- 
Man-Coyote, the hero of Crow folklore; nay, in a single 
cosmogonic myth there is constant vacillation on this point. 
Now Old-Man-Coyote is in many episodes of his cycle a 
typical trickster, wallowing in grossness and buffoonery. 
Consequently the fact that the identification is not definitely 
spurned is in itself significant. My own impression, given 
for what it may be worth, is that originally the two figures 
were distinct and that, possibly because of their familiarity 
with the legendary character of Old-Man-Coyote, the Crow 
unconsciously tried to give greater sharpness to the vague 
outlines of the solar deity by merging it into the better- 
known individuality. 

Yet even if the Sun be wholly dissociated from Old-Man- 
Coyote, he remains an odd sort of supreme being. In fact, 
he is not really supreme at all: there is nothing to preclude 
his being worsted by Morning-star or the human hero of 
a traditional tale. Again, he looms as the creator by hav- 
ing some birds dive into the sea for the submerged earth 
and by fashioning human beings out of mud; but he is not 
the source of all being. Apart from the cryptic Old-Man- 
Coyote, the sacred Tobacco (usually identified with a star) 
and the sacred Rock appear as entities of explicitly inde- 
pendent origin, Finally, from an ethical point of view, 

22 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

he is sometimes benignant but also turns malevolent towards 
the whole tribe when his mistress is seduced by a boy hero, 
and is even represented as boiling and eating the flesh of 
brave warriors. 

If the Sun is a shadowy and inconsistent deity, this ap- 
plies with even greater force to other spirits. Morning- 
star, for example, is commonly identified with Old- 
woman’s-grandson, the child of the Sun and an Indian 
maiden. He rids the world of various monsters, triumph- 
ing through his father’s aid, and is ultimately translated 
to the sky. Possibly because of his solar lineage some In- 
dians regularly prayed to him, yet others vigorously denied 
that he was ever addressed by suppliants! As a further 
sample of Crow consistency may be cited one informant’s 
statement that Sun and Morning-star were pitted against 
each other in a trial of strength and that Morning-star’s 
protégés vicariously won the game. 

The Thunder, commonly identified with a species of 
eagle, doubtless made a deep impression on the Crow mind 
and was the patron of several natives even during the last 
few decades. Yet in one myth this powerful deity requires 
a human hunter’s assistance to slay his traditional enemy, 
a water-monster; and he is defied with impunity by an 
Indian named Big-iron, who has been adopted by a spirit 
in the guise of an aged man. 

It is useless to proceed with this enumeration. Evidently 
a diversified host of beings, whether identified with natural 
forces or with the apparitions of visions or with what not, 
may function as deities. But there is no systematization, 
no coordination or subordination that has fixed validity: 
the spirits seem to move in a variety of distinct universes, 
and their religious importance varies with the individual 
Crow. Gray-bull’s grandfather was once visited by two 

CROW RELIGION 2a 

birds, which turned into a man and a woman but after 
giving him instructions retransformed themselves into 
birds. These were not conceived as messengers or servants 
of some deity: they were themselves possessed of mys- 
terious potency and capable of making their adopted son 
invulnerable. Why should the pragmatic beneficiary fret 
over their possible inferiority to other beings? 

It may not be superfluous to add that while among the 
motley throng of spiritual patrons who bless the Crow 
Indians ghosts occasionally occur, these are indeed asso- 
ciated with the whirlwind and the owl but never with the 
surviving souls of deceased relatives. Ancestor-worship 
in any form is totally lacking. 

RITUAL 

There were numerous ritualistic observances, some of 
relatively simple private character, others elaborated into 
complex public festivals. The definite procedure followed 
when a revelation is sought is of course itself ritualistic, 
but the altogether unique significance of the vision appears 
as soon as we examine a representative set of rites. 

To begin with a relatively simple type, that associated 
with the sweat-lodge. The ancient Crow did not resort to 
this form of vapor bath for mere pastime or even for 
purely therapeutic purposes. It was considered a sacred 
thing, and the little dome-shaped structure of willows might 
be erected only by one who had secured an appropriate 
revelation or had purchased the privilege from a visionary 
of this type. Nay, even those entitled to build a sweat- 
lodge would, according to one authority, put it up solely 
after special spiritual counsel to that effect. The sweat- 
lodge was most commonly conceived as an offering to the 

24 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Sun and linked with prayers in the form of a conditional 
pledge. A man afflicted with disease might pray, “My 
father’s kinsman (the usual mode of addressing the Sun), 
if I recover, I will erect a sweat-lodge’; and corresponding 
vows were uttered by a warrior eager to obtain booty on 
a new raid or to strike a blow against the enemy. Since 
four is the ceremonial number, it is customary to undergo 
the sweating in four successive doses. Rocks heated for 
hours outside the little hut are carried to a central pit, then 
the willow structure is covered with blankets so as to be- 
come pitch-dark, and one of the inmates, all of whom are 
practically naked, pours water on the red-hot rocks. For 
several minutes the celebrants sweat, then the blanket at one 
side is raised, allowing them to cool off before the second 
sweating process. Each time more water is poured on than 
before, causing more and more vapor and proportionately 
greater perspiration. Each stage is also associated with 
a prayer formula. Medicine-crow, for example, may have 
dreamt of the snow on the ground, an image interpreted to 
mean that he and his kin shall live to see the winter season. 
He announces his dream and the other sweaters thank him, 
hoping that they also shall reach that point of time. Others 
announce their respective dreams when the cover is lifted, 
and after the final airing all dash to the nearest stream and 
plunge into its waters. 

Passing to the more complex ceremonialism of the To- 
bacco society, we find that the whole procedure is domi- 
nated by the vision-concept. The tobacco in question is a 
species of Nicotiana, but not that smoked by these Indians ; 
in other words, it is raised for exclusively religious pur- 
poses. It is planted on behalf of the entire tribe, but while 
every Crow in some measure shares in the benefits of the 
performances the right to plant is restricted to persons duly 

CROW RELIGION 25 

initiated into the Tobacco organization. This originated 
in a vision and the subsequent adoption of co-celebrants by 
the original visionary. But in course of time there were 
supplementary revelations, and accordingly at least over 
twenty distinct chapters sprang into existence, each embrac- 
ing the person blessed by a new vision and the people of 
either sex whom he allowed to participate through adoption. 
Though the immediate benefits were purely gain in social 
standing, the Indians down to the most recent times have 
been willing to pay heavy fees for the privilege of initia- 
tion. In the adoption ceremonies I witnessed in 1910 and 
IgI1I the novices’ kinswomen were seen staggering under 
the load of goods offered to the sponsor’s chapter in partial 
payment of the new member’s debt. The tyro is instructed 
for several months in the songs given him and is finally 
led in solemn procession to a specially constructed lodge, 
where for hours he and others dance the Tobacco dance, 
gently swaying their bodies and executing characteristic 
movements with their arms. Immediately after the dance 
or on the following morning the novice takes a vapor bath 
together with his song instructors, and finally he is per- 
mitted to take from the members of the adopting chapter 
some packages of the precious seed as well as other sacred 
objects. For some of these, as well as for certain highly 
specialized ritualistic privileges, additional fees are paid. 
One informant, for example, gave a horse for the right of 
sitting next to the door. Exorbitant prices were also paid 
for the more important prerogative of erecting the adoption 
lodge. 

The above is the merest sketch of a highly interesting 
performance, diversified by the recounting of military ex- 
ploits and a short dramatic representation of how a warrior 
coming home from a successful expedition reports the vic- 

26 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tory, describes the Crow tobacco garden seen on his return 
trip, and prophesies an abundant crop. 

After the acquisition of his seed the novice becomes a 
full-fledged member entitled to share in the next spring 
planting. First his seed will be mixed with various in- 
gredients by the official Mixer of his chapter, then all the 
members of the society proceed to the garden site dreamed 
by one of the Mixers and plant their seed, each in his al- 
lotted space. The procession to the garden follows a tradi- 
tional style: the members walk abreast, carrying their sacred 
objects in bags and preceded by a woman who carries a 
holy otter skin, but in one locality on the strength of a 
vision this emblem has been changed toa crane. After four 
stops with ceremonial songs and smoking the members en- 
trust their bags to swift runners, who race to the site and 
deposit the sacred sacks there. The ground is prepared by 
burning (nowadays by plowing), then the seeds are dropped 
into holes dug for them, songs are sung, and the members 
dance and eat before dispersing. After the ceremony peo- 
ple are wont to lie at the garden in hope of a revelation and 
are likely to hear Tobacco songs. 

The planting is followed by several inspections of the 
tobacco and at last the seeds are harvested with relatively 
little ceremony. 

An examination of the Tobacco ritual demonstrates with 
great clearness the importance of the vision. From the in- 
stitution of the order in the beginning to the tiniest varia- 
tion in procedure within recent years everything is inter- 
preted as the result of visionary experiences; the member- 
ship comprises the visionaries and those to whom by a sort 
of apostolic succession they have transmitted their powers; 
even the site of the planting is not chosen without super- 
natural sanction. On the other hand, the data illustrate 

CROW RELIGION 27 

equally well the dominance of the basic Crow values. Peo- 
ple want to join either for general human benefits—to gain 
recovery from illness or rise from poverty—or for the sim- 
ple hankering after social prominence; and to secure the 
latter end they cheerfully render material sacrifices of 
property. 

If the vision looms large in the Tobacco ceremonies, it 
is all-important in the Sun Dance. The Crow performed 
this festival ostensibly from a single motive, the desire for 
revenge. If a tribesman had suffered the loss of a son or 
brother at the hands of the Dakota and could not shake off 
his grief, he would pledge a performance of the Sun Dance. 
Since his purpose was revenge, he naturally sought the in- 
dispensable prerequisite for a successful military venture, a 
vision. That could be procured with greatest likelihood of 
success by erecting the Sun Dance lodge with the aid of the 
whole tribe and dancing before a sacred doll till he saw the 
image of a bleeding enemy. There were several dolls, each 
the result of a vision by its owner or one of his predeces- 
sors, and the pledger chose one of them to instruct him 
and become the high-priest of the performance. As soon 
as the mourner beheld a vision promising the death of an 
enemy, the ritual abruptly terminated, for that vision was 
the avowed be-all and end-all of the performance, though 
a vast number of additional but theoretically extraneous 
features made it a spectacle of interest to the onlookers. 
Even these unessential performances revolved in large part 
about the vision-concept. Thus, many young men consid- 
ered the occasion a proper one for seeking a revelation on 
their own account and would undergo the usual austerities 
publicly for purely individual ends. 

The vision is thus the factor that integrates the whole of 
Crow ritualism; and it is interesting to see that as an ex- 

28 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

planatory principle it is extended to other tribes. The 
closely related Hidatsa were observed to lack the Tobacco 
ceremony and to have a Sacred Pipe ritual originally un- 
known to the Crow. Crow philosophy formulates the facts 
by declaring that when the sister tribes parted their leaders 
had two distinct revelations, one seeing the Tobacco, the 
other the Pipe. 

DoGMA AND WORLD-VIEW 

Crow religion does not obligate its votaries to accept a 
fixed set of tenets concerning the phenomena of the uni- 
verse. A man would not be denounced as a heretic be- 
cause he rejected the current theory of creation, and in the 
absence of an official pronunciamento on the subject there 
is nothing to prevent a number of varying versions. When 
we recollect that the cosmogonic tale of the earth-divers 
is found from the Atlantic to the Pacific, it seems a likely 
supposition that the Crow did not originate the essence of 
their creation story but borrowed it from another tribe, 
possibly not many centuries ago. Whether it superseded 
an earlier conception or was adopted in the absence of any 
creation myth, the theory of an alien origin bears witness 
to the trifling part relevant ideas play in the religious life 
of the people. 

What applies to cosmogony holds in even greater degree 
for conceptions of the hereafter. Like other peoples, primi- 
tive and civilized, the Crow believe in a survival of the soul, 
but the subject is of no emotional interest to the majority 
of these Indians and has hardly exercised their imaginations 
at all. Such notions as are current can be traced to the 
accounts of men who are believed to have died but who re- 
turned to consciousness. The general upshot of ‘such re- 

CROW RELIGION 29 

ports is that the spirits of the dead are encamped like In- 
dians but are better off than the living. They send back 
people who for some reason offend them or, it may be, 
from sheer caprice. One narrative associates the spirit 
land with the west. In no case are the departed souls as- 
sociated with one of the more or less established deities, such 
as the Sun or the Thunderbird; and never is there the faint- 
est suggestion that the deeds of this world must be accounted 
for in another or that the good shall be separated from the 
wicked. 

This leads to the consideration of how religion and ethics 
are related among the Crow. It would certainly be strange 
if two such fundamental aspects of culture remained wholly 
unconnected, yet their relationship is of an extremely tenu- 
ous sort. The Sun, as dissociated from Old-Man-Coyote, 
does not play the part of a divine lawgiver nor could he 
serve as a uniforin paragon of virtue from the aboriginal 
point of view. Old-Man-Coyote is indeed the founder of 
many customs and the instructor in such arts as fire-making 
and stone technique; but he does not lay down elements of 
the tribal ethics, which in fact he flagrantly violates, as 
when he marries his own daughters or gains access to his 
mother-in-law. 

Ethical imperatives are sometimes issued by the beings 
who appear to visionaries. In order, however, to appraise 
such edicts at their true value it is necessary to recall their 
setting. The most frequent desire on the visionary’s part 
is social distinction, which in itself tends to preclude anti-so- 
cial behavior. When a warrior is bidden to kill an enemy 
or to protect the women and children of his camp, he is 
told to do what promotes his own as well as the tribal in- 
terest. There is indeed the interesting legendary case of 
the benevolent Dwarf who indignantly withdraws protec- 

30 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tion from the camp tyrant he had taken under his wing: 
““Try to benefit your people,’ I said to him. “Take away 
and possess their desirable property,’ I did not say. ‘Kill 
them continually,’ I did not say.” But no such loving-kind- 
ness towards the people at large is manifested when in other 
instances, traditional or historic, the spirit supports a fa- 
vorite regardless of the merits of the case, as in the stories 
of shamanistic rivalry. 

In one sense, it is true, definite, stringent rules of con- 
duct are laid down by the visitant. A man owning a cer- 
tain kind of shield must shift its position according to the 
sun’s movements. The custodian of a sacred arrow must not 
knock off the snow from his lodge,—he must gently scrape 
it. Gray-bull is told not to eat bird’s eggs, and Muskrat 
must not allow any one to bump against her. Dire conse- 
quences would flow from disregard of these injunctions, 
even when transgression, as in the instance last cited, is in- 
dependent of the visionary’s volition. 

Subjectively these utterly capricious commandments were 
undoubtedly among the most important principles of indi- 
vidual conduct; and I am convinced that the reaction to a 
breach of this personal code psychologically comes closer to 
what we call sin than anything else in Crow life. But this 
purely personal and potentially anti-social morality is 
manifestly unconnected with anything normally included 
under the heading of ethics. The Crow did have a clear-cut 
code for social conduct, and this may be said to be almost 
wholly dissociated from religious sanctions. 

To summarize the foregoing, Crow religion is not a dog- 
matic faith; it imposes no doctrines, cosmological or eschato- 
logical; it does not prescribe rules of conduct that possess 
general validity. It seems subjectivism raised to the highest 
power. 

CROW RELIGION 31 

But this extreme individualism is after all only theoretical. 
The individual Crow is indeed free from the dictates of a 
priesthood, but he is in the grip of a more potent, precisely 
because it is a more subtle, leadership. The stock of ideas 
and emotions characteristic of his social group fashions his 
whole cosmic outlook as it fashions the very pattern of his 
vision. There are certain conceptions which from a child 
he receives as unchallengeable, even though they are not 
formulated as so many propositions; and while they may in 
themselves be completely devoid of religious value they in- 
evitably frame and tincture whatever acquires such value. 
To give a positive definition of what Dr. Thurnwald calls 
the primitive Denkart (mode of thinking) or Geistesverfas- 
sung (mental constitution) ? is not so easy as to sense it 
from such concrete exhibitions as are yielded by the visionary 
experiences. Negatively, it seems easy enough to contrast it 
with our modern world-view, to define it as an eminently ir- 
rational one, that is, one that does not involve the checking 
of associations by the spirit of critical inquiry. No woman 
has ever been known to handle a Sun Dance doll, hence 
Pretty-enemy, who disobeyed the rule, must die or suffer the 
loss of some dear relative as an automatic punishment. A 
horseman seen in a vision escapes from the enemy, hence 
the visionary will be invulnerable. To draw a representa- 
tion of one’s enemy and puncture the heart is to injure the 
man figured. These are all actual illustrations of how the 
Crow mind applies the principle of causality. The implicit 
philosophy of reality, imbibed with the mother’s milk, limits 
and predetermines the individual’s religious views, just as the 
social standards current in his community predetermine his 
life-values and the wishes he seeks to fulfill through religion. 
In contrast with this body of received notions and ideals the 
scope for individual creativeness seems, from an outsider’s 

32 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

point of view, pitiably meager. Thus even the most ex- 
treme subjectivism may merge in abject servility, not to the 
authority of a personal dictatorship, but to the impersonal, 
though none the less real, dominance of folk-belief and folk- 
usage. 

REFERENCES 

1 The account given above is based on the author’s own re- 
searches. Most of the data will be found in the following publi- 
cations: Lowie, 1915; id., 1919; id., 1922. The reader may 
also be referred to the author’s contributions to Parsons, 1922: 
17-43. 

2 Thurnwald: 296, 

CHAPTER II 
EKOI RELIGION + 
-SORCERY 

WHEN several well-known men have died in succession in 
an Ekoi village, suspicion is naturally aroused that they are 
the victims of black magic, and some friendless woman may 
be pounced upon as the probable culprit. Illness, when noi 
traceable to the anger of offended spirits, is likewise derived 
from the practices of witch or wizard. An unsuccessful 
hunter lays his bad luck to the charge of sorcery and seeks to 
break the spell by a rite of conciliation. Prospective mothers 
shield themselves from the inroads of sorcerers by special 
charms, and childless women similarly lift the bane of 
sterility. Towns are abandoned for fear of a half-witted 
woman’s curse. 

What seems strangest in the relevant notions of the abo- 
rigines is the maniacal dread that even the next of kin may 
practice sorcery in disguise. Chief Nenkui accuses his own 
daughter of afflicting him with blindness by touching his eye, 
a husband charges his wife with bewitching her own chil- 
dren, a grandmother is hounded into suicide by the per- 
sistent suspicion that she has killed her son’s offspring. 

These strange obsessions are fostered by a deep-rooted 
belief in shape-shifting. Who can recognize a witch when 
she assumes the form of a bat or owl, and, seated on the roof 
of a house, sucks out her sleeping victim’s heart? Such ani- 
mals or birds are the sorcerer’s familiar spirits and can be 
exorcised and extracted from his body by a qualified priest. 

33 

34 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

There are other cases of metamorphosis that may or may not 
be coupled with evil magic. Every man has two souls, one 
of them dwelling constantly in the body, the other capable of 
being sent forth to possess some wild animal in the bush. 
A man need merely drink of the magic potion transmitted in 
his family as the means for turning into the hereditary 
animal linked with his kin group. Here, too, there is chance 
for clandestine wickedness. One man will destroy his neigh- 
bor’s goats or cows as a were-leopard, while another drags 
people under water in the convenient disguise of a crocodile. 

Sorcerers assemble at night in a sort of witches’ sabbath, 
dance a few feet above ground, simultaneously growing to 
gigantic stature, and jointly plot the death of a victim. They 
are invisible to ordinary mortals, but those endowed with 
“four eyes” have seen them celebrating in the moonlight and 
may bring them to confess. 

It is essential to understand the hysterical fear of evil 
magic that haunts the Ekoi in order to judge fairly the treat- 
ment meted out to its practitioners. From the aboriginal 
point of view, sorcerers are prospective or actual murderers 
insidiously destroying their neighbors, nay, their own blood. 
Small wonder, then, that those convicted of such malpractice 
receive scant consideration and are summarily put out of 
the way. It is rather to the credit of the natives that in- 
stead of resorting to lynch law they usually conform to the 
juridical standards established among them, determining 
guilt by the orderly processes of divination and the ordeal. 

The diviner must be sought, for while affliction is perhaps 
most frequently the result of sorcery, other causes have to 
be reckoned with, such as the wrath of neglected ancestral 
spirits. In order to become established as a specialist in 
divination, a novice must be initiated by a master. The 
charm consists of two pairs of strings, each composed of 

EKOI RELIGION 35 

four “shells,” in reality the dried seed-coverings of a sacred 
tree. These are laid side by side on either hand of the di- 
viner, and each pair must fall in exactly the reverse manner 
of the other to secure certainty, otherwise the process is re- 
peated. There are other elements of the diviner’s stock-in- 
trade,—the egg of a bush fowl, the quill and tail of a porcu- 
pine, white chalk for good luck, a boar’s tooth to ward off 
evil influences, the small horns of a duikerbok because that 
animal has “four eyes,”’ that is, can discern phantom shapes 
that remain unseen by normal mortals. The total number 
of ways in which the shells can fall is considerable, and each 
has its own interpretation by the diviner’s code. Thus, one 
shell turned upward while the rest face in the reverse way 
designates a young man, three shells up and the rest down 
indicate food, and so forth. 

For final ordination of a tyro the old expert chews the 
leaves and bark of various sacred trees, spitting small quan- 
tities into the shells, which are placed high up in the roof- 
thatch, where they may hold communion with Obassi Osaw, 
one of the two great tribal deities. After a while they are 
removed and buried at a cross-road to talk with ghosts and 
with Obassi Nsi, the second great god. Some days later 
the new diviner digs them up again and is set up as a fully 
trained member of the profession, entitled to the traditional 
fee of threepence in kind and threepence in money. 

But the mere declaration of the diviner, while presumptive 
evidence of guilt, does not convict without a formal ordeal, 
administered either by pouring boiling palm oil on the sus- 
pect’s hands or, more commonly, by giving him a potion 
made from a poisonous wild bean. On the native theory 
the innocently accused will not take harm in either case, 
while the guilty sorcerer is supposed to die. The drink is 
certainly likely to cause intense anguish when of the standard 

36 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

consistency, but an excessive or a deficient dose merely pro- 
duces vomiting, and if the bean has been previously boiled 
the same result is effected with pain but without fatal con- 
sequences. All this naturally places the alleged criminal at 
the mercy of the officials in charge. 

Highly interesting is the psychological condition of the 
people concerned in these proceedings. Though personal ani- 
mosity naturally must be supposed to have often asserted it- 
self in accusations and trials of witchcraft, the evidence for 
the general good faith of the plaintiffs is quite convincing. 
Mr. Talbot, a district commissioner to whom we are in- 
debted for an excellent account of the Ekoi, gives even Nen- 
kui a relatively good character, though in his hysterical fear 
of sorcery this chief seems to have decimated his people, 
driving two of his own wives and his own children into 
undergoing the bean ordeal and inflicting untold misery on 
his subjects at large. Not less significant is the mental state 
of the defendants. Our authority graphically describes the 
profound distress of a poor woman charged with the mur- 
der of the grandchildren she had eagerly longed for, and the 
reactions of another accused of having killed her own chil- 
dren: “I ate the . . . bean, so that, if I were a witch and 
had killed the children, I might die also, for I did not want 
to live if I had harmed my little ones.” In this utterance 
there is no longer the complete self-assurance of offended 
innocence. Under the hectoring suggestion of the chief and 
her whole social environment the accused is no longer cer- 
tain of herself and solves the mental conflict by willingly 
submitting to the ordeal. In this connection reported cases 
of confession also demand attention. It is easy enough to 
understand that a woman unable to bear the physical agony 
of the boiling oil should end the torture by admitting her 
guilt. But how can we account for the story of a chief’s son 

EKOI RELIGION ae 

who declared that he and his father had turned into croco- 
diles in order to kill two women crossing a river? Or the 
, confession of a mother that she had killed one of her own in- 
fants as well as her sister? Or the wife who owned to pre- 
venting a sore on her husband’s ankle from healing because 
every night a snake issued from her mouth to lick the 
wound? . 

In order both to understand the underlying mental opera- 
tions and to ward off a prematurely condemnatory verdict 
on the benighted people who can entertain a belief in witch- 
craft at all, it is desirable to turn to our own past. Not in 
the so-called Dark Ages, but in the centuries following “the 
revival of learning” the belief in black magic gained ascend- 
ancy to a point never known before or since and led to the 
death of thousands of victims, not through the ebullition of 
popular wrath but by the solemn machinery of duly consti- 
tuted legal authorities. Barely five generations separate us 
from the time when a maidservant—the contemporary of 
Hume, Kant, Voltaire, and Goethe—was burnt at Glarus, 
Switzerland, in 1782, for bewitching a child. Let any one 
inclined to pass judgment on the cruelty of the Ekoi read 
the official account of the witch-trial at Zug in 1737, by 
which half-a-dozen poor women, ranging in age from twen- 
ty-eight to seventy, were executed or fiendishly tortured to 
death on the accusation of a demented girl of seventeen, who 
professed herself to have held intercourse with the devil 
since the age of four.” There is nothing among the Ekoi 
even remotely approaching in brutality and senselessness the 
treatment of Kathri Gill, one of the victims of the law on 
this occasion. After she had been flogged, racked, and con- 
fined for days in a cell that neither permitted her to stand 
upright nor to lie at full length, refusing all the time to 
confess her dealings with Satan, new incriminating evidence 

38 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

was discovered. She had eked out a livelihood as a peddler 
and her stock-in-trade was found to include a bag of white 
powder and a box containing some salve. Could anything 
be more obvious than that the powder was the poison with 
which she summoned hailstorms and destroyed cattle? Or 
that the salve was smeared on her broomstick in preparation 
for her diabolic flights? Her assertion that the substances 
were nothing but oatmeal and butter were rejected by the 
court. Nevertheless the executioner was ordered to test the 
supposed poison by feeding it to a dog. The experiment 
failed to reveal any harmful consequences. Thereupon the 
half-witted accuser declared that God had naturally pro- 
tected the innocent beast from harm. In vain Kathri Gill 
offered to partake of all the substances herself. Her peti- 
tion was denied and the process of torturing her was re- 
sumed. It is essential to note that the accuser herself, 
though apparently immune from torture by virtue of her 
great service to the State, reaped no material benefits 
from her allegations: she merely had the satisfaction of 
being executed with the sword instead of perishing by 
fire. 

In the trial of Zug, as in most of the Ekoi cases, the ele- 
ment of rapacity is completely lacking as a motive for the 
prosecution : the Swiss victims were uniformly poor women, 
and on the other hand it is not likely that Nenkui’s daughter 
had any property that the chief, her father, lacked. Nor in 
the light of our detailed information can the desire for re- 
venge have played a prominent part in either set of cases. 
In both areas we meet with the phenomenon of self-accusa- 
tion, which at first blush may seem especially enigmatic. But 
in any of our large cities to-day the report of a sensational 
crime leads forthwith to a volley of wholly imaginary and 
often demonstrably false confessions, which the police auto- 

EKOI RELIGION 39 

matically disregard. The psychological explanation is doubt- 
less the one offered by Dr. Stoll. There are in every society 
individuals to whom the suggestion of any idea immediately 
produces a sense of reality, so that they are quite incapable 
of distinguishing what they have merely thought or heard 
from what they have experienced as eyewitnesses. Given 
the firm folk-belief in sorcery, given—even without any spe- 
cial vindictiveness—that emotional ambivalence towards the 
most closely related kin which psycho-analysts describe, the 
mental processes involved in either European or Ekoi so- 
ciety, however obscure in detail, are at least intelligible in 
principle. A stray wave of resentment against a husband 
may lead to a momentary wish to bewitch him; in the ab- 
sence of scientific principles of causation any accident that 
may befall him will inevitably be associated with that wish; 
and the recollection may produce a definite sense of guilt. 
This feeling is naturally reéenforced by the notions prevalent 
in the social environment; nay, it may be not merely stimu- 
lated but awakened by the accusation. The charge of sorcery 
strikes a resonant key when it brings into consciousness sen- 
timents of hitherto latent animosity or coincides with a 
transient mood of bitterness. But even apart from such 
potent affective agencies, the mere dominance of a set of be- 
liefs, backed by all the received authorities of the tribe, suf- 
fices not merely to convince the fear-ridden mob but to shake 
the defendant’s faith in his own innocence. What Sumner 
writes of European conditions is equally applicable to West 
Africa : 

Many perfectly sound-minded and innocent women could not 
be sure that they were not witches. They had had dreams sug- 
gested by the popular notions, or had suffered from nervous af- 
fections which fell in with the popular superstitions.® 

40 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

The Ekoi phenomena can be rightly evaluated only when 
we align them with their European parallels. If they illus- 
trate the disheartening impotence of human reason in the 
face of prestige suggestion, they constitute at the same time 
a cogent if unflattering proof of the psychic unity of man- 
kind. 

GHOSTS 

The magical machinations of neighbors possessed by 
familiar spirits are not the only weird phenomena that 
darken the Ekoi’s existence. The deceased, too, may become 
a menace; for an evil ghost will smite a passer-by in the face, 
causing fatal lock-jaw, and even one’s own forbears may 
avenge neglect by sending illness. A very considerable por- 
tion of Ekoi religion centers in the conceptions of ghosts 
and the ritual practiced to avert or nullify their anger. 

According to native psychology, the soul of a person is 
somehow connected with his breath and leaves him when he 
expires. Diminutive so long as it dwells within his breast, 
it becomes rarefied on his death so as to expand to the size 
and form of his body. But in this condition it remains in- 
visible to all but the “four-eyed” who have the gift of per- 
ceiving spirits. The shadow cast by a live man is also re- 
garded as the shape of the soul. There is evidently some 
confusion in the mind of the Ekoi, for while he is capable 
of declaring that every man has but one soul he quite defi- 
nitely describes how a second soul can be sent into the bush 
to possess an elephant, crocodile, buffalo, or what not. Simi- 
lar contradiction confronts us regarding the immortality of 
the soul: it is said to be indestructible, yet in the folk-tales 
ghosts are slain and recover not by their inherent spiritual 

EKOI RELIGION 41 

quality (ghosts require food like mortals) but through the 
external application of some magically potent medicine. 

It is not only the bush-soul that can go forth in search of 
new fields of activity. In trances the souls of men, and 
more frequently of women, fly away to visit remote places; 
and the fully initiated members of the secret society known 
as Egbo can summon the shadow forms of living men known 
to be far away. 

Animals, trees, rocks, weapons, and household utensils as 
well as human beings are credited with souls, and when food 
dedicated to the spirits remains unaltered to the sight it is 
because the supernatural beings are capable of sucking out 
the “astral” essence of the offering. 

Normally the souls of the dead descend underground to 
join the great Earth deity, Nsi, and only return to this world 
in exceptional cases. But some spirits, either because the 
persons associated with them died a violent death or from 
some special cause, roam about for an indefinite period, en- 
tering the towns for several hours after midnight. Special 
locations are haunted by the ghosts, among them two lakes 
shunned by the natives, who would not even track game in 
the vicinity for fear of arousing the vengeance of the snakes 
and crocodiles credited with the guardianship of these sacred 
waters. 

Ghosts are by no means all bad, and it is even asserted 
that evil ones are usually accompanied by more benevolent 
spirits to prevent mischief. The folk-tales likewise yield tes- 
timony to the kindly sentiments of which the departed are 
capable, for sometimes they befriend visitors and bestow 
valuable powers upon them. Nevertheless the dominant 
note in the native attitude towards these spirits is fear. The 
Ekoi are afraid of the dark because they do not wish to en- 

42 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

counter ghosts.. Ghosts sometimes eat human beings. Even 
the newly deceased have to buy food from older ghosts with 
the decorative scars on their bodies. People take pains to 
exclude ghosts by wearing amulets or keeping lamps lit or 
by burning spices; and they go to great trouble to conciliate 
them. 

Even the ancestral spirits cannot be depended upon, for 
they send disease when they feel neglected. “I do not know,” 
said the head priest of one of the numerous cults, “if ghosts 
can do harm to the living, but I always sacrifice yams and 
plantains to my father’s spirit so that I may not fall sick, 
and to ask him to protect my farms. About once a year, too, 
generally when it is time to cut ‘bush’ for our farms, I sacri- 
fice to my mother, for we know that ghosts are hungry just 
as we are.” Similar offerings are presented to the ancestors 
at funerals, at the building of a new house, or after a return 
from a victorious raid. In cases of illness the diviner de- 
termines not merely whether the cause be sorcery or the 
spirits of the patient’s forbears, but whether the paternal or 
the maternal kin are responsible, and proceeds to call the 
names of all individual ancestors till the identity of the 
disease-giver is ascertained. When the operator has dis- 
covered what the offended ghost demands, his client goes 
before the town, pours out the required libation, deposits 
the food, and prays as follows: “Here is what you asked of 
me. Do not let me be sick any more,” 

Such observances suggest ancestor-worship, but it should 
be noted that ghosts other than ancestors are also propiti- 
ated, that in fact the entrance to every Ekoi town is framed 
with offerings to the ghosts at large, in the hope of keeping 
them from coming in. Moreover, the whole series of rites 
and beliefs about ghosts, though tremendously important, by 
no means exhausts the totality of Ekoi religion. 

EKOI RELIGION 43 

Mysterious Potency 
Mr. Talbot writes: 

The term “Njomm,” is so elusive as to defy definition, but 
as far as may be gathered from the vague conception of the 
Ekoi, it includes all uncomprehended, mysterious forces of 
Nature. 

It is apparently applied both substantively and as an ad- 
jective and corresponds fairly closely to the Crow word 
maxpé. Our authority translates it by what seems to be a 
West African pidgin English expression, but I see no reason 
for unnecessarily introducing such terms and shall try to 
cover the underlying idea by such unexceptionable English 
words as “mysterious,” “supernatural,” “weird,” and, when 
hard put to it, shall fall back upon the classical Ekoi 
njomm. Let us examine the range of application of the 
concept. 

It has already been pointed out that when ghosts are killed 
in the folk-tales they fail to revive by any inherent spiritual 
attribute of theirs. What resuscitates them is the rubbing 
on of a mysterious substance with revival power, so that the 
Lame Boy who functions as the good fairy of Ekoi folklore 
succeeds in bringing to life an infant hero by clandestinely 
applying the same device used by the ghosts among them- 
selves. Similarly what makes ghosts invisible in a particu- 
lar story is the application of some weird black material to- 
gether with a relevant wish formula; when a spying human 
outcast possesses himself of the same substance and utters 
the same charm he, too, becomes endowed with supernatural 
powers and is capable of preventing the ghosts from feast- 
ing. To cite another instance of supernatural power vested 
in what we consider an inanimate object, chalk is capable of 

44 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

bringing good luck to mortals whose bodies are marked with 
it, and accordingly it is rubbed over a newborn infant. 
Again, a tree with magical properties seems to be sacred to 
every town, and among trees the cotton tree is the one most 
feared. Specifically, it is addressed in prayer and presented 
with a gift when an Ekoi desires to revenge himself upon an 
enemy. He will then call aloud the victim’s name, and the 
tree may consummate his wish by seizing and imprisoning 
the enemy’s child. As recently as 1908 a man accused his 
own brother of having tried to imprison their sister in a 
tree. 

Since everything that exists, including manufactured ar- 
ticles, has a soul, it would hardly do to separate personal 
from impersonal manifestations of mysterious power; yet 
in some cases the personal aspect seems to dwindle away, 
while in others we are clearly dealing, to all intents and pur- 
poses, with individual beings wielding superhuman potency. 
When the ghosts are said to have been resuscitated by the 
black njomm, the personal quality is certainly not in the fore- 
ground of the native’s consciousness. Not so when a hunter 
leaving for the chase makes the customary sacrifice to his 
njomm or breaks his spell of ill-luck by a prayer; nor when 
a njomm. is first invoked to smite a tribesman with disaster 
and in more relenting mood adjured to lift the curse. The 
impression derived from a careful reading of the evidence— 
and, indeed, supported by our authority himself—is that the 
Ekoi mind places in one category both personal and imper- 
sonal manifestations of extraordinary power. The differ- 
ence between the two is at all events often far from well- 
defined: the supernatural power seems indeed personal, yet 
unindividualized ; it is a personification of the votary’s wish 
but a blindly mechanical personification. Mfam, for exam- 
ple, the oldest njomm, protects villages from theft; but he or 

EKOI RELIGION 4S 

it is so remorseless a guardian that even a person who inno- 
cently tastes a single plantain without the owner’s permission 
must die. 

However this may be, it seems clear that while there is an 
indefinite number of mysteriously potent agencies, many of 
them are concentrated into personal form and their effigies 
represent the focus for so many distinct cults, some familial, 
others local, still others linked with clubs or fraternities. The 
personal character of these supernatural agencies is also sug- 
gested by an important analogy with ghosts: disease, when 
not caused by sorcery, is the result either of offended njomm 
or of neglected ancestors; and since witchcraft is itself an 
effect of possession, we may say that disease is traced to the 
agency of spiritual beings and that the 2jomm as spirits quite 
naturally figure among pathogenic instruments. Now to say 
this is essentially equivalent to charging the votaries of the 
disease-causing ujomm with sorcery; and in some cases there 
is explicit statement to that effect. For example, the mem- 
bers of the Mfepp cult use their power exclusively to injure 
others, whether they be tribal enemies or townspeople who 
have aroused their resentment, such as dilatory debtors. Sim- 
ilarly, those connected with the Nsann njomm are powerful 
poisoners and can destroy their enemies by lightning. That 
is to say, the salient fear of evil magic has been connected 
by the Ekoi mind with the concept of extraordinary power. 
This association, however, has not uniformly been inter- 
preted in a fashion detrimental to human interests,—quite 
the contrary, indeed, has taken place. As Talbot points out, 
irrespective of local differences the protection against witch- 
craft ranks as the foremost attribute of dominant njomm. 
For example, the destructive agency of Nsann can be over- 
come by the power of Eja. Here we have an epitome of 
what is most essential in the whole matter. Sorcery is so 

46 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

overshadowing an influence in native life that the operation 
of mysterious power is very largely made to hinge on the 
cause and the prevention of witchcraft. 

Gops 

Ekoi theology is in a sense dualistic: while there is a host 
of supernatural beings, two take precedence in all ceremonies 
or prayers, even when these are primarily associated with 
ancestors or other divine powers. These two major deities 
are Osaw and Nsi, the former associated with the sky, the 
latter with the earth. Both are at present conceived as male, 
but Mr. Talbot finds some hints of the formerly feminine 
character of Nsi. Between them these two deities, when 
originally living together, made all things in the world, but 
later they agreed to separate and took up their abode in the 
heavens and under the earth, respectively. Osaw is cruel; 
sometimes he sends too much rain, at others not enough; 
then again he will terrify and kill human beings with thun- 
der and lightning. Nsi, on the other hand, is benevolent 
and ripens the crops. All witchcraft and all bad njomm are 
interpreted as having been sent by Osaw, while all good 
mystic power is traced to Nsi. 

Sometimes people pray to the latter to destroy Ojje (sorcery), 
for it is well known that no witchcraft can stand against his 
might. 

All of this smacks of Manichzan philosophy, but nothing is 
more remote from the Ekoi mind than the conception of a 
cosmic conflict between good and evil, with the fate of man- 
kind as a possible stake. Nsi and Osaw are not to be set at 
loggerheads by so paltry a point of difference as their re- 
spective attitudes towards humanity. They are the best of 

EKOI RELIGION 47 

friends, and Nsi orders people to make offerings to his celes- 
tial counterpart. However, the benevolent Earth deity is 
regarded as the stronger, and of the emblems found in most 
of the native habitations by far the majority are sacred to 
Nsi. 

The above is the notion of these deities entertained in ab- 
stract discussion, but it is by no means strictly borne out by 
the spontaneous evidence of the folk-tales in which Osaw 
and Nsi play a part. The “good” Nsi no less than the malev- 
olent Osaw is pictured as cruelly discriminating against an 
inoffensive but unloved son and plotting his death; and what 
is at least equally remarkable, this supreme god against 
whom no sorcery can prevail is on occasion completely 
thwarted in his wicked designs. Still stranger is the tale of 
how Nsi, after having been bribed into sending Lamb to his 
destruction, is duped and himself killed by a falling tree. 
It is also interesting to find Lamb warning Nsi of a great 
njomm! After all this, it is not surprising that Nsi should 
at times fear Osaw, irrespective of his theoretical superior- 
ity; and here another discrepancy must be noted: while in 
philosophical exposition the Ekoi represents his two chief 
deities as closely allied by bonds of friendship, they appear, 
at least in two myths, as bitter enemies. Needless to say, 
it is no profound ethical difference that divides them, but 
the purely personal grievance suffered by Osaw’s children at 
Nsi’s hands. Sometimes it almost appears as though Osaw 
and Nsi have exchanged parts in folklore, for while Nsi may 
indulge in wanton cruelty, Osaw is capable of benevolence, as 
in giving water to mankind, who had formerly been obliged 
to do without. But such loving-kindness is episodic, and the 
god conforms more nearly to his norm when he chastises 
Lame Boy for his Promethean theft of fire or envies Tor- 
toise’s wisdom. As for his supernatural potency, Osaw, like 

48 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

his terrestrial compeer, may be outwitted by adversaries and 
even slain by the son whom he had unnaturally sought to de- 
stroy. 

In short, the two great deities of the Ekoi are no more 
consistently conceived than the Sun or Old-Man-Coyote of 
the Crow. Neither is uniformly good; and, however power- 
ful they may be, somewhere in the universe there are stores 
of mystic potency they have never tapped and which can be 
used to frustrate their designs. 

Compared with other peoples, the Ekoi pay little attention 
to celestial phenomena; even the Sun, though addressed in 
daily prayer at sunrise, merely serves as an intermediary be- 
tween the supplicant and the two main deities. One other 
spirit, however, must be singled out from the host of 
njomm,—the goddess Nimm, who appears in the triple form 
of woman, snake, and crocodile. She is the guardian of 
farms and crops, and figures above all as the women’s deity. 
Her priestesses are famed for their skill in divination, and 
their sorority, from which men are rigorously excluded, is 
invested with such a halo of superstition by, the natives that 
it ranks as the equal of the Egbo, the great men’s organiza- 
tion, Nimm will avenge wrongs to her followers, and when 
a man is seized by a crocodile it may be in answer to an 
abused wife’s petition. Every eighth day is a rest-day in 
honor of Nimm, and if any woman should venture to break 
the rule and farm her plot, her labors would be destroyed 
by the beasts that are the goddess’s slaves. As might be an- 
ticipated from her animal associations, Nimm is a cruel 
deity ; when the great yam festival is held in her honor, she 
craves offerings in compensation for the fertilization of the 
land, and any man entering the water during a period of 
seven days is slain as a sacrifice to the goddess. 

EKOI RELIGION 49 

RITUAL 

Some of the most characteristic features of Ekoi ritualism 
have already been mentioned incidentally in the preceding ac- 
count. In contrast to anything reported for the Crow, there is 
an elaborate procedure of divination and a tendency to pacify 
the spirits by bloody offerings, usually of such domesticated 
animals as goats and cows, but sometimes even of human 
beings. Other elements of West African ceremonialism are 
not so foreign to Plains Indian usage. Thus, when we learn 
of the pot, the queerly shaped pieces of carved wood, the 
sacred knife, and the white feathers cherished by every 
Nimm-worshiper in a special shrine in her room, we are re- 
minded of the miscellaneous assemblage of sacred objects 
often united in a Crow medicine-bundle. 

Still more reminiscent of the Plains, though rather dif- 
ferent in both spirit and details, are the more or less dramatic 
performances of the numerous Ekoi societies, some of them 
executed in the course of the funeral rites in honor of a de- 
ceased man by his fellow-members, others as part of the 
normal business of these organizations or by way of enter- 
tainment. Even the children have clubs which practice pub- 
lic performances, and the mingling of sportive and religious 
aspects in these ceremonies is well illustrated by an experi- 
ence of Mr. Talbot. A group of children appeared in a 
pageant before him, hoping to be rewarded for their pains 
with some small coin. As is customary in corresponding 
processions of the adult, one participant had his face con- 
cealed with cloth, and the British spectator innocently pulled 
off the covering, which seemed to handicap the little player. 
At once the children uttered a cry of protest, while the mum- 
mer covered his face with his hands and “the elders has- 
tened up to rearrange the veils about him, volubly explain- 

50 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

ing that the face of the ‘image’ must never be seen by his 
companions.” 

Among the men’s organizations the Egbo takes prece- 
dence. It is a fraternity subdivided into at least seven 
grades with increasing entrance fees. There is a head priest 
for the whole order, with lesser chiefs for the various grades 
and other functionaries. Every village has its Egbo house; 
indeed, the first thing on moving to a new site is to erect a 
shed to mark the site of the permanent club lodge. In the 
interior there are carved pillars and a long cut stone sacred 
to Nimm. The ritual, which is imperfectly known to sci- 
ence, is extremely intricate, involving many distinct cults 
and diverse sacrificial observances. The utmost mystery 
was formerly maintained in the performance of certain cere- 
monies, and intruders, even though by mere chance, might 
be flogged to death or otherwise dispatched. In spite of this 
secrecy, or rather as part and parcel of the correlated ter- 
rorization of outsiders, there were spectacular public per- 
formances, at which each degree exhibited distinctive 
dances, tunes, and costumes. At least one chief performer, 
evidently designed to impersonate a supernatural being, ap- 
peared in a long garment furnished with eye-holes, robing 
him from crown to toe, and usually topped by a mask. The 
player was accompanied by one or more assistants, some of 
whom were generally prepared to beat spectators or those 
who had offended the fraternity. The Egbo is charged with 
political and judicial functions of the utmost importance to 
the tribe, but for our purpose only the ceremonial associa- 
tions are considered here, and even they in the most summary 
fashion, 

EKOI RELIGION 51 

CoMPARISON OF Exor AND Crow RELIGION 

The essence of Crow religion was found in the visionary 
experience. That of the Ekoi is not so easily summarized. On 
the intellectual side, at least, it is difficult to derive the main 
features from any one source of origin. That there is in the 
individual consciousness an overpowering sense of the ex- 
traordinary, sometimes more, sometimes less clearly individ- 
ualized, is true enough; but this hardly suffices for a charac- 
terization when we recall that this very same recognition of 
the supernatural has led to such divergent results among the 
Crow. What seems to set off the faith of the Ekoi most 
sharply is not this or that type of practice, this or that form 
of belief, but an emotional undertone that somehow pene- 
trates the whole of their religion. Theirs is 

a land full of mystery and terror, of magic plants, of rivers of 
good and ill fortune, of trees and rocks ever lowering to engulf 
unwary wayfarers; where the terror of witchcraft stalks abroad, 
and where, against this dread, the most devoted love or faithful 
service counts as naught. 

This somberness of outlook we should seek in vain among 
the Crow. 

When from such general impressions we turn to concrete 
elements, a fact of the utmost significance confronts us. 
Most of the phenomena that occur in either tribe are also 
found in the other, but they are quite differently weighted. 
For example, the individual psychic experience that looms 
so large in Crow life is not lacking among the Ekoi. 
Wraiths of dead friends appear in the dark to warn of dan- 
ger or to demand offerings. In the dead of night men see 
some of their acquaintances holding solemn conclave and 
suddenly assuming the shapes of ducks and elephants, At 

52 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the jeopardy of her life a woman confesses having a snake 
familiar, which appears to her in her sleep. A person mys- 
teriously linked with the Oji tree will suddenly hear it call- 
ing and must set out post-haste by night or day to respond 
to the summons, regardless of circumstances, as when a 
warder deliriously leaves his post to dash into the bush: 
“To-night I was very tired and lay down on my bed. In 
my sleep my tree began to call ‘Oji, Oji” I woke and still 
heard it call. So I started up to run out into the night. It 
always calls about the time of the new yams, sometimes ear- 
lier, sometimes later. When they tried to stop me it called 
louder and louder. So I fought them to get away and go to 
my tree.” It would be foolish to deny that such experi- 
ences may be of the utmost importance to the individual. 
Nevertheless it remains true that they are far from having 
the universal and pivotal, because socially standardized, sig- 
nificance attaching to them in the Plains of North America. 
On the other hand, such a phenomenon as divination is 
not wholly absent among the Crow, for occasionally a war- 
rior will read his fate by examining the blood of a badger 
mixed with that of a buffalo; but the procedure figures so 
rarely that in my general account it was possible to ignore it 
completely. Evil magic was certainly practiced by some of 
the Crow, but it was not often leveled against a tribesman, 
let alone a relative, hence that abiding terror of sorcery even 
in the midst of the Ekoi family circle has no parallel in 
Crow society. Furthermore, Crow sorcery is practically al- 
ways linked with the favoritism displayed by the tutelary 
spirit acquired in a vision, so that its associations are quite 
different from those of its equivalent in West Africa. Simi- 
larly, the belief in ghosts bears a quite different character in 
the two areas: it exists, indeed, among the Crow, but with 
only an infrequent religious association based on the sporadic 

EKOI RELIGION 53 

appearance of ghosts in visions; among the Ekoi it consti- 
tutes one of the most obtrusive phases of their adjustment 
to the supernatural. 

The result of this brief comparison is an important one. 
Merely to catalog the occurrence of such and such beliefs 
and observances is a futile enterprise. When we know that 
a tribe practices witchcraft, believes in ghosts, recognizes the 
mysterious potency resident in inanimate nature, or, it may 
be, the supremacy of some one supernatural being, we know 
precisely nothing concerning the religion of the people con- 
cerned. Everything depends on the interdependence of the 
several departments of supernaturalism, on the emotional 
weighting that attaches to each and every one of them. 

REFERENCES 

1 This sketch is based on Talbot: 13-88, 165-202, 230-241, et 
passim. 

2 Stoll : 385-389, 397-430. 

8 Sumner : 119. 

CHAPTER III 

BUKAUA RELIGION ? 
Macic 

Sorcery does not play as devastating a part in the Huon 
Gulf littoral of New Guinea as in West Africa, yet the 
belief in its reality is sufficiently strong. Though there 
is no evidence that the dread of its practitioners invades 
the intimacy of the family circle, outsiders are potential 
agents of evil, and the natives cautiously remove any 
material that might furnish them a starting-point for their 
malpractices. But among the Bukaua and their congeners 
witchcraft, however important, is only one special mani- 
festation of a more general system of ideas, the faith in 
magic; and this system is founded on a triple conception,— 
the notion that desired ends can be attained by vicarious 
action at a distance, the belief in the efficacy of a prescribed 
though irrelevant conduct, and a dependence on the super- 
natural potency of certain traditional formulas. How these 
ideas are interlaced in the operations of daily life can easily 
be illustrated by a variety of examples. 

A number of magicians specialize in regulating the 
weather. Theirs is a lucrative profession, for people are 
eager to bribe a wizard into stopping excessive rainfall or 
ending a season of drought. His stock-in-trade consists 
essentially of two coconut cups and a great multitude of 
little stones; from two species of vine growing in the depths 
of the forest he squeezes enough sap to make a cup half 
full, then stone after stone is thrown into it till the fluid 

54 

BUKAUA RELIGION 55 

overflows its container: the more it overflows, the greater 
will be the precipitation. Thunder is produced by shaking 
the stones together with fragments of the tough skull of 
a certain fish in one of the cups, after which a hollow sound 
is made by striking a palm trunk, while lightning is simu- 
lated by tearing a strip of pandanus leaf. The two vessels 
are covered and left in the woods. If the wizard is hired 
to make the rain cease, he fetches his cups and dries them 
on a stage over his camp-fire. 

So far there is the characteristic belief in “imitative 
magic,” i.e., the belief that a desired effect can be produced 
by the simple device of imitating it under convenient con- 
ditions: as the sap overflows the vessel, so the longed-for 
rain will flow from the firmament ; as the contents evaporate, 
so the moisture will disappear from the atmosphere. But 
this is far from being the whole story. Over his cups the 
wizard must mutter a magic formula: 

) The cuttle-fish was devoured by the shark, whose inside 
turned quite black. The hen and the cassowary were traveling 
in a boat, but the cassowary, angered because people despised 
him, destroyed the boat. The hen flew into a village, which was 
called “Hen,” and a giant tortoise carried the cassowary to 
Buso; when it got to the big grassy plain of Bahom, the casso- 
wary turned into a rock, which is still standing there. 

Obviously this pointless tale bears no clear relation to 
the magician’s purpose, and the same irrelevancy appears 
in the conduct prescribed for him: until the rain falls he 
must refrain from work and betel-chewing; on the other 
hand, he is obliged to rub his hair with black earth, dotting 
his forehead and nose, and must take a daily bath in the 
sea at dawn while extending his hands over the water and 
calling the rain. It is by fulfilling the triple set of condi- 

56; PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tions,—by using imitative magical practices, by reciting a 
mystic form of words, and by following a ritual mode of 
conduct,—that the wizard makes sure of gaining his ends. 
A similar combination of observances precedes and ac- 
companies the holding of a pig market. Swine form the 
most highly esteemed article of property, and their public 
sale is linked with a good deal of solemnity. The inaugu- 
rators of the celebration provide a large number of well- 
fattened pigs and invite prospective buyers, who feel hon- 
ored by the summons. In order to guarantee high prices 
and a peaceful gathering and to avert the premature death 
of the pigs selected for the market, the owners resort to 
magical practices of a somewhat involved character. A 
series of little stones represent the pigs’ vital organs; others, 
varying in color, designate correspondingly colored pigs. 
The sellers. or their agents must submit-to a rigid diet, all 
food except roasted taro being tabooed. In a double bowl 
filled with water are kept a snake and a fish, and on their 
safety, insured by the celebrants’ fast, depends that of the 
pigs. The vital force of snake and fish are communicated 
to the stones representing the pigs’ organs and are in turn 
fostered by the presence of herbs credited with high nutri- 
tive value. Less transparent is the practice of setting up 
a stone idol between two clay representations of boars’ tusks 
for the purpose of luring buyers who own valuables worth 
acquiring in trade, or the clandestine blowing of little shells 
to make the guests amass plenty of these desirable media 
of exchange. On the other hand, for the preservation of 
law and order the procedure is again based on an intelligi- 
ble enough association of ideas: a bit of root is burnt and 
the ashes are secretly sprinkled over the site of the gather- 
ing, so that they may impart their coolness to the foot of 
a buyer who should be fired with anger. The charm recited 

BUKAUA RELIGION 57 

on this occasion over the double bowl is somewhat less 
cryptic in its application than the one cited above: 

A man and his cousin, named Gasi and Anu, wished to hold a 
pig market; they conferred about the swine and fattened the 
young pigs until they were big in order to prepare for a feast. 
Before that they cooked several little pigs and ate them; then 
the man himself turned into a pig and made a litter. His cousin 
went, constantly looking for him and saying, “Cousin, what are 
you doing?” He answered: “Go, look for our wives and bid 
them come to fetch the little pig.” They carried it away, kept 
it till it was big enough and gave birth to plenty of pigs, so 
there were a great many. Then he said, “Cousin, let us not 
wait any longer, but hasten to arrange a pig market after two 
rainy seasons.” They acted accordingly. There were a great 
many pigs. They made a new clearing and entertained each 
other, and the people brought boars’ tusks and swine there. 

In short, the pig-seller uses the same pattern as the rain- 
maker,—vicarious magical procedure, ritualistic abstinence, 
and a mystic spell. 

This pattern is equally discernible in the machinations of 
the death-dealing sorcerer, which combine the processes of 
imitative with those of “contagious” magic, that is, center 
in the bewitching of some object once intimately connected 
with the enemy. The profession is usually followed by 
puny, deformed men, who inherit the technique from their 
fathers but only begin practice after a period of apprentice- 
ship and a trial of their competence. A wizard is powerless 
unless he can secure some object, however small, that has 
been in contact with his enemy; a remnant of his victim’s 
meal, the spittle he has expectorated in coughing, the paint 
he has used to daub his hair, will suffice, and to obtain 
any one of these stealth and trickery are employed. But 
the price of success is once more a prescribed form of con- 

58 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

duct, both positive and negative: the magician must not 
bathe nor drink anything except coconut juice nor eat any 
but roasted dishes ; and he is obliged to consume what others 
shun,—certain species of onions, some bitter fruits, a slightly 
poisonous plant. The fragment secured is wrapped up in 
leaves, tied together, and suspended in the depths of the 
forest. It is the victim’s soul itself that is thus bound by 
proxy, and its owner must inevitably fall sick. As soon as 
the disease takes a serious turn, the patient’s kin determine 
the sorcerer’s identity and pay him to desist from his pur- 
pose. If he has not been hired by persons of greater con- 
sequence and regards the fee as adequate, he will readily 
grant the request, breathe on some leaves, murmur a spell 
over them and send them to the sick man, while he himself 
will go into the woods and nullify his previous acts by 
putting the package into water. This leads to the patient’s 
recovery. Should he remain ill, the fault is laid to the 
charge of another sorcerer or, if his conciliation likewise 
fails to produce results, to that of evil spirits. But the 
magician may refuse the gifts offered, retire to the forest, 
and there put his package into glowing ashes while mutter- 
ing his spell: “As the fire slowly consumes this package, 
so shall disease destroy the sick man.” Then the patient 
must die, but his death will be avenged by his relatives 
unless the crafty wizard seeks safety in flight. 

The examples cited sufficiently indicate the nature of 
Bukaua magic. Its specific object naturally varies, em- 
bracing in fact almost the whole range of native activities. 
Magic is used to insure a haul of fish, to acquire the min- 
strel’s art, to fascinate women, to cause a famine. In vir- 
tually every instance the recital of a formula—either a 
prayer addressed to the ancestral spirits or a snatch of a 
tale as in the quoted spells—is linked with a certain mode 

BUKAUA RELIGION 59 

of procedure; and in the cases most fully reported the 
practitioner is under obligation to observe certain taboos 
and some positive fixed form of conduct. 

SOULS AND SPIRITS 

According to Bukaua psychology, the soul (katw) leaves 
the body to lead an independent existence during sleep, and 
the same applies to fainting-spells; when a person awakes 
from sleep or swoon, his soul has come back. Death, too, 
liberates the soul, which becomes a spirit (balum or ngalau) 
capable of assuming any shape and most frequently tending 
to malevolence. The souls of the deceased reside in the 
underworld, whose entrance lies towards the east. Very 
little attention is paid to their mode of life there, which in 
general is pictured as similar to existence in this world. The 
kindred Jabim display a like indifference but are slightly 
more explicit: they represent the ghosts as haunting the 
woods at night but retiring at dawn. Neither tribe has 
the slightest conception of other-worldly reward and pun- 
ishment. 

Although Herr Lehner, our authority, sometimes seems 
to imply that all spirits are derived from the souls of 
the deceased, this does not appear from his concrete descrip- 
tion of the host of balum beings. It is true that certain 
bodily afflictions are traced to the action of spirits wishing 
to avenge their neglect by the living, or to inflict penalties 
for a breach of tribal custom. But when in the enumera- 
tion of spiritual beings the local and village spirits are 
singled out as the ancestors of the villagers, the question 
naturally arises whether the others should not be conceived 
as beings dissociated from the idea of ever having tenanted 

a human body. 

60 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

However this may be, a variety of supernatural persons 
are believed to affect the life of the natives, and so far 
from being confined to the above-mentioned resting-place 
in the underworld they haunt beach and stream, wood and 
village. The village spirits, who are to be regarded as pre- 
eminently the ancestral ghosts, are invoked in the pig-hunt, 
in tillage, and on special occasions; they receive offerings 
either as a bribe to induce favorable action or as a thanks- 
giving for past services. It would be perilous to excite their 
wrath by disrespectful behavior. Deference is also shown 
to the field spirits, who may grant plentiful crops. They 
are wont to sit on the stumps of trees as sentries warding 
off danger to the plantation. If the fruits near such a 
stump grow to exceptional size, this proves the presence 
of the spirit, and no one may make a noise in the vicinity, 
let alone chop wood from the trunk of the tree. 

With these potentially benign figures may be contrasted 
a series of wholly or predominantly malevolent ones. Bumo 
infests the bushes along the beach and attacks innocent 
passers-by, who are seized with fainting-spells on theif re- 
turn to the village. Balum-buauwi haunts the sinister-look- 
ing recesses of streams; her specialty is to blight little 
children carried across the creek by their mothers, for she 
infects them with the wrinkled appearance of her own 
countenance. Mothers crossing streams at uncanny-looking 
fords can only safeguard their infants by murmuring a 
spell over some rocks and then throwing the stones towards 
both mouth and source of the watercourse. Many a Bukaua 
seriously asserts that he has seen this ill-favored spirit and 
heard her song. Again in the primeval forest there dwell 
innumerable trolls, whose voices are recognized in the chirp- 
ing of wood insects. They play all manner of tricks on 
people, causing dogs to stray from the right track, making 

BUKAUVA RELIGION 61 

wild pigs ferocious, or assuming the shape of snakes to 
commit depredations in human dwellings. They—especially 
one of their number named Molo—are inclined to make 
men mad or epileptic. 

Besides the definitely localized beings there are the vagrant 
demons, most prominently represented by the love spirits 
(wasu). All the love charms now in vogue are derived 
from a single being of this category, whose story is told 
as follows. Once upon a time a native seeking shelter 
from a shower discovered the spirit sitting in the foliage 
of a big tree. He reported what he had seen and all the 
villagers hastened to behold the wasu. The women became 
inflamed with passion and forgot their conjugal duties in 
their infatuation with the spirit. Their husbands, incensed 
at such conduct, cut down the tree and killed the seducer, 
who bore the form of a child, was beautifully decorated, 
and had a sweet-smelling body. One of two netted bags 
in his possession was found to contain every kind of love 
charm, and since this event these charms have been used 
by men in abducting women. Another member of this 
mysterious group seeks intercourse with men and women, 
the result being sickness and death. 

Owing to the obscurity that envelops the relations of the 
ancestral spirits to those of other categories among the 
Bukaua, it may be well to cite some data from the neigh- 
boring Tami Islanders as possibly shedding additional light 
on the beliefs of their fellow-Melanesians. 

The Tami rather clearly distinguish the spirits of the 
departed from supernatural beings of other categories. The 
latter are numerous and of varied character. There are local 
spirits, many of them double-faced, haunting ravine and 
mountain top, secluded rocks, and giant trees. Only the 
natives of neighboring villages may approach such spots 

62 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

with impunity; all others are liable to suffer punishment, 
whether in the form of sickness or some mishap in travel- 
ing. This type figures prominently in legendary lore. One 
representative, Tumangon, for example, lures children to 
accompany him on a voyage and plans to desert them on 
a lonely islet, but by shrewdly playing on his gluttony they 
succeed in foiling and destroying the monster. Yet the 
story of an almost namesake of this ogre’s, Tumangon 
Sumosum, proves that this class of beings is not conceived 
as wholly malevolent. Rebuffed by village after village 
when he approaches in the guise of a skeleton, the spirit 
gratefully rewards a hospitable old man with a bountiful 
supply of valuable dogs’ teeth. Logically the love-spirits 
would seem to fall into the same class of local spirits as 
the foregoing, for they, too, haunt definite spots, such as 
groves and springs; but in the aboriginal scheme they con- 
stitute a separate group characterized by their power to 
seduce young maidens with magic songs or redolent splinters 
of wood. Their essence is of finer stuff than mortal flesh, 
and when a young woman in her ardor seizes a spirit before 
he has had time to “materialize” she crushes him, though 
ultimately he may be restored from a drop of his blood. A 
third variety of spirit is called ding. Its representatives 
are body-snatchers and have the power of assuming the 
shape of a dog or of one of the mourners of a deceased 
native. They appear in folk-literature as stupid trolls who 
are always hoodwinked by their human adversaries. 

Still another series of supernatural beings are dignified 
by our authority with the title of “deities.” These include 
the race of buwun, who inhabit an otherwise untenanted 
island and are represented on house planks as having fish- 
like bodies and human heads. Normally invisible, they 
assume human form in order to seduce women, who in- 

BUKAUA RELIGION 63 

variably die as a result of their adulterous intercourse with 
the spirits. Even in quite recent times inexplicable deaths 
of women have been explained as due to such experiences. 
Indeed, the buwun are generally a dangerous lot, causing 
earthquakes and epidemics. Nevertheless, there is little 
attempt to placate them: only when the ravages of disease 
are especially terrifying they receive the offering of an 
emaciated pig or a mangy cur. 

Strangely enough, there is no consensus of opinion as 
to whether Anuto, the generally recognized creator, belongs 
to the buwun. Some figure him as occupying a fair island, 
others picture him sitting on a subterranean cliff, where a 
turning of his body produces an earthquake; then again he 
is described as seated on the earth and supporting the sky 
with his head. At all events, he is definitely the creator 
of the world and of the first human couple. His is the 
first portion of food at public banquets and markets, and 
the presentation of this offering constitutes the whole of 
his cult; nor can it be regarded as involving much of a 
sacrifice since aboriginal theory has it that only the soul 
of the food is partaken by the gods while its material 
essence may be consumed by their votaries. Sometimes 
Old Panku, instead of Anuto, is represented as the creator 
and earthquake-producer. Apparently the inconsistencies 
in Tami cosmology are in part due to the existence of 
distinct family traditions, which in the absence of a theo- 
logically-minded caste have not been welded into unison. 

But all of the aforementioned beings are of relatively 
subordinate importance as compared with the ancestral 
spirits or, to be more accurate, the spirits of those forbears 
personally known to the descendants. _They dwell in the 
underworld, where everything is finer than on this earth, 
amidst such abundance of fruit that life is far easier than 

64 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

here. Yet it is but a continuation of earthly existence: 
men work and marry, fall sick and die, when they are 
transformed into worms or white ants; or as some contend, 
into goblins of the woods who damage the natives’ crops. 
The spirits are far from hospitable to arriving souls. A 
favorite practical joke of theirs consists in sending the 
novices up trees, then suddenly seizing them by their feet 
and jerking them down so that the rough bark cuts open 
all their bodies. To prevent such scurvy treatment the 
kin of the deceased present them with gifts, the souls of 
which are designed to placate their hosts of the spirit world. 

The dead are not confined to their subterranean abode 
but are able to reappear at any time. This happens most 
commonly when one of their relatives approaches death; 
then they assemble to conduct him to his prospective home. 
However, this conception is not universal, and at times the 
departing soul is exhorted not to go astray. But though 
the dead may return to this world, they do not linger here, 
because it is too cold for them. Some families make a 
practice of summoning the spirits of recently departed kins- 
men, which appear in the shape of snakes and may be 
consulted as oracles by those conversant with their lan- 
guage, which consists of whistling sounds. Such perform- 
ances take place only at night and are conducted mainly 
by women. 

It is not superfluous to add that the séances are wholly 
devoid of any material advantage for the managers, and 
the same holds for the complementary enterprise of visiting 
the spirit land. Here, too, women play the most important 
part and transmit their powers—that is, their magic spells 
—to their daughters. If any one desires information 
from a dead relative, he provides the seer with some article 
used by the person in question, upon which she lies down 

BUKAUA RELIGION 65 

after rubbing her forehead with ginger and murmuring her 
magic formula. Then her soul descends to the spirits and 
secures the required revelation from her deceased kin. The 
fame acquired by the performance is her sole reward. 

The importance of magic that appears in the last-cited 
performance is equally manifest in the treatment of disease. 
There is one formula against pains in the chest, another 
against catarrh, a third against rheumatism. Spirits, who 
might snatch away the souls of first-born infants, are ban- 
ished by the singing of special songs. In general, there 
is a magical rite for restoring a patient’s soul when pur- 
loined by ghosts. The performer, reciting his spells, chews 
ginger or the bark of a certain tree, places these substances 
into a shell, and blows this as an instrument. The blast 
recalls the soul, while the odor of the ingredients drives 
away the spirits. 

In this connection it remains to explain some interesting 
points of Tami psychological theory. The natives recognize 
two souls, a “long” and a “short” one, both occupying the 
abdomen. The long soul leaves the body during sleep and 
also permanently just before death, when it announces the 
impending event to relatives who happen to reside else- 
where; finally it migrates by way of western New Britain 
to a village on the north coast. It is this long soul that 
is stolen by malevolent ghosts and has to be restored to the 
body. On the other hand, the “short” soul only departs 
after death and even then lingers about the corpse before 
going to the underworld, from where it returns to molest 
the sorcerer who caused its departure and to see that his 
deed is avenged by the victim’s kin. 

66 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

CEREMONIALISM 

The outstanding Bukaua ceremonial is that connected 
with the admission of boys to an adult’s privileges. There 
is indeed a parallel puberty rite for girls: common to both 
performances are the segregation of the novices, their in- 
struction by elders, the observance of food taboos and other 
restrictions, and the formal promotion to a new status. | 
But the social import of the girls’ ceremony is relatively 
slight; or, rather, its significance is essentially of a private 
character. While among various African peoples initiation 
means entrance into an organization of women comparable 
to the men’s society, no such goal is attained in New 
Guinea: the young maiden is merely recognized as of mar- 
riageable age. The youths’ initiation, on the other hand, leads 
to what may be called full-fledged citizenship, from which 
women are by the unwritten tribal law forever barred. 

This basic distinction in favor of the male sex is prom- 
inent throughout the great festival, Women are mystified 
and terrorized so long as it lasts. A hoax is propounded 
for their exclusive consumption. The Balum, they are told, 
is a voracious demon hungering for their sons, but willing 
to disgorge them at the price of a fat pig a head. It is also 
well to flatten his gullet with taro and other vegetable food. 
Thus it becomes the mothers’ duty to fatten pigs and amass 
provisions for a solemnity they are never allowed to wit- 
ness. Circumcision forms an indispensable part of initia- 
tion, and to account for the wound the women are informed 
that the monster has bitten or scratched his victims in spew- 
ing them forth again. Under the primitive conditions of 
performing the operation it naturally proves fatal at times, 
and in that event the unfortunate mother is told that her 
ransom was rejected by the ogre as inadequate, or that 

BUKAUA RELIGION 67 

the boy failed to conform to the regulations. No wonder 
the terrified women display great zeal in raising pigs and 
part from their sons in a state of tremendous excitement. 
In order to keep the secret from the female sex the newly 
initiated are warned on pain of horrible penalties never to 
divulge the real nature of the festivities, while the women 
must leave the village when the ceremonial structure has 
been built, for they, too, would fall prey to the insatiable 
monster if he caught sight of them. To lend verisimilitude 
to the strange tale, the men simulate the spirit’s voice by 
musical instruments, especially by the swinging of the leaf- 
shaped wooden slabs known as bull-roarers. Only two or 
three aged women, in some unexplained manner, are cog- 
nizant of what really takes place, and these are bribed into 
silence by surreptitious gifts of pork. 

While the festival is thus a severe test of the women’s 
nerves, it is naturally an at least equally grave ordeal for 
the tyros themselves. After the heart-rending separation 
from their mothers they are led blindfolded to the cere- 
monial building that is to form their abode for from three 
to five months. There two hidden sentries guard them, 
terrifying the boys with strange noises and menacing the 
over-bold with a sharp adze. Novices and guardians alike 
must practice continence and abstain from pork, lizards, 
mice, and fresh water. Otherwise the pigs and the novices 
might both die. Except for the plaiting of mats and the 
manufacture of flutes, the young men do absolutely no 
work during the period of seclusion, nor are they permitted 
to bathe until the morning of the operation. Just before 
the circumcision itself the elders frighten the boys by every 
manner of noise,—the swinging of dozens of booming bull- 
roarers, the clamor of hundreds of human voices, the weird 
rattling of shells and stones suspended from the tops of 

68 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

trees. The novices’ anxiety is not lessened when their 
hands are tied behind their backs and they are carried 
or led blindfolded to the site of the operation, where sham 
attacks are made on them and their guides; nor is circum- 
cision with a splint of obsidian an unalloyed pleasure. Cries 
of pain, however, are muffled by boars’ tusks tied in front 
of the victims’ mouths, and drowned by the elders’ thun- 
derous music. After a bath the boys return to the cere- 
monial house and may join in a vast feast. Any surplus 
food must be buried lest the women grow skeptical as 
to the Balum’s voracity. This day’s proceedings form the 
climax of the festival and alien visitors depart forthwith. 
There follows a two or three months’ period of convales- 
cence, at the close of which the novices, now conversant 
with the true state of affairs, are once more pledged to 
secrecy and receive sage advice as to ethical conduct. Gayly 
bedecked with ornaments, their faces daubed with paint, 
finely carved combs stuck in their hair, the boys return to 
the society of their mothers and the village at large, greeted 
by a merry and vociferous throng; and with a final banquet 
the ceremony as a whole comes to a close. 

So far, then, the Balum festival appears as a means of 
exploiting the women and of admitting youths to the grade 
of adult manhood after a severe test. But this by no 
means exhausts the content of this composite cultural phe- 
nomenon. The occasion has political and economic sig- 
nificance. It unites, at intervals of from ten to eighteen 
years, not only the Bukaua and the kindred Jabim, but also 
the Tami Islanders and the wholly unrelated Kai of Papuan 
speech. Since all feuds are suspended during the course 
of the ritual, intertribal amity is promoted, and its basis, 
as so often happens, lies in the trade relations involved, 
for the foreign guests are invited on the assumption that 

BUKAUA RELIGION 69 

they are eager to buy pigs. In other words, the perform- 
ance by which boys become full-fledged members of their 
own community is linked with the quite unrelated idea of 
a pig market. Logically enough, the taboos imposed on 
the novices are interpreted to safeguard not only their in- 
terests, but the health of the pigs destined for sale. 

The Balum proceedings evidently loom as awe-inspiring 
mysteries in the minds of the women and uninitiated males. 
What, however, is their religious significance for the in- 
siders, the adult men who conduct the performances? This 
inevitable query is not easily answered. It is tempting to 
deny the religious feature altogether and to cite in support 
the conscious deception of the women for the benefit of 
the men. Now of course so much is clear, that the per- 
formers cannot have any faith in the cock-and-bull story 
told for feminine consumption. But from this it does 
not follow that they have no faith in some mysterious be- 
ing associated with the ritual, still less that the ritual itself 
is wanting in sacredness from their point of view. As a 
matter of fact, occasional utterances by the natives leave 
little doubt on the subject. One informant conceives the 
Balum as the incarnation of spirits of long-deceased men, 
who on reappearing demand a pig; another describes him 
as the ancestor of a group of villagers or pictures a weird, 
vague personality responsible for landslides and other catas- 
trophic events. Moreover, the bull-roarers are far more 
than a mere means for the intimidation of women. Each 
bears the name of a departed villager, to which is added 
the honorific epithet “the old” in the case of those repre- 
senting distinguished men of the past. In these latter cases 
individual peculiarities are indicated; for example, two lat- 
eral humps are a reminder of Gumba’s protruding hip- 
bones, and an obliquely hung instrument perpetuates the 

70 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

memory of Wabo’s disfigured nose. These major or “rul- 
ing’ bull-roarers enjoy special veneration, are carefully 
guarded by the master of the initiation ceremonies, and sup- 
ply the villagers with a rallying-cry and shibboleth. Some 
of the decorative engravings are definitely symbolic of the 
spirit presiding over the festival. A design interpreted as 
a scorpion or millipede is intended to suggest that the Balum, 
like them, can cause sudden poison by his bite, and will do 
so if his injunctions are set at naught. On another bull- 
roarer a ghost is shown carrying aloft a firebrand and thus 
exposing the culprit who has dared divulge the secret of 
the Balum. While these decorations may be charged in 
part to the gratification of esthetic impulses and the desire 
to impress the newly initiated, their elaborateness betokens 
that they had some deeper significance for the elders them- 
selves, a conclusion in harmony with the appellations and 
uses of the articles as explained above. 

But from our broader point of view the religious char- 
acter of the Balum festival is not dependent on the elders’ 
belief in any spiritual patron, as may be demonstrated by 
an extreme case. The bull-roarer initiation ritual has spread 
from the mainland about Huon Gulf to Tami and other 
neighboring islands and has naturally lost some of its holy 
associations in transmission. Indeed, if we can trust our 
missionary authority, the Tami elders fail to associate any 
conceptions of supernatural beings with either the cere- 
mony or the anthropomorphic representations connected 
with it. Nevertheless we are told that the bull-roarers are 
treated with reverence, and that the initiation proceedings 
are marked by a series of meticulously observed solemnities. 
Whether these have for their primary object the magical 
preservation of the fattened pigs, as Herr Bamler suggests, 
is of subordinate interest. The main point is that even in 

BUKAUVA RELIGION 71 

the borrowed and apparently weakened form characteristic 
of these islands, the festival preserves that quality of holi- 
ness or supernaturalism which lifts it from the plane of 
everyday thought to what may properly be called the level 
of the religious attitude. 

It must not be supposed that prior to contact with the 
Bukaua there was a total absence of pretentious ritual in 
Tami. First of all, the natives practiced the Tago cult; 
secondly, there was an elaborate memorial festival that 
closed the two or three years’ mourning period in honor 
of a dead kinsman. The Tago or mummers’ cult, as we 
may call it, is like the bull-roarer festival an alien feature, 
though one of greater antiquity in these parts. It is in 
fact identical with the Dukduk of New Britain, so that 
Tami ritualism represents.the confluence of two cultural 
waves resulting to a certain extent in duplication, since both 
cults are associated with ghosts and with the terrorization 
of women and the uninitiated boys. The Tago is only cele- 
brated once every ten or twelve years, but then its cere- 
monial period extends over approximately a twelvemonth 
and throughout its duration the use of coconuts is strictly 
tabooed. The spirits impersonated by the masqueraders 
are said to come out of pits in the ground or from across 
the sea. They receive a formal welcome with a sennet 
of shell-horn music and are warmly thanked for having 
braved the long journey. Every morning and evening one 
or more of the performers, wearing a mask and heavy cere- 
monial garb, proceed through the village, frightening the 
uninitiated, while at night distinctive dances are executed 
to the accompaniment of drums. Each family owns a 
mask peculiar to its members, and the owner satisfies the 
hunger of the man performing for him. At the close of 
the Tago there is a final feast and dance, the performers 

72 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

bid farewell to their patrons and receive provender for the 
journey, as well as minor valuables; then they disappear 
amidst general lamentation. 

The memorial festival constitutes another grand occa- 
sion in the natives’ life. All the villagers, and probably 
the people of a neighboring community as well, are invited 
and lavishly entertained with pork and taro porridge in 
quantities that might have been ample for a ten days’ nor- 
mal diet. Every one adorns himself in special fashion,— 
the mourners by daubing their necks, heads and chests with 
black earth. With nightfall the dance commences and is 
continued until daylight, when the food is distributed and 
the feast begins. The spirits, both those in whose honor 
the ceremony is primarily held and an indefinite number 
of others, partake of the food by somehow absorbing its 
spiritual essence. Finally, the dancers once more appear 
in a set of pantomimes that make the spectators shake 
with laughter. Two men pretend carrying a pig, the ani- 
mal being represented by a piece of wood tied to a pole. 
Suddenly they are confronted by a thicket,—in reality two 
dancers,—and the man in front makes gestures to his 
partner, explaining the nature of the obstacle which is 
cleared away with a mock-ax. One of the carriers sud- 
denly runs a spine into his foot, which his comrade attempts 
to extract with a stick an inch in thickness. In another 
farce of this type one player takes the part of a pig, while 
two companions are the old women supposed to feed it. 
The pig grows savage and charges the women, who ap- 
proach the trough full of fear but are driven to take to their 
heels. In still other cases actors carry sand in perforated 
bags. If the deceased was a person of prominence, an of- 
fering of food and valuables normally terminates the per- 
formance, though some add a further act of devotion, dis- 

BUKAUVA RELIGION 73 

interring the bones after decomposition in order to daub 
them with red paint, and after keeping them in the house 
for two or three years rebury the remains for good. 

SUMMARY 

Bukaua and Tami supernaturalism stands closer to that 
of the Ekoi than to that of the Crow: sorcery and ghost- 
cults are prominently associated with New Guinea notions 
of extraordinary power; and while direct personal com- 
munion with the supernatural undoubtedly occurs, it is not 
the recognized and generally practiced right of the individ- 
ual native to seek it. Ceremonially, too, the mystery of the 
initiation festival, with the sacrificing of animals and the 
subordination of women, savors far more of West African 
ritualism than of any Plains Indian performances even 
when these are executed by a restricted membership. That 
a consistent scheme of the Extraordinary moiety of the 
universe is lacking in all three tribes, is manifest; but it is 
equally clear that all three somehow respond to the Extra- 
ordinary in the routine of existence. What differs is the 
technique employed: in one of the typical crises of life a 
Crow throws himself upon the Supernatural by going out 
for a vision; an Ekoi consults a diviner and prays to ghost 
or njomm; a Bukaua resorts to the magician, who in turn 
falls back upon the traditional recipe. 

Let us note again that catchwords utterly fail to penetrate 
to the ultimate psychology of our phenomena. In a sense, 
both the Ekoi and the New Guinea natives are “ancestor- 
worshipers.”’ But in the West African tribe the spirits of the 
dead are definitely subordinated to the two major gods and 
coordinated with a legion of njomm; in New Guinea there 
are several categories of supernatural beings, but probably 

74 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the ghosts alone are of much religious significance. More 
important still, these personal beings cannot only be sporad- 
ically overcome by the use of impersonal magic, as hap- 
pens among the Ekoi likewise, but they are regularly ig- 
nored in important situations of life in favor of the imita- 
tive practices, charms, and taboos described. ‘‘Ghosts” in 
the Kamerun are not what they are in Huon Gulf. 
Finally, we may ask, in what sense some of the spiritual 
beings described in the preceding chapter belong to the realm 
of religion at all. The ding, for example, have the power of 
shape-shifting. But does that bring them within the range 
of the Extraordinary, let alone Holy, when they are regu- 
larly outwitted by human opponents? The caterpillar, too, 
undergoes a metamorphosis foreign to man, yet this does 
not raise it to superhuman status. Let us prepare for the 
conclusion that non-human personalities, including spirits, 
may be conceived in such a way as to be eliminated from 
the domain of the Extraordinary. It is the psychological 
response to them that is alone decisive in the matter. 

REFERENCES 

1 This sketch is based on Lehner and Bamler, both in Neu- 
hauss. 

CHAPTER IV 
POLYNESIAN RELIGION? 

In spite of many local peculiarities the culture of Poly- 
nesia presents an essentially uniform character. Certain of 
its aspects, however, have either been more accurately re- 
ported in some of the islands than in others, or were de- 
veloped with unequal degrees of clarity in distinct sections 
of the area. Hence, instead of selecting a single group for 
intensive treatment, I will essay a synthetic sketch of the 
whole region, though most of the illustrations will be drawn 
from Tonga, Hawaii, and New Zealand. 

A comparison of the Polynesian religion with that of the 
tribes hitherto considered will once more illustrate the point 
that cultures are not so much set off from one another by 
distinctive traits as by the weighting and the organization 
of these traits into a distinctive whole. So we find that there 
are features common to the Bukaua and the Polynesians,— 
noticeably the combination of spells and sympathetic magic 
for purposes of sorcery. Again, these South Sea Islanders, 
like the Ekoi, rendered homage to the souls of departed an- 
cestors. Finally, though much has been written concerning 
the supposedly peculiar mana concept of the Oceanians, 
when we ignore irrelevant philological niceties and minor 
variations in local usage it unmasks as nothing but a very 
old friend. ‘Mana was shown when a man undertook to do 
an unusual and almost impossible thing and yet succeeded.” 
On the other hand, when a Maori chief was captured by 
the enemy he had evidently lost his mana. It was by no 

75 

76 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

means limited to personal agents, however. Conceived as 
somewhat in the nature of a transferable fluid, it could be 
conducted into weapons by placing them in temples, where 
they might absorb the potency vested in the gods. Won- 
drous tales are told of clubs mysteriously invisible to all but 
their rightful owner or so highly charged that they con- 
stantly kept moving, and of a quarterstaff that could fore- 
tell the issue of a battle. Whether mana was always ulti- 
mately a gift of the gods, as Mr. Collocott suggests, is not 
quite clear. It is certain that the term was applied both to 
persons and things, that it denotes “miracle’’ in the Tongan 
rendering of the Bible, that it might designate an unusually 
protracted spell of rain no less than a mysterious apparition. 
In short, there is nothing unique in the concept; it corre- 
sponds, as exactly as concepts of widely separated peoples 
can ever be expected to do, to the Crow maxpé and the Ekoi 
njomm. ‘The peculiarity of Polynesian religion must be 
sought in another direction: it will be found, among other 
things, in the interrelations of social and religious motives. 

RELIGION AND SOCIETY 

In the whole range of human history no people probably 
ever attached greater significance to distinctions of rank than 
the Polynesians. There was first of all a division of all so- 
ciety into the nobility and the common herd; and the former 
were subdivided with an extraordinary degree of subtlety. 
The basic dichotomy rested in theory on the divine lineage 
of the aristocrats, and the finer gradations of status de- 
pended either on the relative loftiness of the divine ances- 
tors or on the directness of descent from a common ances- 
tor. In practice, many knotty heraldic problems were bound 
to arise when the dignity of one parental line had to be bal- 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 77 

anced against the possibly inferior status of the other in 
settling the claims of rivals for precedence. Primogeniture, 
such as prevailed in some regions, likewise introduced com- 
plications. Since all but the eldest-born suffered a degrada- 
tion of one step in the ladder, it inevitably happened that the 
younger children of the lowest title-bearer sank to the level 
of plebeians. Now, in Tonga, for instance, the theory ob- 
tained that only the souls of nobles survived death; thus, by 
a rigorous application of this notion, the soul of one son in 
the family would live on, while the souls of his brothers 
would perish with the body. Some of them might well balk 
at this interpretation and indulge what Mariner quaintly calls 
“the vanity to think they have immortal souls as well as the 
matabooles (lesser nobles) and chiefs.’ But whatever in- 
tricacies might be presented by everyday experience, the ideal 
principle underlying the whole scheme was transparent: 
status was correlated with purity of lineage. 

This conception appears perhaps most clearly in Tonga, 
precisely because there rank and power were in a measure 
divorced: while the spiritual supremacy was vested in the 
Tuitonga, political sovereignty had been arrogated before the 
beginning of the nineteenth century by a presumably distant 
kinsman, hence comparatively lesser nobleman. But though 
this king might flout the pontiff’s counsel in temporal af- 
fairs, there was no question concerning the Tuitonga’s social 
preéminence. Chafing under the humiliation, King Finau 
would indeed take pains to avoid a meeting, but whenever it 
occurred he yielded precedence and homage in the traditional 
fashion. 

Within the body of the upper caste there was an interest- 
ing sub-group that played a significant part in the culture of 
these tribes. They were perhaps the lowest of their class, 
yet in some islands, such as Samoa, they rather than the titu- 

78 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

lar sovereign held the reins of power. They embraced the 
courtiers and landed gentry, corresponding at once to the 
lesser nobility and the upper middle class of European coun- 
tries. It was often from this class that the priests were re- 
cruited, but though their status appears in such cases inter- 
mediate between the pinnacles and the dregs of Polynesian 
society, they were essentially to be considered a part of the 
regnant caste and as pillars of the established order. How- 
ever, in Mangaia the noble of highest hereditary rank was 
at the same time the priest of the chief deity, and a corre- 
sponding union of priestly and heraldic preéminence charac- 
terized the Maori. Certain phenomena in the religion of 
these tribes become more readily intelligible when one recalls 
that it was molded in part by a group of men specially de- 
voted to the management of sacred things and serving as 
professional systematizers and standardizers of current 
thought. 

One of the most remarkable creations of these guardians 
of things divine was the taboo concept. Our own word 
“taboo” is derived from the Polynesian tapu (dialectically, 
tabu, kapu), but it is far from designating all the ramifica- 
tions and shades of meaning that clustered about its proto- 
type. The aboriginal term was, like mana, the expression 
for a highly abstract concept, but while mana invariably de- 
noted a startling deviation from the norm, tapu was dis- 
tinctly ambivalent: it represented the holiness of the divine, 
setting it off from the profaneness of plebeian (noa) things 
and persons; but that very attitude which lent mystic power 
to the deities and their earthly vicegerents invested them with 
a “mysterious perilousness and unapproachableness”’ for the 
uninitiated, or indeed, for any one of lesser quality. In 
some unaccountable way the sacredness flowed out from the 
divine chief and communicated itself to what he ate or drank 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 79 

or wore. No Tongan durst appropriate the remains of a 
superior’s meal on pain of a sore throat; the cloak discarded 
by a Maori chief could not with safety be donned by an at- 
tendant. A Mangaia pontiff’s body could not be tattooed: 
his equivalent in Tonga could not be either tattooed or cir- 
cumcised like other men, since no one was competent to touch 
him with immunity, and when he was buried by his inferiors, 
as he inevitably. had to be, these were reckoned infected for 
ten months. A number of prohibitions were widely dis- 
tributed. Thus, no one was allowed to touch a superior’s 
head or pass close behind him or eat in his presence. A 
Hawaiian whose shadow fell upon the king’s house or back 
or who climbed over the royal stockade was doomed: to defy 
these taboos was tantamount to asserting oneself an equal 
or superior. 

Such rigor could not of course be consistently extended 
to all the numerous ritual prohibitions without extraordi- 
nary inconvenience to all concerned. How, for example, 
could the menial tasks connected with temple-building be 
undertaken by common workingmen who were bound to pol- 
lute the holy site? Polynesian casuistry was equal to the 
problem by devising a ritual mechanism that transformed 
the tapu spot into a temporarily noa one. Again, in Tonga 
the rule held that any one who, however accidentally, had 
touched a grandee was infected and might not feed himself 
with his hands without danger of disease; but that menace 
was averted if he touched the soles of any superior chief's 
feet with the palms and backs of both hands. Since the 
supreme chief was not always present to absolve—as he 
alone was competent to do—from infractions of the taboo 
against himself, touching one of his consecrated bowls was 
considered an equivalent rite of purification. In Samoa, 
where the gentry rather than the titular chiefs held the reins 

80 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

of power, the grimly humorous fiction evolved that an un- 
popular ruler could be stripped of his sacred character by 
being sprinkled with coconut water, whereupon he might be 
summarily dispatched. Practical considerations also dic- 
tated whimsical exceptions. In Tonga, where the kava was 
drunk on every possible occasion, both plant and beverage 
were held immune to infection by tapu, and the meanest cook 
might chew the root touched by the Tuitonga. 

These concessions to the exigencies of daily life were 
doubtless merely unconscious rationalizations and must not 
be taken to throw doubt on the sincerity and intensity of na- 
tive belief in the taboo system. Of that there is indisputable 
and ample evidence. The strong hold the scheme had on the 
Polynesian mind is indicated by its preservation among the 
Tikopians, who live in isolation from their congeners, in the 
midst of Melanesian populations. It is shown by the extent 
to which even so skeptical a scoffer as King Finau was will- 
ing to bow to its decrees. Above all, it is demonstrated by 
the survival of its spirit among the thoroughly Christianized 
Tongans of to-day, who have unconsciously applied their 
old notions of the inviolability of the sacred to the Sunday 
and the churches of the new creed. As fanatical Sabbatar- 
ians they will not even pluck a flower or break a branch on 
the tapu day, nor will they countenance any dances or social 
gatherings in the tapu house of worship. Nay, even water 
from the roof of a church is never stored or used, and only 
recently the death of a child was traced to the transgression 
of this rule. 

Under the old régime one practical application of the 
principle played a conspicuous part and did much to 
strengthen the dominance of the upper caste. In some of 
the islands private ownership was virtually abrogated by 
the law that anything touched by a superior became taboo, 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 81 

hence no longer proper for common use. Thus, the canoe 
or house entered by the chief became his property. Contrari- 
wise, it was not only inconceivable that a commoner should 
trespass on a nobleman’s traditional domain, but the noble 
might arbitrarily impose a taboo his inferiors were bound 
to respect. A piece of white barkcloth in the shape of a 
lizard or shark would serve notice that the fruits or flowers 
in its vicinity were not to be disturbed; a similar token by a 
stream would forbid its use by the common herd. 

Thus, social privilege and religious belief were closely in- 
tertwined in the Polynesian community. A query that ob- 
trudes itself in this connection can unfortunately no longer 
be answered satisfactorily. That the beneficiaries of the es- 
tablished order should accept it without reflection is intel- 
ligible. But what of the down-trodden masses? Were they 
uniformly cowed into an acceptance of their lot, content to 
believe that their masters were the sons and darlings of the 
gods? Or were there adventurous spirits among them who 
insisted that there were gods, as well as death-defying souls, 
for themselves in the universe? We shall never know, but 
we can guess. 

PANTHEON 

The social organization of Polynesia affected religious cul- 
ture ina way already suggested: whatever beliefs and rites 
may have been current among the people at large were co- 
ordinated and systematized by a guild of professional theo- 
logians. As Gill puts it: 

Correct knowledge of these “mysteries” was possessed only 
by the priests and “wise men” of the different tribes. By them 
the teachings of the past were embodied in songs, to be chanted 
at their national festivals. 

Bo PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Even apart from these esoteric elaborations, the bluebloods 
standardized that part of the tribal theology which linked 
their line with that of its divine founders. For the patent of 
nobility sometimes consisted precisely in the knowledge of 
the poetic chants eulogizing the heroic ancestor of the family. 
Even lesser men might contribute to the development of re- 
ligious thought where, as in Hawaii, a retinue of minstrels, 
irrespective of rank, jointly concocted laudatory songs in 
honor of their noble patrons. The total effect of these tend- 
encies was a complexity far transcending what would be 
deemed possible in an illiterate community, nay, rivaling 
that of ancient classical mythology. A few samples must 
suffice. 

On Tonga six classes of supernatural beings were recog- 
nized, one of them being constituted by Moui, who Atlas- 
like supported the earth and occasionally, like the god Anuto 
of the Tami, caused earthquakes by turning about in his 
usual prostrate position. All the other gods were conceived 
as inhabiting the island of Pulotu, northwest of Tonga, 
where all good things abounded, but where no mortal could 
eat the food or breathe the air without subsequently sicken- 
ing and dying. One of the five groups properly belonging 
to Pulotu comprised the mischievous sprites or hobgoblins, 
who play tricks on the natives, trip them up or pinch them 
in the dark, or otherwise molest them in a minor way, hence 
spend most of their time in Tonga. Of the remainder, two 
classes excelled in power and effect on native life,—the 
primeval gods, numbering about three hundred, and the 
spirits of the higher nobility. The original attendants of 
the former were without influence, while the souls of the 
lesser nobility or gentry played the part of intermediators 
between their living kin and the major deities, or by suffer- 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 83 

ance were protectors of the meaner orders of society. In 
short, only two of the six groups of gods, the original dei- 
ties and the spirits of the patricians, had independent power 
and were the objects of a cult; and they alone could make 
direct revelations to the priesthood. The spirits of the 
nobles were invoked at their graves, while a limited number 
of the major deities had special temples dedicated to their 
worship; indeed, some of them had as many as five or six. 
Of the major gods, that of war, Taliai Tubo, took prece- 
dence, as the patron of the king, with whom he sometimes 
communicated without a priestly go-between in the man- 
ner to be described below. Other deities protected special 
families or professions or presided over certain depart- 
ments of nature. Thus, Tubo Totai combined the func- 
tions of a tutelary of King Finau’s family and of mariners; 
Alo Alo controlled the weather and vegetation; and Tan- 
galoa was the protector of skilled artisans. One attribute 
peculiar to this class of gods among the Tongans is the 
faculty of entering the bodies of lizards, porpoises, and 
other animals. 

Hawaii presents an at least equally impressive array of 
supernatural powers, but no more than in Tonga were they 
all uniformly adored by all groups of the population; in- 
deed, Malo cites only four as great national gods, the great- 
est, Ku, being the special guardian of royalty but wor- 
shiped in various forms by lesser men: Ku-ka-oo was the 
god of peasants, Ku-ula that of fishermen, while carpenters 
prayed to Ku-pulupulu, and bird-snarers to Ku-huluhulu- 
manu. Thus, each recognized vocation had a particular 
patron saint,—the bark-eaters or barkcloth decorators 
among women prayed to a special divinity, and even thieves 
had their distinctive god. Apart from these functional 

84 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

deities, there were gods localized in different parts of the 
globe, such as the four quarters, or residing in inanimate 
objects ready to execute the wishes of their owners. 

But the metaphysicians of the South Sea Islands not 
only constructed an elaborate pantheon, in connection with 
it they also created a remarkable cosmology and cosmogony, 
of which the Mangaian scheme is a fair representative. 
The universe was conceived as the hollow of a vast coco- 
nut shell terminating in a thick stem tapering to a point, 
with Mangaia above the central aperture at the top of the 
shell, and at least ten celestial tiers of azure stone arching 
one beyond the other above Mangaia. The terminal point 
of the structure was regarded as a spirit but not in human 
shape: “The entire fabric of the universe is constantly sus- 
tained by this primary being.” Immediately above it is a 
stouter demon, and at the thickest part of the stem a third 
being completes the trio of “the primary, ever-stationary, 
sentient spirits, who themselves constitute the foundation 
and insure the permanence and well-being of all the rest 
of the universe.” In the lowest, narrowest portion of 
Avaiki, the interior of the shell, there sits a woman, Vari- 
ma-te-takere, so cramped in position that her knees and 
chin meet. Eager for progeny, she at one time plucked off 
a bit of her right side, which became a male being, Vatea, 
half man, half porpoise; and successively produced five 
other children in like manner. Vatea married a female 
spirit, Papa, and begot the first beings of purely human 
shape, viz., the twin gods Rongo and Tangaroa, of whom 
the former gained the ascendancy; and it was one of his 
grandsons that pulled Mangaia up from the interior of the 
great shell to become the center of the universe. Avaiki 
is peopled by a throng of deities, who marry, multiply, and 
live like human beings. Thence come all the arts of life, 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 85 

whether peacefully copied from their original possessors or 
wrested from them like that of fire-making, which the 
demigod Maui gained from Mauike in mortal combat. 
There, too, lives the terrible female ogre Miru, who cooks 
and devours the souls of all who die a natural death. But 
the warriors slain in battle elude her fires and leap into the 
blue expanse above to be transformed into the clouds of 
the dry season. The celestial vault, at first a pitiable six feet 
above the earth, was raised to its present height by Maui’s 
puissance. 

These brief indications must suffice. In contemplating 
with amazement this wonderful edifice of philosophical 
fancy, we must discriminate, at least in principle, between 
myth and religion. Clearly it was not obligatory on a 
Mangaian to accept each and every element of the theory 
laid down by his theologians in the sense in which one of 
our fundamentalists is committed to the acceptance of the 
Scriptures; for Mr. Gill reports not a few discordant vari- 
ants. Thus, according to one version the souls that fall into 
Miru’s clutches are annihilated, while another has it that 
they revive after passing through her intestines. Again, 
some held that even the braves who have perished on the 
battlefield are eaten by Rongo and only ascend to the sky 
after ultimate liberation from his body. In other words, 
the rigor in the observance of ceremonial to be noted later 
was not incompatible with a certain latitudinarianism in 
point of doctrine. Or, rather, cosmology and cosmogony 
were only in part a matter of dogma or religion at all, 
whence the observed freedom of belief. 

The mutual independence of poetical or philosophical 
fancy on the one hand and devotional fervor on the other 
is demonstrated by another reflection. No more than 
Chronos held the first place in the religious consciousness of 

86 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Greece did Vari and Vatea,—let alone the three non-human 
demons below Avaiki,—gain a hegemony among the gods 
by their priority in time. As a matter of fact, they had no 
cult whatsoever, while Rongo, Vatea’s son, was the fore- 
most of Mangaian gods. The explanation is not hard to 
find: these cosmogonic and cosmological subtleties were 
priestly or poetical glosses on the popular creed and had as 
little religious significance for their inventors as for the 
populace at large. The delights of untrammeled specula- 
tion with sacred beings as a starting-point were one thing; 
illumination through direct intercourse with the divine was 
something radically different. 

COMMUNION WITH THE SUPERNATURAL 

The deliberate quest of a vision was not practiced, or at 
all events was not a characteristic usage in Polynesia. But 
great importance was attached to dreams. The spirit of a 
deceased parent might appear to a sleeper and map out 
his course of action, aiding him in the achievement of great 
enterprises. Again, dreams were interpreted as ominous of 
impending calamities, as when a Tongan woman dreamt 
of the Tuitonga leading a force of spirits against the people 
at the time of the harvest festival; or when another visited 
the island of Pulotu in her sleep and heard the decree of 
the god Hikuleo that the inhabitants of Vavau were to suf- 
fer some great misfortune. Similarly, a profound im- 
pression was created when Funaki, the wife of a great chief, 
reported that the late king of Tonga had appeared to her 
in her dreams on several nights in succession and complained 
of the conspiracies hatched by his son’s enemies. Inci- 
dentally, the last-mentioned case seems to supply a good 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 87 

example of a transition from an ordinary dream to a sought 
vision. For Funaki, who was deeply attached to her de- 
ceased royal master, who had indeed been suspected of an 
intrigue with her, slept and mourned regularly on the king’s 
grave for six months; and it is not at all unlikely that this 
was done at least partly with the expectation of an appari- 
tion. 

Experiences in swoon or trance also produced an effect 
at least on the beliefs of individuals. Thus, according to 
the accepted Maori notion, the soul of the deceased traveled 
to the northernmost point of New Zealand, where it lacer- 
ated itself with obsidian after the manner of mourners; 
then it slid or leapt into the underworld, undergoing succes- 
sive deaths, passing to lower and lower regions, and was 
ultimately doomed to extinction. But this general picture 
would sometimes receive a personal tinge. For example, 
there was a woman who died, was pursued by a gigantic 
bird in the realm of spirits, but escaped to her father, who 
sent her back to tend her child; he also gave her two sweet- 
potatoes, and by throwing them to pursuing ghosts on the 
return trip she succeeded in making her escape. Naturally 
the priests were conspicuous for their weird experiences and 
for making them socially significant. Thus, a Hawaiian 
priest who had seen the wraith of a man and interpreted 
this as a token of his tribesman’s approaching death could 
readily prevail upon the victim to pledge a propitiatory rite 
and pay the requisite fees. 

The characteristic mode of entering into communion 
with divine beings, however, was not through a mere the- 
ophany but by a veritable inspiration: the visitant was be- 
lieved to enter the body of the person favored and to speak 
through him, whence the appropriate Mangaian designa- 

88 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tion of a priest as a “god-box” and the Tongan term “god- 
anchor.” This custom is as characteristic of remote Tiko- 
pia as of Tonga and Hawaii. 

A man who is possessed shakes and quivers all over, his eyes 
get red and he begins to shout and, when the shouting is heard 
by the people, all run to hear what the atua (ancestor) has to 
say. 

The Tikopians, Dr. Rivers informs us, regularly invoke the 
spirits to determine the future course of events, especially 
in case of sickness. Apparently, it is not known before- 
hand which of the summoners is to be possessed; also if an 
adverse divination is offered, additional ghosts are called 
in order, if possible, to reverse the prediction. Here com- 
moners, as well as chiefs, may be inspired; but, character- 
istically enough, the former are possessed only by the spirit 
of a dead commoner, nor may the spirit of a chief be ques- 
tioned by any one of lesser dignity. 

In Tonga only the major gods and the souls of nobles 
possessed the priests, who for the time being spoke in the 
god’s name and took precedence of the king himself, though 
immediately after the performance they resumed their nor- 
mal station. The session was ushered in by a feast with 
kava-drinking, the inevitable accompaniment of Polynesian 
ceremonial. Tor a long time the priest sat in silence, hands 
clasped and eyes cast down. In answer to the questions 

he generally begins in a low and very altered tone of voice, 
which gradually rises to nearly its natural pitch, though some- 
times a little above it. . . . All this is done generally without 
any apparent inward emotion or outward agitation ; but on some 
occasions his countenance becomes fierce, and, as it were, in- 
flamed, and his whole frame agitated with inward feeling; he is 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 89 

seized with a universal trembling; the perspiration breaks out 
on his forehead, and his lips, turning black, are convulsed; at 
length, tears start in floods from his eyes, his breast heaves with 
great emotion, and his utterance is choked. These symptoms 
gradually subside. Before this paroxysm comes on, and after 
it is over, he often eats as much as four hungry men, under 
other circumstances, could devour. The fit being now gone off, 
he remains for some time calm, and then takes up a club that is 
placed by him for the purpose, turns it over and regards it at- 
tentively ; he then looks up earnestly, now to the right, now to 
the left, and now again at the club; afterwards he looks up 
again, and about him in like manner, and then again fixes his 
eyes upon his club, and so on for several times; at length he sud- 
denly raises the club, and, after a moment’s pause, strikes the 
ground, or the adjacent part of the house, with considerable 
force: immediately the god leaves him, and he rises up and re- 
tires to the back of the ring among the people. 

In interpreting this phenomenon the early observer quoted 
above was already on the right track. Denying a mere at- 
tempt at deception, he writes: 

There can be little doubt . . . but that the priest . . . often 
summons into actions the deepest feelings of devotion of which 
he is susceptible, and by a voluntary act disposes his mind... 
to be powerfully affected: till at length what began by volition 
proceeds by involuntary effort, and the whole mind and body 
become subjected to the overruling emotion. 

Similar manifestations were not restricted to the priest- 
hood, and hysteria in some of its forms is still interpreted 
by Tongans as the result of possession. In Mariner’s day 
the king was occasionally inspired by the spirit of a one- 
time ruler, and a prince by that of his father’s immediate 
predecessor. The latter found it difficult to describe his 

go PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

subjective impressions in retrospect: he felt himself all over 
in a glow of heat and quite restless and uncomfortable, and 
did not feel his own personal identity as it were, but seemed 
to have a mind different from his own natural mind, his 
thoughts wandering upon strange and unusual subjects, 
although perfectly sensible of surrounding objects. When 
asked how he knew it was the spirit of Tukuaho, his answer 
was, “There’s a fool! how can I tell you how I knew it; I 
felt and knew it was so by a kind of consciousness; my 
mind told me it was Toogoo Ahoo (Tukuaho).” This is an 
excellent example of the intuitive insight of mystic experi- 
ence and at the same time of its ineffableness. 

Women as well as men were capable of possession. The 
laity generally reacted differently from the priests and their 
experiences were ascribed to a deity accusing them of re- 
ligious negligence “not by an apparent audible warning, but 
by an inward compunction of conscience.” Accordingly, 
the visitation was marked by low spirits and a profusion of 
tears, possibly supplemented by a brief fainting-spell. Lay- 
men, like priests, could bring on a paroxysm by an act of 
will, but Mariner witnessed the interesting case of a native 
who called for kava in anticipation of a god’s visit, yet was 
obliged to acknowledge amidst general surprise that he was 
disappointed. 

The interpretation offered by this early observer is in 
accord with recent medical opinion: there is no simulation 
of the trance, though there is doubtless auto-suggestion in 
the incipient stage. A number of modern European cases 
reported by Dr. Stoll are obviously of the same category, 
and one of the most instructive may be cited here. Dr. 
Stoll was taking a walk in the vicinity of Zurich one day. 
Some distance ahead of him an Italian workingman was 
marching along with a bundle on his shoulder. At a turn 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION gl 

in the road this man suddenly tottered backward, dropping 
his bundle and the stick to which it was tied, and beat the 
air with his arms as though trying to find a hold. Next he 
fell on his back, soon rising to the height of a foot but only 
to fall again head foremost on the hard pavement. His 
body, supported only by head and feet, curved like an arch, 
then was jerked up, and altogether he presented the picture 
of a fish floundering out of the water. When Dr. Stoll 
came up, the Italian had become quiet and had apparently 
lost consciousness. After a while he awoke as though from 
a deep sleep, looked about in surprise, patted his head, which 
was doubtless suffering considerable pain from its repeated 
contact with the road, and finally inquired for the road to 
Lucerne, at the same time presenting a certificate attesting 
his treatment for epilepsy in a Swiss hospital. He had ob- 
viously trained himself to the voluntary performance of 
epileptiform fits in order to arouse the charitable instincts 
of passers-by. But as soon as he had decided on an attack, 
the further course of events was purely automatic; no one 
could have willed the total series of single events crowded 
into so narrow a space of time, nor would any sane person 
have deliberately wished his skull to undergo the maltreat- 
ment described above.” 

RITUALISM 

As in a sense an outpost of Old World civilization, Poly- 
nesia reveals more kinship in the concrete elements of cere- 
monial procedure with Africa and New Guinea than with 
America. Among these features of Polynesian ritualism, 
bloody sacrifices play a prominent part. The Crow limited 
themselves to self-torture in attempting to placate the 
powers of the universe, and this practice was by no means 

92 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

unknown in the South Seas. In Tonga, indeed, there was 
a specific analogy in that people regularly sacrificed a little 
finger in order to bring about the recovery of a superior: 
relative; hardly an adult had his hands intact, and Mariner 
witnessed a violent contest between two children five years 
of age, each claiming the favor of having the ceremony per- 
formed on him, “so little do they fear the pain of the opera- 
tion.” Fasting was likewise a Polynesian usage, for ex- 
ample, at a certain stage in the Hawaiian Luakini cere- 
mony. But far more conspicuous were the offerings of 
domesticated animals, especially pigs, which at the great 
festivals were sacrificed in droves: thus at the festival just 
mentioned as many as eight hundred hogs were baked, and 
even in the normal consultation of an oracle, as described 
above, a pig was killed. Equally important was the ren- 
dering of human sacrifices. Malo would have it that at 
the Luakini rite only criminals were slain in propitiation of 
the deity, but his editor’s contention that a nobler offering 
was required is borne out by the data from other groups. 
When a Maori chief erected a public edifice, he might even 
offer a favorite child to be buried as a foundation stone for 
the building. Infanticide, like the finger-sacrifice, was also 
practiced at Tonga to remove a relative’s illness, and when 
a sanctuary had been defiled by bloodshed a chief was con- 
tent to have one of his children strangled to avert a ca- 
lamity. 

In the stress laid on omens and the elaboration of a system 
of divination, though probably not so complex as in some 
parts of Africa, the Polynesians again reveal their kinship 
with Old World culture. Weather signs were noted, es- 
pecially the appearance of the clouds, and as late as the 
time of Queen Liliuokalani’s accession in Hawaii the sight 
of a rainbow was hailed as a symbol of her dignity. Some 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 93 

soothsayers even paralleled the classical technique of 
augury by the flight of birds or from the entrails of ani- 
mals, In Tonga a coconut with the husk on was spun like 
a top, and the direction of the upper part was taken to 
indicate whether a patient might be expected to recover or 
die. Apparently, in contrast with African practice the in- 
quirer might arbitrarily fix the meaning of a given event 
before consulting such an oracle. The importance often 
attached to trivial occurrences is well illustrated by Mari- 
ner’s inopportune sneeze on a solemn occasion, for which he 
narrowly escaped the death penalty. 

Still another trait allying Polynesian with West African 
ritualism is its iconic character. In Mangaia thirteen pieces 
of iron-wood roughly carved into the semblance of the 
human shape and wrapped up in fine cloth represented 
as many gods and were stored in the pontiff’s sanctuary. A 
procession round an island of the Hawaiian group with one 
of the idols formed an integral part of the Makahiki cere- 
mony. 

The Hawaiians usually worshiped their gods by means of 
idols, believing that by the performance of certain rites, power, 
mana, was imparted to the idols, so that they became a means 
of communication with unseen divinities. They imagined that 
a spirit resided in or conveyed influence through the image rep- 
resenting it. 

As these images were physically more impressive than the 
njomm effigies of the Ekoi, so they seem to have been alto- 
gether of a more public character,—objects rather to be 
venerated from afar and only on great occasions, than pa- 
trons with or through whom to commune intimately in 

everyday life. 
Next may be mentioned a similarity to Bukaua culture, 

94 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

to wit, the extravagant reliance on magical incantations 
with the implied belief in the power inherent in a set for- 
mula of words. In New Zealand, especially, every under- 
taking of any consequence, whether relating to ostensibly 
sacred affairs or such apparently secular undertakings 
as the cultivation of the soil, the launching of a 
canoe, or a hunting trip, was accompanied by the recital 
of an appropriate spell. Incantations could compel the re- 
turn of an errant lover, prod the memory of a youthful 
novice in the arts, or wreak vengeance on a personal enemy, 
the last-mentioned object being usually attained by a com- 
bination with sympathetic magic. Small wonder, then, that 
in the Maori college the young nobleman, to whom alone 
its doors were open, had to learn above everything the mys- 
tic spells that would bend the universe to his will, possibly 
by making the gods favor his desires, possibly by their in- 
trinsic efficacy. 

The more impressive performances consisted largely in 
the combination of the aforementioned features, to which 
some additional elements, often of a dramatic nature or in 
furtherance of sociability might be added; practices clus- 
tering about the taboo concept would almost inevitably be 
injected into the procedure. Thus, the Luakini of Hawaii 
may be largely defined in terms of the phenomena already 
familiar to the reader. Its celebration was in honor of Ku 
and involved the erection of a special temple to ensure a 
successful campaign or to promote the crops. The per- 
formance involved the imposition and removal of taboos, 
the carving of images, the destruction of vast numbers of 
pigs and some human beings, the recital of litanies by the 
priests and of responses by the congregation. In the Maka- 
hiki some of the same elements recur, supplemented by a 
procession with a sacred idol, a sham attack on the King, 

POLYNESIAN RELIGION 95 

the complete cessation of all ordinary labor, and a succes- 
sion of athletic contests and other games. A taboo on 
work, coupled with indulgence in such secular pastimes as 
dancing, wrestling, and boxing, was also linked with devo- 
tional exercises in the harvest feast of Tonga, where pugil- 
istic combats, as well as promiscuous fighting, likewise 
marked the offering of fruits to the weather god, Alo Alo. 
In the same group kava drinking was the invariable con- 
comitant of sacred ritual, from the invocation of a deity in 
a private attempt to be inspired to the most elaborate na- 
tional solemnities. 

When we turn from the specific features of religious be- 
havior to the spirit animating it, we can best characterize 
Polynesia as representing the acme of formalism, as em- 
bodying to the greatest degree a tendency displayed by 
many other primitive groups. Just as some peoples in the 
course of human history have acquired certain literary de- 
vices, say, of versification, and in the joy of discovery have 
played with their new toy till sense was sacrificed to jingle, 
so the Polynesians after achieving an intricate series of 
socio-religious technicalities seem to have reveled in their 
creature and made themselves its slaves. As among the 
Crow, sin was independent of intent and consisted in the 
usually involuntary infraction of an arbitrary rule of con- 
duct, but the Polynesian taboos were incomparably more 
numerous than those of the Plains Indian and were gener- 
ally of such a nature as to involve an indefinite number of 
persons. The punctilio typical of the whole scheme was un- 
doubtedly a powerful instrumentality in the hands of the 
dominant caste and served to perpetuate its ascendancy. But 
in its efflorescence it came to subject the original beneficiaries 
themselves to considerable inconvenience. It was all very 
well to impose the death penalty on the plebeian idol-bearer 

96 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

who committed an error in running on his ceremonial cir- 
cuit or who broke the stillness of the air while the priests 
were chanting some sacrosanct litany. But Hawaiian royalty 
itself suffered when the accidental barking of a dog or the 
hoot of an owl nullified the whole ceremony. Similarly in 
the case of the Maori spells. 

The incantations had to be most faithfully and religiously 
learnt, the least slip was disastrous to the user. If a line or 
even a word was missed the spell was broken. 

Even Maui, demigod and hero, was doomed to destruction 
from his birth because his father had omitted part of the 
baptismal service. Practical necessity would require a 
technique to ward off the perils that constantly beset the 
taboo-ridden native, yet even these devices were rather pal- 
liatives than panaceas or prophylactics. When a Tongan 
warrior had inadvertently clubbed a foeman on hallowed 
ground, a chief might save the community from disaster by 
strangling his own child, but even this sacrifice could not 
ward off destruction from the culprit, whose death in the 
next skirmish was anticipated by himself and interpreted 
by public opinion as due to the unappeased wrath of the 
gods. For the gods themselves were largely the embodiments 
or servitors of Polynesian formalism. 

REFERENCES 

* The material used in the preparation of the preceding chap- 
ter includes mainly the following: Tregear; Martin; Collocott ; 
Malo; Beckwith; Gill; Rivers. 

2 Stoll: 25. 

Part II: Critique of Theories 

CHAPTER V 

ANIMISM 
THE PRIMITIVE CONCEPT OF SPIRIT 

TyLor, who gave currency to the term “animism,”’ de- 
fined it as the belief in spiritual beings, and only in that 
sense shall it henceforth be used in this book. But what is 
meant by “spiritual”? A spirit, according to the diction- 
aries, may be identified with any supernatural being, good 
or bad, and the term has doubtless occasionally been so used 
in the preceding pages. But the time has come for a more 
rigorous definition. 

By common agreement spiritual represents the opposite 
of material existence. The difficulty is that if we in- 
sist on the notion of completely incorporeal being there are 
probably no examples to be found on primitive levels. Cer- 
tainly none appears in the beliefs of the tribes hitherto de- 
scribed. The Sun of the Crow Indians lures a maiden to 
the sky and begets a son; the ghosts of the Ekoi can be 
thrown and killed in a wrestling-match; Anuto, the Atlas of 
the Tami, turns about in quite fleshly fashion; and the 
Polynesian gods procreated by others that evolved from 
portions of Vari’s body are surely not without a taint of 
materiality. Nevertheless, some of these belong to a dif- 
ferent order of existence from that of men, beasts, and 
rocks. They are not, indeed, immaterial, but they are cer- 
tainly less grossly material than the bodies of ordinary 
physical objects; and it is this subtler mode of corporeal 
existence that may be called “spiritual” in an ethnological 

99 

100 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

sense. It will be well to illustrate by a few additional ex- 
amples this double aspect of primitive animism,—the un- 
questionable assumption of a relatively tenuous kind of 
being distinguished from the cruder reality of tangible mat- 
ter, and the equally indubitable inability of the ruder peoples 
to divest this notion of all marks of materiality. 

The Jagga, an East African Bantu people inhabiting the 
slopes of Mt. Kilimanjaro, recognize a form of existence cer- 
tainly differing from that of living man, for their practices 
largely center in a cult of the dead, to whom both good luck 
and misfortune are ascribed and who are propitiated by their 
descendants through prayer and offerings before every im- 
portant enterprise. But the disembodied soul is not freed 
from the exigencies of earthly life: it must be fed and thus 
is dependent on the attentions of the living. As in the case 
of the Ekoi, these ghosts, then, do not survive because of 
intrinsic indestructibility; on the contrary, they grow old, 
are deprived of offerings by more youthful and vigorous 
spirits, and ultimately die.* 

The Negrito of the Andaman Islands in the Bay of Ben- 
gal have the highly typical belief that man has a soul in the 
form of a breath, double, reflection or shadow, which can 
leave its owner during his sleep and travel far away. When 
a person dies, it is this double that departs, becoming a 
spirit either of the jungle or of the sea. These beings some- 
times communicate with favored mortals and confer super- 
natural powers upon them, but are generally dangerous,— 
the cause of sickness and death. As a rule they are invisible, 
but some people have caught sight of them and give dis- 
cordant descriptions of their appearance, though mostly im- 
puting to them a grotesque or fearful aspect, such as abnor- 
mally long legs and arms joined to a small body. Spirits 
are attracted by whistling but kept away by singing,—also 

ANIMISM 101 

by a firebrand or a human bone. As to the habitat of the 
ghosts, accounts vary yet bring out clearly their relatively 
—but only relatively—immaterial character. The spirits 
can travel on rainbows when they visit their sleeping friends 
on earth, but their activities have a terrestrial flavor,—they 
hunt and fish, eat pork and turtle, dance and sing.” 

One more illustration will suffice. The Lemhi Shoshoni 
of Idaho recognize a life principle, mi’gua, which resides 
in the head and at death rises cloud-fashion till it reaches 
the house of the mythical god or hero called Wolf. The 
souls of the Indians are darker than those of the white men 
and very small. Half-way up they are met by a spirit of 
longer standing, who escorts them to their proper places. 
Wolf washes and revives each soul, which then becomes a 
ghost, dzdap. Ghosts often appear in the form of skeletons 
and terrify mortals. They cause disease by entering the vic- 
tim’s body and must be extracted therefrom by the practi- 
tioner; but sometimes they fly away with the patient’s soul 
and make him mad. As a result of an individual experi- 
ence, Red-shirt Jim had somewhat unusual ideas about the 
soul and the hereafter. In about 1890 he fell sick from 
breaking a food taboo. He dreamt about a great war and 
was suddenly struck by a hailstone. His condition became 
serious, and a separate lodge was built for him to die in. 

I was still breathing. I thought of seeing my dead father and 
mother, brother and relatives. I wished to die immediately. 
For three days and four nights I lay in my tent. At last on 
the fourth day my soul (mii’gua) came out of my thigh, made a 
step forward and glanced back at my body. The mi’gua was 
about as large as this (ten inches). My body was not yet life- 
less. When the mii’gua had made three steps forward, my body 
dropped, cold and dead. I looked at it for some time; it made 

no movement at all, 

102 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Suddenly something came down and went through my soul. 
My soul began to go downward. It did not ascend. I reached 
another world and followed a trail there. I beheld a helper of 
the Father who was making some dead men over again. I 
thought I might see the Father, but could only hear him. He 
was saying to me, “You don’t look ill.” A kind of thin wire 
was making a noise at the time. The Father had a buckskin 
bag; out of its contents he makes everything. He tapped the 
wire three times. Then I was able to see his hand, which was 
as small and clean as a baby’s. Then the whole world opened 
up and I could see the earth plainly. I saw everything there. I 
saw my own body lying there. I saw my own body lying there 
dead. 

The Sun told me I would be restored to life. I did not walk 
back and I don’t know how I returned. Suddenly I was back 
alive. For a few minutes, I had seen the Father. He was a 
handsome Indian.* 

A soul that is washed, a soul that is ten inches tall, does 
not correspond to our notion of spirituality; yet it is obvi- 
ous that the Shoshoni conceive it as distinct from and 
of finer essence than the human body. Without multiply- 
ing examples we can accept Tylor’s statement that the soul 
of primitive man is “a thin unsubstantial image, in its 
nature a sort of vapor, film or shadow.” * Abundant lin- 
guistic evidence could be adduced to prove that it is usually 
designated by terms somehow denoting this finer type of 
materiality. This alone would not prove the absence of a 
purely immaterial soul-concept, for our own abstract terms 
are reduced to a very concrete basis when etymologically 
analyzed. But in this instance philosophical thought has 
not outrun its vestments, as is demonstrated both by the 
preceding examples and others that will presently be cited. 

In many regions of the globe there is a belief in two or 

ANIMISM 103 

more souls. These are generally localized in the different 
parts of the body during life and have separate careers after 
death. Thus, the Menomini of Wisconsin, assign one soul 
to the head, another to the heart. The former wanders 
about aimlessly after the burial of its owner, lingers about 
the graveyard, whistles in the dark, and receives offerings 
of food; the latter travels to the realm of the spirits, which 
it reaches only after conquering various temptations to eat 
and drink on the way.*® 

Dualism was found to characterize the psychological no- 
tions of the Tami, off the coast of New Guinea, and it is 
equally typical of the Bagobo of southeastern Mindanao in 
the Philippine Islands, who distinguish not a long and a 
short but a right-hand soul and a left-hand soul. The 
former, which is good, never leaves the body except to lie, 
still intimately associated with it, as the shadow on the 
right side; its permanent separation constitutes death. Ex- 
cept for its lesser coarseness, it resembles the living Bagobo, 
even to the color of the skin. After death, this soul goes 
straight down from the grave to the lower world, which is 
called the Great (or One) Country. By purification it be- 
comes a naturalized spirit, who now joins his predecessors 
in a mode of life closely patterned on that of the living 
Bagobo. While in life the dextral soul is associated with 
health, activity and joy, its sinistral counterpart spells sick- 
ness, pain, and death. It is this left-hand soul that appears 
as the shadow on the left side and also as the reflection in 
the water; and it alone leaves the body at night to go flying 
about the world. These dream adventures are fraught with 
peril for the owner of the soul, for were a demon to catch 
it the bodily container would also fall prey to its devourer. 
At the moment of death the left-hand soul leaves the body 
for the last time and after the funeral becomes merged in 

104 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the company of demons who cause disease and dig up corpses 
in order to eat the flesh. A Bagobo, when expounding these 
views, is quite capable of theoretically maintaining the tri- 
partite nature of man,—the existence of a body that is buried 
and dug up by cannibalistic ogres; of a left-hand soul that 
is ultimately transformed into one of these demons; of a 
right-hand soul “that goes to the One Country to continue 
its existence in a less substantial and more highly idealized 
manner than on earth.” The interesting thing, as Miss Bene- 
dict informs us, is that in contemplating his own future 
existence a native will shift his point of view, now merging 
his individuality in that of the demon, then in that of the 
denizen of the Great City, according to the emotional re- 
actions of the time being.® 

Some peoples attribute four souls to every human body. 
This for instance, is the belief of the Yuchi, who once resided 
about the banks of the Savannah. One was said to remain 
rooted to the place of death, two others—not sharply dis- 
criminated—hovered near the kin of the deceased, while 
the fourth departed for the point where earth and sky meet 
and attempted to leap into the spirit land on a constantly 
moving cloud. The notion of four mutually independent 
souls is also attributed to some of the Hidatsa of North 
Dakota, who account for the gradual sinking of the body 
by the consecutive departure of the four souls.” 

A quadruple soul has also been recorded among the 
Dakota, but Dr. Walker, writing of the Oglala subdivision 
of that tribe, reports only three souls, all bestowed on the 
infant at birth and all distinct in the hereafter. The ni 
represents the vital force, being identified with the breath 
or shadow and causing death by its departure. It accom- 
panies the second soul or nagi to the god Skan, testifies on 
its behalf, and then disappears like smoke among the stars, 

ANIMISM 105 

for it is one of these that Skan had implanted in the new- 
born babe. The nagi controls its owner’s disposition and 
after his decease lingers near his haunts until it appears be- 
fore Skan for judgment. Finally, there is the sicun, which 
is likened to a shadow; this likewise abides with its owner 
from birth until death, serving as his guardian angel, and 
after his demise conducts him to the land of spirits, but 
without itself entering it. The last term is also used in a 
radically different sense by the Western Dakota. If the 
nagt does not pass muster, it thereby becomes a sicun and 
must wander over the world until adjudged worthy of ad- 
mission to the spirit trail, and these roamers are classed 
with the malevolent beings. But the term nis applied with 
still another meaning, viz., to the are spirits a man of 
his free volition chooses in the course of his life.* 

These conceptions, while by no means free from obscur- 
ity, are instructive in exemplifying the attempts of the In- 
dian metaphysicians to grapple with the problems of psy- 
chology and of existence as a whole. 

One remark concerning multiple souls may be offered. 
As has already been suggested by the French philosopher, 
Lévy-Bruhl, their precise number may probably be correlated 
in more than one case with the mystic number of the tribe. 
Since the Plains Indians constantly associate four with pe- 
culiar potency, it is not surprising to find some of them 
bringing the souls into line with their preconceived idea. 
All that seems prerequisite is that they should first consider 
the matter from a numerical angle at all. As soon as that 
happens the favored number will assert itself with the ob- 
trusiveness of a fixed idea. Thus the Peninsular Malays, 
who value seven as sacred, are not content with less than 
seven distinct souls. Considering the arguments advanced 
in Galileo’s day against the possibility of more than seven 

106 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

planets, we need not marvel at the force of such preconcep- 
tions. 

To the subject of non-human souls the briefest of refer- 
ences will suffice. It is not astonishing that animals should 
be credited with souls, for primitive man rarely, if ever, 
draws a sharp line of demarcation between mankind and 
other animals as a group, though there may be a capricious 
favoritism in ascribing a soul to some species and not to 
others. What at first sight arrests our attention is that 
even the lifeless phenomena of nature are sometimes con- 
ceived as endowed with a spirit. We have already seen 
that when a Bukaua makes sacrifice it is not the food itself 
that is supposed to be appropriated by the spirits but the 
spiritual essence of the offering, and this is a far from un- 
common practice. To cite another case, the Bagobo as 
_cribe a soul—a single one, incidentally—to such manufac- 
tured things as tools, weapons, and clothing.’ 

Tytor’s THEORY: THE ORIGIN OF THE SPIRIT CONCEPT 

Having briefly surveyed some of the facts of animism” 
we are now ready to examine Tylor’s theory of them. His 
scheme naturally divides itself into two parts. First, he 
determines how the concept of comparatively spiritual as. 
opposed to grossly material existence could ever have arisen; 
secondly, he attempts to.show how when that concept had 
once evolved all types of supernatural beings evolved from 
_it. Each inquiry is best considered separately. 

According to Tylor, the belief in a more refined form of 
existence than the bodily one of normal experience is based 
both on an inference from observed facts and on the direet 
evidence of the senses. Primitive man observes that there 
is a difference between the living body and the corpse, and 

ANIMISM 107 

he concludes that there must be something in the former, 
however elusive in essence, that is absent from the latter; 
hence, the notion of a vital principle. But, secondly, the 
savage sees, either in dreams or in visionary revelations, 
human shapes different from those of waking experience. 
“When the sleeper awakens from a dream, he believes he 
has really somehow been away, or that other people have 
come to him.” But since his body lies where he lay down to 
rest, since the people he sees are known to be far away, it 
is necessarily not his normal self or the selves of his dream 
interlocutors that are concerned, but phantom selves present- 
ing a new category of reality, though bearing the semblance 
of the fleshly body. Says Tylor: 

p 
( My own view is that nothing but dreams or visions could 
have ever put into men’s minds such an idea as that of souls 
being ethereal images of bodies. ) 

But the vital force and the phantom are intimately con- 
nected with the body, the former enabling it to feel, think, 
and act, while the latter is its image or double. Further, 
both are separable from the body,—the life principle dur- 
ing insensibility or death, the double when it appears to 
people at a distance. Tylor argues that primitive man com- 
bines the two into the notion of a ghost-soul. 

Given the human soul, the extension of the soul concept 
to other animals was natural considering the primitive view 
of animals as not basically distinct from man. As for the 
souls attributed to inanimate objects, Tylor points out that 
even they may be regarded as endowed with life, while in 
any event they will appear as phantoms in dreams and 
visions alongside of persons wearing, carrying, or otherwise 
using them.*° 

108 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Let us understand clearly the relations of Tylor’s theory 
to the phenomena to which it pertains. That even extremely 
rude tribes believe in the existence of a spiritual, that is, 
relatively immaterial, reality, is the starting-point of the 
inquiry. Whence, asks Tylor, do they derive this belief, 
which is apparently not suggested by experience? His 
answer is that the lack of an empirical basis is only appar- 
ent; and he cites two sets of phenomena that conjointly may 
have led to the notion of spirit as here defined. He does 
not pretend to have historical records for the origin of a 
conception that belongs to dim antiquity. His theory is 
avowedly a psychological interpretation pure and simple, 
but inasmuch as it not only explains the empirical observa- 
tions, but operates exclusively with facts like death, dreams 
and visions, all of which demonstrably exercise a strong in- 
fluence on the minds of primitive men, it must be conceded 
to have a high degree of probability. I, for one, certainly 
have never encountered any rival hypothesis that could be 
considered a serious competitor. However, the eminent 
French sociologist Durkheim has raised objections to Tylor’s 
theory, and it will accordingly be necessary to examine his 
arguments.”* 

One criticism offered by Durkheim seems to coincide with 
what I have myself said in the Introduction concerning 
Tylor’s intellectualistic bias. Why, asks the French scholar, 
should primitive man crave a theoretical interpretation of 
dream life? |He is not a philosopher who deliberately con- 
cocts theories of the phenomena observed. 

Now it is undoubtedly true that Tylor’s phraseology is 
often tinctured with rationalistic psychologizing. But 
Durkheim does not put his finger on the right spot. Tylor 
is at fault in so far as he limits the consideration of religion 
almost wholly to the belief in spiritual beings, that is to the 

ANIMISM 109 

conceptual aspect of religion without due regard to its emo- 
tional conconiitants. But in the present context the charge 
of intellectualism is pointless because Tylor is concerned 
with tracing the origin of a concept, that is, of a cognitive 
element of consciousness. Further, he derives it very 
largely not from ratiocination about observed phenomena 
but from the immediate sensory testimony of dream life. 

As a matter of fact, Tylor’s errors in the way of intel- 
lectualism are the veriest peccadiiloes beside his critic’s. 
For Durkheim’s remarks in part involve an intellectualistic 
notion of the savage that is well-nigh incredible. How, he 
asks, could a dreamer fail to discover that he has been the 
dupe of an illusion? Say, he has been disporting himself 
in his sleep with some fellow-tribesman; all he has to do 
on awakening is to compare notes with his friend. Has he 
undergone similar experiences? In most instances there 
will be discrepancies, hence no reality will be attached to the 
adventures of dream life. 

This is almost beneath criticism. In the first place, the 
persons seen in sleep are not always so close at hand as to 
be readily interviewed about the precise simultaneity of 
their dream experiences. Secondly, what evidence is there 
that primitive men would naturally resort to such a check- 
ing process? From what we know it would appear that in 
proportion as they attached emotional value to their dreams 
they would be reticent concerning them. But, waiving that 
point, let us suppose that our inquirer categorically con- 
fronts a camp-mate with a tale of joint nocturnal wander- 
ings. Which one of us is able to recall with complete 
sharpness all the varied details of a night’s dreams? How, 
then, could the person consulted be sufficiently certain of 
the facts to make a categorical denial? His reactions, when 
he is so confronted, would certainly depend solely on his 

110 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

inborn suggestibility and his psychological relations to the 
questioner. They would correspond, in some cases at least, 
to the response given under comparable conditions, already 
mentioned, when a Hawaiian priest would announce to some 
native that he had seen the latter’s wraith misbehaving him- 
self, that such conduct had aroused the anger of his familiar, 
and would result in dire consequences unless a rite of atone- 
ment were undergone. 

At this speech of the kahuna kilokilo [priest], the man whose 
soul was concerned became greatly alarmed and cast down in 
spirit, and he consented to have the kahuna perform the cere- 
mony of kala, atonement, for him.’? 

Other arguments advanced by Durkheim suffer from the 
same combination of arbitrary assertions and rationalistic 
psychologizing and, above all, from a misunderstanding of 
the question at issue. We are told that Tylor simplifies 
the problem by representing the soul merely as a separable 
double; to be sure, it may be so conceived, but it also figures 
as something not radically separable, as something fusing 
with the organism it animates, so as to be affected by bodily 
wounds. ‘Tylor, then, fails to explain why the dualism of 
soul and body does not exclude a profound unity and an in- 
timate interpenetration of the two. 

The obvious answer is that that is beside the problem; the 
problem is not why primitive man does not attain a logical 
consistency rarely encountered among learned metaphysi- 
cians, but how the empirically observed notion of relatively 
spiritual being came into existence. Whether that notion 
solely dominates the view of mental operations, or is coupled 
with contradictory notions, is irrelevant. Specifically, the 
transmission of a wound from the body to the soul is wholly 

‘ 

ANIMISM III 

intelligible from Tylor’s scheme whenever the soul is repre- 
sented as an image reflected by the body. 

Again Durkheim contends that dream phenomena are not 

most simply explained by the assumption of a double; for 
example, it would have been simpler for a dreamer to imag- 
ine himself endowed with telescopic vision when he sees 
remote regions in his sleep. That would make lesser de- 
mands on the imagination than “cette notion si complexe 
d'un double, fait d’une substance étherée, a demi invisible, et 
dont Vexpérience directe n’offrait aucun exemple.” 
( Let us remark again that the question is not to show 
how the savage might in simple fashion explain his dream 
life but how the empirically noted idea of a double could 
arise. Durkheim misses the point of departure for Tylor’s 
investigation by thus inverting the problem. Further, the 
assertion that telescopic vision is simpler than the double- 
concept is at best an idle conjecture, ) As a matter of fact, 
there is nothing complex about this notion, which is ac- 
cording to Tylor directly yielded by the sensory experience 
of dreams and abnormal mental states. ( Finally, how would 
telescopic vision explain those cases in which the dreamer 
does not observe remote happenings but is visited in his 
own habitat by persons known to be far away?/ 

Durkheim is not more fortunate when he argues that 
our dreams very often relate to past experiences, that we 
survey once more what we have already seen, do again what 
we have done. All this, he insists, cannot be explained by 
the double; even if that were capable of traveling in space, 
no human being, however devoid of intelligence, could in- 
vest it with the power of traveling in time. It is much 
simpler for early man to regard such dreams as what they 
are, namely, as particularly vivid recollections of the past. 

But again we must insist that a theory which purports 

112 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

to derive the soul-concept—partly, it should be noted— 
from dream life is under no obligations to outline a savage 
theory that shall consistently explain all dream experiences. 
When the theory has explained how some of the ordinary 
dream phenomena yield the notion of a double, it has 
achieved all that can reasonably be expected. | The very as- 
sumption that primitive man must be credited with a con- 
sistent scheme of things reveals a strange lack of insight 
into his mental operations. Apart from this, it would be 
interesting to know whence Durkheim derives the informa- 
tion about the relative frequency of dreams that must nec- 
essarily be referred to the past. 

Finally, a chronological stricture cannot be ignored. 
Durkheim is willing to grant that nowadays the savage uses 
the concept of the double to account for dream apparitions ; 
but he maintains that this represents a later stage of devel- 
opment. Primitive man, he argues, does not explain all 
dreams alike, but disregards the majority of them; he pays 
attention only in so far as they are sanctified by a pre- 
existing religious system. (The Australians, in particular, 
neglected dreams unless they exhibited souls of the deceased: 
the soul-concept thus precedes and underlies the conception 
of dream experiences and cannot be derived therefrom.) 

( In answer to this, we may note once more, in passing, the 
inversion of the real problem and the one-sided emphasis 
on dream life, which Tylor considers only one, though a 
very important, source of the spirit-concept.) For reasons 
to be explained below, we cannot accept Durkheim’s bland 
assumption that Australian usage, even if correctly reported, 
is decisive as to primitive, let alone primeval, belief. But 
even if it were, what is meant by “ignoring” dream ex- 
periences? It would be entirely possible not to weight them 
emotionally yet to apprehend them intellectually. As a 

ANIMISM Ti3 

matter of fact, it is improbable that repeated nocturnal ap- 
paritions in sleep should fail in the long run to yield evi- 
dence of a relatively immaterial form of reality, and that is 
all that is required by the theory. The point that there is 
discrimination exercised as to the value of different dreams 
is valid enough but irrelevant. Incidentally, I suspect that 
in a good many instances the appraisal of a dream has a 
purely subjective basis, that it is due to a simple thrill which 
carries with it immediate conviction. 

( To sum up, Durkheim’s objections leave Tylor’s explana- 
tion entirely unshaken.) Certainly the alternative proposed 
by the critic cannot be regarded as an adequate substitute. 
Durkheim assumes that the most archaic religious concep- 
tions are those found in Australia. / Typical of the island 
continent is the belief that each sib (clam) in the tribe has 
peculiarly intimate relations with a species of animals or 
plants—its “totem.” Diffused throughout the sacred 
species there is an anonymous force. But the individual 
Australian is himself a part and parcel of the group that 
comprehends alike his sib and his totem species: the totemic 
principle is incarnate in him as his soul, which is really 
only part of the collective totemic soul. Since, nevertheless, 
each. individual is distinct from animals or plants, the no- 
tion of a dual form of existence naturally arises. 

Since this is not a treatise on dialectics, it is unnecessary 
to examine the numerous allegations bound up with Durk- 
heim’s scheme, together with their logical ramifications. 
We shall content ourselves with putting the ax to the root 
of the theory. It is ethnographically unwarranted to deduce 
primeval conceptions from Australian conditions. The 
Australians are not so primitive as, certainly not more primi- 
tive in their culture than, the Andaman Islanders, the Se- 
mang of the Malay Peninsula, the Paviotso of Nevada. In 

114 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

_ these sociologically simplest tribes totemism does not occur. 
Totemism is a widespread but far from universal phe- 

nomenon, while the belief in spiritual beings is universal; / 

precisely these rudest tribes which have a decisive bearing 
on the question are non-totemic animists.\ Hence, the no- 
tion of spirit cannot be derived from totemism.) Moreover, 
the totemic ideas of the Australians represent a highly local- 
ized product and cannot even be accepted as the earliest 
form of totemism. 

Durkheim’s argumentation may therefore be dismissed as 
in no way invalidating the core of Tylor’s hypothesis in 
the absence of historical evidence. 

Quite recently an objection to Tylor’s theory has come 
from another quarter. An eminent anatomist, Professor 
G. Elliot Smith, has broached the view and impressed it 
on the minds of several students of cultural anthro- 
pology, that animism is not a product of the primitive mind 
at all but was transmitted to the ruder peoples of the world 
from Egypt since, say, 2600 B.c... Thus Mr. Perry, a dis- 
ciple of this school, does not hesitate to pronounce it as 
probable that 

prior to the coming of this (Egyptian) civilization, the native 
peoples were devoid of any magical or religious practices or 
ideas. 

The historical evidence adduced to support this inference 
seems to me to be precisely nil. The conclusion is based 
partly on an irrational pan-Egyptological bias that impels 
members of the school to trace practically all arts and be- 
liefs to the banks of the Nile, partly on the dogma that 
it is a psychological impossibility for any belief, custom, 
or art to be re-invented independently. Even were this 

ANIMISM 115 

psychological principle fully demonstrated, the Egyptian 
origin of animism, or of anything else, would not follow as 
a logical corollary; for it is entirely conceivable that the 
beliefs shared by the ancient Egyptians with the modern 
Australians or Andamanese are in all three instances sur- 
vivals of an extremely ancient and deep-rooted human set 
of ideas. That is, of course, the implication of Tylor’s 
theory. Tylor, disavowing historical knowledge, has shown 
to my mind a satisfactory correspondence between the primi- 
tive concept of spirit and certain psychological phenomena, 
known to occur among primitive folk, that would produce 
that concept. I, for one, shall not be bulldozed into the con- 
viction that it was psychologically impossible for primitive 
man to arrive at animistic ideas before the ancient Egyptians 
are proved to have had a unique innate mentality that would 
enable them alone, of all hominids, to evolve the spirit- 
concept. 

TyLor’s THEORY: NATURE AND SEQUENCE OF SUPER- 
NATURAL BEINGS 

Tylor represented in admirable fashion the characteristics 
of the English intellect. Fine-spun dialectics and their elab- 
orate speculative products were little to his taste. He 
reveled in facts, burying his arguments and his readers under 
their solid array, and approached his problems with a punc- 
tiliously judicial frame of mind. But even the most cauti- 
ous and open-minded are not immune to the subtler influ- 
ences of their intellectual atmosphere, and so Tylor, the 
compeer and comrade-at-arms of Darwin and Huxley, 
could not but insensibly transfer to his field of inquiry the 
basic principles of biological evolution that were then being 
rapidly extended to every branch of learning. The biolo- 

116 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

gists were asserting that an essential unity underlay the ap- 
parent diversity of organic life; and for the student of com- 
parative religion it was a tempting conclusion that the 
varied forms of religious belief were likewise linked by a 
fundamental likeness. Zodlogists were passing from the 
general proposition that species hitherto regarded as dis- 
tinct were related by blood to the elaboration of family 
trees ; and the anthropological investigator of religion spon- 
taneously followed suit and, naturally enough, regarded it 
as a foregone conclusion that as man had been derived 
from a unicellular ancestor so the beliefs of the most highly 
civilized peoples had evolved by a corresponding series of 
progressive changes from the faith of the tribes lowest in 
cultural rank. In other words, when Tylor had answered 
the question how humanity ever came to conceive such a 
thing as spirit at all, and next confronted the varied mani- 
festations of belief in supernatural beings, he automatically 
attempted to bring order into the welter of facts by a theory 
monistic in its psychology and unilinear in its historical im- 
plications. As to the psychological interpretation, indeed, 
nothing could be more explicit: 

It seems as though the conception of a human soul when once 
attained to by man, served as a type or model on which he 
framed not only his ideas of other souls of lower grade, but 
also his ideas of spiritual beings in general, from the tiniest elf 
that sports in the long grass up to the heavenly Creator and 
Ruler of the world, the Great Spirit. 

And again we read: 

The idea of souls, demons, deities, and any other classes of 
spiritual beings, are conceptions of similar nature throughout, 
the conceptions of souls being the original ones of the series.** 

ANIMISM 117 

In part the argument on behalf of this basic unity is quite 
convincing. It is easy to understand how the souls of the 
living, postulated for reasons set forth in the first part of 
Tylor’s scheme, should assume the character of malignant 
demons or of benign patrons after the death of the body.’ 
There is also a good deal to be said for the interpretation 
of what Tylor calls ‘“‘fetichism’’: as the human soul can ex- 
ist in the human body or leave it in dream life and abnormal 
states, so spirits modeled on the soul may either flit about 
freely or become temporarily housed in material bodies, 
which through this incorporation become sacred objects or 
“fetiches.” *® But here a difficulty arises that is indeed ex- 
plicitly expounded by Tylor. Plausible as this interpreta- 
tion may be, have we the right to assume that sacred ob- 
jects always derive their mystic character from spirits em- 
bodied in them? “We have not, Tylor candidly explains; 
but his monistic bias is too strong to be seriously shaken 
by the caution felt and expressed in abstracto. That is to 
say, what he is really interested in demonstrating is the 
omnipotence of the animistic principle not only as an ex- 
planation of all spiritual beings but of all objects whatsoever 
that possess religious value. Hence these are brought 
so far as possible into the animistic category. Yet there is 
now considerable evidence that precisely in some of the 
regions where fetichism flourishes most, viz., in West Africa, 
the power of the fetich is derived not from an embodied 
spirit but from, say, some magical substance that is smeared 
over it and is inherently endowed with supernatural po- 
tency. 

Doubts likewise arise as to the alleged identity of nature- 
spirits with human souls. “As the human body was held 
to live and act by virtue of its own inhabiting spirit-soul,” 
the argument runs, “so the operations of the world seem to 

118 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

be carried on by the influence of other spirits.” There is an 
infinite multitude of spiritual beings in primitive belief to 
serve as causes of natural phenomena: “these spirits are 
looked upon as souls working nature much as human souls 
work human bodies.” Thus, the firmament is explained 
“by an indwelling deity, modeled on the human soul. We 
may best understand what was meant by the Heaven-god, _ 
if we think of him as the soul of the sky.” At first the 
spirits are merged in their element, later as anthropomorphic 
gods they are independent controllers of the phenomenon. 
Thus, the barbarian’s fire-worship is at first directed to the 
spirit supposed to be animating “the actual flame which he 
watches writhing, roaring, devouring like a live animal,” 
but at a subsequent stage any particular fire is a manifesta- 
tion of a general elemental being, the fire-god. Similarly, 
the sea divinity of the older period evolves into Poseidon 
“so little bound to the element he governs, that he can 
come from the brine to sit in the midst of the gods in the 
assembly on Olympus, and ask the will of Zeus.” *” 

Undoubtedly the facts can be consistently explained along 
these lines. But if we ask whether Tylor has demonstrated 
his interpretative principle to the exclusion of all others, 
it must be said that no such rigid proof is to be found. Asa 
matter of fact, the data will be seen below to admit in part 
of a simpler explanation. 

Turning from the psychological to the chronological as- 
pects of Tylor’s scheme, I must confess that it is not in all 
details perfectly clear to me, for the overwhelming mass of 
concrete illustrations is leavened by a minimum of logical 
correlation. Thus I am not sure whether fetichism is con- 
ceived as a definite stage succeeding ancestral cults and 
antedating nature-worship; or whether it is merely con- 
sidered an outgrowth of the basic soul-concept, such as 

ANIMISM 119 

might appear in any and every period after the initial estab- 
lishment of the spirit idea. Two facts, however, are quite 
beyond the possibility of doubt: according to the theory, the 
soul concept is the earliest because it is “based on evidence 
most direct and accessible to ancient man’’; and a belief in 
a Supreme Being is the last in the series, arising from a 
preceding polytheism through the ascendancy of one deity, 
—presumably on the pattern of the earthly supremacy of 
the chief or king.** Moreover, when such a belief is 
reported for primitive peoples, Tylor is strongly inclined to 
scent the influence of contact with higher cultures, those of 
Christianity and Islam. 

In the interests of the reader I have seen fit to punctuate 
my exposition with an occasional anticipatory query. How- 
ever, for a long time after its appearance Tylor’s theory 
remained unquestioned in anthropological circles.y Its con- 
sonance with the thought of the period, the wealth of its 
documentation, Tylor’s well-earned reputation as a leader 
of the new science, all served to silence dissent. When, in- 
deed, doubts were at last voiced, they did not issue from the 
ranks of the academic guild. 

Andrew Lang, who in 1898 ventured to challenge one of 
the most impressive parts of Tylor’s scheme, was indeed 
very much more than a mere amateur. Though a profes- 
sional man of letters with primarily literary interests, he 
was widely read in folklore and related fields of anthropol- 
ogy. He serves as an illustration of the fact that at a 
certain stage in its development a branch of knowledge may 
well profit from the labors of a nimble-witted outsider. 
Precisely because Lang stood aside from the intellectual 
currents that could not but affect a man like Tylor, he was 
able to preserve a greater freshness of outlook. He was 
not interested .n natural science and the catchword “evolu- 

120 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tion” that held many of his contemporaries spellbound did 
not accordingly stir his imagination at all. However, it 
would not be just to ascribe his attitude wholly, or even pre- 
dominantly, to mere aloofness from the -contemporaneous 
philosophy of natural science. Lang belonged to that rare 
company of men who do not readily bow to the mere au- 
thority of learning. He displayed a certain mental .affinity 
with writers like George Bernard Shaw or, to take academic 
men, like William James and Gustay Theodor Fechner. So 
far from being cowed by the pronunciamento Of an acknowl- 
edged master, the very idea exerted upon him a contra- 
suggestive influence. With specific reference to Tylor, 
Lang felt and expressed the admiration common to every- 
one who could appreciate vast knowledge coupled with sound 
judgment; but he was not hypnotized into blind acceptance 
of Tylor’s theory and preferred to draw conclusions on the 
basis of a personal scrutiny of the data. 

I have pointed out that what were foregone conclusions 
for Tylor would necessarily appear'to Lang as highly dubi- 
ous propositions. Why must all notions of supernatural 
beings be ranged in a unilinear series? Why must loftier 
conceptions of the deity grow out of less worthy ones? 

“sf History, as a matter of fact, seemed to demonstrate that 
gods do not always improve ethically with advancing cul- 
ture. Why, then, could not the conception of a “high-god” 
be held by the very simplest tribes,—a god, that is to say, 
who could be described as a “primeval eternal Being, author 
of all things, the father and friend of man, the invisible, 
omniscient guardian of morality’ 2?’ Lang contended that 
such a notion of divinity actually existed among a number 
of rude peoples and that it was not introduced by white mis- 
sionaries, or that at least such alien influences were highly 
improbable. He was by no means disposed to challenge 

ANIMISM 121 

Tylor’s scheme in toto. He had no particular quarrel with 
Tylor’s derivation of the spirit-concept and freely admitted 
that the cult of demons and ancestral spirits naturally 
flowed from the idea of the soul What he denied was 
that it ever culminated in the conception of a high-god’ 
Referring to Tylor’s suggestion that it had arisen out of 
ancestor-worship and on the pattern of earthly royalty, he 
pointedly asked how such a process was possible among 
those peoples who did not worship their ancestors and who 
were not governed by kings. He thus arrived at the theory 
that the high-god faith represented a line of development 
radically independent of that which held for the soul-ghost 
idea. But, though radically distinct, that faith did not re- 
main so. The high-god was conceived as sublime in such 
measure as to be removed from direct relations with human 
needs and received neither prayer nor offerings; these would 
be rendered instead to the ghosts of the deceased, who thus 
came to occupy in increasing degree the center of the re- 
ligious stage and arrogated to themselves all cult activities. 
"ith In addition, the myth-making tendency would come to over- 
lay the originally sublime character of the high-god with 
human and even contemptible traits. Thus, the Creator of 
primeval days would secondarily fuse with the idea of an an- 
cestor and might assume the mutually contradictory charac- 
teristics of a hero and a trickster. This, for example, is 
supposed to have happened among the Zulu: in the begin- 
ning the Unkulunkulu of their mythology was, according to 
Lang, a typical high-god, but the intense development of 
ancestor-worship led to his identification with the first man, 
while the myth-making fancy of the natives made him the 
hero of adventures hardly consistent with a monotheistic 
divinity in our sense,” 
But the chronological aspect of Lang’s theory is at least 

122 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

( 
equaled in interest by its psychological complement. ‘Lang 
denies flatly that the high-god of primitive tribes need be 
a spiritual, i.e., soul-like being. } 

To us, such a being is necessarily a spirit, but he was by no 
means necessarily so to an early thinker, who may not yet have 
reached the conception of a ghost. 

The savages conceived their high-gods as “undefined eter- 
nal beings,” to them the deity was “a magnified non-natural 
man,’’—one, in other words, vastly superior to natural hu- 
man beings but not envisaged as resembling the shadowy 
double inhabiting the human body,—a conception that may 
have been of later origin. In answer to the question, how 
primeval man could evolve such a high-god, Lang appeals 
to the human desire for an explanation of origins, which 
would naturally stimulate the conception of a Maker or Cre- 
ator.*® 

In the course of my exposition of Tylor, I have already 
hinted at a criticism of the same nature as this psychological 
one advanced by Lang but of even broader application. If 
it is possible to doubt that the high-god is necessarily con- 
ceived by primitive man as spiritual, the same skepticism is 
surely permissible with regard to other supernatural beings. 
We cannot blame Tylor for striving to bring the greatest 
possible number of phenomena under a single formula, for 
that is the aim of all science. But it is the duty of subse- 
quent scholarship to test the evidence on which the bold 
generalizers of an earlier age based their conclusions and 
to disclose whatever gaps appear. Approaching the subject 
in this temper, I find no proof in Tylor of the assumption 
underlying his theory, that all supernatural beings are “spirit- 
ual,” that is, modeled on the idea of the human soul. It is 

ANIMISM 123 

of course, possible that, say, the sun-god is conceived as the 
soul manipulating the solar body to which it is somehow at- 
tached. But it is at least equally probable that the savage, 
without splitting up the phenomenon by a dualistic point of 
view, directly apperceives it as a person of vast power,—in 
other words as “a magnified non-natural man.’”’ To take an 
actual case, among the beings who bless the Crow Indians 
the benevolent Dwarf plays a part, but there is not the 
slightest hint that he is soul-like: he has all the earmarks of 
robust non-natural anthropomorphism, he belongs as it were 
to a distinct and powerful, though stunted, branch of the 
family Hominidz, localized near Pryor Creek. For North 
America generally, Dr. Ruth Fulton Benedict has proved 
that the so-called guardian spirits are only in a few 
tribes the spirits of dead people, and even there these never 
constitute a majority of the tutelaries acquired.”° In this 
area, in short, the “‘spirits’”’ of descriptive monographs are 
not comparable to the ghosts of the Ekoi or Bukaua. 

I do not wish to deny that it is possible for the soul-con- 
cept to color the deities of primitive man without their being 
expressly identified with the deceased, but I think more defi- 
nite indication of that fact is required in each instance. Cer- 
tainly, great caution is obligatory in the use of the term 
“spirit” and its equivalents. Many writers freely employ it 
to designate any supernatural being. This may be conven- 
ient, but in the interest of clarity such usage should be 
tabooed. For example, Dr. Radin, after defining Indian re- 
ligion as animism “in the old Tylorian sense of the term,” 
speaks of certain monsters as spirits generally distributed 
over North America, and particularly of the Horned 
Snake.*t Now Tylor would undoubtedly have tried to bring 
these, together with all other supernatural beings, under the 
head of “spirits,” but always with the explicit or implicit 

124 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

understanding that they are derived from the concept of 
soul. Dr. Radin, however, in no way indicates any features 
of the serpent that suggest such an origin, and altogether re- 
veals a quite un-Tylorian indifference concerning this point. 

Some additional comments on Tylor’s animistic interpre- 
tation will be offered below under the heading of “Anima- 
tism.”’ 

We shall thus not merely recognize as valid Lang’s ob- 
jection to the alleged psychological unity of high-gods and 
souls but are willing to extend his skepticism to other super- 
natural beings. Let us now revert to Lang’s critique of the 
historical aspects of Tylor’s scheme. On this subject Lang 
has found a vigorous adherent in the person of Father Wil- 
helm Schmidt, the combative editor of Anthropos, one of the 
keenest and most erudite writers in the domain of anthro- 
pology to-day. Schmidt has independently developed and 
systematized Lang’s views while fitting them into the total 
scheme of culture-history first propounded by Dr. F. Graeb- 
ner. In the modified form of that system elaborated by 
Father Schmidt himself, the most archaic form of culture 
accessible to inquiry is that common to the rudest peoples 
of the globe, including the Tasmanians, Bushmen, Andaman 
Islanders, Semang of the Malay Peninsula, Congo Pygmies, 
and a few others of comparable grade, including some native 
tribes of the New World. All these share the belief in a 
high-god, the argument runs, hence Lang’s contention of 
the great antiquity of the high-god concept and its contem- 
poraneousness with the crudest culture stands confirmed. 

Though the basic assumption here made is one that I am 
myself willing to accept, it obviously requires justification, 
for as has been pointed out in the Introduction, “primitive” 
and “primeval” are two distinct concepts. To review what 
was explained there, even the Tasmanians, however isolated 

ANIMISM 125 

and culturally stagnant compared with more progressive peo- 
ples, were not absolutely stable in their ways of life. They 
have indeed been compared with Palzolithic man, but the 
very fact that they had evolved some sort of adjustment to 
local conditions proves that they had added something to 
whatever cultural techniques they may have brought with 
them to their new island home. In other words, Tasmanian 
culture, too, had a history, and we cannot simply equate it 
with the culture of the ancestral immigrants of five—or ten 
—or twenty—thousand years ago. Now it would be strange 
indeed if what obtained for material culture were wholly in- 
applicable to the field of religion. In other words, the beliefs 
of the Tasmanians recorded by their observers cannot be set 
down as of Paleolithic antiquity without further inquiry. 
And the same skepticism will be in place with the correspond- 
ing ideas of the Andamanese, Semang, and their compeers. 

But fatal as the criticism may appear at first blush, it can 
be fairly answered. In the first place, the tenacity with 
which all religious beliefs are maintained in spite of the 
superficial adoption of later creeds is notorious. The Mo- 
hammedanized Malay will still in the hour of need pray to 
the older gods of Hinduism and, if the worst comes to the 
worst, fall back upon the pre-Hindu deities of the pagan 
pantheon. So the modern Greek peasant along with his 
Christian faith preserves fragments of belief that can be 
traced back for well over two millennia into ancient Hellas. 

Accordingly, since the force of conservatism is certainly 
not less in the rudest communities than among the represen- 
tatives of a more sophisticated civilization, we can fairly 
assume that each of the very simple peoples cited will pre- 
serve some archaic elements. If, moreover, all, or most of 
them, should turn out to share certain conceptions of the 
religious order, the probability that these common features 

126 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

are very old will be considerable. For their likeness cannot 
be explained either by mutual borrowing or by borrowing 
from a common source since the isolation of these groups 
has been precisely one of the most important determinants of 
their backwardness. An alternative presents itself: each 
tribe in isolation may have evolved the same idea through 
the obscure workings of the “psychic unity’? of mankind. 
But on that principle it would not be clear why such unity 
should have brought about the high-god idea precisely among 
all the simplest tribes and not in the whole of the human 
species. Finally, it might be argued that though the several 
“simplest” peoples had brought their common religious no- 
tions into their present habitat this implies only a moderate 
antiquity for these beliefs in so far as the tribes in question 
are racially akin to one another. This contention might in- 
deed be properly advanced against ascribing great age to fea- 
tures common to the Andamanese and the Semang, both of 
whom are of Negrito stock and have presumably separated 
in relatively recent times. But even the Bushmen, though 
sometimes classified with the Negrito, represent so special- 
ized a physical type as to demand a considerable period of 
time for their development; and the Tasmanians, while 
Negroid, are definitely not in the Negrito family. Hence, 
any religious traits held by these Negroid groups prior to 
their specialization must be of hoary age; and if these fea- 
tures are common to them and the rudest American aborig- 
ines, we are indeed carried back to as early a period of 
human belief as we can reasonably expect to attain by means 
of an historical reconstruction. 

In short, on the score of logic I have no objections to 
Father Schmidt’s premises: if, nevertheless, I demur to his 
conclusions it is on the score of facts. In other words, if 
all the rudest peoples share a distinctive high-god religion, 

ANIMISM 127 

then it represents an element of archaic culture; but do they? 

At this point it will be useful to outline somewhat more 
fully Father Schmidt’s conception of that cult as sketched by 
one of his associates and disciples.” The high-god is sup- 
posed to live in the sky and is not clearly soul-like. He is, 
however, eternal, omniscient, omnipotent without ever abus- 
ing his power. He acts as the founder of moral law, re- 
wards the good and punishes the wicked by disease and 
death, nay, even in a hereafter. He is asexual, and such 
anthropomorphic traits as are ascribed to him result from 
the later influence of mythology. A being of this type, rep- 
resenting a union of ethics and religion, naturally inspires 
the believers with awe, so that they are reluctant to name 
him. They do not worship him in temples or through 
images, but address him in spontaneous unstereotyped prayer 
and offer him first-fruits as a tribute of adoration, mot in the 
frame of mind of ghost-worshipers offering food to the 
souls of the departed. 

The points of agreement with Lang’s position are obvious ; 
the main difference lies in the stressing of the occurrence of 
a definite, though as yet little standardized, cult in the form 
of supplication and sacrifice. 

We must, then, inquire to what extent the beliefs and 
practices cited are really characteristic of the tribes that in 
recent times correspond most closely to the archaic sub- 
stratum. And here we are at the very outset confronted by 
not inconsiderable technical difficulties. To determine ac- 
curately the religion of an alien people is at best a difficult 
task, as shown by the contradictory nature of the views 
found among such relatively high and well-known tribes as 
the Crow and the Polynesians. But concerning many of 
the simplest tribes we know nothing. Mr. Ling Roth has 
faithfully collected everything written about The Aborigines 

128 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

of Tasmania, but the evidence is so vague, fragmentary, nay, 
contradictory that beyond the conviction that they had some 
form of belief nothing positive can be gleaned from the com- 
pilation. About the Pygmies of the Congo forest we have 
no trustworthy data because their shyness has hitherto defied 
attempts at intensive study. Similar timidity has been noted 
as characteristic of the Semang, and though it can not be 
said that we are wholly ignorant regarding their creed, it 
remains true that our knowledge is of the scantest kind and 
that we are tantalized once more by conflicting testimony.” 
Concerning the rudest North American tribes, such as the 
Shoshoneans of the Great Basin, our information is far 
from satisfactory, though a fair body of mythology has been 
collected. 

Certainly for the determination of those singularly elu- 
sive points involved in Schmidt’s theory, the evidence for 
any of the tribes cited is inadequate. For example, an 
earlier observer among the Semang records a belief in Kari, 
to whom his informants ascribed various attributes of a 
monotheistic deity; but a somewhat later investigator, Mr. 
Skeat, failed to find the slightest corroboratory testimony. 
Instead he was told about a very powerful and benevolent 
being named Ta’Ponn, who was pictured as the creator of 
the world and as inhabiting the eastern heavens. Now the 
name of the high-god would hardly affect the argument; 
what does matter is that Ta’P6nn is anthropomorphically de- 
scribed as the husband of the moon, the father of four chil- 
dren, and the son of Earth-mother and her obscure 
spouse. Furthermore, in the western heavens the high-god 
has a powerful adversary, with whom is associated a giant 
monkey; this ogre pelts into space any would-be intruders 
into his abode and the belief is held “that when the end of 
the world came, everything on earth would fall to his share.” 

ANIMISM 129 

In these conceptions the idea of moral retribution is lacking; 
further the benevolent deity is clearly not all-powerful, nor 
eternal, nor asexual. In other words, he is not a high-god in 
Schmidt’s sense. Perhaps the earlier reporter’s account is 
authentic, but until that fact is established by new field-work 
the Semang data will not help support the theory of an 
archaic high-god cult. 

The difficulty urged above has been on the score of in- 
adequate descriptive material. Let us now turn for a final 
test of Schmidt’s theory to tribes better known,—to the 
Andaman Islanders and the Bushmen. The former seem 
especially favorable since we have two independent accounts 
by good observers, Mr. E. H. Man and Professor A. R. 
Brown. What, then, can we learn from these concerning 
the religion of the natives? First of all, it is clear that, 
whatever may be the high-god conceptions held by them, 
these are coupled with animistic beliefs. This fact of course 
does not militate against Lang’s or Schmidt’s theory but is 
worth remembering. The spirits, who are definitely asso- 
ciated with the souls of the dead, are generally conceived as 
bizarre and fearful beings who cause sickness and death. 
Nevertheless, they sometimes befriend mortals and impart 
to them some of their own supernatural powers either on 
chance encounters or during serious illness or in dreams, and 
cures are sometimes effected through their aid. The only 
persons who in any way correspond to the priests and sha- 
mans of other peoples derive their authority from these 
spirits alone. 

But in addition to these animistic figures there is a char- 
acter, variously named according to locality, Biliku, Bilik or 
Puluga, who suggests a monotheistic deity. It is true that 
he has a counterpart in a being known as Tarai, Teriya or 
Daria, but since Biliku (to use a single term regardless of 

130 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

dialectic variants) is clearly more powerful the dualism is 
more apparent than real. The question then narrows itself 
down to a determination of Biliku’s personality, and here 
we find our two witnesses in direct disagreement. Mr. Man 
pictures him as an eternal, omniscient creator who punishes 
iniquity both in this world and the hereafter; according to 
Professor Brown, he is the Northeast monsoon (Tarai rep- 
resenting the Southeast), is not omniscient since the natives 
try to deceive him when committing ritual offenses, and is 
not in the least interested in inflicting penalties for anything 
but the breach of purely ritualistic, i. e., non-ethical, taboos. 
Before discussing the data furnished by this more recent in- 
vestigator, it is worth noting that in spite of his predeces- 
sor’s enumeration of Biliku’s divine characteristics this deity 
is far from wholly conforming to the high-god standards set 
by Father Schmidt even on Mr. Man’s own concrete testi- 
mony. For one thing, he eats, drinks, sleeps, mates, and 
reproduces like a human being; for another, the natives of 
South Andaman do not scruple to threaten him with the bite 
of a mythical snake to prevent him from causing rain, It 
is of course very easy to say that anthropomorphic traits 
are a later blot on the loftier archaic picture, but where is 
the proof for this assertion? It is not contained in the em- 
pirical data but represents a superadded and arbitrary in- 
terpretation. 

Turning now to Professor Brown’s material, one of the 
most striking facts we encounter is the lack of agreement 
among his Andamanese informants, both individually and 
locally. Even on so fundamental a point as Biliku’s sex, 
there is division. Such variability need not unduly surprise 
us in view of our experiences with the Crow and the Poly- 
nesians. But its bearing on the present argument is a pecu- 
liarly significant one. We are trying to establish as an 

ANIMISM 131 

archaic substratum of human religion those elements shared 
by the Andamanese with the Semang, Bushmen, and so 
forth. But what if the Andamanese themselves failed to 
share in a common belief? That would be reducing the basic 
argument to an absurdity. Asa matter of fact, the case is 
not so desperate. There is absolute unanimity concerning 
the identification of Biliku with the Northeast wind, and 
also as regards the taboos he insists upon. Other features, 
such as the association of this character with the discovery 
of fire, are at least sufficiently common to be reckoned pos- 
sibly ancient beliefs that have merely dropped out here and 
there. But the striking fact is that precisely the data that 
would vindicate the monotheistic character of Biliku are 
rare and of localized occurrence. It is only sporadically or 
in the south that he (she) figures as a beneficent creator; 
the common view, supported with much legendary evidence, 
makes him (her) hostile to mankind, or at best reluctantly 
benevolent. Thus, we find the ancestors of the natives steal- 
ing fire from this deity, exiling him, nay, even killing him in 
revenge for his attacks. In other words, the lofty concep- 
tion of a high-god dissolves into nothing on closer scrutiny: 
even if we admit Mr. Man’s evidence on a par with Pro- 
fessor Brown’s, the new data demonstrate the absence of a 
general Andamanese belief in a high-god and its rarity pre- 
cludes great antiquity.” 

Finally, a few words may be devoted to the case of the 
Bushmen of South Africa. According to an early observer, 
they differed from their neighbors in not praying to their 
ancestors and in so far were less animistic; but this 
does not by compensation imply monotheistic ideas of the 
type under discussion. If we turn to the incontrovertible 
evidence of the natives’ own literature,” we find no being of 
monotheistic dignity. Prayers are addressed to the moon 

132 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

and stars. But the moon is now represented as the Mantis’s 
shoe, now as a man gradually sliced down to almost com- 
plete extinction by the Sun; while the stars are made from 
roots hurled into the sky by a girl of the mythic race of 
First Bushmen. The Mantis is a typical trickster. The Sun 
was a man different from the mythic people; he illuminated 
only the space about his own habitation by raising one of his 
armpits, the sources of light; but an old woman induced 
some children to throw him into the sky. In all this there is 
not a suggestion of an eternal, primal, benevolent creative 
lawgiver. It is of course conceivable that myths developing 
at a subsequent stage would obscure the character of such a 
divinity; but here as in other instances of this type, actual 
evidence for the sequence postulated by Lang and Schmidt 
is not forthcoming. 

To sum up, Schmidt’s logical premises are acceptable, but 
it is impossible to reconstruct an archaic monotheistic layer 
of religion from the data on the simplest peoples. On some 
of these tribes, such as the Tasmanians and the Congolese 
Pygmies, information is practically non-existent, hence they 
must be completely disregarded. In the case of the Anda- 
manese, for whom our accounts are most satisfactory, in- 
dividual and local variability is so great that only certain 
features can be assumed to represent the proto-Andamanese 
creed, and these are precisely not in harmony with the 
monotheistic theory. 

It may appear that this is a discouragingly negative result 
after our appreciative introduction of Lang’s and Schmidt’s 
views. But as a matter of fact, their labors have not been in 
vain. First of all, there is the important anti-monistic con- 
ception of supernatural beings. Whether the high-god is 
later or earlier than the conception of a soul, the two notions 
are distinct in origin, and this emboldens us to inquire 

ANIMISM 133 

whether other forms of supernatural beings, say, nature- 
gods, are necessarily derived from animistic ideas. Sec- 
ondly, though in the absence of adequate data for at least 
half of the simplest tribes no archaic layer can be recon- 
structed from this comparison, the occurrence of a creative 
personality in the thought of peoples so lowly as the Anda- 
manese and the Semang is a phenomenon of the greatest 
psychological interest, even though we must divest that per- 
sonality of the monotheistic halo with which Lang and 
Schmidt surround it. Biliku, for example, may not be 
omniscient or omnipotent, but she is the inventor of basketry, 
the maker of celestial bodies, the discoverer of edible roots. 
It is true that such a figure is perhaps primarily no more than 
the product of intellectual and esthetic fancy, but it is equally 
true that it may easily acquire religious character. The 
germ of a non-spiritual type of deity is thus actually demon- 
strable here. These results are admittedly not so sensational 
as would be the discovery of Christian theology on the Ne- 
grito level; but they do not for that reason lose all value. 
In this moderate appraisal of the high-god phenomena I am 
glad to be able to coincide in the conclusions of the learned 
Archbishop of Sweden.” 

ANIMATISM 

' Tylor’s bias in favor of the soul-concept led him, as we 
have seen, to conceive fetiches, that is, inanimate objects of 
sacred character, as hallowed by the presence of a spirit. As 
a matter of fact he was inclined to apply the same view to 
all instances in which inanimate reality is personified by 
primitive man. But as Dr. Marett has convincingly shown, 
this involves an unnecessary hypothesis, and he has intro- 
duced a useful conceptual and terminological distinction by 

134 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

segregating as “animatism” those cases in which there is 
mere evidence that the savage regards as living what we 
class as lifeless. When, to use one of his own illustrations, 
a South African yells at a hurricane, he is personifying the 
natural phenomenon, but we have no right to assume that he 
is thinking of a being of relatively refined bodily essence 
residing in and directing the storm. Similarly, we may add, 
when a Crow picks up a curiously shaped rock and hits upon 
the quaint conceit that it can reproduce its kind, he is putting 
it into the organic kingdoms, but it no more follows that he 
attributes spirit to it than that we ascribe a soul to a cat 
when we describe it as animate. 

Dr. Marett makes a further point that I unhesitatingly en- 
dorse: both animism and animatism are essentially non-re- 
ligious, or only potentially religious, becoming religious only 
in so far as the emotional attitude characteristic of religion 
clusters about their objects. When a Melanesian distin- 
guishes between a yam and a pig by ascribing to the latter 
a vital principle, he is, so to speak, on the level of com- 
parative biology; he still adheres to that level when he dis- 
tinguishes between a pig and a man by attributing to the 
latter exclusive transformation into a ghost after death. 
But when he proceeds to differentiate among the ghosts of 
the deceased and to ascribe mysterious potency to the ghosts 
of distinguished men only, he passes the threshold that sep- 
arates the everyday world from the universe of religion.”” 

REFERENCES 

1 Gutmann: 127, 142-145. 

2 Brown: 136-147, 163-179. 

5 Lowie, 1909 (a) : 226-229, 301. 
* Tylor, 1913: I, 429. 

ANIMISM 135 

5 Skinner, 1913: 85. 

°L. W. Benedict: 49-65. 

7 Speck: 97. Matthews, 1877: 50. 

® Walker: 86-88, 155-159. 

®L. W. Benedict: 54, 64. 

*° Tylor, 1913: 1, 428-479; esp., 428 f., 442, 445, 450, 477- 
479; id., 1881: 343. 

11 Durkheim: 66 sq., 78-84, 347, 355, 370, 378. 

12 Malo: 150. , 

ae Petry "450. 

ae EVlor, IOIS 11; Log Ff. 

peel ylon, £913 :-11, 51 3-sd. 

4# Tylor, 1913: 15.123, 144. 

SE LyiIOr, 1O132tr, 105, 247, 255, 277 51d, 1O81 : 357.Sq, 

18 Tylor, 1913: 11, 110, 331 sq. 

19 Lang, 1909: 160-190; id., I901: 15-45, 224 sq. 

20 R. F. Benedict: 43-49. 

21 Radin, 1914 (b): 351, 356. 

22 Koppers: 145 sq. Schmidt, 1908-1909: 111, 590-611; IV, 
244-250. 

28 Skeat and Blagden: 11, 173 sq. 

24 Brown: 136-288, 354 sq. 

25 Bleek and Lloyd. 

26 Sdderblom: 151, 162. 

27 Marett : 14, 18, 118. 

CHAPTER VI 
MAGIC 

FRAZER’S THEORY 
In Murray’s Dictionary magic is defined as 

the pretended art of influencing the course of events, and of pro- 
ducing marvelous physical phenomena, by processes supposed 
to owe their efficacy to their power of compelling the interven- 
tion of spiritual beings, or of bringing into operation some oc- 
cult controlling principle of nature. 

If we rapidly pass in review some of the data presented in 
the synthetic sketches, we find many phenomena that fall 
under the definition. To resuscitate a dead being, man or 
ghost, by a particular substance, after the Ekoi fashion, is 
surely to apply an occult natural law; the binding of a vic- 
tim’s soul by a Bukaua shaman, and the Polynesian priest’s 
muttering of a magical incantation fall within the same 
category. The presence or absence of spiritual assistants is 
considered immaterial: what counts is how such spiritual 
helpers are regarded. If they are used as mere tools, as a 
specific type of device for attaining certain ends, then we are 
dealing with magic, even though the feeling accompanying 
such procedure may lift it into the religious sphere as de- 
fined in this book. The difference between the Crow and 
the Winnebago attitude towards supernatural beings is in- 
structive. The Crow supplicates the powers of the universe, 

who may yield to his entreaties or withhold favors at will; 
136 

MAGIC 137 

the Winnebago spirits are constrained: if a man “make the 
requisite offerings to the Thunderbirds they must accept 
them and bestow on the suppliant the powers they possess.” 
For at the time when the earth was created Earthmaker or- 
dained that in return for tobacco the spirits were to bestow 
blessings on man.* 

So cavalier a treatment of personal beings, however, seems 
devoid of the peculiar flavor of religion; and the whole ap- 
paratus employed by the magical practitioner, with or with- 
out spiritual agencies, suggests other things than religion as 
popularly understood. Accordingly, it is not surprising that 
in his great work Tylor separates Magic from Religion by 
a chasm of several hundred pages. Magic is to him a pseudo- 
science based on the erroneous association of ideas; and di- 
vination, in particular, which he considers under the same 
general head, is characterized as “a sincere but fallacious 
system of philosophy.” ? 

This general point of view has been elaborated by Sir 
James George Frazer, whose latest exposition shall be fol- — 
lowed here.* In this connection we are concerned mainly 
with two points in his treatment,—the relation of magic to 
science, and its relation to religion. In essential agreement 
with Tylor, Frazer sees a basic unity in magic and science. 
Both assume immutable laws: so long as the magician ad- 
heres to the rules of his art he is infallible, resembling the 
scientist who repeats the same experimental conditions and 
thus produces the same reaction. It is true that magic is 
false and science valid, but the mental operations of the two 
are alike. Both employ the association of ideas; the sum- 
total of empirically tested and established associations con- 
stitutes science, the sum-total of illegitimate associations is 
magic. Taboo is merely negative magic involving the be- 
lief that harmful consequences are averted when certain acts 

138 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

are not performed. In contrast to both science and magic, 
religion does not assume the immutability of nature. On 
the contrary, since it is “a propitiation or conciliation of 
powers superior to man which are believed to direct and con- 
trol the course of nature and of human life,” its central as- 
sumption is the variability of natural phenomena as deter- 
mined by the will of supernatural personalities. While the 
scientist or magician assumes an arrogant attitude towards 
the conditions he controls, the religious devotee grovels be- 
fore the beings who are masters of the universe and sway its 
manifestations according to their caprice. 

Frazer himself cites instances to show that this clear-cut 
distinction does not obtain everywhere. In ancient Egypt 
and India, nay, among the peasantry of Europe, we find that 
gods are prayed to, while the supplicants simultaneously re- 
sort to magical processes; or that gods themselves reveal the 
magical. knowledge that gives miraculous powers to its pos- 
sessor. But such fusion, we are told, is a relatively late de- 
velopment; and this brings us to a cardinal part in Frazer’s 
scheme,—its chronology. 

According to our author, the Age of Religion in the sense 
defined above has been everywhere preceded by an Age of 
Magic, the regularity of this sequence rivaling the estab- 
lished succession of the Stone and Metal Ages. Two argu- 
ments are advanced on behalf of this conclusion,—one of 
them resting on a priori grounds, the other on the empirical 
facts of distribution. First of all, it is contended that the 
association of ideas constituting magic is psychologically sim- 
pler than the conception of personal beings, is indeed so sim- 
ple that it occurs even among animals. Hence it is probable 

that man essayed to bend nature to his wishes by the sheer 
force of spells and enchantments before he strove to coax and 

MAGIC 139 

mollify a coy, capricious or irascible deity by the soft insinuation 
of prayer and sacrifice, 

The second argument again divides in two. On the one 
hand, the Australians, “the rudest savages as to whom we 
possess accurate information,” universally practice magic 
and eschew religion; they are all magicians, none of them 
priests. On the other hand, magic is essentially uniform 
wherever found, while religion is notoriously diverse. But 
generally the range of a cultural element is proportionate to 
its antiquity. Hence magic, the invariable, is older than re- 
ligion. Only gradually the leaders of thought came to real- 
ize the futility of magical procedure, which they supplanted 
with religious rites, while the weaker intellects continued to 
cling at least partially to their faith in magic. 

Frazer’s theory has the merit of throwing into relief two 
divergent primitive attitudes,—the one implying an appeal 
to personal helpers in the form of prayer, the other resting 
on the application of a formula that may or may not involve 
the constraint of such helpers but excludes supplication. 
The differentiation is a useful one, most useful, however, 
when considered as defining two limiting cases, two types of 
reaction conceivably antithetical, yet often coexisting among 
the same people. 

For example, on Frazer’s theory the Winnebago who ad- 
dresses a “spirit’? with a tobacco offering forces him to 
grant the favor desired, hence we are dealing with magic. 
But from our observer’s concrete illustrations—and, indeed, 
from some of his explicit statements—it appears that the 
matter is not quite so simple. There are certainly individ- 
ual differences in the attitudes of Winnebago visionaries, by 
no means all of whom adhere to the mechanical theory of 
cause and effect broached by some of Dr, Radin’s witnesses. 

140 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Nay, we can go farther and declare categorically that, what- 
ever these Indians may say or think they think, their attitude 
practically never corresponds to that of Frazer’s magician. 
For, we are told: 

The personal religious experiences were very sacred and 
rarely told even to near relatives. As far as I know, they were 
only told before death or when a person was very ill. ... 

If it is merely a case of compulsion of spirits by recourse to 
a set recipe, whence the sanctity of the encounter? The 
case is really typical. As Dr. Marett has shown, the error 
of Frazer’s interpretation lies in false intellectualistic psy- 
chologizing. There is no evidence that the magician among 
the Winnebago or elsewhere normally postulates the uni- 
formity of natural phenomena. On the contrary, there is 
everything to suggest that he performs his acts ‘“‘solemnly, 
earnestly, in short, in a spirit of reverent humility which is 
surely akin to homage,” and what applies to “‘positive magic” 
in Frazer’s sense holds equally for his “negative magic’ or 
taboo.* 

To revert to the Winnebago, if they are not uniformly re- 
ligious according to Frazer’s definition, neither are they by 
any Means pure magicians in his sense. There is certainly 
a vacillation in the attitude of different Indians, perhaps even 
of the same Indian at different times. 

This lack of a sharp distinction can be illustrated by ma- 
terial from other areas. As Dr. Marett points out in one 
of the essays of the book quoted, thin partitions often di- 
vide the spell from prayer: a slight change in the formula- 
tion of words, a possibly transitory personification may con- 
vert the magical formula into a religious petition. This 
is well brought out by an intensive comparison of the sev- 

MAGIC I4I 

eral magical performances of the Bukaua. As demonstrated 
in the sketch presented above, these conform generally to a 
single style of procedure. But while in many cases the in- 
cantation is a mere recital of incidents without the sugges- 
tion of prayer, there are equally stereotyped formulas in 
which an ancestor is supplicated to grant a request. Are, 
then, the Bukaua to be classed as magicians or as religious 
devotees? The instance illustrates the arbitrariness of which 
we should be guilty if we assigned them wholesale to either 
category. 

With these qualifications Frazer’s definition of the two 
types of attitude may be accepted; that is, they do not cor- 
respond to uniformly identifiable modes of tribal behavior 
but roughly describe the more or less prevalent character of 
individual reactions. Apart from this, I cannot concede to 
Frazer’s scheme the slightest basis: it seems to me to mis- 
represent grossly the psychological situation, while its his- 
torical contentions are equally devoid of validity. 

The psychological error has already been exposed above 
in the treatment of the Winnebago case and the exposition 
of Dr. Marett’s views. For good measure I will throw in 
a discussion of divination, for though not dealt with as 
magic by Sir James it offers an a fortiori case inasmuch as 
it represents a phase of primitive thought strictly compara- 
ble and is saturated with intellectual motives to a degree that 
preéminently seems to warrant its definition as a pseudo- 
science. 

Divination is probably nowhere more highly elaborated 
than among the Thonga of Southeastern Africa, who shall 
therefore serve for purposes of illustration. M. Junod, 
our authority, is full of admiration for the intricate system 
of these natives, for the skill with which they have inter- 
woven with the practice every aspect of their social life. In 

142 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

a sense it is a national pastime to interpret the meaning 
of a throw of the astragalus bones and other objects con- 
stituting a complete divination set; nevertheless, only the 
initiated pass as fully equipped diviners. Now what, we 
ask, is the attitude of one of these adepts toward his appa- 
ratus (bula)? Is it the attitude of a surveyor toward his 
theodolite, of a chemist toward his reagents, of an architect 
towards his scaffolding? Not at all. One of M. Junod’s 
informants once ejaculated: “You Christians believe in 
your Bible. Our Bible is much better than yours! It is 
the divinatory bones!” Mankhelu, we are told, “was at- 
tached to his divinatory bones by all the fibers of his heart.” 
He had two sets, one called the “Father” and used at home, 
while the “Son” was taken along on travels. M. Junod 
tried to buy one of them for his ethnographical collection, 
but the wizard could not be prevailed upon to sell either. 
All this hardly betokens the attitude of a nascent Helmholtz 
or Galileo. 

It might be suggested that the reverential attitude here 
displayed has its psychological basis in that association 
with supernatural beings which, according to Frazer, may 
set in as a secondary development. But the argument re- 
mains unshaken by this consideration. To be sure, some 
connection with religion in Frazer’s sense exists. The an- 
cestral gods were themselves bone-throwers and are in- 
voked to give or to revive the spirit of divination. Mank- 
helu, for example, derived one of his prophecies from his 
father’s spirit. But such association is definitely incidental 
and unessential : 

The Bula, the Word, is not generally considered as being the 
utterance of the ancestor-gods. The bones are, in a certain 
sense, superior to the gods, whose intentions they disclose. The 

MAGIC 143 

Bula is the revelation of a somewhat impersonal power, inde- 
pendent of the gods.” ® 

In other words, the Bula is sacred and supernatural, and 
is so not in a derivative fashion but in its own right. Its 
emotional concomitants are not those of mere intellectual 
curiosity but are closely similar to those evoked by the 
objects of religious devotion. Both the parallelism of 
magic and science and antithesis of magic and religion 
thus rest on inadequate psychological analysis. 

To turn next to the chronological sequence advanced 
by Frazer, the a priori argument adduced is absurd. It is 
for comparative psychologists to decide whether and how 
far down the scale of the organic kingdom animals can 
be credited with the power of associating ideas. But even 
if we make the most liberal concessions in this respect, 
it remains true that while all magic may consist in the 
association of ideas (though we have just seen reason to 
repudiate such a purely rationalistic interpretation) it does 
not follow that all association of ideas leads to magical 
beliefs and rites. After asserting that without associating 
ideas beasts could not survive, Frazer triumphantly asks: 

But who attributes to the animals a belief that the phenomena 
of nature are worked by a multitude of invisible animals or by 
one enormous and prodigiously strong animal behind the scenes? 

The fact is that the things compared here are not on the 
same plane. We ask in reply, “Who attributes to animals 
a faith in the uniformity of nature, a belief that the same 
ceremony accompanied by the same spell will produce iden- 
tical results? What animal has ever made an effigy of 
its hunter to cause his destruction? What beast ever 

144 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

secured an enemy’s hair to croon a spell over it?’ The 
logical error involved here is really of an incredibly ele- 
mentary character. As soon as we pass from the mere 
association of ideas underlying magic to magical processes 
themselves the extreme simplicity alleged by Frazer van- 
ishes in thin air. 

The inductive proof for the priority of magic does not 
indeed rest on a patent logical absurdity but is unacceptable 
on empirical grounds. It is not true that the Australians 
are the ‘“‘rudest’’ savages concerning whom accurate infor- 
mation is available; it is not true that they practice magic 
to the virtual exclusion of religion; it is not true that magic 
is essentially uniform in the world as contrasted with re- 
ligion. 

In a previous chapter we have already listed those peoples 
who may fairly be regarded as the “rudest’”’ known, and 
certainly they do not represent a higher level than the 
Australians. Let us take the three best-known, the Anda- 
man Islanders, the Bushmen, and the Semang of the Malay 
Peninsula, and examine Frazer’s thesis in the light of our 
information about their beliefs. 

Among the Andamanese there are certainly magical prac- 
tices of some sort: thus human bones are believed to drive 
away evil spirits, and the same property is attributed to 
fire, which is accordingly always kept burning by the side 
of a patient. A practitioner may avail himself of such 
methods if he chooses; but he has other means of dispelling 
the disease-causing spirits, viz., “addressing them and con- 
juring them to go away,” for “in his dreams he can com- 
municate with the spirits and can persuade them to help 
him to cure the sick person.” This is manifestly a case 
of the conciliation of superior beings. It is worth adding 
that whatever extraordinary knowledge of the magical 

MAGIC 145 

properties of objects a shaman has is supposed to be de- 
rived from his spirits.° 

The Bushman data are of the same general tenor. Magic 
was performed, as when a man unable to reach home threw 
earth into the air so that his wife at home might see the 
dust. But there is also positive evidence for prayer to the 
moon and stars.’ 

Finally, the Semang perform various acts typical of 
magic, such as the sending of a bamboo sliver against the 
enemy’s heart. But though this tribe displays a very weak 
development of religious ritual, invocation and sacrifice are 
not absent. The more important of their deities are ad- 
dressed in spontaneous prayer; and blood drawn from the 
region of the shinbone is thrown to the skies as a sacrifice 
to Kari or the ghosts.® 

But the Australians themselves, surely rude even though 
not “rudest,” fail to support Frazer’s arguments. It is 
indeed a fact that the Central Australians described by 
Spencer and Gillen constantly utilize magic and are reported 
never to appeal for assistance to supernatural beings. But 
congeners of theirs not one whit more advanced in general 
culture by no means uniformly refrain from such propitia- 
tory rites. Thus, the Dieri perform a ceremony directed 
towards the alien race of sky-dwellers called Mura-mura, 
who in times of drought are asked to supply rain, while, 
on the other hand, in case of excessive showers they are 
invoked to restrain the precipitation. To this must be added 
the unimpeachable testimony of Mrs. Parker, a life-long 
observer of the Euahlayi. The “high-god” of this people, 
Byamee, is invoked on a number of occasions. People 
pray to him at funerals on behalf of the souls of the 
dead; orphans successfully address him to secure rain; at 
the close of initiation rites the oldest attending medicine- 

146 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

man prays to him for long life; and even a female shaman, 
debarred by her sex from communing with him under his 
proper name, has been known to supplicate him for rain 
through the intercession of a tutelary spirit.° 

The only inference that can fairly be drawn from the 
facts is that among very rude peoples magic and religion 
(in Frazer’s sense) coexist. 

What shall, however, be said of the argument from dis- 
tribution? Admitting with qualifications that the range of 
a cultural element is proportionate to its age, we must reject 
the conclusion drawn, because once more Sir James is not 
comparing comparable phenomena. If religions are com- 
pared in their specific characteristics and magical faiths 
only as regards their most abstract common traits, the 
former will of course appear diverse and the latter uniform. 
A fair survey, on the other hand, will bring out frequent 
recurrences of religious no less than of magical practice. 

On the other hand, magic is very far from presenting 
that uniform character one might infer from Frazer’s state- 
ment. Even one of the two main branches into which he 
divides magic, to wit, contagious magic, is not represented 
among the Arunta and their Central Australian neighbors. 
For, if we can rely on the definite statement of Spencer and 
Gillen, Frazer’s favorite authorities, the custom of bewitch- 
ing a person by first securing and then charming a lock 
of his hair or some detachable part of his body does not 
occur in this area.*® To take another aspect of magic, in 
our sense, divination as a definite art is far from universal 
and is certainly less pronounced in America than in the 
Old World; and within the Old World we find a definite 
regional distribution for such divinatory techniques as 
scapulimantia, the art of foretelling events from the cracks 
in an animal’s shoulder blade. Again, the practice of chant- 

MAGIC 147 

ing spells, universally recognized as magical, which was 
found so highly elaborated in Polynesia and New Guinea, 
is far less conspicuous in North America, where the exten- 
sive use of magical formule is restricted to special districts, 
such as northern California. 

In short, Frazer’s argument breaks down at every point, 
and even if we adopt his definitions there is no reason to 
ascribe greater antiquity to magic than to religion. Ipso 
facto, our broader definition of religion will not support 
such a chronological hypothesis. In the state of our knowl- 
edge, both magic and religion are best regarded as ex- 
tremely ancient components of the human world-view. But 
since the magical has been found to partake of the psycho- 
logical character of the religious, no good ground for a 
sharp division of the two remains, and it is permissible 
to regard the magical beliefs and practices as religious in 
our sense of the term. If this seems unacceptable, it will 
be necessary at least to follow Drs. Marett and Golden- 
weiser, who conceive of Magic and Religion as two distinct 
compartments or branches of one larger whole, Supernat- 
uralism. 

In the interest of clearness, however, a few supplementary 
statements seem called for. Magic—not only as generally 
defined, but as specifically dealt with by Frazer under the 
headings of “imitative magic” and “contagious magic’”— 
is assuredly akin to religion if the psychological factors 
are taken into account. On the other hand, primitive man 
undoubtedly does form a vast number of associations in a 
matter-of-fact way, and the generalizations based on these 
constitute his lore, the psychological equivalent of our sci- 
ence irrespective of its objective value. Some of this— 
indeed an appreciable portion of it—is genuine knowledge 
resting on sound observation and inference, as Drs. Golden- 

148 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

weiser and Marett contend.1‘ But the residue, which we 
are obliged to reject when testing it in the light of our 
knowledge, does not, for that reason, belong to a different 
category from a psychological point of view. 

It is the native’s frame of mind that invariably decides 
the matter. In so far as he observes and reasons without 
enveloping his mental operations with the atmosphere of 
supernaturalism he is none the less a scientist or at least a 
precursor of science because of his errors, for mistakes 
from sheer ignorance are committed by our greatest think- 
ers. When a Bukaua hears the call of the moqua bird, 
he infers that the enemy is planning an attack; when he 
hears the soqueng, this is accepted as the harbinger of a 
visit from a neighboring village. These are associations 
of ideas, devoid so far as one can see of any trace of 
religious sentiment, mere summaries of experience: they 
are pseudo-science. Again, when a Crow in Montana or 
a Jagga on the slopes of Mt. Kilimanjaro assures a sneezer 
that some one is calling him by name, we are once more 
dealing with false science, though this is magic neither in 
Frazer’s sense nor in any one else’s. On the other hand, 
the attitude of the Bukaua sorcerer, the Thonga diviner, 
the Maori spell-chanter, is different not because they are 
objectively farther from the truth, but because one and all 
they err not as cool observers who happen to be only partly 
familiar with a range of facts but as inveterate devotees 
of supernaturalism. 

This conception of a domain of supernaturalism embrac- 
ing both magic and religion and opposed to the sphere of 
the everyday world that includes as a late product scientific 
thought runs counter to Durkheim’s theory. For while the 
French sociologist likewise dichotomizes the universe into 
two antithetical principles, the Sacred and the Profane, his 

MAGIC 149 

Sacred does not coincide with ours, which is merely syn- 
onymous with the Extraordinary or Supernatural, often 
modified, by an additional affective tinge, into the Holy. 
Natural and Supernatural, Durkheim argues, are correla- 
tive concepts; the Supernatural is merely the negation of 
Nature. Then, how can the Supernatural have been con- 
ceived by early man, who had no notion of a natural order 
in the universe? For that is demonstrably a late develop- 
ment; and before it evolved, human beings had no reason 
to reject the most marvelous occurrences as impossible.” 

To recognize the false intellectualistic psychologizing be- 
hind this specious reasoning is to knock it into a cocked 
hat. Dr. Marett anticipated and clearly refuted the objec- 
tion when he wrote: 

The savage has no word for “nature.” He does not ab- 
stractly distinguish between an order of uniform happenings 
and a higher order of miraculous happenings. He is merely 
concerned to mark and exploit the difference when presented 
in the concrete.** 

A man does not need to have studied comparative anatomy 
to see that a bird is not a fish, nor to have analyzed his 
sensations to know that one woman inflames him with ardor 
while another leaves him cold. So an Ekoi does not keep 
a double catalogue to which he refers as occasion arises 
to decide whether an audition is normal or abnormal: he 
hears his Oji tree calling and in the middle of the night, 
regardless of consequences, he dashes towards it. He 
knows intuitively, immediately, spontaneously, that the 
summons is generically different from that of a tribesman, 
even of a chief, and he reacts accordingly with the pre- 
cision of a lower organism exhibiting its tropisms. Our 

150 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

conception of the Supernatural involves nothing but such 
differential response to external or internal stimulation. 

DuURKHEIM’S THEORY 

Durkheim, like Frazer, separates magic and religion; but, 
as might be expected, his reasons are quite different.** 
While he regards religion as founded in a sense of the 
Sacred, as contradistinguished from the Profane, he adds 
a vital differentia: religion in its historical forms is invari- 
ably linked with a church. That is to say, there is always 
a body of votaries united by the same ideas of the Sacred 
and by the same practices revolving about it. Now such 
a bond, the argument runs, is lacking in magic. The re- 
lations of a sorcerer to his clients are like a doctor’s to his 
patients; they form no basis for any kind of church. This 
situation is not altered when the magician works for the 
public good rather than for private individuals: there is 
still no permanent or durable tie established between the 
practitioner and his beneficiaries. 

It is true enough, Durkheim admits, that sometimes ma- 
gicians assemble in fraternities. But, first, such association 
is not essential to the practice of magic; secondly, even at 
best it does not supply a parallel to a church organization. 
For a brotherhood of wizards would correspond merely to an 
association of priests without the congregation of laymen; 
and where is there a church made up exclusively of priests? 

Anticipating a protest from another angle, the French 
sociologist takes cognizance of such individual subjective 
experiences as have been described in our first synthetic 
sketch. He does not deny their existence but explains them 
away as constituting not so many individual, that is, church- 

MAGIC 151 

less forms of religion but so many minor variants of one 
social religion corresponding to a single church. 

In this last contention there is indeed a germ of truth. 
We have seen that even the extreme subjectivism of the 
Crow is quite consistent with a spontaneous conformity 
to tribal standards. That, however, is a subordination not 
to a clear-cut church doctrine but to that far vaguer thing, 
a common cultural background. The same objects are not 
held sacred by all the Crow, nor do they display an identical 
behavior toward their respective sacred objects. When a 
Crow shaman allows a young warrior to go out with his 
own medicine, his attitude does not differ fundamentally 
from that of a magician towards his client. And when a 
number of braves singly resort to him, there is still no 
necessity for a congregational development; there is cer- 
tainly a possibility for it, but so there is in the case of a 
magician’s clients. In so far, however, as such a group is 
united, the members are segregated from, not merged in, 
a tribal Church. Precisely as the Crow shaman’s notions 
and practices are circumscribed by the traditional Crow 
culture, the Bukaua magician’s technique, taboos, and spells 
are determined by Bukaua culture. There is as much or 
as little of a church in one case as in the other. In both 
there is automatic acceptance of the received beliefs, while 
in neither is there a rigid conformity to a set of tribally 
established dogmas and observances. The sociological dis- 
tinction between magic and religion is untenable. 

REFERENCES 

1 Radin, 1923: 279, 289. 
2 Tylor, 1913: 1, 117-136. 

152 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

8 Frazer: 11-60. 

* Marett: 29, 38, 73, 190. 

5 Junod: 11, 488 sq., 493 sq. 

® Brown: 178 f., 184. 

7 Bleek and Lloyd: 57, 81, 339, 385. 

§ Skeat and Blagden: 11, 174, 198 f., 205 f., 233. 

® Spencer and Gillen, 1904: 490 sq. Howitt: 395 sq. Par- 
ker: 8. 

10 Spencer and Gillen, 1899: 553; ei., 1904: 478, 605. 

11 Goldenweiser, 1922: 154. 

12 Durkheim: 33-40. 

18 Marett : 109. 

14 Durkheim: 60-65. 

CHAPTER VII 
COLLECTIVISM 

In the preceding chapters I have several times referred 
to Durkheim’s theories, and uniformly in a critical spirit. 
This attitude will not be abandoned in reviewing the core 
of his system, hence a prefatory word of explanation seems 
desirable in order to guard against misunderstanding. I 
am convinced that the cardinal tenets of Durkheim’s scheme 
are unacceptable, but I should not like to be understood 
as denying that it represents an estimable intellectual achieve- 
ment. Indeed, so far as I can see, it is the only compre- 
hensive effort since Tylor’s day to unify religious data 
from a wholly novel angle. Moreover, Durkheim’s inci- 
dental interpretations of religious phenomena in the con- 
crete sometimes reveal considerable acumen, and we shall 
have occasion to adopt his views on at least one important 
subject. 7 

Let us recall that Durkheim’s minimum definition of 
religion implies an antithesis of the Sacred and the Pro- 
fane, and the union of fellow-worshipers of the Sacred in 
a sort of church. In casting about for the key to the mys- 
tery of religion, that is, of its origins, our author goes to 
the Australians because they are said to represent the pri- 
meval condition of human communal life. Their concepts 
of sacredness are all wrapped up in totemic ritualism, hence 
the essence of their totemism will be the essence of archaic 
religion. What, then, is the essence of Australian totem- 

153 

154 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

ism? On the surface it seems that certain species of the 
animal kingdom are the sacred objects of adoration. But 
that is only a superficial view, says Durkheim. For many 
of these sacred totems are such insignificant specimens of 
organic life as the ant, the lizard, or the rat. Surely these 
are too insignificant to thrill primitive man with a sense 
of holiness; and more impressive phenomena of nature, 
such as the stars, rarely function as totems in Australia. 
Moreover, it is not the animals and plants themselves to 
which the natives attach the maximum of holiness, but 
to their representations, the totemic symbols. The prob- 
lem thus narrows down still further and becomes equivalent 
to that of the significance of the symbols. 

Durkheim has a ready solution: the symbols are em- 
blematic at the same time of the totemic principle or “god” 
and of the clan. “Si donc il est, a la fois, le symbole du dieu 
et de la société, n’est-ce-pas que le dieu et la société ne font 
qu’un?” In other words, the social group or clan is the 
god of the clan, is the totemic principle, but disguised and 
“représenté aux imaginations sous les espéces sensibles du 
végétal ou de l’animal qui sert de totem.” 

It remains to show how society could have the power 
of calling forth the sense of the divine. According to our 
author, this results from the fact that the relationship of 
society to the individual parallels that of the typical deity 
to the typical worshiper. On the one hand, society domi- 
nates every member by its superior authority, overriding 
the individual will regardless of personal considerations; 
on the other hand, it is a source of strength, for to be in 
harmony with one’s fellows is to be inspired with confi- 
dence and courage such as the devout believer enjoys when 
he is conscious of the benevolent gaze of his god. Further- 
more, all of a man’s cultural possessions are the gift of 

COLLECTIVISM 155 

society. In short, the individual consciousness finds an 
environment peopled with forces at once transcendently 
potent and helpful, august yet benevolent; it objectifies its 
relevant impressions as we objectify our sensations, but 
with a significant difference: these sensations do not evoke 
the sentiment of awe, they correspond to the profane as 
contrasted with the sacred part of the universe. In the 
case of primitive man, Durkheim further contends, the 
religious sentiment would be inspired primarily not by 
society as a whole but by the immediate group with which 
he is related, viz., the totemic clan. 

For the origin of the fundamental difference between the 
sacred and the profane which he regards as essential to 
religion, Durkheim has recourse to the antithesis he notes 
in Australian society between the workaday and the cere- 
monial season. The former is characterized by the peace- 
ful monotony of isolated economic activity, the latter by 
the all but frenzied excitement incident to the big festive 
assemblies, a contrast which prefigures that of the profane 
and the sacred. 

The question is naturally asked, why it was necessary 
for the native to conceive the social forces in the guise of 
plant. and animal symbols. Durkheim answers the latter 
query by pointing out that the primitive Australian is above 
all a hunter and that animals most naturally suggest them- 
selves to his imagination; such phenomena as the several 
stars are not sufficiently distinguishable to serve as badges 
for a considerable number of distinct clans. On the other 
hand, the choice of some symbol is imperative: the clan 
is too complex a concept to be grasped in its concrete unity, 
while the totemic symbol is the flag of its group, the visible 
body of its god. Moreover, that period of excitement 
which gives rise to the sense of the sacred passes away; 

156 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

if there were no outward sign to survive as a rallying-point, 
the religious sentiment itself would vanish. 

In this interpretation of totemism there is something 
like an anticipation of the Freudian interpretation of 
dreams. Things are not what they seem on the surface 
but have a hidden meaning. Totems are not the real ob- 
jects of worship but acquire sacred character in so far as 
they symbolize the clan, which is the real god. Neverthe- 
less, once sanctified by this symbolization, they become the 
center of ritual performances and themselves appear as the 
source of awe-inspiring and benevolent activities. By con- 
tact with them, in turn, other objects, intrinsically of a 
religiously indifferent character, also acquire sanctity, and 
thus whole systems of sacred things evolve. The relation- 
ship of the totemite to the totem which looms so large as 
the manifest content of the faith is a secondary attempt 
by the natives to explain why they believe and act as they do. 

Durkheim especially piques himself on having escaped 
what he considers the vital error of the two most signifi- 
cant rival theories, animism and naturalism. Both of these 
derive religion from illusions. But a phenomenon of such 
vital importance in the life of humanity as religion cannot 
be founded in unreality. Durkheim’s view avoids such 
error, he thinks, by basing religion on an indubitable verity, 
—the social group. Specifically with reference to natural- 
ism, Durkheim contends that it is incomprehensible how 
such erroneous notions of nature as are implied in natural- 
ism could have persisted among mankind. If, however, 
the clan is god and if the latent goal of religion is not the 
adjustment of man to the outer world but the integration 
of society, then the most absurd notions of nature might 
be entertained and would be irrelevant, hence would not 
affect the believers’ attitude. Further, nature is incapable 

COLLECTIVISM 157 

of arousing the religious sentiment. It is too uniform to 
produce deep emotions; and even if it could evoke sur- 
prise and admiration it nowhere suggests a duality of the 
sacred and profane, such as is indispensable for the con- 
cept of religion. 

While by no means inclined to join in the pzeans of praise 
that have been intoned in Durkheim’s honor, I repeat that 
his essay is a noteworthy mental exercise and would rank 
as a landmark if dialectic ingenuity sufficed to achieve 
greatness in the empirical sciences. Even as it is, the fresh- 
ness of his approach is at times stimulating and reconciles 
us somewhat to a narrowness that balks at no measure 
of absurdity.* 

The present book is not a treatise on logic, and it would 
profit us little to follow Durkheim’s thoughts into all their 
ramifications. Without slavishly summarizing Dr. Golden- 
weiser’s exposition and critique, let us rather follow the 
broad sweep of this writer, who, more appreciative of the 
French sociologist’s mental operations than we profess to 
be, has nevertheless repeatedly made his system the butt 
of his critical acumen.” His strictures fall into three cate- 
gories,—the ethnological, the sociological, and the psycho- 
logical. 

From the ethnological point of view Dr. Goldenweiser 
pertinently asks whence the non-totemic peoples have de- 
rived their religion. Durkheim proceeds on the assump- 
tion, now thoroughly discredited, that the sib (clan) in 
the typical form of the totemic sib is a universal trait of 
very rude cultures. As a matter of fact, it has already 
been shown that the simplest tribes in both the Old World 
and the New World lack sibs and totems. No such insti- 
tution occurs among the Andamanese of the Bay of Bengal 
or the Chukchi of Siberia, nor has it been reported from 

158 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the Tasmanians, the Congolese Pygmies, or the Bushmen. 
If it be objected with some plausibility that our knowledge 
of the three tribes just mentioned is too inadequate to 
permit negative data to weigh heavily, there is the wholly 
unobjectionable evidence from the Western Hemisphere, 
where the sib organization is uniformly absent from all the 
rudest hunting tribes and in North America is an almost 
regular accompaniment of horticulture. The Mackenzie 
River Athabaskans, the Shoshoneans of the Great Basin, 
the tribes of Washington and Oregon are sibless, while 
the sedentary Iroquois and Pueblo tribes are organized 
into sibs with at least totemic names, if not with a full- 
fledged totemism; for, as we cannot resist mentioning in- 
cidentally, the sib organization is by no means uniformly 
linked with totemism. These simple facts had been pointed 
out by Dr. Swanton some years before the publication of 
Durkheim’s book, but the French sociologist prefers to 
ignore them and to take for his point of departure a de- 
monstrably false theory of primitive society. 

In short, then, there are many non-totemic peoples and 
among them precisely are those of simplest culture. But 
they all have some sort of religion! Shall we assume that 
they only obtained their beliefs and practices by contact with 
and borrowing from the higher totemic cultures? The 
assumption is not a priori probable, and empirically there 
is not the slightest proof for it except as respects specific 
features of religious culture, such as may be borrowed 
back and forth under favorable conditions. Dr. Ruth Ful- 
ton Benedict has recently examined Durkheim’s thesis with 
reference to the North American data, selecting for dis- 
cussion the relations of totemism to the most persistent 
of North American religious traits, the guardian-spirit 
complex.* This feature is not only by virtue of its range 

COLLECTIVISM 159 

far older than totemism but also turns out to be highly 
developed where no traces of totemism have ever been re- 
corded. It is therefore impossible to derive the guardian- 
spirit belief from totemic conceptions. On the contrary, 
there is good evidence that in certain regions totemism, 
which otherwise has a very meager religious content, “tends 
to take its coloring from the guardian-spirit concept, and 
the high-water marks of a religious attitude towards the 
totem, which beyond doubt are found on this continent, 
are intelligible from this fact.” 

To summarize the essentials of the ethnological argu- 
ment, Durkheim—like Frazer—has been deceived by the 
rash assumption that the primeval culture of humanity is 
represented in Australia. In reality, the Australians have 
only a moderate, certainly not an exclusive, claim to being 
reckoned among the rudest peoples, and what holds for 
them in the way of religion does not correspond to a uni- 
versal archaic faith of mankind. 

From the sociological angle, Goldenweiser objects that 
while ostensibly Durkheim deifies society his conception 
of it in the role of god is a singularly narrow one since 
he practically identifies society with the crowd. While this 
may not be a wholly accurate statement of the case, our 
critic is undoubtedly right as regards the origin of the re- 
ligious sentiment, for that Durkheim surely traces to the 
crowd-psychological situation typified by the atmosphere 
of the Australian ceremonial season. Now, as Goldenweiser 
remarks, man does not objectify his crowd as something 
distinct from and superior to himself, but identifies him- 
self with it: “the crowd or group self is the self par ex- 
cellence.” Again, a crowd setting never creates a specific 
psychic state: crowd ecstasy is merely a feeling of joy 
carried to an extreme degree, and so with all other emo- 

160 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tional states; they are not originated but merely intensified 
by the crowd. As Goldenweiser trenchantly asks, Why is 
it that the gatherings of Indians for secular dances are 
not transformed into religious occasions if the assembly 
itself gives rise to the sentiments of religion? 

To these comments I should like to add another. In so 
far as Durkheim does not identify divine society with the 
crowd, he rather lightly fixes upon the sib as the social 
group that would at the same time loom as the god-like 
protector and curber. No doubt the individual derives 
sustenance and protection from his own sib, but that is 
equally true of his local or tribal group as a whole. Why, 
then, should the sib alone function as the nascent god? On 
the other hand, restraint is precisely what one’s own sib 
does not usually exercise,—that is left to the other sibs. 
If by special act of grace we follow Durkheim to his 
favorite Australian field, special difficulties arise. He in- 
sists that the individual acquires his culture from society. 
But the society from which he acquires it is only in small 
measure his sib. For example, in a matrilineal Australian 
tribe a boy belongs indeed to his mother’s sib, but his 
training in woodcraft is derived from his father, regard- 
less of rules of descent, and later his education is com- 
pleted in the camp that unites all the bachelors, irrespective 
of kinship. The leap from society as a whole to the in- 
dividual’s own sib seems to be in no way justified by Durk- 
heim’s reasoning. We are obliged to conclude that his 
theory neither explains how the assemblages of the cere- 
monial season create religious emotion nor why the sib 
should be singled out for masked adoration from among 
all the social units when it is only one of a series all of 
which jointly confer on him the blessings of culture and 
of protection, 

COLLECTIVISM 161 

To turn to the psychological aspect of the case, under 
this head we must consider first of all the idea that nature 
cannot inspire primitive man with religious emotion and 
that he does not feel the superiority of natural forces over 
human beings. Durkheim’s error here is all the more re- 
grettable because with his initially skeptical attitude on the 
subject he might have made a perfectly valid and interest- 
ing ethnographic point in correction of a widespread fal- 
lacy. There is really no necessity for attaching religious 
value to cosmic phenomena, plausible as that may seem 
to the closet philosopher. For example, the Thonga of 
Southeast Africa never personify or worship the sun or 
moon, while the stars also play an insignificant part in their 
thought. In fact, altogether the forces of nature are quite 
subordinate to the ghosts of ancestors in the religious life 
of these people.* What we require here, as in so many 
other phases of culture-history, is an investigation of 
regional distributions. The best prophylactic against base- 
less speculation that man must believe this or do that is 
the actual knowledge that throughout a definite part of the 
globe he believes and does nothing of the kind. 

But any such ethnographic point of view is quite foreign 
to Durkheim, who merely combats one psychological dogma 
with another. So far from the truth is the alleged impos- 
sibility of nature to impress mankind with religious senti- 
ments that perhaps a majority of North American Indians 
have the most specific myths and rites in connection with 
natural phenomena. The sun and the thunder, for exam- 
ple, are widely reverenced, and the Pawnee of Nebraska 
developed a veritable astral cult. To return to Africa, the 
great deities of the Ekoi were found to be associated with 
sky and earth, while among the Andamanese the two main 
gods direct the principal winds of the area. Without 

162 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

going further, we can safely reject Durkheim’s anti-nat- 
uralism as absurd. 

But, as Goldenweiser has forcibly explained, Durkheim 
is guilty of false psychologizing in another direction also, 
for he underestimates to an incredible degree the capacity 
of individuals for religious experience, quite independently 
of the crowd, which prophets and seers often notoriously 
shun. The typical North American vision-quest, as among 
the Crow, involves a lonely vigil, and the thrill that comes 
to the successful seeker may possibly remain his life-long 
secret. 

Finally, there is something almost pathetically inept 
about Durkheim’s plea that unlike animism and naturalism, 
his collectivist theory rests on the solid rock of reality. 
In this context the objective reality of the religious con- 
struct is irrelevant: the sense of sacredness remains a fact 
whatever may have produced it and its subjective value 
remains unaffected by metaphysical considerations of illu- 
sion and reality arising in another consciousness. Inci- 
dentally we may well ask in what sense natural phenomena 
are less real than society. It is true that as religious ob- 
jects they may be fantastically personified, but then society 
in the form in which it is pictured by Durkheim as capable 
of becoming a “god” bears very little resemblance to the 
society of actual experience. As for animism, Durkheim 
ignores once more the fact that the concept of spirit is 
not exclusively derived from the illusions of dream life but 
in part from the contrast between the living body and the 
corpse, which is real enough. 

Before parting from the French sociologist’s original 
but unsound speculations, I should like to direct attention 
to one phase of his work that rests on a surer foundation. 
His treatment of symbolism seems to me excellent. There 

COLLECTIVISM 163 

is little doubt that symbols may concentrate the worshiper’s 
religious fervor upon themselves and that their holiness may 
in turn flow into still other channels. We have seen how 
devoutly a Crow will regard the feather that is basically 
merely a badge of his vision yet becomes glorified out of 
proportion to its intrinsic value through that association; 
and the communicability of holiness is one of the striking 
features in the Polynesian taboo system. 

In this connection Durkheim’s view that the specific na- 
ture of the object worshiped is immaterial may likewise 
be cited as coinciding altogether with the position here 
assumed. It is hardly susceptible of doubt that the person 
of a sovereign may call forth a sentiment hardly distin- 
guishable from religious emotion; and the abstractions la- 
beled “Country” and under certain conditions ‘“Liberty” 
and “Reason” have an equal potency. If we adhere to the 
psychological point of view, we shall find no reason to 
exclude such ideas from the rank of “gods.” Of this, more 
anon. 

We leave Durkheim with the consolatory reflection with 
which Mach once commented on Herbart, that after all this 
eminent thinker has not been exclusively a perpetrator of 
errors. 

REFERENCES 

1 Durkheim : 97-121, 293-334. 

2 Goldenweiser, 1917: 121 sq.; id., 1922: 360 sq. 
2R. F. Benedict: 61 sq. 

4 Junod: 11, 281-285. 

lana! - 

Mae a = ai 

: > ut ’ 
bis 

Part III: Historical and Psychological 
Aspects 

CHAPTER VIII 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES AND REGIONAL 
CHARACTERIZATION 

To apply a historical point of view is to the minds of 
not a few scholars equivalent to elaborating a scheme of 
sequences. Tylor’s theory of animism is historical in that 
sense, though he assumed a unilinear development which 
modern representatives of the historical schools reject. 
With some writers the tendency to predicate relative 
chronology is so strong that they cannot help ascribing a 
like disposition to others who do not share their obsession. 
Thus, because Dr. Marett insisted on the antiquity of the 
sense of the supernatural and its independence of the ghost- 
soul concept, he has been credited with the assumption of 
a pre-animistic era, which he expressly disavows.* Those 
who have been most active in repudiating unilinear evo- 
lutionism have not abstained from outlining a generalized 
scheme of religious history,—generalized not in the sense 
of ascribing one course of development for all peoples 
but as purporting to sketch along its several distinct paths 
the religious history of all humanity. 

Father Schmidt’s scheme, while not accessible in this 
country except in summary form, serves as an ideal illus- 
tration of a multilinear system.” First of all he assumes 
an archaic culture now only represented by the very rudest 
peoples, whose faith is characterized positively by a belief 
in a high-god, by the union of religion and ethics, and 
the beginnings of prayer and ritual, while negatively the 

167 

168 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

lack of ancestor-worship and magic are noteworthy cri- 
teria. Upon this common substratum three diverse struc- 
tures were reared in mutual independence,—the horticul- 
tural, the totemic, and the pastoral. Horticulture was a 
feminine invention and produced a corresponding social 
preponderance of the female sex, which found expression 
in matrilineal descent and in the worship of a female deity, 
the Moon. Animism and an ancestral cult also arose, 
largely in connection with a revolt of the masculine under- 
dog, which led to the organization of men’s associations, 
that is, secret societies designed to curb woman’s power. 
In the second, totemic culture, which evolved elsewhere, 
masculine precedence was mirrored in the adoration of a 
solar deity of male sex; totemic beliefs and the excessive 
reliance on magic as contrasted with archaic dependence 
on a high-god were significant features. Finally, pastoral 
nomadism adhered more tenaciously to primeval monothe- 
ism: neither sun nor moon but a sublime heaven-god, the 
Jahve of the Semites and the Dyaus pitar of Indo-Germanic 
peoples, occupied the first place among divine beings. As 
for subsequent events in the history of religion, they were 
the result of interaction among these three primary differ- 
entiations of the archaic culture. 

Much might be said concerning the sociological assump- 
tions underlying this theory and especially with reference 
to its naive economic determinism, but detailed criticism 
is hardly in place so long as the full evidence adduced by 
the author of the scheme cannot be examined. Our pres- 
ent concern is with quite a different phase of the matter. 
I must repeat what I said in my discussion of animism, 
that Father Schmidt and his school quite underestimate the 
technical difficulties to be overcome in a historical recon- 
struction where religion is the subject-matter. Every such 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 169 

reconstruction obviously rests ultimately on the descriptive 
data, and it is precisely these which, even when abundant, 
are usually far too intricate to admit of a convenient sum- 
mary by one or two catchwords such as “solar cult” or 
“animism” and “magic.” Even in so rude a tribe as the 
Andamanese we have to reckon with a supernaturalism of 
at least triple form,—Biliku and his counterpart Tarai; the 
spirits of the deceased; and a variety of magical concep- 
tions. We have already seen that in spite of the simplicity 
of such conditions the relative weighting of factors is far 
from easy. No wonder that in circumstances of greater 
complexity the problem may become practically insoluble. 
On how many peoples is the evidence even approximately 
so complete and so trustworthy as for the Ewe of Togo, 
West Africa? Herr Spieth, as the result of his years of 
missionary experience, has given us in Die Ewe-Stamme 
an admirable account replete with documentation in the 
vernacular. Yet when Spieth in another treatise essays 
to give a general summary of Ewe religion, a fellow-mis- 
sionary cannot assent to some of his most important prop- 
ositions, those relating to the high-god and to the here- 
after. The critic concludes: “Die Arbeit ist mit viel Fleiss 
geschrieben; und doch legt sie der Leser unbefriedigt 
beiseite, da sie so viele Fragen nicht oder nur unklar 
beantwortet.” ° 

To cite another example, the Crow seem unable to de- 
cide as to the character and identity of the Sun. No doubt 
by making an indefinite number of arbitrary auxiliary 
hypotheses a skillful dialectician could explain away the 
obscurities, but that would be the lawyer’s rather than the 
scientist’s procedure; and in the present instance even the 
special pleader’s task would be an arduous one. If he 
set out from the plausible proposition that the Sun is the 

170 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

archaic high-god obscured by mythological fancy and what 
not, he would be confronted forthwith with the query 
why the Crow, who are matrilineal, have given to their 
supreme being the solar and masculine character that might 
be expected from a patrilineal group, while the moon, which 
is really conceived in feminine guise here, is of quite sub- 
ordinate importance. But to leave dialectics for scientific 
argumentation, the whole discussion on this basis is from 
our point of view a meaningless irrelevancy because we 
have found that the specific nature of the “god” is im- 
material to the Crow and that it is the subjective experience 
that is really significant to him. In characterizing the re- 
ligion of this tribe I have actually shown how at all events 
the greater part of their beliefs and practices can be con- 
nected with the vision. Nevertheless, the catchword “vision” 
is no more successful than other catchwords in doing jus- 
tice to the marvelous wealth of concrete situations that are 
invariably bound up with religion; and still less is it capa- 
ble of even remotely indicating the historical relations of 
Crow religion, which are manifold and point in diverse 
directions. 

I should not like to be misunderstood as opposing histor- 
ical reconstructions on principle; quite the contrary is the 
case. But in this field of inquiry there is still so much 
doubt as to the raw materials themselves that historical 
schemes, except if confined to narrow limits, are likely to 
come to grief. How can we reconstruct history if even 
the facts of regional distribution are far from clear? About 
ten years ago Dr. Paul Radin surveyed the data of North 
American religion and concluded that a belief in the local- 
ization of spirits, in genii loci, is prevalent in this continent 
and underlies the guardian-spirit concept. But Mrs. Bene- 
dict has recently shown that what Dr. Radin considered a 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 171 

universal correlation is a strictly localized one and that gen- 
erally the guardian spirit is in no way associated with the 
local genius.* 

The immediate task of the comparative student is there- 
fore a sifting of the material, an accurate determination of 
specific tribal religions and upon this basis a series of 
intensive distribution studies covering successively culture 
areas, continents, and the whole globe. In the absence of 
adequate preliminary regional surveys, the following re- 
marks on some, not all, major areas are to be taken as 
purely tentative. 

North America is characterized by the conspicuousness 
of the subjective experience conveniently labeled “vision” 
and by the frequency with which tutelaries are derived 
from such abnormal psychic states, a correlation which 
Mrs. Benedict has shown to be by no means an organic, 
logical correlation but a fortuitous historical conjunction.° 
This author has demonstrated the basic importance of the 
vision in this continent by producing evidence that even 
among the Pueblo Indians, where the hypertrophy of group 
ritualism dwarfs the significance of individual revelations, 
such experiences are far from wholly lacking. But though 
the vision itself is ubiquitous, its correlates vary considera- 
bly: in one area, for instance, all men strive for a revela- 
tion, as among the Crow, while elsewhere, as in California, 
vision and tutelary are the shaman’s prerogative. Com- 
pared with other divisions of the globe, North America 
is likewise distinguished by the extreme development of 
more or less spectacular ceremonialism, often bound up 
with definite organizations. This trait is weakly devel- 
oped only in the extremely rude cultures of the Mackenzie 
River region, the Great Basin, and adjoining territories. 

The South American phenomena are not sufficiently 

172 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

known to admit of a comprehensive statement, for such 
meaningless catchwords as “animism,’ which in no way 
differentiate one area of the world from another, must be 
rigidly barred in the interests of an ultimate comprehen- 
sion of the facts. On the other hand, it is worth noting 
that direct intercourse with the supernatural—in short, the 
equivalent of the vision—is distinctive of native doctors 
in the tropical forest region, nay, as far south as Tierra 
del Fuego. In the latter region the investigations of Fathers 
Koppers and Gusinde have brought to light a number of 
interesting parallels between the southernmost Yahgan and 
North American tribes. The Fuegians represent the Cal- 
ifornian and Siberian rather than the Crow or Winnebago 
type, for there is no universal seeking of a revelation but 
a sudden imperative call to special individuals in the form 
of some soul-stirring psychic experience. To be sure, there 
is a deliberate attempt to induce hallucinations by rigorous 
fasting in a wizards’ school, but only persons with a spe- 
cific vision or a definite predisposition enter the fold of 
pupils, and to become a full-fledged shaman the vision is 
prerequisite. Again, as in California and Siberia, resistance 
to the supernatural summons is fraught with danger. An- 
other definite resemblance consists in the acquisition of a 
song taught to the visionary by his supernatural protector. 
In order properly to appreciate the significance of such 
analogies it would be necessary to possess fuller data on 
other South American tribes than are at present available. 
However, the possibility should be kept in mind that the 
Fuegians may have preserved very ancient elements of 
New World religion. From the point of view of ceremoni- 
alism, the simpler South Americans do not rival the North- 
ern peoples of corresponding status; however, even the 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 173 

Fuegians have secret cult organizations and performances 
with simple masks. 

The higher American cultures from Mexico to Peru are 
naturally associated with a great elaboration of ritual, which 
reveals certain marked features. Most noteworthy is the 
excessive development of bloody sacrifices, human sacrifices 
being especially common among the Aztecs. In North 
America bloody sacrifices, even of animals, are definitely 
rare, the Pawnee (Nebraska) offering of a maiden and 
that of a white dog by the Iroquois being notable excep- 
tions. The apparently systematic practice of divination in 
the more complex cultures likewise merits consideration. 

Asia, the home of many higher centers of civilization, 
largely falls outside the scope of our present survey, but 
regarding one of its larger subdivisions, Siberia, some 
statements are called for. It is to a remarkable degree a 
region of shamanistic activity; in other words, the direct 
intercourse with the supernatural world is in the fore- 
ground. However, it seems that here communication with 
beings of another sphere is restricted in the main to definite 
individuals instead of being sought by all or the majority 
of men, as in many North American tribes. Among the 
Turkic tribes the tutelaries are predominantly ancestral, 
while the more important Chukchi equivalents belong to 
other categories of supernatural beings. Turks and Mon- 
gols are further characterized by the dualistic conception 
of a good and an evil being of great power. From the 
ritual point of view we may note the wide occurrence of 
bloody animal sacrifices, whether of dogs, reindeer or 
horses; also, the method of divination known as scapuli- 
mantia, that is, by the cracks in a sheep, reindeer, or other 
animal shoulderblade held above a fire, a usage which 

174 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Dr. Andree has traced from the Chukchi to the Mongols 
and Turks, and indeed into westernmost Europe. The 
special regard shown to the bear, culminating among the 
Ainu and Amur River peoples in a great public festival, 
will engage our attention a little later. 

In Africa the ancestor-worship appearing in Siberia and 
carried to extremes in the higher Chinese civilization is 
a widespread phenomenon,—certainly far more so than 
“fetichism” in the sense of a cult centering in carved effigies 
of divine beings, for this appears in typical form only in 
the West. Sorcery is of tremendous practical importance, 
and in association with it the appeal to ordeals and such 
elaborate systems of divination as have been described for 
tribes so remote from each other as the Southeastern 
Thonga and the Ekoi of Kamerun and Nigeria. Cere- 
monial activity is often linked with two ideas,—the initia- 
tion of one or both sexes into the status of an adult, and 
a definite cult belonging to a secret fraternity or sorority, 
which not infrequently employs masks. These religious 
brotherhoods thrive especially in the West but have been 
found as far east as Ruanda, a country east of Lake Kivu. 
Bloody sacrifices are probably common throughout the 
Dark Continent. 

The Polynesian religion has been characterized at some 
length in a previous chapter, and for the simpler Melanesian 
area, including New Guinea, we content ourselves with 
referring to the prevalence of ghost-worship and magic. 
This latter, in the form of sorcery, finds an extraordinary 
development in Australia. Here, too, is found an elaborate 
ceremonialism, connected on the one hand with the initiation 
of boys into the status of full-fledged tribesmen, on the 
other with totemic conceptions, such as the desire to mul- 
tiply the totem animal. 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 175 

This brief and wholly inadequate summary must not, I 
repeat, be taken too seriously; least of all, should negative 
conclusions be drawn from it in an absolute sense. For 
example, sorcery is given as a characteristic of the Aus- 
tralians and Negroes, but not of the North Americans. 
Nevertheless, tribes like the Menomini of Wisconsin had 
sorcerers who destroyed their victims by imitative and 
contagious magic, deriving their power from the mythical 
horned snake. Guardian spirits bestowing the arts of black 
magic upon their protégés have been noted widely in the 
Algonkian family, and also among the Takelma of Ore- 
gon. The Pueblo Indians, indeed, possibly dread witch- 
craft quite as much as the Africans and explain by it such 
afflictions as droughts and disease; the Cochiti imputed to 
sorcery so recent an epidemic as that of 1896.° Neverthe- 
less, when the totality of religious phenomena in these sev- 
eral cases is considered, there is warrant, I think, for as- 
signing to this phase of supernaturalism a comparatively 
humble place. 

Again, it is safe to say that the lack of ancestor-worship 
is a significant negative trait of North American religion. 
As Mrs. Benedict has shown, even ghosts, irrespective of 
their kinship, rarely become tutelaries and never to the sub- 
ordination of other beings. Nevertheless, the suggestion 
of an ancestral cult appears in the Pueblo area. Thus, the 
Cochiti believe that the dead go to Wenaima in the west 
to become shiwanna and on the order of Uretsete, the 
mother of the Indians, give rain to the people, who make 
offerings of pollen to the spirits and impersonate them 
in ceremonial masquerades. But, as Kroeber explains for 
the parallel Zufii case, the Pueblo Indians pray to the dead 
as a generality and there is accordingly no genuine equiva- 
lent of the adoration of a particular ancestor by his sur- 

176 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

viving kin.” In other words, while it would be rash to say 
that the dead play no part in North American belief, a 
relative appraisal of the facts lends corroboration to the 
general statement made above. 

Our conclusion, then, comes to this, that in the present 
state of our knowledge world-embracing schemes purport- 
ing to account for the great variety of religious beliefs are 
premature; that first of all the facts themselves and their 
distribution must be ascertained with a reasonable degree 
of certainty if we are not to build a house of cards. Never- 
theless, even with the information at hand it is by no 
means necessary to despair of the possibility of establish- 
ing historical connections, and in some instances the in- 
ferences that can safely be drawn are sufficiently compre- 
hensive to satisfy all but the most insatiable synthetic pal- 
ates. A few examples must suffice. 

Let us consider for one thing some North American con- 
ceptions of disease. Over a wide area we find the theory 
and the practice recorded by Dr. Walker among the Oglala 
of South Dakota: 

All diseases are things which get into the body and do violence 

to it in some way. The thing to do is to get these things out 
of the body. 

This is the dominant idea east of the Rockies: it is noted 
for the Montauk of Long Island as early as 1761, for the 
Yuchi of Georgia and South Carolina, for the Natchez of 
the Lower Mississippi, and in the Plains area. As a matter 
of fact, it is found widely also in the Far West and on 
the Pacific. In California the Colorado River people form 
the only exception, and the Takelma of southwestern Ore- 
gon also entertain the characteristic Californian view that 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 177, 

sickness is a “pain” lodged in the patient’s body, from 
which it may be extracted in the form of a splinter. In 
the Southwest, the Zufii and Pima are known to practice 
medicine on the extraction theory. But when we turn to 
the region of the Pacific slope somewhat farther north 
than the examples cited, a rival conception appears, either 
in addition to the other or possibly even as a complete 
substitute, viz., the notion that illness is caused by the loss, 
usually theft, of the patient’s soul and that accordingly the 
doctor must recapture and restore the kidnaped vital prin- 
ciple. Among the Chehalis and Chinook of the lower Co- 
lumbia River this looms as the major cause of disease. 
The ghosts carry away the patient’s soul, and it is the 
shaman’s task to recover it and put it back into the patient’s 
body. But it is essential that the truant shall not have 
taken anything belonging to the ghosts or drunk of their 
water, otherwise the sick man must die: the doctors may 
seize the soul and bring it back but it has shrunk to so small 
a size that it can no longer fill its owner’s body. Some- 
times a sorcerer abstracts the soul and hides it near a corpse 
or in some other uncanny place, and then some other man 
with supernatural power is hired to find the soul lest the 
victim. die. However, the doctrine of soul-loss is com- 
bined in this region with that of intrusive causes: and the 
shaman may have to take out the disease in the form of 
a rope or pieces of bone or a wolf’s claw. This double 
notion of soul-loss and intrusion also occurs among the 
Northern Athabaskans, the Coast Salish of Puget Sound, 
the northern coastal tribes of British Columbia, and the 
Eskimo; while both ideas again appear in the Southwest 
among the Cochiti of New Mexico.* 

It is the apparently complete lack of the soul-loss the- 
ory and the correlated method of curing over a vast and 

178 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

continuous part of the New World that is historically sig- 
nificant. Miss Lublinski has recently summarized the 
South American data, and it seems that intrusion coupled 
with extraction by blowing or suction alone occurs accord- 
ing to her records. Mr. M. R. Harrington informs me 
that Dr. S. A. Barrett found soul-capture in Ecuador, which 
would thus define the southernmost range of the idea. Ac- 
cording to Father Koppers’s quite recent data for the Fu- 
egians, however, an apparently spontaneous wandering of 
souls may figure as the cause of illness, though the ex- 
traction of pathogenic agents is probably more common 
than the conjuring back of errant souls by means of sacred 
chants. From a survey made by Mr. Forrest Clements un- 
der my direction it appears that the Greenland Eskimo are 
the only North American people of the East who entertain 
the theory of soul-kidnaping. Indeed, with a few excep- 
tions to be noted below, we must go to the Far West to 
find evidence of this notion: according to my own inquiries, 
it is absent among the Ute of Colorado and Utah and 
does not turn up in the Basin area until we get to the Lemhi 
of Idaho and the Paviotso of northern Nevada. Yet there 
is not the slightest psychological reason for this limited 
distribution. One and all, these American aborigines be- 
lieve in the existence of the soul; some South American 
tribes go so far as to have the shaman’s soul leave his body 
to consult the spirits in the course of medical practice. Yet 
the idea that disease results from soul-snatching has not 
been evolved.” Why this geographically restricted occur- 
rence of a conception so plausible on the uniformly dis- 
tributed animistic basis? 

The answer is to be found not in psychology but in the 
historical connections between America and Siberia. The 
basic disease-concept of America is clearly that of intrusion, 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 179 

for it occurs virtually throughout; and even in the North- 
east, where the rival idea is most intensely developed, it 
is almost everywhere coupled with intrusion. The only 
reasonable supposition, then, is that locally soul-theft has 
supplemented or even ousted the ancient American theory 
of disease. But this can hardly be regarded as an autoch- 
thonous product of Far Western America, for while in the 
Western Hemisphere the feature is almost wholly marginal 
it has a considerable range in Siberia, embracing the 
Chukchi, the Buryat, of Mongolic stock, around Lake 
Baikal, and the Turkic people of the Altai. Hence we are 
probably dealing with a relatively late borrowing from 
Siberia.*° 

The few exceptional instances ostensibly contravening 
this assumption can be readily explained. Among the Cen- 
tral Algonkians in the Great Lake region the soul-loss prin- 
ciple once more turns up. Thus, certain Menomini wiz- 
ards not only extract bones, worms, or other pathogenic 
agents shot into the patient by a sorcerer, but on occasion 
may cajole back a wandering soul by whistling and cause 
it to reénter the sick Indian’s body. Since some of the 
Central Algonkians have been in direct contact with the 
Eskimo, who have demonstrably carried the soul-loss con- 
cept as far east as Greenland, this sporadic occurrence of 
the trait in the East is quite intelligible.” 

In America, then, intrusion represents an old cultural 
layer that has been partly overlaid by the soul-loss stratum. 
But the question can be studied from a broader point of 
view. Even in Siberia the Yakut practice the cure by ex- 
traction, which indeed is not unknown as a subsidiary 
method among the Chukchi themselves; it is coupled with 
other theories in Africa and Malaysia, and is dominant in 
Australia, The chief facts of distribution are already 

180 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

sketched in one of Tylor’s earliest books. Tylor, without 
working out the hypothesis in detail, definitely espouses the 
view that only some historical connection can account for 
the resemblances of belief and practice as to sickness in 
South Africa, Australia, Borneo, America, and Europe.”” 
I adopt this assumption in the following specific form. 
The doctrine that disease is due to a tangible intrusive 
body is probably of very great antiquity,—is a genuinely 
Paleolithic feature. Originating somewhere in the Old 
World, it was carried into the New by early immigrants, 
while in the Eastern Hemisphere it likewise came to cover 
an enormous stretch of territory, so that while often super- 
seded by other conceptions it still persists to some extent 
in every major area. 

The definite proof that the American and Siberian con- 
ceptions discussed above had a common origin emboldens 
us to look for further resemblances between these two 
areas. In passing we may call attention to the quite arbi- 
trary association of shamanistic activity with a tambourine, 
which links some of our Eastern Indians not only with 
Siberia but with Lapland. Mythological parallels between 
Asia and America have been repeatedly pointed out by 
Bogoras, Jochelson, Boas, and others, and have been gen- 
erally accepted as proof of historical contact. Here it is 
merely necessary to mention the remarkable recurrence 
among the Chukchi, Yukaghir, Mongolic, Turkic, and Fin- 
nic tribes of the widespread North American “earth-diver” 
motive, viz., the diving into water for mud from which 
the earth is created.** At present, I am interested in indi- 
cating more elusive instances of dissemination. Thus, Mrs. 
Benedict has shown that in Eastern North America and the 
Plains a revelation is normally sought by fasting and even 
torture, but that in the Ultramontane area a different idea 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 181 

occurs widely, viz., the conception of the vision “as un- 
sought, involuntary, a thing of predisposition”; and she 
further indicates that that is precisely the attitude among 
the Koryak and, she might have added, other Siberians.2* 
Another feature that may be mentioned is the “berdache” 
custom, the notion that a man as a result of a‘psychic ex- 
perience must change his sex and thereafter fulfill all the 
duties of a woman. This phenomenon has been amply 
described for the Chukchi in Bogoras’s classical monograph 
and is attested for a great number of North American tribes, 
where religious associations may or may not be present. 
A similar usage has been reported from Borneo, and the 
question arises whether we are dealing with a phenomenon 
calling for an historical interpretation or with one rooted 
in a general tendency of human groups to produce a certain 
proportion of aberrant individuals. That an abnormality 
of this type might be regarded with more or less awe and 
thus be linked with supernaturalism, seems plausible enough. 
A satisfactory answer to this query, however, will be pos- 
sible only when the distribution of the trait is more defi- 
nitely known. 

Finally—though I should not like to suggest that addi- 
tional parallels are not present in abundance—the reveren- 
tial attitude assumed toward the bear on both sides of 
Bering Strait merits intensive comparative study. Char- 
acteristic of the Asiatic point of view is the Koryak fes- 
tival in which the slain bear is entreated not to be angry 
and is equipped with traveling provisions, the object of the 
ceremony being to secure success in future hunting. Cor- 
responding ideas exist among the Yukaghir and Lamut, 
while the Chukchi likewise stand in awe of the bear and 
commonly refer to him by such euphemisms as “grand- 
father” or “the old man.” Now among people so far to 

182 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the east as the Cree and Saulteaux about Hudson Bay Mr. 
Skinner has found elaborate practices connected with a 
slain bear: the bones are cleaned, the skull is painted, kept 
for months and finally put into a tree, and there are various 
taboos. All ‘this is conceived as a prayer and offering to 
the great chief of the bears who would otherwise prevent 
the Indians from killing.any more members of the species. 
Even before killing his game, the bear-hunter would ad- 
dress him in a conciliatory speech. Further west, the As- 
siniboin made offerings to a bear’s head, praying for 
future success in bear-killing, and conciliatory prayers to 
the carcass are noted for the Shuswap, who also put the 
skulls of bears on tall poles. An apologetic. statement is 
recorded for the Tlingit, who paint the grizzly’s head.*° 

It is thus not at all improbable that central and even 
eastern North America can be connected as regards a whole 
series of religious traits with central and even western 
Siberia. This does not mean that all the features in ques- 
tion originated in one area and were thence disseminated 
in a body to the other. The simplicity of such an assump- 
tion has tempted many scholars, but historical phenomena 
are not simple and a simpliste view is more likely to be 
wrong than right. We know that the American Indians 
borrowed many things from the Caucasian intruder, but 
we also know that the Caucasian obtained maize and to- 
bacco from the aborigines. We know that the Chinese 
formed a center for the diffusion of culture in Eastern 
Asia, but we also know,—thanks to Dr. Laufer,—that they 
borrowed more than one element from the ruder tribes to 
the north and to the southeast. Sane historical reconstruc- 
tion will not assume as a foregone conclusion that historical 
connection is equivalent to a steady irreversible stream of 
cultural traits from an active initiator to a passive recipient. 

HISTORICAL SCHEMES 183 

That theory breaks down even when material culture alone 
is considered and is obviously less tenable in matters of the 
spirit, where man is less dependent on the knowledge of 
technical devices. 

It would of course be folly to deny the far-reaching in- 
fluence of higher cultures on the beliefs of simpler peoples 
when specific evidence is available. A superb illustration 
has been cited by Kroeber.** Hepatoscopy, that is, divina- 
tion by examining the liver of sacrificial animals, occurs 
in modern Indonesia, including Borneo and the Philippines; 
but it was a usage in ancient Babylonia possibly as early 
as 2,000 B.c. and spread thence both towards the east and 
the west. We know that Indonesia derived many cultural 
features from Hindu and Chinese sources; hepatoscopy is 
too specific a trait to be readily intelligible as due to a 
repeated invention; and our earliest record of the usage 
points to Western Asia. Hence we can safely infer that 
an ancient Babylonian practice survives in modern Ma- 
laysia. 

It should be clear to the reader that what divides me 
from the diffusionist school of Father Schmidt is not a 
denial of diffusion nor even parsimony in the use of the 
principle of historical connection, whether in point of space 
or of time. The difference lies merely in my insistence on 
an incomparably greater difficulty in the determination of 
what is fact in religion, on an incomparably greater com- 
plexity of the historical process itself than Father Schmidt 
seems willing to admit. Hence, I prefer to practice the 
historical method by tracing the distribution in time and 
space of traits with sharply defined individuality and to 
establish sequences where the distribution is spatially con- 
tinuous or rendered plausible by documentary evidence or 
at least by known ethnographic principles; and the estab- 

184 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

lishment of more ambitious schemes strikes me as distinctly 
premature. 

REFERENCES 

1 Marett: IX, XXVI. 

2 Koppers, 1921: 145, 150, 168, 170. 

8 Witte in Anthropos, 1913: 1162. 

4 Radin, 1914 (b): 357. R. F. Benedict: 46 f. 

5R. F. Benedict: 20 sq. 

6 Skinner, 1915 (a): 182, 188. R. F. Benedict: 44f., 74. 
Dumarest : 151-165. 

7R. F. Benedict: 47. Dumarest: 170-175. Kroeber, 1916: 
277, 

8 Walker: 163. Skinner, 1915 (b):67. Speck: 132. Swan- 
ton, 1911: 80, 180. Lowie, 1922: 375, 380. Kroeber, 1922: 
299. Sapir, 1907: 40. Stevenson: 393, 396, 414. Russell: 261. 
Boas, 1894: 205 sq. Morice: 206, 209. Haeberlin in Amer. 
Anth., 1918: 249-257. Boas, 1916: 475, 559, 561. Jenness: 
172. Dumarest: 151-161. Densmore: 127 sq. 

® Lublinski. Koppers, 1924: 173, 175. 

10 Bogoras: 463 sq. Czaplicka: 158, 282, 287. 

11 Skinner, 1915 (a): 194 sq. 

12 Tylor, 1865: 275 sq. Gutmann: 158. 

18 Jochelson, 1905-1908: 351 f. 

Reo, Benedict: 27, 

16 Jochelson, 1905-1908: 88. Bogoras: 325. Skinner, I9II: 
68 sq., 162 sq. Teit: 602. Lowie, 1909 (b): 56. Swanton, 
1908: 455. 

16 Kroeber, 1923: 209. 

CHAPTER 1X 
HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 

SoMETIMES the historical and the psychological point of 
view are contrasted as if they were necessarily antithetical. 
Nothing is further from the truth. The psychological facts 
of religion are the most fundamental that a history of re- 
ligion can deal with; without them, indeed, such a history 
would be well-nigh meaningless. On the other hand, it is 
equally true that an insight into the psychology of religious 
phenomena is impossible without reference to the conditions 
that preceded and accompanied them. This is seen forth- 
with when we consider some of the definitions by poets or 
philosophers that purport to penetrate the subjective aspects 
of religion without the drudgery of historical research. 
Place the Roman poet’s saying that fear created the gods 
alongside of the divine beings described in the synthetic 
sketches. Did fear create the Crow visionary’s equestrian 
patron who promises his “son” invulnerability in battle? It 
may indeed have led the American aborigines to worship the 
Thunder, but how could it have evoked the characteristic 
association with a bird? Fear is prominent enough among 
the Ekoi; but it is bound up primarily with their ideas of 
sorcery, to a lesser extent with their ghosts and Nimm, least 
of all with the greatest of their deities. It is quite true that 
their supernaturalism largely revolves about the practice of 
sorcery; but the specific ways of using it or averting its ef- 
fects are not at all explained by the simple psychological 
motive of fear, The Polynesians, too, with their taboos 

185 

186 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

and formalities were prey to religious dread; yet this emo- 
tion seems hopelessly inadequate to account for their system 
of beliefs and practices. We should not fare better if we 
substituted for the Roman epigram the German philosopher’s 
“Der Wunsch ist das Wesen der Religion.” The wish, like 
fear, can surely be detected in religion, but it quite fails to 
explain what we should like to understand, viz., the concrete 
diversity of religious phenomena. Why does a Crow try to 
secure his wishes by fast and prayer, an Ekoi by bloody sac- 
rifice, a Maori by a sacred incantation? The high-sounding 
aphorism leaves us in the lurch. It and all its congeners 
seem to postulate that individual man reacts to the universe 
religiously in response to certain inborn instincts and in com- 
plete independence of time and space, whereas the most ob- 
vious illustrations from our own culture suffice to demon- 
strate the shallowness of such an assumption. 

Thus, eliminating all controversial discussion as to the 
Gospel of St. John, let us examine for a moment its open- 
ing sentence: “In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God.” If we at- 
tach to the term “Word” its everyday English connotation, 
the meaning is nil, and we cannot picture its author as thus 
spontaneously voicing his religious sentiments. Certainly 
the instinct of fear and the craving for wish-fulfillment help 
us not a jot. It is otherwise when we turn from random 
psychologizing to history. 

Our “Word” then ‘turns out to be the equivalent of the 
Latin Verbum, Greek Logos; and this Greek term not 
merely designated a vocable but stood in Hellenic philosophi- 
cal literature for the rational order of the universe, the ra- 
tional principle immanent in the cosmos. Introduced by 
Heraclitus (ca. 500-450 B.c.) and adopted by the Stoics, the 
concept was assimilated by Philo, a Jewish thinker born in 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 187 

Alexandria about 30 or 20 B.c., who absorbed features 
of Greek metaphysics while still retaining his faith in the 
God of the Old Testament. He harmonized the two views 
by characterizing the Logos as indeed a creative principle but 
as one subordinate to God. On the one hand, it appears as 
a mere faculty of God, by which He thought out the nature 
of the universe; on the other hand, as a being derived from 
God and carrying His influence into the world. Philo’s 
Logos is of course not identical with that of the Gospel, 
where it is not a secondary but a second Divine Being, not 
an intermediary but a Mediator uniting divine and human 
nature in one person. Yet it is in a sense an anticipatory 
conception, and a conception identical with that of St. John 
but as yet unlabeled appears among his Christian predeces- 
sors, as when Jesus figures as an “image of the invisible 
God” (Ep. to Col., 1, 15), as his Son, “whom he hath ap- 
pointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds” 
(Ep. to Heb., 1, 1-2). As the Catholic Encyclopedia puts it, 
nothing was lacking but the name “Logos.” In short, the 
initial sentence of the Fourth Gospel translates these earlier 
expressions into the nomenclature of Greek speculation, bor- 
rowing a term there used for a comparable concept. With- 
‘out a knowledge of the historical relations of Hellenic to 
Western Asiatic thought, St. John’s opening sentence re- 
mains a psychological enigma, but the puzzle is instantly 
solved when the historical facts are elucidated. 

The same point could be demonstrated for other parts of 
the Johannine writings. An important purpose of them was 
to safeguard the Christian faith against the attacks of here- 
tics, and specifically against the teachings of Gnosticism. 
Thus, St. John’s assertion that a claim to sinlessness is er- 
roneous seems to be not an abstract proposition laid down 
regardless of all temporal circumstances but a rebuke admin- 

188 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

istered to the hostile faction that associated purity from sin 
with the gnosis, or intuitive spiritual insight, characteristic 
of their sect.* 

But enough has been said to suggest the interdependence 
of psychological and historical factors on higher levels of 
civilization. In consonance with the plan of this work we 
turn now to a fuller consideration of two remarkable ex- 
amples of fairly well-known primitive cults, the Ghost Dance 
of our Plains Indians, and the Peyote religion of the Winne- 
bago of Wisconsin and Nebraska. Apart from illustrating 
my main point, both are interesting as illustrations of a 
proselytizing tendency that is on the whole very rare on the 
primitive level. 

Tue Guost DANCE 

In 1890 a Martian visitor to the Teton (Western Dakota 
or “Sioux’”’) reservations of South Dakota might have sum- 
marized his outstanding impressions in some such terms as 
the following: 

At frequent intervals, usually once a week, these people 
undergo solemn preparations for ceremonial activity. They 
will fast for twenty-four hours, purify themselves at sun- 
rise by a vapor bath, and are then decorated by some of their 
great men, such as Short-bull or Sitting-bull, who paint each 
person’s forehead, face and cheeks with a circle, cross, or 
crescent. Next every one dons a shirt likewise ornamented 
with symbolic figures. Finally the whole community to the 
number of several hundred adults gather round a tree hung 
with streamers, cloth, feathers, and what not. The leaders are 
seated at the foot of the tree, and before anything vital hap- 
pens a young woman within the circle lets fly four bone- 
headed arrows towards the cardinal directions and remains 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 189 

standing by the tree with a redstone pipe extended toward 
the west. There follows a plaintive chant by the whole as- 
sembly, whereupon food is passed and shared by every in- 
dividual. Then at a signal by the leaders all rise, sing the 
initial song, standing motionless with hands stretched out 
toward the west, and join hands. Soon other songs are in- 
toned, the dance begins, and the steps are accelerated till the 
performers are going round at topspeed, bodies swaying and 
hands tightly clasping the neighbors’. Now a woman with 
hair disheveled, staggers from the ring, panting, groaning 
wildly, and waving her arms, and soon falls unconscious and 
twitching to the ground. Now a man follows suit, then a 
second woman, and still another. After a while possibly a 
hundred are lying on the ground. As each recovers from 
his swoon, he is brought to the center where he makes some 
statement to the master of ceremonies, who heralds it to 
the crowd. At last they all shake their blankets and disperse. 

If our hypothetical Martian knows the language of his 
hosts or commands the services of an interpreter, these procla- 
mations, together with the songs of the dancers and Short- 
bull’s harangues to the crowd will give him some notion of 
what ideas are associated with the strange performance he is 
witnessing. The Indians are hoping to be reéstablished as 
supreme rulers of the country. Their white oppressors are 
to be overwhelmed,—smothered by a terrific landslide or 
destroyed by whirlwinds; their firearms will be powerless 
against the Teton, whose painted shirts render them invul- 
nerable. The spirits of all the dead Indians are returning 
to reinhabit the earth and are driving immense herds of buf- 
falo before them. The dancers who have fallen into a 
trance see visions in earnest of this glorious destiny. The 
maiden over there has seen her dead mother and is now im- 
ploring her to return and tend her orphaned infant. That 

190 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

man has taken part once more in an old-fashioned buffalo 
hunt and beheld the scouts dashing back to proclaim the 
sighting of a herd. Yonder hag has helped in making pemmi- 
can after a successful chase. A dozen men and women have 
seen the spirit of a deceased kinsman, who suddenly van- 
ished in the guise of a beast or bird. But in order to see 
the spirits and bring them back for good, and to destroy the 
enemy, it is necessary to dance the Ghost Dance and to dis- 
card the gewgaws and trappings of the white man. 

Now, how much of all this is amenable to a simple psycho- 
logical interpretation? Very, very little. Of course, certain 
general motives are involved here as they are in every hu- 
man activity. Naturally enough, men do long to see their 
departed kin and resent the intrusions of foreign invaders. 
But such generalities not only leave the greater part of the 
story unexplained, but become progressively less illuminating 
as our visitor extends his inquiries in time and space. Why 
has the desire for union with departed relatives never been 
voiced by the Teton prior to 1890, at least, never in com- 
parable fashion? Why are they rising in armed rebellion 
against the United States, while the Arapaho and Cheyenne 
are content to leave the destruction of the whites to the 
supernatural powers of the universe, nay, even deprecate the 
use of the painted shirt because it is a symbol of war? Why 
are the pipe and the dancers’ hands extended toward the 
west? Is it perchance because that is the home of the setting 
sun and the land of the dead? (Our visitor may have fa- 
miliarized himself with the theories of sublunary mytholo- 
gists.) These questions and many others are unanswerable 
or answerable only in demonstrably incorrect fashion so 
long as we conceive of the Ghost Dance as a direct religious 
response by such and such an individual or tribe. But they 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY IgI 

can be illuminated at once if we resort to the sane method 
of historical reconstruction, Let us begin with the last-men- 
tioned query. 

The pipe and the dancers’ hands are extended towards the 
west because it is from that direction, viz., from Nevada, 
that the Teton have received the new ceremony and its 
doctrine, which was promulgated about the beginning of 
1889 by Wovoka (“Jack Wilson”) of the little-known Pavi- 
otso tribe, otherwise known as the Northern Paiute. It 
seems that at the time of a solar eclipse, probably on Jan- 
uary I, 1889, Wovoka fell asleep during the daytime and 
was taken up to the other world, where he saw God and all 
the dead of long ago, who were happy and young, playing 
at their old games and engaged in their old occupations in a 
land of joy and plenty. After showing him everything, God 
bade him return with a message of peace, good-will and 
moral exhortation. If the people obeyed instructions, they 
were to be reunited with their dead friends. They were to 
practice the dance revealed to Wovoka in his vision. “By 
performing this dance at intervals, for five consecutive days 
each time, they would secure this happiness to themselves 
and hasten the event.” Finally he was given control over 
the elements by means of five songs, each with a distinctive 
effect on the atmosphere. 

The first point of contrast with the Teton variant of the 
cult that strikes us in Wovoka’s revelation is the genial at- 
titude assumed towards the whites. This may indeed have 
been modified in occasional audiences as a concession to In- 
dians from hostile tribes, but everything goes to show that 
primarily Wovoka brought a gospel of universal brother- 
hood. This is borne out not only by his statements to Mr. 
Mooney, which might’ be construed as designed to curry 

192 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

favor with a white man, but by the report of an early Chey- 
enne delegate, which must be considered free from this 
source of adulteration: 

He also told us that all our dead were to be resurrected ; 
that they were all to come back to earth. . . . He spoke to us 
about fighting and said that was bad and we must keep 
from it; that the earth was to be all good hereafter, and we 
must all be friends with one another. . . . He told us not to 
quarrel or fight or strike each other, or shoot one another ; that 
the whites and Indians were to be all one people. 

_ Wovoka’s friendliness, or at least freedom from fanatical 

hatred, for the whites is further indicated by his attitude to- 
ward the elements of our material culture. While the Teton 
made a deliberate attempt to dispense with the enemy’s arti- 
facts, even to the point of not using beads for decorative 
purposes, the Paviotso prophet did not scruple to wear good 
trade clothes and a white man’s hat. 

Another point of considerable interest is that, at least oc- 
casionally, Wovoka pretended to be Christ returning after 
hundreds of years to renew the world, which was getting 
too old, and to instruct mankind once more. 

All this is quite intelligible from Wovoka’s antecedents. 
As a young lad he began to work for a white farmer, David 
Wilson, and because of his close attachment to the family, 
he was dubbed “Jack Wilson.” Through this contact he evi- 
dently acquired not only a smattering of English but also 
some notions of Christianity, possibly enlarged by other 
white acquaintances ; and these associations explain both cer- 
tain specific features in the original Ghost Dance code and 
also its freedom from racial antipathy. 

Why the Teton so strangely altered the harmless concep- — 
tions of Wovoka, will be discussed below. For the present 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 193 

it is important to note that we have not yet ascended to the 
fountainhead of the Ghost cult. Wovoka had a forerunner 
in the person of his possible father and probable kinsman 
Tavibo, whose appearance dates back to about 1870. As to 
his precise doctrine, especially as regards the prospective 
destruction of the whites, there is conflicting evidence. But 
he certainly went into trances and declared that the spirits 
of the dead were about to return to earth, and that game 
animals together with the ancient life were to be restored. 
In one version he is even credited with a definitely ethical 
doctrine. However this may be, there is manifestly a his- 
torical connection between the elder and the younger of the 
two related prophets, and the Ghost Dance of the Plains 
tribes is thus ultimately traceable to the preachings of a 
Paviotso antedating their adoption of the ceremony by nearly 
twenty years. Here the question naturally obtrudes itself, 
why the Teton, instead of waiting for Wovoka, did not wel- 
come the earlier Messianic teaching. 

Before attempting to solve this problem, it will be worth 
while noting a point that eluded Mr. Mooney. It was not 
by sheer whim or accident that Wovoka set the period of the 
dance at five days and acquired five songs for controlling the 
weather. As no reader of that half-educated Paviotso, 
Sarah Winnemucca, can fail to observe, five is the mystic 
number of her tribe as definitely as four is that of the Plains 
area. Hence, in so far as the Prairie tribes adopted the idea, 
they were acting under the prestige suggestion of an alien 
leader, who was himself quite spontaneously bowing to the 
accepted folkways of his own people. 

When we set side by side the beliefs and observances that 
constituted the Ghost cult of the Paviotso with those charac- 
teristic of the Teton variant, the differences are more strik- 
ing than the resemblances. Let us turn first of all to two 

194 PRIMITIVE ‘RELIGION 

closely connected queries: Why did the Teton fail to adopt 
the gospel of 1870 when they espoused with such ardor the 
gospel of 1889? And why did they alter not merely lesser 
details, but the very spirit of Wovoka’s teaching? In order 
to solve these problems it is necessary to consider the change 
in outward circumstances effected among the Western Sioux 
during the intervening periods. In 1870 they were still able 
to subsist in large measure on the products of the chase; by 
1889 the virtual extinction of the buffalo had reduced them 
and neighboring tribes to a precarious economic existence. 
But the Teton were worse off than other Plains Indians be- 
cause of a variety of special conditions. Not only had they 
lost their favorite game animal, but for two successive years 
they had suffered a failure of crops, had seen their live- 
stock depleted by disease, and their Government rations ma- 
terially reduced, so that they were literally threatened with 
starvation. Add to this a series of epidemics that wrought 
havoc in their midst, the chafing of a nation of warriors 
under the encroachments of whites, the recollection of recent 
conflicts with the Government and of various grievances 
against their official guardians: and the intense emotional 
stress predisposing a people to yearn for deliverance from 
their ills is amply accounted for. In 1870 all these condi- 
tions were either lacking or much less acute, and the soil was 
therefore but indifferently prepared for the reception of a 
Messianic faith. But even apart from the inevitable differ- 
ence in psychological attitude, there were circumstances that 
would greatly impede the rapid dissemination of Tavibo’s 
teachings : the means of transportation that enabled delegates 
from a thousand miles away to make their long pilgrimages 
to Wovoka were still in their infancy, and the number of 
educated Indians who might spread knowledge of a new 
revelation in Nevada by writing to remote tribes was ex- 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 195 

tremely small. It is not at all unlikely that in Tavibo’s day 
not a single Teton had ever heard of the Paviotso. But even 
if the Paviotso were known, their ability to propagandize 
the proud Plains Indians in a relatively normal state was 
more than problematical. Could anything good come out of 
the country of the seed-gathering kinsmen of the “Bad 
Lodges,” as even the more eastern Shoshoneans were con- 
temptuously designated on the Prairie? It was otherwise 
with the Teton when decimated by disease, deprived of their 
livelihood, and incensed against the oppressor to the point 
of clutching at any hope of salvation. 

With this major difference of initial attitude interpreted, 
various special features are directly explicable from a knowl- 
edge of Dakota ethnography. When the Teton introduced 
decorated shirts to ward off the enemy’s bullets, they were 
merely, as Wissler has demonstrated, reviving the hoary 
custom of averting darts by the designs on shields, for in 
either case the protective virtue was believed to lie in the 
decoration, supposedly revealed in each instance by a super- 
natural power. Why did the Dakota, unlike the originators 
of the ceremony, begin with a sweat-bath? Because while 
among the Paviotso the sudatory was of little significance, 
the Teton regarded it as a regular preliminary to any rite 
dedicated to the major gods. Why did the Dakota erect a 
tree in the middle of the circle when no such feature ap- 
peared in Nevada? Probably because in two of their great- 
est festivals, the Sun Dance and the Round Dance, a tree 
was erected in the middle of the site. Again, the visions of 
buffalo, scouting-parties, and pemmican-making were faith- 
ful reflections of normal Plains Indian life that were mani- 
festly impossible to natives of the Basin area. The de- 
parture of spirit visitants in animal shape is once more a 
trait highly characteristic of Dakota visions generally but 

196 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

never recorded for the Paviotso. In this connection another 
difference may be noted: while in Nevada the Prophet him- 
self was the only one to go into a trance, the Teton and some 
other Plains tribes developed the mass ecstasies described 
above, another possible influence of the Sun Dance pattern. 

As for the Christian elements of Wovoka’s revelation, 
they completely evaporated on Dakota soil. There is no 
trace there of the ethical doctrines proclaimed by the Prophet. 
Already familiar through contact with missionaries with the 
notion of the crucified Christ, the Teton did not indeed spurn 
it but subordinated it to their own desires, corrupting it into 
the conception of an avenger of their wrongs. He merely 
served the function of any one of their own guardian spirits. 
Indeed, he was very far from supplanting the figures of 
their pantheon; the protective shirt designs recorded by 
Wissler demonstrate the old reliance on Sun, Thunderbird, 
and their mates. 

In short, the Teton Ghost Dance involved essentially the 
assimilation of a single novel idea, that of the returning dead 
and the restoration of the old-fashioned life, in consonance 
with the preéxisting Teton system of religion; and the total 
result was applied to the solution of the critical situation 
in which they then found themselves. 

This last statement may be extended to other tribes. 
Though not animated by the fanatical hatred for the whites 
nourished by the Western Dakota, the Arapaho, Cheyenne, 
and Kiowa—to mention only a few cases—had enough 
grounds for discontent in the inevitable conflicts with the in- 
truders to welcome a revelation that promised freedom from 
their yoke. They were ready to accept the leadership of an 
alien prophet, nay, in their exaltation might raise him to 
divine dignity and invest with a halo of sanctity even such 
trivialities as the ochre he used to decorate the faces of 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 197 

dancers, or might attach veritably sacramental value to pifion 
nuts from Nevada, which in that country were a common 
enough article of diet. It was indeed possible for the Ghost 
Dance to supersede all the older ceremonies of the Cheyenne 
and Arapaho,—but only because they largely retained the 
ancient ceremonial pattern, automatically molding the new 
cult into harmony with it. Seven was one of the mystic 
numbers of the Arapaho; and the apostle of that tribe would 
ordain seven priests, or seven of each sex, to superintend the 
dance. It had been customary to make ceremonial pipe-of- 
ferings to the sun, the earth, the fire, and the four cardinal 
points, and this usage was followed in Arapaho song re- 
hearsals. In Plains Indian theory every mode of decoration 
for a ceremony was the result of inspiration, and the Ghost 
Dancers strictly adhered to this conception. A certain flat 
pipe was the Arapaho holy of holies, and it held its place de- 
spite the new cult, entering into some of the new chants. 
The Thunderbird was one of the great figures in Plains In- 
dian religion, and so far from abjuring it, the Ghost Danc- 
ers frequently wore its effigy on their heads. In short, the 
Plains Indians gave up next to nothing that was really vital 
in their old faith; and what they adopted could be easily 
made to fit into the system of inherited belief. The basic 
conception of a revelation from a supernatural power was 
one of the most deep-rooted traditions of their culture. 
Whether Wovoka was himself divine or merely the recipi- 
ent of divine blessings, there was nothing shocking to their 
sense of verisimilitude in his dispensation of miraculous fa- 
vors. Since the quest of a vision was practically universal, 
at least among the men of the Plains area, the striking fact 
that many individuals experienced visions, which in Nevada 
were restricted to the Prophet himself, is at once intelligible. 
It was natural for the Pawnee shamans to interpret all the 

198 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

relevant phenomena as merely revivals of the traditional 
type of revelations with a mere modification of content; 
and there is little doubt that that was essentially the view 
held throughout the region. Even the extensive employment 
of hypnotism in some of the tribes had its parallel in earlier 
practices. Of the Crow we know that the conductor of the 
Sun Dance would deliberately put the pledger of the cere- 
mony into a trance if mere dancing before the sacred doll 
failed to produce the desired result; and similar customs 
were doubtless found among neighboring tribes as well. 

Let us now revert once more to the basic question, in how 
far the Teton cult as practiced in 1890 is intelligible apart 
from the historical setting described above. In other words, 
in how far could any individual separated from those specific 
conditions be expected to express his relations to the super- 
natural in like fashion? The answer is, Not at all. Even 
disregarding all matters of ritual detail, we cannot fail to 
recognize that the receptiveness toward Wovoka’s message 
and its peculiar elaboration with the stressing of the trance 
idea, were directly dependent on the Plains Indian world- 
view. Inthe Ghost Dance as it developed in the Prairie re- 
gion possibly three factors stand out above the rest,—the 
return of the buffalo, the return of the dead, and the de- 
struction of the whites. Of these, the first and last were in 
principle of old standing. Rites for luring the herds of 
game animals towards the encampments in times of famine 
were prominent among most of the Plains groups. Simi- 
larly, the destruction of the enemy through supernatural 
sanction was a well-established principle, so that no Crow 
war party was organized without a corresponding revelation. 
The economic plight of the Plains people was only a particu- 
larly accentuated instance of a situation with which they had 
often had to contend in the old days; and the whites were 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 199 

only a particular type of especially obnoxious enemy. Even 
as early as 1881, eight years before Wovoka’s name had 
traveled eastward, a Kiowa shaman had sought to recall the 
buffalo, prescribing to his people a mode of ceremonial con- 
duct revealed ina dream. In 1887 the Crow prophet Wraps- 
up-his-tail laid claim to a vision that would enable him to 
drive the whites from the country. In the same year a sec- 
ond Kiowa shaman not only pronounced himself heir to his 
forerunner’s powers but declared that since the whites had 
caused the destruction of the buffalo he would destroy them 
all. 

There was a Plains prehistory, as it were, to the Ghost 
Dance, and that prehistory made the cult different from what 
it would otherwise have been anywhere else in the universe. 

But is not at least the longing for the deceased a phe- 
nomenon of universal occurrence and a human motive that 
requires no historical interpretation? Undoubtedly, but alas! 
it fails to explain the case at issue. For that supposedly 
abiding motive had never before produced the conception of 
a re-peopling of the world by the spirits of the dead. The 
Plains Indians were for the most part conspicuously little 
interested in the hereafter, and it required the suggestion of 
Wovoka, established and fostered through the circumstances 
already sketched, to implant his eschatology among these 
tribes. In other words, a Teton unaffected by Wovoka’s 
evangelists might have yearned for a sight of the dead in 
1890 as he might have done in 1790 without more than 
dreaming of a visit to the land of spirits. If in 1890 such 
dream experiences were linked with the expectation of a 
definite reunion, not through the dreamer’s journey to the 
dead but through their reéntrance into this world, it was 
simply because by historical accident the gospel of Wovoka, 
itself the resultant of Paviotso and Caucasian culture, that 

200 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

is, of another historical accident, had reached Dakota ter- 
ritory.” 

THE PEYOTE CULT 

An excellent illustration of my thesis is provided by the 
history of the Peyote cult, which in several of our Western 
tribes has manifested a strong tendency to supersede the an- 
cient ritualism. The peyote, incorrectly called ‘“mescal,” is 
a species of small cactus that grows along the lower Rio 
Grande and in Mexico. It resembles a radish in size and 
shape and has a white blossom, which is displaced by a tuft 
of white down. North of the Mexican boundary only the 
top is used, being sliced and dried to form the “button,” 
while in Mexico the whole of the plant is sliced, dried and 
used in decoction. The Peyote worship centers in the eating 
of the button or drinking of its infusion. Professor Kroe- 
ber, who partook of peyote among the Arapaho, thus de~ 
scribes its effects: 

It affects the heart, produces muscular lassitude, is a strong 
stimulant of the nervous system, and has a marked effect on 
the general feeling of the person, giving the impression of 
stimulating especially the intellectual faculties. In most cases 
it produces visions of a kaleidoscopic nature. Its emotional 
effect varies greatly, being in some cases depressing or intensely 
disagreeable ; in others, which are the more frequent, producing 
quiet but intense exaltation. There is little subsequent reaction. 

Now in perhaps the majority of cases this modern faith 
clearly combines Christian elements (including such features 
as Bible-reading, testimony, puritanical ethics) with the 
adoration of the cactus plant. Yet it is not a concise his- 
torical formula any more than a psychological formula that 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 201 

really sheds light on the psychological processes involved, but 
only a painstaking consideration of each step in the his- 
torical development, such as has been furnished by Dr. Paul 
Radin for the Winnebago.’ 

Since the cactus in question is indigenous only in the 
South, the Winnebago naturally derived its cult from that 
direction. John Rave, who introduced the new faith among 
his people, had learned to eat peyote while visiting an Okla- 
homa tribe in 1893-94. He was a member of the important 
Bear sib, but personally had a bad character as a shiftless 
drunkard. When visiting in the South he was in a very 
unhappy frame of mind, for he had recently lost his wife 
and his children. At the invitation of his hosts, he ate peyote 
and saw some horrible monsters that threatened to devour or 
spear him. To quote his own words: 

There seemed to be no possible escape for me. Then sud- 
denly it occurred to me, “Perhaps it is this peyote that is doing 
this thing to me?” “Help me, O medicine, help me! It is you 
who are doing this and you are holy! It is not these frightful 
visions that are causing this. I should have known that you 
were doing it. Help me!” ‘Then my suffering stopped. “As 
long as the earth shall last, that long will I make use of you, 
O medicine!” 

Rave ate more peyote and saw God and the morning-star, 
also his dead wife and children and other kinsfolk, and all 
seemed well. Then he ejaculated, “Ah! Peyote, you are 
holy. All that is connected with you I should like to know; 
for now I first realize what holiness is.” 

On his return he cured himself of a disease of old stand- 
ing and likewise his new wife, who had also suffered from 
the same affliction. He further treated several other people 
with the aid of the peyote. Yet in the beginning, despite his 

202 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

propagandist fervor, the cult spread slowly, embracing only 
Rave’s immediate family. But after four or five years there 
was a marked increase in membership and with it the ap- 
parently spontaneous development of an organization with 
a leader and four deputies. Towards the traditional Winne- 
bago faith Rave’s initial attitude was that of passive indif- 
ference, but for various reasons—doubtless in part owing 
to the unreceptiveness of the conservative element—this 
changed into violent antagonism. 

At this point a fundamental innovation was introduced 
by another personality. Hitherto the faith had been essen- 
tially of aboriginal cast with possibly a slight tinge of Chris- 
tian ethics. Rave, it must be remembered, was an illiterate 
and hence incapable of reading the Scriptures. But now 
there appeared on the scene a Carlisle graduate named Al- 
bert Hensley, who revolutionized the cult by introducing 
Bible readings and making Rave baptize the members with 
an infusion of peyote. Hensley, who was an epileptic, ex- 
perienced frequent trances with glorious visions of Heaven 
and Hell, which he subsequently interpreted in terms of the 
Revelation. At the same time he explained the Bible in terms 
of the peyote, assuming the position that the Bible was in- 
telligible only through the supernatural cactus. Rave him- 
self preserved an attitude of indifference towards the Scrip- 
tures. He was quite willing to accede to the introduction of 
Christian features if craved by his flock. To him the peyote 
was the end-all and be-all of the cult, the source of all bless- 
ings: if a peyote-worshiper reckoned the Bible among the 
life-values, then naturally the peyote as the fountainhead of 
everything precious would open up avenues for its compre- 
hension that otherwise would remain closed. 

Subsequently a schism was precipitated by Hensley’s puri- 
tanism. He objected to the appointment of a deputy leader 

HISTORY AND PSYCHOLOGY 203 

of notorious character, while Rave insisted that official posi- 
tion in the organization was independent of moral character. 
Hensley seceded with a number of adherents, but the major- 
ity of peyote-eaters remained under Rave’s guidance and 
even some of the dissenters returned to the fold. However, 
a new competitor arose when in 1912 Jesse Clay returned 
from the Arapaho and introduced their form of the Peyote 
ritual, thus establishing a distinct sect, in which Christian 
symbolism is conspicuous while Winnebago conceptions, at 
the time of Dr. Radin’s inquiries, were wholly absent. It is 
important to note that even in Rave’s congregation the in- 
creasing number of young educated Indians tended to pre- 
serve the Christian elements due to Hensley, despite the lat- 
ter’s withdrawal. Our authority notes, indeed, a virtually 
complete adoption of Christianity by some of the members 
balanced by the relapse of others into paganism, while many 
had lost their ardor for Rave’s cult. The subsequent for- 
tunes of the Peyote sects of the Winnebago in the last dec- 
ade have remained unstudied. 

Now when we examine the phenomena outlined above we 
find that here, too, any attempt to understand their sub- 
jective aspect is doomed to failure if divorced from the his- 
torical facts. To begin with the most recent innovation, 
Jesse Clay’s separatist movement is psychologically in a quite 
different category from Hensley’s: learning from the Arap- 
aho a form of the cult diverging from Rave’s, to whose in- 
fluence he had apparently remained immmune, he naturally 
became to all intents and purposes the prophet of a new 
creed rather than a dissenter from an established one. Again, 
Hensley’s innovations are not spontaneous products of the 
religious sentiment but represent a quaint attempt to unify 
two currents of thought that had come powerfully to affect 
his mystic’s soul,—Christianity and the Peyote complex. 

204 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Without alien contact of a specific sort the former influence 
could never have been exerted, and as a matter of fact it was 
practically non-existent for Rave, the illiterate founder of the 
Winnebago cult. It is in considering how Rave and his early 
followers elaborated the ‘Peyote cult” that the indispensa- 
bility of a historical point of departure for psychological 
understanding appears most clearly. For the attitude of these 
devotees is unintelligible except on the basis of the traditional 
Winnebago faith. Unlike the later prophet Clay, Rave was 
not the passive recipient of an alien creed but automatically 
transformed what he accepted by casting it into the tradi- 
tional Winnebago form. The peyote plant had cured him, had 
put him into a state of exaltation, and he forthwith ranged it 
in the category of sacred substances with supernatural cura- 
tive powers, assuming towards it the typical attitude of a 
Winnebago shaman. It was customary to offer tobacco to 
supernatural entities, and accordingly he offered tobacco to 
the peyote. There were five leaders in the ancient Medicine 
Dance, and accordingly the new society had a leader with 
four deputies. The old cult societies derived their origin 
from the revelation granted in a fasting experience, and con- 
sequently even Hensley, Christianized as he was, could not 
free himself from the influence of this tribal pattern. Thus 
we find once more that the path to psychology lies through 
history. Only when we know the Winnebago heritage of 
belief and ceremonial, can we appreciate the psychological 
reactions of the peyote-eaters, whether as a group or as 
single individuals. 
REFERENCES 

1 Catholic Encyclopedia: vil, 437, 442; 1X, 329. Scott. 
Schmiedel, 1906 (a) and (b). 

? Mooney: 701-704, 706 f., 764-842, 894-926, 958-1075. 

® Radin, 1914 (a) ; id., 1923: 388 sq. Bartlett: 160 sq. 

CHAPTER X 
WOMAN AND RELIGION 

Ir we were asked whether women or men are the more 
religious, most of us should unhesitatingly answer in favor 
of women and should presumably cite their proverbially 
greater emotionalism as an explanation. On the Continent 
—say, in Spain—it is a familiar enough thing to have 
women go to mass while their free-thinking brothers and 
husbands never enter a church, and in Anglo-Saxon coun- 
tries pietism or any obtrusively religious or ethical reform 
movement is more definitely associated with the feminine 
psyche,—and this irrespective of the fact that in most de- 
nominations women are barred from the positions of priest 
or minister. But when we survey the corresponding phe- 
nomena of ruder cultures, the significant fact appears that 
in various regions women are not only ineligible for office 
but seem to be shut out from all religious activity. In 
most Australian tribes it would be death for a woman to 
witness the initiation procedures; corresponding conditions 
have been described for New Guinea and Melanesia and 
have a sporadic distribution elsewhere. Does this mean that 
women in such areas are really debarred from religious 
manifestations? And if not, how do they display the rele- 
vant sentiments? To what extent are their disabilities 
founded in some innate peculiarity, how far are they due 
to a specific cultural environment? And how do woman’s 
subjective reactions differ from man’s? 

At the present stage of our knowledge some of these 

205 

206 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

questions are more easily asked than answered. If in spite 
of our ignorance a special chapter is devoted to the topic, 
it is in order to direct attention to an interesting but neg- 
lected field of inquiry. On the last-mentioned problem in 
particular I have ransacked the literature in vain for even 
a shred of enlightening material. One turns naturally to 
those regions in which women are least hampered by social 
conventions. Thus, among the Northwestern Californians 
the part of shaman is most commonly played by the female 
sex, and Professor Kroeber has secured the confessions of 
one of these medicine-women. Yet when one analyzes her 
statements, the personal factor seems wholly submerged in 
the characteristic tribal (Yurok) trait of greed for money: 
she is obsessed with the desire of acquiring wealth through 
her practice, precisely as her fellows, male or female, are 
in the ordinary business of life: “So whatever I did I spoke 
of money constantly . . . I said to myself: ‘When people 
are sick, I shall cure them if they pay me enough.’”? From 
such stereotyped longings of avarice it is impossible to 
distill the faintest flavor of distinctively feminine character. 

Among the Crow there are relatively few restrictions 
because of sex. Women, as well as men, have the right 
to seek visions and if they avail themselves more rarely 
of the privilege it is because in so intensely martial a cul- 
ture the craving for success in war is the most usual im- 
petus to a vision-quest. In the important ceremonial soci- 
ety concerned with the sacred Tobacco there are no offices 
for which members are ineligible because of sex, and the 
part played by women in the dances is a conspicuous one. 
Of the women I knew, Muskrat was probably the most pos- 
itive personality that figured in religious activities. She 
was very well informed and intelligent, but inordinately 
vain, and her attempts at self-aggrandizement were some- 

WOMAN AND RELIGION 207 

times ridiculed by her fellow-tribesmen—in her absence. 
She had been Mixer in the Weasel chapter of the Tobacco 
society, and to the resentment of some old people she con- 
tinued to exercise the duties of the office after having sold 
the prerogative. She herself explained that she had only 
sold part of it and at all events remained a dominant figure 
in the organization. I repeatedly interviewed her and 
obtained much interesting information but nothing that 
would suggest a positive sex difference. Thus, she had a 
revelation of a particular tobacco-mixing recipe such as any 
man might have secured; on another occasion a weasel 
entered her body, a not uncommon experience of either 
sex; precisely like any other member of the Tobacco or- 
ganization she adopted new members; and again like other 
Crow Indians with corresponding revelations she exercised 
specific functions, such as charming an unfaithful husband 
or doctoring broken bones. Her taboos also wholly re- 
semble those of other visionaries in principle.* 

It is of course conceivable—though hardly a priori prob- 
able—that no sex differences exist. On the other hand, 
it is possible that our field methods have hitherto been too 
gross to sense such elusive differences as may occur; and at 
all events a resolute attempt in that direction—if possible, 
by a woman anthropologist—would be eminently worth 
while. 

If very little can be said on the subjective side, I think 
we can definitely dispose of a plausible misconception based 
on objective observations. It does not follow that women 
are excluded from the religious life of the community be- 
cause their social status is inferior or because certain spec- 
tacular features are tabooed to them. In the striking Ekoi 
case we found that women were indeed prohibited from 
touching a strong njomm or seeing a bull-roarer or a stilt- 

208 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

walking exhibition and from ever intruding into an Egbo 
meeting; but by way of compensation they -exclude men 
from the Nimm sorority and through that cult play no 
mean part in tribal ritual. Elsewhere in Africa the legal 
subordination of women in no wise interferes with very 
important religious offices. Among the Zulu, women no 
less than men detect sorcerers, and the same is reported 
for the Thonga, where Mholombo, whom M. Junod not 
unnaturally describes as ‘‘an extraordinarily acute woman,” 
would confound evil magicians, work such miracles as 
walking on the water, and interpret the divining-bones 
through the agency of a spirit possessing her. Other women 
have been known to become diviners, though not so often 
as men, and to be possessed by ancestral ghosts ; and though 
normally the eldest brother acts as priest in ancestral wor- 
ship the duty may also devolve on the eldest sister.” 

The condition characteristic of these African tribes is of 
very wide distribution: that is to say, women may not 
participate so frequently or so fully as men, yet their rdle 
is far from negligible in the religious life. For instance, 
the highest reaches of Chukchi shamanism—those connected 
with the practice of ventriloquism—are inaccessible to the 
female sex, yet lessér forms of inspiration are more com- 
monly bestowed on women than otherwise. In the Anda- 
man Islands women do not join in ordinary dances, though 
they attend to form the chorus; but they have a mourning 
dance of their own and act as shamans, though less fre- 
quently than men. In Polynesia, again, all kinds of taboos 
hedged in the life of the women: in Hawaii they were 
obliged to eat food apart from the men and were not even 
allowed to enter a man’s eating-house prior to the abolition 
of the old rule by a decree of Kamehameha II in 1819; 

WOMAN AND RELIGION 209 

they were not admitted to the sacred college of the Maori 
of New Zealand and might not travel by boat in the Mar- 
quesas. But in spite of Malo’s statement that in Hawaii 
the majority of them “had no deity and just worshiped 
nothing,” his own description tells of their worship of 
female deities; and in Tonga inspirational dreams of con- 
sequence were not denied to women.® 

It is, however, particularly noteworthy that even in 
regions where some rigid penalty seems wholly to eliminate 
women from ceremonial participation closer scrutiny re- 
veals a very different state of affairs. Oceania and Aus- 
tralia furnish stock examples of the former, but the less 
obtrusive assertion of women in religious life has not been 
adequately recognized. Thus, among the Tami of New 
Guinea we have seen that while the female sex was ex- 
cluded from the initiation ceremony and terrorized by its 
performers, women normally call the spirits of recently 
deceased tribesmen. An equally striking illustration is pro- 
vided by Australia. Among the Euahlayi of New South 
Wales the inner mysteries of the initiation ritual also re- 
main a sealed book to women, nay, even the usual name, 
Byamee, of its divine inaugurator is concealed from them. 
But this does not prevent them from praying to him under 
another designation, as did that remarkable old shaman, 
Bootha, whose portrait has been so vividly painted by Mrs. 
Parker. When probably well over sixty, she absented her- 
self from camp in order to grieve over the loss of a favorite 
granddaughter. After a long seclusion in more or less 
demented condition she returned a full-fledged medicine- 
woman. Henceforth she was able to summon and. inter- 
rogate the guardian spirits acquired; with their aid she 
performed miraculous cures and produced rain at will, evi- 

210 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

dently exerting a considerable influence on the aborigines 
in the vicinity and apparently in no way inferior to her 
male colleagues.* 

An American instance may be added for good measure. 
The Northern Athabaskans generally are hardly conspic- 
uous for their chivalrous attitude toward women, and the 
Anvik, who inhabit an Alaskan village some hundred and 
twenty-five miles inland, form no exception. Even from 
infancy a girl is carefully watched lest she step on any- 
thing lying on the floor that might affect the welfare of 
her family. “The spirit of the boy is stronger than the 
spirit of the girl, so a boy may step where he pleases.” 
As the child grows older, restrictions multiply, especially 
from puberty on, nor has the girl a will of her own in 
the choice of a mate. Again, there is discrimination in 
the ceremonial use of masks: men may wear female masks, 
but no woman is allowed to put on a man’s mask. Yet, 
all these taboos to the contrary notwithstanding, the weaker 
sex is by no means wholly debarred from participation in 
the religious activities of the community. Some women 
own sacred songs and chant them at the tribal festivals. 
There are female shamans who treat sick members of their 
sex, and the wives of shamans are favored to the extent 
of being allowed to sing at the more important dances and 
to inherit something of their deceased husbands’ supernat- 
ural gifts. Individual cases are known of women who 
gained great influence. 

Cries-for-salmon’s mother is a woman with power. She has 
many strong songs. Her father had been a great hunter, with 
wolverene and bear songs. She is always consulted in the vil- 
lage, she knows her power, and there is no one to check her or 
to talk about her.® 

WOMAN AND RELIGION 2I1 

This notable trio of instances establishes a sort of a 
fortiori conclusion. Evidently even marked sexual disabil- 
ities do not exclude women from exercising religious func- 
tions of social significance, and there is not the slightest 
indication that their limitations are the consequence of in- 
nate incapacity or that a lack of emotional interest in re- 
ligion has been engendered by compulsory disuse. As a 
matter of fact, as soon as outward pressure is somewhat 
relaxed the sexes share quite equitably in ceremonial duties. 
This is clear even from the African cases cited above, and 
the case for North America could be easily strengthened 
by additional instances. Among the Plains Indians the 
custody of sacred objects, such as shields, was regularly 
entrusted to a favorite wife; membership in secret organi- 
zations was often open to women on equal terms with men; 
nay, they were even at times eligible to the highest ceremonial 
offices. To turn to another area, nothing could be fairer 
than the allotment of ritualistic privileges among the Bagobo 
of Mindanao, and indeed other natives of the Philippines. 
Old men offer sacred food, recount their exploits while 
holding the ceremonial bamboo poles they have cut, prepare 
for human sacrifices, perform magical rites, while old women 
conduct altar rites at the harvest, make offerings at shrines, 
and recite the accompanying prayers. If the men direct the 
ceremonial as a whole, it is virtually a feminine prerogative 
(as in New Guinea) to summon the spirits at a séance. In- 
deed, the women “direct many ceremonial details and are 
often called into consultation with the old men; they exercise 

a general supervision over the religious behavior of the young 
9? 6 

people. 

Where pronounced religious disabilities occur, I am in- 
clined to impute them predominantly to the savage man’s 
horror of menstruation. Lest this seem a fanciful sugges- 

212 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tion, I offer by way of substantiation a part of the abundant 
evidence. 

Among the Ila, a Bantu tribe of Rhodesia, a woman dur- 
ing her periodic illness is dangerous “and must be separated 
as far as possible from contact with her fellows.” A man 
eating with her would lose his virility, and sick people would 
be most injuriously affected by her. She may not use the 
common fire or handle other people’s pots or drink from their 
cups or cook or draw water for others. In Central Aus- 
tralia a menstruating woman is carefully avoided, while in 
Queensland she is secluded and must not even walk in a 
man’s tracks. In the Torres Straits Islands investigators 
have found an “intense fear of the deleterious and infective 
powers of the menstrual fluid,” and various taboos are im- 
posed on the menstruant, who must live in seclusion, shun 
the daylight, and abstain from sea-food. Her Marshall 
Island sister dwells in a special menstrual hut, is limited to 
a prescribed diet, and is believed to exert an inauspicious in- 
fluence.’ 

However, for no other region is the evidence so con- 
vincing as for America. One of the most illuminating re- 
ports is that of an eighteenth century observer among the 
Choctaw of Louisiana. Here the women at once left the 
house, hid from the sight of men, were not permitted to use 
the family fire lest the household be polluted, and under no 
condition were supposed to cook for other people. The 
French narrator, having once stumbled upon a menstruant, 
prevailed upon her to make him “some porridge of little 
grain,” and after the arrival of the husband invited him to 
partake of the meal. At first the Choctaw unwittingly fell 
to eating, but suddenly grew suspicious and inquired for the 
cook, 

WOMAN AND RELIGION 213 

- . . When I replied that it was his wife who had been my 
cook, he was at once seized with sickness and went to the door 
to vomit. Then, reéntering and looking into the dish, he no- 
ticed some red things in the porridge, which were nothing else 
than the skin of the corn, some grains of which are red. He 
said to me: “How have you the courage to eat of this stew? 
Do you not see the blood in it?” Then be began vomiting again 
and continued until he had vomited up all that he had eaten ; and 
his imagination was so strongly affected that he was sick on 
account of it for some days afterward. 

In intensity of reaction the Menomini of Wisconsin rival 
the Choctaw. A woman must use her own culinary uten- 
sils during her illness, and she must not touch a tree, a dog, 
or a child lest it die. She is not supposed to scratch her- 
self with her fingers but with a special stick. As Mr. Skin- 
ner reports: 

To this day many pagan Menomini positively refuse to eat in 
Christian houses for fear of losing their powers through par- 
taking of food prepared by a woman undergoing her monthly 
terms. 

The Winnebago go so far as to assert that sacred objects 
lose their power through contact with a menstruating 
woman, 

If the Winnebago can be said to be afraid of any one thing 
it may be said it is this—the menstrual flow of women—for even 
the spirits die of its effects.® 

In the Far West the same psychological attitude appears 
practically unchanged. A Blackfoot menstruant must keep 

214 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

away from sacred articles and from sick people: something 
would strike the patient “like a bullet and make him worse.” 
What is particularly noteworthy is the diffusion of corres- 
ponding beliefs throughout the area of rudest culture. As 
late as 1906 I myself was able to observe the seclusion of 
Shoshoni women in Idaho, where abstention from meat was 
likewise imperative during the period. The same food taboo 
was observed by their kinsmen, the Paviotso of Nevada, who 
gave as a justification that if the women ate antelope flesh 
the game impounded in a drive would break through the en- 
closure. In north-central California the Shasta impose a 
special hut, the scratching-stick, strict food taboos, and the 
rule that the woman must not look at people or the sun or the 
moon. Should a woman be taken unexpectedly ill while at 
home, 

all men leave at once, taking with them their bows, spears and 
nets, lest they become contaminated and thus all luck desert 
them. 

Among the Chinook of the lower Columbia the adolescent 
girl is under rigorous restrictions. 

She must not warm herself. She must never look at the 
people. She must not look at the sky, she must not pick ber- 
ries. It is forbidden. When she looks at the sky it becomes 
bad weather. When she picks berries it will rain. She hangs 
up her towel of cedar bark on a certain spruce tree. The tree 
dries up at once. After one hundred days she may eat fresh 
food, she may pick berries and warm herself. 

In subsequent catamenial periods she must not be seen by a 
sick person, nor must berries picked by her be eaten by the 
sick. Finally (though the list could be greatly enlarged), 

WOMAN AND RELIGION 215 

there are the Northern Athabaskans. According to Father 
Morice, “hardly any other being was the object of so much 
dread as a menstruating woman,” who ate only dried fish, 
drank water through a tube, and was not allowed to live with 
her male kin nor to touch anything belonging to men or re- 
lated to the chase “lest she would thereby pollute the same, 
and condemn the hunters to failure, owing to the anger of 
the game thus slighted.” More than a century ago Samuel 
Hearne made corresponding observations among the related 
Chipewyan: women in question lived apart in a hovel and 
were not permitted to walk near a net or to eat the head of 
an animal or cross the track where a deer head had lately been 
carried,—and all this to ward off bad hunting luck. Quite 
similar notions prevail among their fellow-Athabaskans, the 
Anvik, of Alaska.® 

It is not so easy to trace the distribution of such a trait in 
the southern half of the New World, yet, thanks mainly to 
Father Schmidt’s indefatigable industry, we are in a position 
to state positively that in one form or another the usage 
extends all the way to Tierra del Fuego, being found in 
southern Central America, Colombia, Guiana, Peru, Brazil, 
Patagonia, and around Cape Horn. The descriptions are 
not always so circumstantial as for North America. Thus, 
from a Fuegian report I glean merely the imposition of a 
puberty fast on girls. The Mundructi added exposure to 
smoke, the Paravilhana corporal punishment. Among the 
Siusi the girl was under dietary restrictions, her hair was 
cut, and her back was daubed with paint. The Arawak of 
Guiana present the typical complex of seclusion, fire and food 
taboos.’° To what extent fuller knowledge of all these tribes 
would bring ampler accounts, remains obscure. We should 
like to know especially whether later menstruation is likewise 
linked with definite regulations. But even in our present 

216 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

state of ignorance it is proper to advance the hypothesis that 
some sort of menstrual taboo is a deep-rooted, an archaic 
element of American culture. 

Let us now survey the remainder of the world. I have 
already pointed out that the sentiment underlying menstrual 
prohibitions exists in Oceania, Australia, and Africa. In the 
rudest tribes for which I can get evidence it likewise occurs, 
but not in the extreme form typical of, say, the Choctaw. 
The Andamanese do not insist on departtire from the camp, 
but proscribe certain kinds of food for their alleged evil ef- 
fects on the woman. Bushman practice, at least at the time 
of adolescence, conforms more closely to type: the adolescent 
is segregated in a tiny hut with a door closed upon her by her 
mother; she must not walk about freely nor look at the 
springbok lest they become wild; and when going out she 
must look down at the ground. On rules of subsequent 
periods I cannot find any data. Of the Paleo-Siberians, the 
Maritime Chukchi do not allow a menstruating woman to ap- 
proach her husband; even her breath is impure and might 
contaminate him, destroying his luck as sea-hunter, nay, 
causing him to be drowned. Under similar circumstances, 
her Koryak sister must not tamper with her husband’s hunt- 
ing and fishing apparatus or sit on his sledge, while among 
the Yukaghir she is forbidden to touch the sacred drum.” 

From the occurrence of the custom among the rudest peo- 
ples of the Old World—the Paleo-Siberians, Andamanese, 
Bushmen—and the rudest peoples of America, and its wide 
distribution on somewhat higher levels, we can draw the 
conclusion that menstrual restrictions are of great antiquity 
in the history of human culture, though probably not in the 
extreme form distinctive of many Indian tribes of Canada 
and the United States. Reverting now to my hypothesis 
that disabilities are correlated with the awe inspired by men- 

WOMAN AND RELIGION a7 

struation, I should like to cite several facts by way of corrob- 
oration. Where the relevant taboos exist in mild form 
or are lacking, sex discrimination seems to be likewise moder- 
ate. The Bagobo let women share in ceremonial life on a 
footing of virtual equality and I cannot find evidence of men- 
strual restrictions. In the Andamans women do not ordina- 
rily join in the dancing but attend, forming the chorus; and 
quite similarly the Bushman women beat the drum and clap 
their hands for the male dancers.’ Still more interesting, 
where the discrimination is intense, it is relaxed in old age: 
old women enjoy privileges in Australia and New Guinea that 
are denied to their younger sisters. The reason is not diffi- 
cult to divine and is explicitly stated by a Winnebago in- 
formant : 

At a feast . . . the old women, who have passed their climac- 
teric, sit right next to the men, because they are considered the 
same as men as they have no menstrual flow any more. 

That is to say, before the menopause women are weird crea- 
tures, after the menopause they become ordinary human be- 
ings, though in many cases, no doubt, their former uncanni- 
ness still in some measure clings to them. A fact otherwise 
obscure can be explained from this angle. Why do the Chuk- 
chi, who close the highest grade of shamanism to women, 
fail to bar male inverts who in every way dress and act as 
women? Obviously because in their case the sentiments pro- 
duced by the thought of menstruation are eliminated. 

In closing the discussion of this topic I am painfully con- 
scious of having contributed very little to a highly important 
subject. But I hope the attempt to treat it as a distinct set 
of problems will lead to more systematic research,—especially 
in the field, 

Bie PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

This is perhaps as good a place as any to express what 
little I have to say about a theory broached rather vocifer- 
ously in some quarters, to wit, the view that religion is at 
bottom nothing but misunderstood erotic emotion. It must 
be obvious that two phenomena that exert so profound an in- 
fluence on so many phases of human conduct must have cer- 
tain points of contact. The simplest kind of interrelation- 
ship occurs where the gratification of erotic desire is merely 
one of the life-values, which accordingly like other life- 
values can be secured by an appropriate intercourse with the 
Extraordinary. Following the traditional technique of his 
tribe, a Crow will seek a vision, where a Bukaua mutters a 
spell and uses some magical charm. But these procedures, 
employed for a hundred other purposes, can obviously not 
be derived from a single, arbitrarily selected motive for their 
application. 

There are, however, a group of other facts adduced by the 
adherents of the theory to prove the dependence of religious 
feeling on the sex instinct. I will follow the convenient 
summary provided by Mr. Thouless. It is asserted that 
adolescence is preeminently the period of religious conver- 
sion, hence religious experience is functionally related with 
the instinct that comes to maturity at this period. Secondly, 
religion employs the language characteristic of the expression 
of erotic passion. Finally, the theory assumes a special con- 
cern of religion with the suppression of normal sexual activ- 
ity, and a compensatory reaction against such asceticism. 

Viewing the question primarily from the ethnological 
angle, I find myself in substantial agreement with James and 
Thouless in rejecting the evidence as ludicrously inconclusive 
for the attempted demonstration.** Mystic experiences are 
indeed commonly sought and secured at the age of puberty 
but by no means exclusively so. Indeed, as Dr. R. F. Bene- 

WOMAN AND RELIGION 219 

dict has proved, several of the Plains Indian tribes regularly 
permitted the obtaining of a revelation in mature middle age, 
sometimes to the exclusion of the puberty fast.* On the 
other hand, among the tribes of the Great Lakes the experi- 
ence considerably antedated what could by the wildest stretch 
of the imagination be called adolescence. Here, as every- 
where, the psychological problem is complicated by the influ- 
ence of cultural environment. It is evidently a matter of 
social tradition whether the religious thrill is looked for and 
obtained at seven, at fifteen, or at forty. Hence, it might 
be argued that these conventions artificially defer or accel- 
erate the advent of religious emotion that “naturally” comes 
with the approach of adolescence. But this would be an 
arbitrary assertion pending empirical confirmation. 

The argument from religious phraseology seems weaker 
still, It is true that a Crow visionary is greeted by his pa- 
tron with the words “I adopt you as my son,” and the associ- 
ated ideas are undoubtedly those of the aid and protection 
the “son” is henceforth to receive from his “father.” But 
I am quite unable to see in this any adumbration of an oc- 
cult “father-complex.” As James wisely remarks, religious 
sentiment simply utilizes “such poor symbols as our life af- 
fords,” and he amply proves that digestive and respiratory 
concepts serve the same purpose of vivid representation as 
directly or indirectly amatory ones. If we attach undue im- 
portance to the words used by man in his groping for an 
adequate expression of his thoughts and feelings, we may be 
driven to reduce the sex instinct to that of nutrition when 
a lover “hungers”’ for the sight of his sweetheart and charge 
him with a latent cannibalistic inclination which is at least 
improbable. 

As for the repression and compensatory over-indulgence 
of the sex appetite, neither can be said to be characteristic of 

220 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

primitive religion. Special phenomena, appearing in re- 
stricted points of space and time, are here confounded with 
the universal essence of religion. The same applies to the 
orgies that are sometimes spectacular accompaniments of 
ceremonialism; interesting specimens of the ideas that may 
become associated with religious phenomena, they do not asa 
rule touch the core of religion. That must be sought where 
James looked for it, in “the immediate content of the re- 
ligious consciousness,” and I quite agree that “few con- 
ceptions are less instructive than this re-interpretation of 
religion as perverted sexuality.” 

REFERENCES 

1 Lowie, I919: 119 sq.; id., 1922: 339 sq. 

2 Talbot: 21, 23, 25, 95, 225, 284. Shooter: 174-183. Junod: 
11, 377, 438, 444, 456, 466. 

8 Bogoras: 415. Brown: 129, 131, 176. Malo: 50-53, 112. 
Mariner: 262. 

* Parker : 6, 8, 42-49, 59. 

5 Parsons, 1922: 337 sq. 

®°L. W. Benedict: 10, 76 sq., 193 sq. 

Smith and Dale: 1, 26f. Spencer and Gillen, 1904: 601. 
Roth, 1897: 184. Reports of the Cambridge Expedition: v, 
196,, 201 sq. Erdland: 135. 

8 Swanton, 1918: 59. Skinner, 1913: 52. Radin, 1923: 136 f. 

® Wissler, 1911, 29. Dixon, 1907: 457 sq. Boas, 1894: 246. 
Morice: 218. Hearne: 313 sq. Parsons, 1922: 344. 

10 Schmidt, 1913. Martius: 1, 390, 631. Koch-Griinberg: 
161. Roth, 1915: 312f. Buschan:.217, 360. 

11 Brown: 94. Bleek and Lloyd: 76 f. Bogoras: 492. Jochel- 
son, 1905-1908: 54; id., 1910: 104. 

12 Brown: 131. Bleek and Lloyd: 355. 

18 James: 11. Thouless: 130 sq. 

144R. F. Benedict: 49 sq. 

CHAPTER XI 
INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 

USEFUL, nay indispensable, as is the historico-sociological 
point of view for an understanding of the individual’s religi- 
ous life, there are limits to its potency. The individual is 
not merged completely in his social milieu,—he reacts to it 
as an individual, that is, differently from every other group 
member. The cultural tradition of his people dominates 
him, but it is reflected in a distinctive fashion by each psyche. 
Were it otherwise, novel conceptions could never arise. It 
is reckoned one of the most epoch-making steps in the his- 
tory of psychology that Galton investigated mind not in the 
abstract but in its varying manifestations among different 
personalities. For too long a time it has been customary to 
ignore corresponding differences in primitive peoples on the 
familiar principle that “all Chinamen look alike.’”’” Only in 
quite recent years men like Dr. R. R. Marett in England, 
Dr. W. D. Wallis in America, Fathers Wilhelm Schmidt and 
W. Koppers in Austria, have insisted that what holds among 
us also holds in ruder levels of culture. 

In the following pages I make an unpretentious effort to 
furnish some illustrative material. The question involved is 
at bottom that of the relation of the individual to society. 
Sometimes no doubt personal idiosyncrasies seem to pro- 
duce no effect on the life of the community ; but they do not, 
for that reason, remain free from social entanglements. The 
extent to which they are free to assert themselves is itself a 

function of the social system in which they appear. 
221 

222 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Even when we are bent on determining the individual 
mentality, we are thus obliged to examine constantly the 
social concomitants. It might appear at first blush that a 
basic phenomenon such as that direct communion with the 
supernatural which underlies all religion could be compre- 
hended in purely psychological terms, that is, without refer- 
ence to any social norms. The very fact, however, that a 
given individual shall be eligible for converse with super- 
natural powers is socially determined. The differences ob- 
taining in this respect within a single continent have been 
clearly summarized by Mrs. Benedict. In the Plains area, 
as typified by the Crow, there is free access to the powers 
of the universe: “die Geisterwelt ist nicht verschlossen” to 
any one, hence all have at least potential personal contact 
with the divine; here, then, innate differences may corres- 
pond closely to the observed differences in religious behavior. 
But it is quite otherwise where, as in California, the pre- 
rogative of a guardian spirit or of vision-seeking is confined 
to a small group of shamans, who acquire their status by 
some such means as inheritance. Here, the majority are 
socially precluded from competition with “the vested inter- 
ests,’ so to speak, and no sound conclusions could be drawn 
as to their inborn religious deficiencies by comparison with 
the shamanistic class.* 

Even where the direct communion with superior beings is 
unrestricted, special cultural conditions complicate the in- 
dividual’s behavior. We found this to be true among the 
Crow, where such accepted notions as the mystic potency 
of the number four spontaneously affect the character of an 
experience, whatever may be the individual’s mental char- 
acteristics. This automatic influence of the surrounding cul- 
ture is all the more noteworthy because here there is no con- 
scious attempt on any one’s part to influence the would-be 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 223 

visionary’s experiences. We are thus dealing with an a 
fortiori case. Among the Great Lakes Indians, such as the 
Ojibwa and Winnebago, the social factor plays so dominant 
a role as almost wholly to obscure and eliminate the individ- 
ual nature of the experience. 

The Winnebago youth’s fasting experience is carefully tested 
by the elders, and if found wanting in any respect the youth has 
either to try again or give up. 

We constantly read of how parents exhort boys to fast and 
fast long in order to acquire a blessing, how offerings of 
power deemed unsuitable by the elders are rejected at their 
behest in the hope of more favorable revelations, yet among 
the Menomini even this veto privilege is conventionally regu- 
lated and when an evil spirit has appeared a fixed number of 
times his blessing must be accepted. When we read how the 
Ojibwa Forever-bird was sent out to fast at the age of five 
and thereafter constantly urged to repeat the experience at 
intervals, it is obvious that no spontaneous psychological re- 
action can be expected under such external prompting and 
surveillance. 

This is positively proved by Forever-bird’s description of 
what happened to him after the powers had addressed him 
as their grandchild and expressed their good-will: 

Everywhere roundabout was I conveyed; roundabout was I 
shown what the earth everywhere was like, and likewise the 
great deep. And when I was able to go without food for eight 
days, then was the time that I truly learned everything about 
how the sky looked. 

Taken by itself, this might be accepted as a purely psy- 
chological experience. But when we turn to another man’s 
fasting narratiye, the following sentence strikes our eye: 

224 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Concerning all sorts of things did I dream,—about what was 
everywhere on earth did I dream; and about the sea, the suns, 
and the stars; and about all things in the circle of the heavens 
from whence blew the winds, did I dream. ... By a great 
throng of the sky-people was I blessed; everywhere over the 
earth and on high was I conveyed by them, how it (all) looked 
I was shown, how it was everywhere in the circle of the heavens 
that I had dreamed about. 

This, however, is not the only parallel. In a tale about a 
youth who over-dreamed he is represented as thus speaking 
to his father: 

Already now have I really dreamed of everything. About 
how the whole earth looks, about how the winds repose from 
whence they blow, have I learned. And all kinds of doings 
have I dreamed of. And also about everything that is in the 
sky have I dreamed. 

In short, cosmic exploration is an integral part of the con- 
ventional revelation pattern and is a recurrent feature simply 
because the tribal standard molds the suggestible tribes- 
man’s psychic experiences.” 

The only possible meaning of an attempt to study in- 
dividual differences should now be clear. We can never hope 
to see the individual displaying his inborn religious capacities 
in independence of his milieu. Nevertheless we can deter- 
mine individual peculiarities by comparing the behavior of 
those exposed to like cultural norms: where the same en- 
vironment provokes a different response, the reason may 
safely be sought in the respective individuals’ original nature. 

SENSORY TYPES 

When discussing Crow visions I briefly alluded to differ- 
ences in the content of the supernatural revelation that 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 225 

seemed correlated with mental differences on the part of the 
recipients. Galton’s relevant investigations of psychological 
variability among Britons are too well known to require de- 
tailed exposition here. Suffice it to say, that according to 
the latest authorities differences in intensity of memory 
images are fully established, while the theory of quite dis- 
tinct sensory types has been practically abandoned. 

In fact, it is now known to be very unusual for an individual 
to be confined to images of a single sense. Nearly every one 
gets visual images more easily and frequently than those of any 
other sense, but nearly every one has, from time to time, audi- 
tory, kinesthetic, tactile and olfactory images. So that the 
“mixed type” is the only real type, the extreme visualist or au- 
dile, etc., being exceptional and not typical.’ 

I know of no anthropologist who has made definite studies 
in this field among primitive tribes, with the solitary excep- 
tion of Professor Brown, who found that the majority of 
Andamanese dreams were visual or motor or both. He does 
not give the details of the dreams themselves and makes 
the significant remark that their study “is made very difficult 
by the fact that it is never possible to tell how far the orig- 
inal dream has been arranged and altered by the waking im- 
agination.”’ * My own attempts to secure accounts of Crow 
dreams suffered from the corresponding difficulty that there 
was an overpowering tendency to present them in convention- 
alized form. The Indians generally recounted seeing a par- 
ticular type of landscape symbolic of a supernatural promise 
that they and their kin should live in safety until the season 
in question. For example, a man who saw the berries ripen- 
ing—probably the most frequent formula—would feel con- 
fident of living until the next summer; and so, mutatis mu- 

226 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tandis, with those who saw the leaves turning yellow or the 
ice floating down-stream. 

This inclination to standardize in conformity with a pre- 
conceived norm has been pointed out in the preceding sec- 
tion. Indeed among the Great Lakes Indians this tendency 
has been carried so far that from the samples available I 
doubt whether appreciable mental variations could be found 
in the narratives of visions from that region, leveled as they 
have been by the roller of conventionality. But in my fairly 
large series of Crow visions matters have not been carried so 
far, and while I have myself stressed the role played there 
by the preéxisting social norms, certain individual differ- 
ences are in my opinion still clearly perceivable. 

But before indicating such variants I should like to point 
out that the Crow data seem to agree very well with the find- 
ings of modern psychology. Visual imagery certainly seems 
to preponderate, and what frequently impresses us is its 
vividness as evidenced by the great particularity of the de- 
scriptive detail. One-blue-bead not merely sees a person on 
a horse, but a rider with face and forehead painted red, 
wearing a buckskin shirt with a chicken-hawk feather tied 
to one shoulder, while the horse is a buckskin with a white 
mane. Lone-tree is visited by a white bird, big as a Mission 
building, with his face turned south, the lightning issuing 
from his eyes and the smoke rising from where he sat down; 
when a hailstorm approaches, it leaves a circle free round 
visitant and visionary. So the couple who come to bless 
Medicine-crow hold each in one hand a hoop ornamented 
with feathers, in the other a hoop with strawberries; and 
various objects, including the entire body of a red-headed 
woodpecker, are tied to the back of their heads; further, 
half of the young woman’s face is painted red. Again, Sore- 
tail’s eagle patron shows him a tent with four main poles, 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 227 

eleven lateral poles, and two on each side of the doorway ; 
and the tipi is decorated with differently colored streamers.® 

Such details, apparently quite trivial, are not so to the 
native: the Eagle chapter of the Tobacco society originated 
in the last-mentioned vision, while Medicine-crow’s revela- 
tion led to the institution of the Strawberry chapter. The 
detail is significant because it is associated with the basic 
psychic experience of Crow religious life, but without a 
certain keenness of visualization it could never have as- 
sumed definite shape and become the starting-point of re- 
ligious innovations. 

Moreover, our Crow material falls in line with the recent 
psychological views not only in illustrating the prevalence 
of visual imagery but also in exemplifying the frequency of 
the “mixed type.” One of the most common elements in the 
revelations made to Indians of this tribe is the song imparted 
by the visitant. True, this is an integral part of the tribal 
pattern and in so far is socially determined. But how 
regularly could such a union of auditory with visual images 
be suggested by social tradition if there were not a frequent 
combination of the corresponding native dispositions? 
From this angle we can understand the character of the 
Tobacco songs: people used to lie at or near the Tobacco 
garden with the hope of a revelation, and if they simultane- 
ously saw an animal and heard a song there would be a 
synthesis of the two, that is, the animal would come to be 
mentioned in the song. This auditory susceptibility, it 
should be noted, may be significant in other ways. It may 
lead to the definite recognition of the supernatural visitor, 
whose identity might otherwise remain obscure. Thus, 
Lone-tree on a fast was visited by a man, who offered him 
food. “I did not know it was the Dipper, but something 
at the back of my head was whispering to me, ‘The man 

228 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

’ 

giving you food is the Dipper.’” It was only after this 
audition that my witness, looking at his patron’s long hair, 
saw the Seven Stars hanging there: the auditory had evoked 
the relevant visual hallucination. Those who, like the pres- 
ent writer, are subject to auditory hallucinations, both in 
presomnic and full waking condition, will appreciate the 
convincing character of such experiences. 

To cite another illustration of the mixed type, we find 
Medicine-crow on the same occasion hearing a shout and a 
whistling sound, then a warning of the approaching visitant, 
who turned out to be a handsome young white man with 
a sweet-smelling strawberry pinned to his clothes. Again 
Hillside saw a gray-haired buffalo, heard him snorting, and 
felt his licking. 

Nevertheless, though the mixed type with visualistic he- 
gemony seems prevalent in the Crow tribe as well as among 
Caucasians, certain individuals represent, to all appearances, 
extreme types. Thus, Scratches-face is evidently an audile. 
On a single occasion he experienced a variety of auditory 
impressions such as is not recorded for any other tribes- 
man: intermittently he would hear footsteps of an approach- 
ing person, then a man clearing his throat, then the snort- 
ing of a horse, then a person asking him what he was doing 
and announcing the arrival of a spirit. Next the heralded 
visitant was heard, also the tinkling of bells, the main visi- 
tant’s speech, promiscuous talk, yelling, and whistling. 
Arm-round-the-neck, on the other hand, gives an account 
that in spite of its brevity bristles with references to falling, 
jumping, kicking, driving,—presumptive evidence of a 
motor type. 

Finally, a very interesting group of cases merits consid- 
eration. A minority—but an appreciable one—of the Crow 
visionaries display the peculiarity of having an animal or, 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 229 

more rarely, an object enter their bodies. This tenant has 
a tendency to come out in part or wholly on special provo- 
cation, such as the singing of a certain tune or the trans- 
gression of a taboo; and, owing to the otherwise fatal con- 
sequences to the host, the parasite must be coaxed back 
again. The clearest exposition was given by Muskrat, who 
pretended to have both a weasel and a horse inside of her. 
Whenever the Bear Song dance is performed, some mys-* 
terious power drives her to the site, where she goes into a 
trance. On one of these occasions the tail of the horse 
protruded from her mouth, but people took some warts 
from a horse’s leg, made incense therefrom, and smoked her 
with it, thus making the tail reénter her body. Whenever a 
person bumps into her, either the horse tail or the weasel 
will come out, so people take care to avoid doing so, and she 
keeps a horse wart about her for an antidote. On the other 
hand, Crane-head had a frog within him, and in the winter 
people could hear it croaking in his throat. Again, the Egg 
chapter of the Tobacco society originated in the vision of 
a man who discovered a nest of eggs, one of which entered 
his mouth and would regularly come out when a certain song 
was sung in the Tobacco ceremony. 

This conception is not confined to the Crow. Almost 
ninety years ago Prince Maximilian of Wied-Neuwied noted 
it among the Hidatsa and Mandan of North Dakota, where 
one man would often feel a buffalo calf kicking about inside 
of him, while the Prince himself saw a woman produce a 
corncob that was later conjured back into her body with in- 
cense. Somewhat similar notions have been reported from 
the Blackfoot, Arapaho, and Menomini. 

So far, then, we are merely dealing with a historical 
phenomenon: the idea arose, so far as our present data go, 
somewhere between Wisconsin and western Montana and 

230 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

was disseminated from its center of origin. But at once the 
query arises, why only certain persons in the tribe are 
directly affected by a traditional belief accessible to all 
members of their group. The combination of auditory and 
visual sensations involved in the simultaneous acceptance 
of a song and, say, certain ceremonial designs is practically 
universal among the Crow; not so the belief in a mysterious 
parasite of the type described. I infer that this latter is 
due to an individual peculiarity—to an excessive sensi- 
tiveness to tactile, kinesthetic and visceral impressions. 
Given such idiosyncracy, the traditional conception—itself 
ultimately intelligible as a product of this phenomenon— 
strikes a responsive chord, while the normal “mixed type” 
fails to react. 

Lest it be supposed that such phenomena as I have cited 
have a restricted distribution in the world, reference may 
here be made to the “Bushman presentiments.” Among 
these South Africans there was general reliance on the in- 
ferences to be drawn from a distinctive “tapping” in the 
body, which was interpreted according to a traditional sys- 
tem. Thus, when a man felt a tapping in the lower part of 
the back of his neck, it meant that an ostrich was coming 
and was scratching himself in a corresponding spot; “when 
a woman who had gone away is returning to the house, the 
man who is sitting there feels on his shoulders the thong with 
which the woman’s child is slung over her shoulders;” 
again, to quote Dr. Bleek’s witness, “I feel a sensation in the 
calves of my legs when the springbok’s blood is going to 
run down them.” ® 

Psychologically these manifestations are evidently equiva- 
lent to the kinesthetic and visceral sensations of the Hidatsa 
or Crow, and when we are told that the stupid Bushmen who 
do not understand the presentiments get into trouble and 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 231 

may even be killed by lions we have fair evidence of the 
recognition of individual differences: the “stupid” ones are 
obviously those who either have no such sensations or ex- 
perience them to so moderate a degree as to attach little 
significance to them. 

SUGGESTIBILITY AND INDEPENDENCE 

Important as may be the individual differences noted 
above in determining the details of a psychic experience, a 
far greater importance in the religious life of the individual 
must be ascribed to the degree of his suggestibility. Does 
he automatically bow to the ideas presented by an elder 
wielding authority? Is he susceptible to the more insidi- 
ous influence of an impersonal social atmosphere? Is he 
willing to set at naught the traditional heritage of belief 
and place reliance mainly on his own experiences? The 
measure in which he corresponds to the several categories 
implied in these questions will make him a member of the 
rank and file, a veritable pillar of society, or a doubting 
Thomas threatening to sap its foundation by his very ex- 
istence. The older ethnology took little conscious interest in 
such differences of outlook, yet it is not difficult to glean 
some evidence of their existence from the descriptive 
records. Only we must make due allowance for the extrane- 
ous pressure under which the individual acts: a Winnebago 
boy under the unremitting surveillance of his parents is not 
the relatively free agent represented by a young Crow. 
Deviation from the traditional norm argues a far greater 
strength of mind in the former than in the latter. But in 
appraising the subjective phenomena involved, considerable 
caution is imperative. “Suggestibility” is not by any means 
a uniform thing: psychologists tell us that there are “various 

232 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tests of suggestibility, and an individual who succumbs to 
one does not necessarily succumb to another, so that it may 
be doubted whether we should baldly speak of one individ- 
ual as more suggestible than another.” * It is obvious that 
an incapacity to receive ideas from without may have quite 
another cause than intellectual independence; nothing more 
may be involved than dullness or lack of interest. Again, 
the very exuberance of the novice’s imagination, the ex- 
alted anticipations aroused in him, may build up a fantasy 
by the side of which amy possible real experience is so dis- 
appointing as to be ruled out. 

The relevant problems are, I think, neatly illustrated in 
a human document rescued for science by Dr. Paul Radin.° 
His Winnebago hero, “S. B.,” recounts the typical puberty 
experiences,—the preparatory abstinence from food, the 
detailed instructions by his elders when he was definitely 
sent out to fast for a blessing, the visits and further ad- 
monitions of his father during the fast itself. But “in 
spite of it all, I experienced nothing unusual.” Dreading, 
however, a prolongation of the fast, S. B. pretended to have 
had a revelation and received food. Subsequently, in obedi- 
ence to the craving for social recognition or the prompting 
of eminent men, he repeatedly fasted but through it all “TI 
was not in the least conscious of any dreams or blessings.” 
This the narrator retrospectively imputes to his lack of re- 
ligious fervor at the time,—his failure to concentrate on 
anything but outward glory and the favor of women: “TI 
was never lowly at heart and never really desired the bless- 
ing of the spirits.” Subsequently he is trained for initia- 
tion into the secret Medicine Dance and learns that instead 
of being actually shot and revived by the old-stagers he is 
merely to feign death and resuscitation at their hands. An 
intense shock of disappointment comes over him and he 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 233 

becomes skeptical of all the things held sacred by the Win- 
nebago. Later he becomes a toper and frequently boasts 
of his alleged blessings. On one occasion he promises to 
intercede with four female spirits on behalf of a woman 
big with child, and the ease with which she for the first 
time gives birth demonstrates his pretensions not only to 
the mother and her kin, but even to himself: “I was sur- 
prised. Perhaps I am really a holy man, I thought.” After 
a while S. B.’s parents came under the sway of the new 
Peyote cult that menaced the very existence of the older 
faith since the votaries “insisted that all the other cere- 
monies were wrong and must be abandoned and _ because 
they destroyed war-bundles, medicine-bags, etc., everything 
dear to the hearts of the conservative Winnebago.” S. B. 
resented this iconoclasm as much as the average tribes- 
man, but after joining his converted kin and receiving 
manifold favors at their hands he consented to partake of 
the new medicine. For a time he maintained an expectant 
and even negative attitude, as of old toward the ancient re- 
ligion of his people. But when he beheld some of the gorge- 
ous color visions induced by the drug, his skepticism was 
swept aside in the twinkling of an eye, and he became a 
full-fledged peyote-worshiper. 

Now, as Dr. Radin points out, what S. B. had striven for 
in all his previous religious experiences was a distinctive 
thrill, an inward change. He had been keyed up to expect 
it from the normal puberty rite and fasting generally, but 
it never came. From this we can hardly conclude that he 
was less suggestible than other boys, but he was certainly 
not suggestible in the same way. I hazard the guess from 
the evidence presented that he was like Ibsen’s Brand an 
“all or nothing” spirit of excessive suggestibility. Other 
boys were willing to present any image that appeared dur- 

234 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

ing their vigil as answering to the experience depicted by 
their elders; Ais expectations had been raised so high that 
they acted as a counter-suggestion, so that he could retro- 
spectively declare that “I experienced nothing unusual” 
where a normal youth would have been quite content to 
regard himself as visited by a mysterious agency. But, 
whether this be or be not a valid interpretation, there can be 
no doubt that some real individual difference of psychology 
is involved and that it had a most important effect on S. B.’s 
religious life. Apart from this particular case, it is clear from 
the parental admonitions reproduced by Dr. Radin that “not 
every one was able to enter into communication with the 
spirits” and that in view of this contingency a vicarious 
reliance on medicinal herbs was enjoined by a father when 
lecturing his adolescent son. In other words, different per- 
sons behave differently under similar circumstances and 
after subjection to similar exhortations. 

The degree of suggestibility is of course inversely pro- 
portional to the subject’s willingness to rely on his direct 
experience, but it is again necessary to take into account the 
amount of pressure exerted from without. It is easy 
enough for a Crow, free as he is from the superintendence 
of elders and shamans, to accept whatever communication 
may be granted by the spirits he invokes. Hence when 
we find occasional instances of men who dare not avail 
themselves of their blessings without a previous conference 
with the sages of the tribe, they may well be reproached for 
timidity. But the case of the Ojibwa or Winnebago boy, 
incessantly drilled and harried by his parents as to what 
he ought and ought not to get in the way of a revelation, 
is not comparable; and here it would require unusual au- 
dacity to break away from the fetters of social and family 
tradition, , 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 235 

Again, when we find an abundance of versions regarding 
the hereafter in tribes of such differing cultural level as the 
Andamanese, the Shoshoni, or the Polynesians, this should 
not be taken to prove an extraordinary prevalence of lati- 
tudinarianism. It may mean nothing more than that there 
is an absence of obligatory sentiment on the subject, and 
where there is no orthodoxy there cannot be any hetero- 
doxy. Why shouldn’t Red-shirt accept the evidence of his 
senses to the effect that the dead live underground rather 
than in the sky, as he had supposed, if that notion, however 
popular, was not sanctioned by any authority, formal or in- 
formal? 

The matter is further complicated by the purely personal 
factor, by those temperamental differences that make it pos- 
sible for the same man to resent the leadership of one hero 
and blindly to trust himself to another. Whatever we may 
think of the formal schemes broached in recent and former 
times for the division of mankind into psychological cate- 
gories, the commonsense experience of the ages supports 
the existence of distinct types, however hard it may be to 
define them. Sometimes, but by no means always, the 
leader is merely a magnified edition of the follower. In 
other cases, adherence seems to rest precisely on a sense of 
difference in a complementary sense. Again, the peculiar 
circumstances of the situation may lead to the acceptance of 
a prophet as “true” or his rejection as “false.” We must 
therefore again proceed with caution before translating into 
direct and even quasi-quantitative psychological terms a 
concrete observation apparently illustrating greater or lesser 
suggestibility. For instance, among the Crow Tobacco 
Dancers of the Lodge Grass district the prestige of Medi- 
cine-Crow succeeded in substituting a crane for the tradi- 
tional otter-skin carried in a procession. But I have heard an 

236 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Indian more or less sneeringly refer to the substitution as a 
mere novelty. introduced by Medicine-Crow. The critic, 
however, was not a rationalist: he was not challenging the 
value of the sacred object carried on the occasion, he did not 
consider that the otter had, in principle, precisely the same 
sanction as the crane, to wit, an individual’s revelation. He 
merely had not for some reason or other come under the 
spell of Medicine-crow’s personality and accordingly dis- 
played the natural enough predilection for an old rather than 
a new ritual device. 

But there are not lacking instances of genuine independ- 
ence and perhaps the most interesting are those of the two 
Tongan kings described by Mariner. Finau I, with char- 
acteristic cunning, utilized the prevalent beliefs in execut- 
ing his own purposes, but seems to have been singularly free 
from their sway. He went so far as to confess to Mariner 
that he doubted the very existence of the gods; and when 
met with the argument that he had professed himself to be 
possessed by the spirit of one of his predecessors, he re- 
plied: “True! there may be gods; but what the priests tell 
us about their power over mankind, I believe to be all false.”’ 
When his daughter died, he planned to execute the priest of 
one of his patron deities, a design only thwarted by his 
own death. His sacrilegious impiety constantly scandalized 
the people, who marveled at his continued prosperity when 
he was so audaciously throwing down the gauntlet to the 
gods. On one occasion, when he was about to proceed 
against the enemy, one of the chiefs sneezed,—an evil omen. 
But Finau wrathfully clenched his fists and uttered this cry 
of defiance: “Crowd, all ye gods, to the protection of these 
people, nevertheless I will wreak my vengeance on them 
tenfold!’ Finau II, notwithstanding his intelligence (see 
below), was not wholly free from the last-mentioned super- 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 237 

stition, for on a solemn occasion he came near slaying 
Mariner for an untimely sneeze, and the subsequent ex- 
planation, that he merely feared its effect on his attendants, 
hardly rings true. However, as might be expected, he also 
showed great independence and abolished two deep-rooted 
customs, the sacrifice of the Tuitonga’s chief wife on her 
husband’s death, as well as the Tuitonga’s office itself, 
though among his subjects “it was whispered about that 
some great misfortune would happen to the country.” ® 

The greatest men never wholly succeed in escaping the 
impress of their time, and it is not difficult to point out all 
manner of inconsistencies in the notions of the two Tongan 
rulers. The elder, his infidelity notwithstanding, evidently 
expected succor from the family god during his daughter’s 
illness; the son was not above conceiving a compass as in- 
spired by a god. Nevertheless, the two Finaus doubtless 
stand out as extraordinarily free-thinking in their mental 
habits. 

This negative activity of theirs, however, again reminds 
us of the subtle relation between individual character and 
the culture of a group. A person endowed with Finau II’s 
ability and outlook could not possibly have exerted any 
noticeable effect on Tongan faith and ritual if he had hap- 
pened to belong to the plebeian ranks. It was the peculiar 
culture of Tonga at that time, involving as it did the concen- 
tration of temporal power in Finau’s hands, that enabled 
him to abrogate the time-honored pontificate of the Tui- 
tonga. Without so enlightened a ruler that dignity might 
have long survived, but enlightenment and sovereign power 
were both prerequisite to bring about the result. 

238 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

INTELLECTUAL POWERS 

In one of his books on the Thonga M. Junod points out 
how much his informants vary in narrative skill: where one 
contents himself with a bald summary of events, another will 
give the most vivid detail, even to the point of pantomimi- 
cally representing the actions of his characters. Every field- 
worker is able to provide corroboration from his own ex- 
perience. What is so conspicuously true of the literary 
sphere holds in equal measure for the intellectual as a whole, 
and the differences in question cannot be ignored in the 
present context. For though I have insisted again and 
again that the essence of religion is to be sought elsewhere, 
this implies a lesser weighting, not an elimination, of the 
intellect, which of course continues to operate somehow in 
association with every mental state. Moreover, what 
begins as a predominantly intellectual theory may become 
secondarily an object of emotion. Views as to the nature 
of the soul, cosmogony, and a host of other subjects may 
conceivably be divorced from religion at the start, yet sub- 
sequently become indissolubly linked with it. Such elabo- 
rate systems as have been concocted by the Polynesians or 
the Dakota are clearly not random expressions of the “‘folk- 
soul” but the joint product of a number of comparatively 
refined intellects who have grappled with the riddles of the 
universe. 

That savage society verily produces intelligences with a 
definitely speculative bent, can no longer be doubted. Thus, — 
Mariner was struck by the mental operations of the Tongan 
ruler whom, for convenience’ sake, we have called Finau 
II. His father, Finau I, had been a man of ambition and 
Machiavellian cunning; his uncle, Finau Fiji, was a man 
of sound enough judgment, based on stability of tempera- 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 239 

ment and considerable experience. But neither displayed 
a tithe of the younger sovereign’s intellectual parts. He was 
constantly visiting the workshops of the skilled artisans. 
He delighted in poetry and restored the concerts by profes- 
sional minstrels which had been abolished by his father. 
Novel ideas were readily absorbed by him and combined 
with unusual alertness. Best of all, he took pleasure in 
gratifying his reasoning faculty: 

He had learnt the mechanism of a gun-lock by his own pure 
investigation: one day on taking off the lock of a pistol to clean 
it, he was astonished to find it somewhat differently contrived, 
and a little more complicated than the common lock, which he 
had thought so clever and perfect that he could not conceive 
anything better ; on seeing this, however, he was somewhat puz- 
zled, at first with the mechanism, and afterwards with its su- 
periority to the common lock, but he would not have it explained 
to him; it was an interesting puzzle, which he wished to have 
the pleasure of solving himself: at length he succeeded, and was 
as pleased as if he had found a treasure, and in the afternoon at 
kava he was not contented till he had made all his chiefs and 
matabooles understand it also, 

Similarly, a practical demonstration of the correctness of 
Mariner’s lectures on the pulse put the ruler into such good 
humor that he dispensed with the corporal punishment about 
to be inflicted on one of his servants.*° 

Junod has given his impressions of an equivalent Bantu 
personality, Rangane. While the majority of his tribes- 
men never troubled themselves about the creation of the 
world, Rangane from a boy sought an answer to the riddle, 
rejecting the curt folk-explanations of his mother and older 
Thonga men, and finally embracing the circumstantial ac- 
count of the Bible. M. Junod writes; 

240 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

I remember his face beaming with joy when he told his story. 
But such earnest, philosophical natures are very rare amongst 
Natives, and Rangane was an exception. He died when still at 
the beginning of his course of study; and he was vastly superior 
to most of his comrades as regards religious perception. 

Our informant refers to men of this type as “religious 
geniuses”: I should rather term them philosophical ones. 
But there can be no question that where the religious emo- 
tion is joined with such speculative interests and a domi- 
nant personality to boot, that type of leadership resulting 
from the combination may well be ascribed to a “religious 
genius.” For example, had the younger Finau taken a 
definitely spiritual attitude towards life, his powerful intel- 
lect might have reshaped and elevated the traditional faith 
of his people and would have made him a positive rather 
than a mainly destructive agency in the history of Polynesian 
religion. 

Various IDIOSYNCRASIES 

Suggestibility, it has been found, is far from being a 
simple psychological phenomenon. Accordingly, in segre- 
gating it I do not mean to assert that some of the features 
there discussed do not correspond to or at least overlap 
phenomena that can be conveniently regarded from another 
angle. Thus, when one Crow youth, privation and torture 
notwithstanding, fails to obtain a vision in trial after trial, 
while another repeatedly succeeds, nay, may acquire a revela- 
tion without a deliberate quest, the difference can be put in 
terms of suggestibility. But we have already seen that the 
result may have such antithetical causes as hyper-sensitive- 
mess and insusceptibility. It is therefore imperative to in- 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 241 

quire with what temperamental or other qualities a given 
form of “the religious impulse” is correlated. That differ- 
ences in its intensity are largely recognized by the primitive 
folk themselves, is proved by some cases in which religious 
activity is inherited. For often there is no automatic trans- 
mission of authority to, say, the eldest-born: a Thonga 
physician, for example, passed on his art to that one of his 
sons or nephews who was most strongly “induced by his 
heart’’ to devote himself to the profession.’* The question 
is, What are these inducements and their accompani- 
ments ? 

In many cases, no doubt, a definitely religious attitude is 
quite consistent with a normal mentality, heightened in cer- 
tain of its phases. The Andamanese believe that certain men 
can communicate with spirits in their dreams, and this is 
one source of shamanism among them. 

If a man or boy experiences dreams that are in any way ex- 
traordinary, particularly if in his dreams he sees spirits, either 
the spirits of dead persons known to him when alive or spirits 
of the forest or the sea, he may acquire in time the reputation 
of a medicine-man. 

To be sure, his claims must be submitted to the test of ex- 
perience before he is generally recognized; nothing suc- 
ceeds like success in primitive society, and the variation that 
may be subjectively significant must conform to chance cor- 
roboration in the world of reality before it can become a 
cultural factor. Psychologically, we may say that while 
all normal Andamanese have dreams, and may even have 
dreams of spirits, constant and vivid dreaming would pre- 
dispose a man to shamanism.” 

However, it is a remarkable fact that the shaman or 
priest—in other words, the pre¢minently religious person— 

242 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

so frequently represents a clear deviation from the psychic 
norm. ‘That is to say, whatever else may be implied, the 
protagonist of religion is often a pathological case, a “neuro- 
tic’ in the modern psychiatric vernacular. Thus, Bogoras 
writes of the Chukchi: 

Nervous and highly excitable temperaments are most sus- 
ceptible to the shamanistic call. The shamans among the 
Chuckchi with whom I conversed were as a rule extremely 
excitable, almost hysterical, and not a few of them were half 
crazy. Their cunning in the use of deceit in their art closely 
resembled the cunning of a lunatic.’* 

One of Bogoras’s acquaintances, whose grandfather had 
likewise communed with the spirits and was not improbably 
tainted with a hereditary tendency to hysteria, would fly 
into a rage on the slightest provocation and attempt to 
assault even a Russian cossack. Another shaman, Scratch- 
ing-woman, was so excitable that he could not sit still for 
any length of time but would leap up with violent gestures; 
and when he was in drink, all knives had to be placed out 
of his reach to prevent a brawl. Other shamans were con- 
spicuous for an incessant nervous twitching of the face, 
and a female practitioner had actually been insane for three 
years, “during which time her household had taken such 
precautions, that she could do no harm to the people or to 
herself.” These nervous idiosyncrasies are not without 
importance when we remember that one of the characteristic 
performances of the Chukchi shaman, especially when go- 
ing in search of a patient’s missing soul, consists in violent 
singing and drumming, followed by a trance, during which 
the doctor’s soul is supposed to visit his guardian spirits 
and secure their advice. Regarding the psychology of these 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 243 

states, I need merely refer to the explanation already offered 
for the inspirational ecstasy of Polynesian priests. 

Among the Thonga corresponding peculiarities are not 
less important. Here spectacular nervous afflictions lead 
to the theory that the patient is possessed by a spirit,— 
oddly enough, not one of the ancestors of his own tribe, but 
by a Zulu spirit. A man will come home trembling, attack 
his fellow-villagers, fall unconscious, suffer abnormal pains 
in the chest, become emaciated, yawn and hiccough to an 
unusual extent. As another instance of how the individual 
is inevitably dependent on the culture of his community, we 
find that the diagnosis of possession must be established 
by the customary throwing of the divinatory bones. The 
possessed puts himself into the hands of an exorcist and, 
when cured, himself advances to the status of an exorcist, 
diviner, prophet or wonder-worker. Sometimes he becomes 
the originator of a new school, developing novel rites of 
exorcism and applying hitherto unknown drugs. The spirits 
who once tormented him are now his benefactors, and he 
will show his gratitude by daily acts of devotion that eclipse 
the piety with which the ordinary Thonga worships his an- 
cestral gods.*® 

In this connection it is impossible wholly to ignore sexual 
anomalies already mentioned in connection with historical 
problems, for in some primitive communities what we should 
regard as pathological phenomena in the sexual sphere are 
intimately related with religious activity. The berdache 
(French Canadian, bardache) or “ hermaphrodite” of popu- 
lar speech was a familiar figure in not a few American In- 
dian tribes. According to all accounts anatomically a genu- 
ine male, he nevertheless affected the garb of a woman, 
mastered feminine accomplishments, in which he often ex- 
celled, and indulged in homosexual intercourse. The Crow 

244 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

at one time had relatively many of these psychiatric cases 
and insisted that it was their nature to dress and act as they 
did; to them belonged the definite task of chopping down the 
sacred tree of the Sun Dance. I saw presumably the last 
representative of the species. The Omaha believed that 
berdaches became such as a result of their first puberty quest 
of a vision. The Moon would appear, holding in one hand 
the bow and arrows symbolic of the warrior’s life and in 
the other the pack-strap used by women. By quickly cross- 
ing his hands, the visitant might deceive the visionary into 
grasping the badge of womanhood. “In such a case he 
could not help acting the woman, speaking, dressing, and 
working just as Indian women used to do.” Miss Fletcher 
tells of a case in which a man tried to resist the implications 
of his experience but found the conflict unbearable and 
committed suicide.*® 

The psychological interpretation of these cases is not 
especially difficult. The fact that not every person in the 
community, that only a small percentage had the berdache 
vision proves a predisposition to perversity on the part of 
the exceptional individual. But the idiosyncrasy is no doubt 
sincerely interpreted in accordance with the vision pattern, 
as though it were the creature and not the author of the 
vision seen. 

Very similar transformations have been recorded among 
the Chukchi, where in addition some women likewise as- 
sumed the character of men, though this case was of rarer 
occurrence and eluded Mr. Bogoras’s personal observation. 
The Chukchi berdaches marry men, but they are believed 
to be wedded to spirit husbands, who act as their special 
protectors and issue orders through them, so that the human 
spouse is degraded to a rather humble status in the house- 
hold. It is remarkable that the “transformed shamans’’ 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 245 

enjoy a position of special prestige: they are supposed to 
excel in all shamanistic practices, even in that of ventrilo- 
quism, which is barred to normal women; even other sha- 
mans dread the berdache because of the power of his super- 
natural patrons.** 

It is interesting to find similar conceptions in the south- 
eastern corner of Asia, to wit, in Borneo. The highest 
grade of shaman, manang, among the Sea Dyak is that of 
the manang bali or “changed shaman,” that is, one who has 
changed his sex, assumed feminine dress and occupies him- 
self with female pursuits. The transformation is said to be 
due to a supernatural command conveyed on three distinct 
occasions in dreams. Disobedience would mean death. 
Owing to his higher rank, the manang bali naturally receives 
much higher fees than ordinary doctors and is summoned 
when others have failed to effect a cure. The wealth thus 
accumulated leads men to marry a manang bali, but the 
role of these husbands seems as unenviable as that of their 
Chukchi equivalents.** 

It may not be superfluous at this point to revert to a sub- 
ject broached in the last chapter. If such phenomena as 
have been described. in the preceding paragraphs occur, have 
I not been over-confident in my repudiation of the theory 
that religion is founded in the sex instinct? Such an objec- 
tion would be the result of a confusion of the issues involved. 
As I have already explicitly stated, sex and religion are 
bound to come into contact at times. It may even be ad- 
mitted without hesitation that such association may be of 
great importance to the individual, nay, to the tribe, as in 
Siberia and Borneo. But what is the nature of the bond? 
The Plains Indian berdache does not have a vision because 
he is an invert, for of all the men in a generation who have 
visions only a handful are inverts. What he does is to 

246 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

justify his innate propensities by an unconscious rationaliza- 
tion that shall make his conduct fit into the scheme of tribal 
convention. His spirit is that of any person who cites 
divine support and prompting for what he craves to do. The 
tribesmen who accept the rationalization as a legitimate ex- 
planation would not do so except for their preéxisting idea 
of the Sacred, that is, the idea that a visionary experience 
imposes an obligation which cannot be safely ignored. The 
berdache phenomena are not the root of Plains Indian reli- 
gion, they pre-suppose its existence. Even where the invert 
plays a dominant part in religion, as in Borneo, similar rea- 
soning can be applied. For whence comes the notion of su- 
pernatural commands in dreams that ostensibly underlies the 
manang bali institution? The sense of the Supernatural can- 
not be created by the perverse longings of the shaman; it is 
already present in the minds of his audience or his plea would 
fail to be even intelligible. On the other hand, so far as 
the very abnormality of his case makes upon them a pro- 
found impression, it is evidently not because of their own sex 
cravings but because the Extraordinary qua Extraordinary 
is of basic significance. Nothing in these data thus justi- 
fies the derivation of the religious impulse from sex: there 
is a conjunction, not a genetic connection with sex as the 
cause and religion as the effect. 

LEADERSHIP 

Leadership in religion, as elsewhere, is psychologically a 
very complex and anything but uniform phenomenon. As 
the musical genius is not necessarily the man who possesses 
to the highest degree the specifically musical talents, so the 
religious creator, that is, the producer of new religious 
values for his group, is not necessarily the one who spon- 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 247 

taneously displays the most intense or readiest religious 
emotion; and the same holds for him who, instead of en- 
riching the cultural content of his people, merely transmits 
the social heritage in unaltered form. That certain qualities 
of mind are prerequisite to leadership in religion as in poli- 
tics, requires no special affirmation. Apart from the a priori 
certainty of the proposition, we can point to the frequent 
transmission of authority from one member of a family to 
another, which, as has been pointed out, by no means fol- 
lows a mechanical law of succession but doubtless exempli- 
fies the hereditary character of certain innate qualities. The 
prophet of the Ghost Dance had for his predecessor a close 
kinsman reputed to be his father; Medicine-crow, one of 
the eminent Crow Indians of recent decades, had a paternal 
uncle (his step-father) renowned for his supernatural 
powers.” Something, of course, must be credited to the 
direct influence of nurture, and wherever the specific details 
coincide the resemblance is best explained from that angle. 
Thus, it is hardly accident that both Medicine-crow and 
his “father” had a vision of the crane, a bird otherwise 
far from conspicuous in that context. But the general 
tendency to communion with the supernatural is probably 
to a far greater extent transmissible by education in so far 
as there is an hereditary predisposition; and where such 
intercourse depends on abnormalities, epilepsy, for ex- 
ample, the hereditary character of the trait can be inferred 
with certainty from our knowledge of psychiatry. 

It was natural for older writers to make the assumption 
still current among educated laymen, that on primitive levels 
no individuality can assert itself sufficiently to rise defi- 
nitely above the rank and file and impress its own stamp upon 
the whole community. We have already seen numerous in- 
dications destructive of this hoary fallacy. It remains to 

248 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

examine a few typical examples from the psychological point 
of view. Once more we shall be driven to regard the 
phenomenon sociologically as well, for the concept of leader- 
ship demands as its logical correlate that of the group. What 
is more, this will involve to a certain degree a retracing of 
our steps; for whatever may be the constituents that jointly 
produce “leadership,” those who are led must illustrate in 
greater or lesser degree the “suggestibility” of an earlier 
section. 

In the first place, let us consider a case that exemplifies 
leadership in its less spectacular forms. Among the Crow of 
the Lodge Grass district Medicine-crow had at the time 
of my visits risen to a position of preéminence. His igno- 
rance of English and consequent difficulty in directly dealing 
with Government officials somewhat diminished his influ- 
ence with the very young “educated” Indians but could not 
shake it among the people at large, who were duly impressed 
by his war record, itself on native theory the consequence of 
supernatural favor. I found Medicine-crow a very dignified, 
courteous but elusive personality. He was perfectly willing 
to give information when not otherwise engaged, and in 
fact he himself took the initiative in introducing me into 
the delights of a sweat-lodge, but it was hard to find him 
unoccupied. He had a very distinct sense of responsibility 
as a result of his status in the community and was con- 
stantly visiting back and forth. Whena newborn infant was 
to be named, Medicine-crow was naturally in demand as a 
name-giver; when a delegation was to be sent to Washing- 
ton, it was a foregone conclusion that he should be a member 
of the party; and of course any public assemblage gave him 
an opportunity to recite his achievements as a warrior. 
Turning now to his strictly religious activities, he owned 
a sacred pipe and an especially sacred rock, and was by far 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 249 

the most prominent figure of the district in the greatest sur- 
viving ceremony, the Tobacco Dance. He had not only 
founded a distinct chapter of the Tobacco society as a re- 
sult of a vision, but had enough authority to alter a symbol 
carried in the procession of all the chapters,—again, of 
course, through another specific revelation. His fame was 
by no means restricted to Lodge Grass: I remember meeting 
him at Pryor as the guest of a man he had adopted into the 
rite of the Sacred Pipe, and in the same district, some eight 
or nine years ago, a case of serious illness led to the idea 
that Medicine-crow should revive the Sun Dance, which here 
had invariably been a ceremony of vengeance, as a curative 
ritual. 

From the subjective point of view, there was undoubtedly 
about the man an impressive high-seriousness. He was 
known for the meticulous care with which every ritualistic 
detail was carried out in conformity with tradition, as when 
he slowly unwrapped his sacred shield for me, smoking it 
with incense, then four times raising it, each time a little 
higher, till he had lifted it aloft, high above his head. The 
same occasion brought out another aspect of his character. 
I asked him whether he would sell the shield for a hundred 
dollars. - He politely but firmly refused. Without my sanc- 
tion, my interpreter then asked him whether he would take 
two hundred dollars for it. Medicine-crow replied that he 
would not accept a thousand, for he wanted to be buried with 
it. In order to appreciate this attitude, it is necessary to re- 
call that before my visit Dr. Dorsey and Mr. Simms had 
bought up nearly every shield on the Reservation for the 
Field Museum in Chicago, and that I myself had succeeded 
in buying two of the small remaining number, one of them 
without any difficulty, the other after some cajolery. 

Psychologically, then, Medicine-crow was a devout man, 

250 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

loyal to the received creed. Ina subordinate way, of course, 
he was able to add to that creed because his personality was 
sufficiently powerful to gain cultural acceptance of his indi- 
vidual visions. At the same time he evidently was not the 
type to produce revolutionary changes: such modifications 
as he introduced—that is, variants in ritual detail suggested 
in abnormal psychic states—belong, indeed, to the very warp 
and woof of Crow religion. As he must then be reckoned 
a minor rather than a major prophet with reference to the 
scope of his mission, so as a social figure, too, he does not 
loom as a really dominant personality sweeping everything 
before him. Gray-bull, for example, a resident of the same 
district, whom I knew well, never gave me the slightest in- 
dication of an inferiority complex with reference to Medi- 
cine-crow. It was not that he suffered from delusions of 
grandeur: indeed, he was very humble when he spoke of 
Bell-rock, his one-time leader in war. But, comparing his 
own record and his own reputation in the community with 
Medicine-crow’s, Gray-bull felt no such difference as he was 
conscious of when he thought of this famous captain of yore. 
Technically he might not rank as a “chief” because he lacked 
one particular deed of valor, but the totality of his exploits 
did not seem to him appreciably less than Medicine-crow’s, 
and his bravery was as little challenged among his tribesmen. 
He had had visions of his own and had played his part in 
the ceremonies of the Crow; Medicine-crow’s corresponding 
activities could not make the impression they did on others. 
Naturally Gray-bull was too intelligent not to know that 
there was a difference in social status, that Medicine-crow 
was constantly in the limelight and was surrounded by a 
group of satellites, but the fact did not seem, in Gray-bull’s 
mind, to have a bearing on intrinsic worth. 

When we inquire next what made Medicine-crow a re- 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 251 

ligious leader in contrast to Gray-Bull, we must look to both 
subjective and external determinants. Medicine-crow was 
clearly by nature and nurture the more religious, while Gray- 
bull represented what Dr. Radin has called the “intermit- 
tently religious” type. But this initial difference alone would 
have been wholly inadequate to raise Medicine-crow to his 
actual status as in a measure a molder of Crow belief if he 
had not enjoyed the conspicuous success characteristic of his 
career as a warrior, which tribal thought invariably linked 
with supernatural sanction. Without these tangible tokens 
of divine favor the utmost possible religiosity would not 
have availed him in the least. 

This cooperation of subjective and objective factors is 
not less marked in the more spectacular instances of primi- 
tive leadership. Let us consider a few representative 
cases. 

The sudden contact of an aboriginal and a Caucasian pop- 
ulation in South Africa produced results there roughly com- 
parable to the Messiah cults of the North American Indians, 
and a series of remarkable characters came to the fore- 
ground. Of these, Makanna, who led the attack on a British 
fort in 1818, was one of the most interesting. His intel- 
lectual abilities strongly recall Finau II, but in the case of 
the Bantu they were coupled with a definitely mystical dis- 
position. When visiting the British headquarters, he 

evinced an insatiable curiosity and an acute intellect on such 
subjects as fell under his observation. With the military offi- 
cers he talked of war, or of such of the mechanical arts as fell 
under his notice; but his great delight was to converse with the 
chaplain, to elicit information in regard to the doctrines of 
Christianity ; and to puzzle him with metaphysical subtleties or 
mystical ravings. 

252 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

He combined the native faith with some notions derived 
from the whites and professed to be a brother of Christ. 
Further, he taught a stricter morality and was not afraid to 
play the part of a Savonarola in denouncing the chiefs, all 
of whom with one exception came to bow to his influence. 
Makanna often sought seclusion, yet when he addressed a 
crowd his eloquence carried everything before him. He an- 
nounced that he had been sent by the great spirit Uhlanga to 
avenge the wrongs of the Xosa, “that he had power to call 
up from the grave the spirits of their ancestors to assist them 
in battle against the English, whom they should drive be- 
fore they stopped across the Zwartkops river and into the 
ocean.” When he summoned his warriors for the assault 
on Graham’s Town, he declared that supernatural aid would 
turn the hailstorm of British firearms into water. As a mat- 
ter of fact, he all but succeeded in capturing the fort, when 
at the critical moment the soldiers were relieved by a friendly 
Hottentot captain. Makanna was obliged to surrender and 
was imprisoned by the authorities. 

Soon, however, another prophet, Umlanjeni, arose, who 
likewise counseled the chiefs to attack the foreign invaders. 
He was something of an ascetic, refused the gifts offered by 
his adherents, and would fast for hours, standing up to his 
chin in a pool of water. He directed the people to prepare 
by slaying their cattle and gorging themselves with meat. 
Despite the failure of his project, he was succeeded in 1856 
by another seer with a similar message. Umhlakaza pro- 
claimed a great change: men and cattle were to be resusci- 
tated, while the foreigners were to be swept from the land 
as though by a whirlwind. This result, however, could only 
be achieved by a summary destruction of the natives’ cattle, 
goats, and corn. In consequence thousands of heads of cat- 
tle were slain,—an extraordinary tribute to the prophet’s 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 253 

personality, considering the idolatrous regard of the South 
Africans for their herds. A definite date was set for the 
resurrection of dead men and beasts, and the failure of the 
prophecy was interpreted as due to the umbrage taken by 
the rising spirits at the reluctance of some chiefs to obey 
Umhlakaza’s orders.”° 

Even from the meager accounts available it is clear that 
some of these Bantu prophets were men distinguished for 
character, intensity of faith, and intellectual powers. But 
it is equally certain that the effectiveness of their propaganda 
was co-determined by the highly special circumstances of 
the South African aborigines at the time. 

Reverting once more to the Ghost Dance, we find a whole 
group of interesting personalities and we are also able to 
glean some faint ideas as to the manner in which they im- 
pressed their contemporaries. Wovoka is commonly de- 
scribed as the source and center of the cult, but I am strongly 
of the opinion that in this, as in so many other historical 
cases, circumstances lent a purely accidental halo to an es- 
sentially commonplace figure. Doubtless Wovoka differed 
sufficiently from other Paviotso to have normally qualified 
for the position of a tribal shaman, but there is no evidence 
that he manifested any unusual ability or any strikingly 
novel conceptions even in a strictly religious sense. His no- 
tions were borrowed in part from his kinsman and _ fore- 
runner Tavibo, while in part they were derived through con- 
tact with the Wilson family. In strength of character, in 
audacity of imagination, he does not even remotely approach 
some of the Plains Indian leaders who were content to act 
as his apostles and to treasure as sacred every object that 
came from his country. What made Wovoka an intertribal, 
nay, national, character, was not his native capacity for guid- 
ing the destinies of his race but the purely accidental plight 

254 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

in which the vigorous and pugnacious Plains Indians—par- 
ticularly the Western Dakota—found themselves when he 
first attracted their notice. His example is all the more in- 
structive as a contribution to the growth of religious thought. 

It is extremely suggestive to trace the individual reactions 
of different Indians to this professed leader of their race. 
Porcupine, a Cheyenne, who visited Wovoka in November, 
1889, forthwith identified him with Christ, nay, even saw 
the scars left on his hands by the crucifixion. He also re- 
ported that Wovoka had addressed all the delegates in their 
respective tongues. Yet it is an established fact that Wovoka 
spoke nothing but his native Paviotso and a little English. 
On his return Porcupine repeatedly saw Wovoka in his sleep: 
now the Prophet warned him of troubles to be expected with 
the soldiers, then again he reassured the dreamer, telling him 
that all would be well. Yet where Porcupine found omnis- 
cience and the marks of crucifixion a Kiowa pilgrim experi- 
enced nothing but disillusionment: he was forced to use an 
interpreter to the man who supposedly knew everything, and 
he could find no evidence of scars on Wovoka’s hands. He 
returned, denouncing the ‘“Messiah” as an impostor. That 
the different versions brought back by different delegates 
were in part due to Wovoka’s own vacillation, is almost cer- 
tain. As Mr. Mooney writes, 

there can be little doubt that Wovoka made claims and proph- 
ecies, supported by hypnotic performances, from which he after- 
ward receded when he found that the excitement had gone be- 
yond his control and resulted in an Indian outbreak. | 

Nevertheless, the discrepancies are largely accounted for by 
the disparity in initial attitude, in other words, by individual 
variation. 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 25s 

From this point of view the report of the Western Dakota 
delegates merits attention. When they arrived at Wovoka’s 
camp, smoke descended from heaven and when it had van- 
ished the Prophet became visible. He ordered the Dakota 
pilgrims to kill a buffalo on their way home, to cut off the 
head, tail and four feet, and to leave them; he declared that 
the buffalo would come to life again. He also told them to 
call upon him if they were fatigued when traveling home, 
and he would shorten their trip. In evident good faith the 
delegates reported that the words of Wovoka had been ful- 
filled on their journey: they had killed a buffalo and it was 
restored to life; they had prayed to Wovoka when tired of 
a night “and in the morning we found ourselves at a great 
distance from where we stopped.” Suggestion surely could 
not go much further. 

Sometimes members of the same delegation were affected 
quite differently by the Prophet’s practices. On one occa- 
sion he had a mixed group of Arapaho and Cheyenne seated 
on the ground facing him as he was holding a hat and some 
eagle feathers in his hand. 

Then with a quick movement he had put his hand into the 
empty hat and drawn out from it “something black.” 

One of the Cheyenne present, Tall-bull, was not much im- 
pressed, merely accepting the performance as one comparable 
with the legerdemain of the shamans of his own people. 
But Black-coyote. looked into the hat and there “saw the 
whole world,’—a phrase, incidentally, characteristic of cer- 
tain Plains Indian visions and reminiscent of the cosmic vi- 
sions of the Ojibwa. This difference in reaction is satisfac- 
torily explained by Mr. Mooney. Tall-bull was a light- 
hearted, skeptical person untinged with “other-worldliness.” 

256 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Black-coyote was a mystic and aspirant to shamanistic hon- 
ors, a man who had cut off seventy pieces of his flesh as an 
offering to the Sun because it had been prescribed in a vision. 
He was predisposed to see marvelous things, and in conse- 
quence he saw them. No wonder he became one of the chief 
apostles of the new cult among the Arapaho. 

However, he was eclipsed by a fellow-tribesman, Sitting- 
bull, who at the early age of about thirty-six developed into 
the principal propagandist of the Ghost Dance in the south- 
ern Plains area, teaching the faith to the Caddo, Wichita, 
and Kiowa by means of the elaborate gesture language of 
the area. Sitting-bull made a deep impression on General 
(then Lieutenant) Hugh L. Scott, who, prepared to meet a 
charlatan, found a sincere, unpretentious, and disinterested 
believer, who was inculcating in his people “precepts which 
if faithfully carried out will bring them into better accord 
with their white neighbors, and has prepared the way for 
their final Christianization.” His influence on his followers 
was remarkable: “All sorts of people wanted to touch him, 
men and women would come in, rub their hands on him, 
and cry.” 

Not less interesting than these Arapaho leaders is the 
figure of the Kiowa seer dubbed “The Messenger.” Long 
before the rise of the Ghost Dance he had been conspicuous 
for his revelations. He would frequently go up into the 
mountains to fast, especially to secure aid in doctoring the 
sick and to convey messages from the departed to their sur- 
viving kin. According to Mr. Mooney, he was a man of 
great intellectual endowments: he devised a wholly novel 
system of ideographic writing based on the gesture language, 
and by means of his invention was able to correspond with 
his sons,.”* 

Compared with Sitting-bull and the Messenger, Wovoka 

INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY 257 

cuts a rather sorry figure; he had neither the humility and 
altruism of the one, nor the intellectual capacities of the 
other. How, then, did this mediocre, weak-spined member 
of one of the rudest Western tribes succeed in enlisting as 
disciples men coming from richer aboriginal cultures and 
unequivocally superior to him in every respect as personali- 
ties? The answer is not difficult if we admit that psychology, 
like history, is not logical. Why did a highly intelligent and 
open-minded man like John Morley follow a pompous and 
dogmatic leader like Gladstone? Endowed with an ex- 
tremely moderate equipment beyond that of the ordinary 
Paviotso, Wovoka was placed in a position where he could 
absorb some of the ideas of Christianity and unite them with 
those of his predecessor and kinsman Tavibo. It is almost 
certain that he did not start with an exalted conception of 
his mission, that had his teachings never reached the Plains 
Indians he would never have risen to more than local fame. 
It was the character of Plains Indian culture and the char- 
acter of some of its individual bearers that transformed 
Wovoka into a national figure. Paradoxical as it may seem, 
the most spectacular of recent Indian religious movements 
had its origin in the least interesting and powerful of its 
personalities. 

REFERENCES 

1R. F. Benedict : 67 f. 

2 Radin, 1923: 290 sq. Jones: 11, 295 f., 307, 311. Skinner, 
1913: 42 sq. 

8 Woodworth: 368 sq. 

4 Brown: 167. 

5 Lowie, 1922: 325, 330; id., 1919: II7, 129. 

6 Bleek and Lloyd; 331 sq. 

258 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

7 Woodworth: 548. 

8 Radin, 1920: 390, 397, 402, 410 f., 440, 461. 

® Mariner : 113, 139, 235, 298, 332, 338, 353, 388. 
10 Mariner: 295; chap. XIV. 

11 Junod: 11, 280. 

1 Junod< 11, 414. 

18 Brown: 167, 177. 

14 Bogoras: 415, 426 sq., 441. 

18 Junod: 11, 435-460. 

46 Lowie, 1912: 226; id.,. 1915: 31. J. O. Dorsey: 387 f. 
17 Bogoras: 450 sq. 

eeGomes 170. Ie L.. Roth: 35,270. 

19 Lowie, 1919: 164; id., 1922: 389, 422. 

20 Shooter : 195-212; Wallis: 255-263. 

#1 Mooney: 797, 821, 896 f., 909 sq., 918. 

- CHAPTER XII 
RELIGION AND ART 

THE relationship of religion and art has often been dis- 
cussed and indeed could hardly fail to attract notice. They 
are closely intertwined in many cultures, and in that ancient 
civilization which has exerted the most profound influence 
on our own the connection was a peculiarly intimate one. 
Psychologically, both involve above all an appeal to the 
emotional side of man, though of course not to the exclusion 
of the intellectual element. Small wonder, then, that we 
find the morbidly devout genius of Kierkegaard pathetically 
bent on marking off the field of religion from that of esthet- 
ics; small wonder, too, that they have sometimes been 
brought into a simple genetic sequence. Miss Jane Harri- 
son, for example, has written a suggestive book, in which 
she attempts to show, through parallels with simpler peoples, 
how Greek drama sprang from ritualistic dances and that 
Greek sculpture was merely “a rite frozen to a monument.” 
She suggests that while ritual does not uniformly develop 
into art “in all probability dramatic art has always to go 
through the stage of ritual.” * 

Without entering into a detailed examination of this 
thesis, we may observe that its very simplicity should mili- 
tate against its acceptance, for the phenomena of culture do 
not so readily lend themselves to a short-hand description of 
their sequences. A priori it is better to assume with Wundt 
that primitive man no less than ourselves is actuated by a 
variety of motives and that among this number those of 

259 

260 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

genuinely esthetic character, i. e., those quite divorced from 
ulterior or correlated ends, must have exerted their influence 
even at a very early period. If, he contends, dancing has 
developed into a source of recreation and enjoyment, the 
reason lies in the sensations and affective accompaniments 
of the dance, irrespective of any other associated purposes. 
Indeed, we shall go further than Wundt, or rather shall ad- 
here more consistently to the view here propounded by him. 
For, notwithstanding the passage just paraphrased, this 
writer tends to obliterate its effect by constantly harping on 
the concomitance of religio-magical factors; thus, contrary 
to some of our descriptive statements, he shrinks from in- 
terpreting the Australian corroborees as forms of social en- 
tertainment pure and simple.” Frankly casting aside such 
timidity, I will postulate the esthetic impulse as one of the 
irreducible components of the human mind, as a potent 
agency from the very beginnings of human existence. In 
other words, I hold with Jochelson that “the esthetic taste is 
as strong and spontaneous a longing of primitive man as are 
beliefs.” Accordingly, its interaction with other such ele- 
ments rather than its derivation from qualitatively distinct 
phenomena will form the subject of this chapter; nay, I shall 
not be afraid to suggest that sometimes the ostensibly re- 
ligious is rather to be traced to an esthetic source than vice 
versa. 

INFLUENCE OF RELIGION ON ART 

It is obvious that religion provides art with subjects for 
pictorial, plastic, and literary representation. This appears 
very clearly in typical Plains Indian decorations of tent- 
covers, robes, or shields. For example, when we survey the 
Southern Siouan designs published by J. O. Dorsey, we find 

RELIGION AND ART 261 

that they are, in aboriginal theory, replicas of things re- 
vealed in visionary experiences. 

Should a man wear such a decorated robe without having had 
a vision of the mystery object, he was in danger (if the object 
was connected with the Thunder-being, etc.) of being killed by 
lightning. Every Omaha feared to decorate his robe, tent, or 
blanket with an object seen by another person in a dream or 
vision. For instance, George Miller would not dare to have 
bears’ claws, horses’ hoofs, etc., on his robe, because neither he 
nor his father ever saw a bear or horse mysteriously. 

The prerogative was transmitted to the next descending gen- 
eration, but unless the son repeated his father’s mystic ex- 
perience he might not in turn bequeath it to his issue.* 
Whenever the relation of religion to art is discussed, it is 
necessary to inquire first into the technical equipment, the 
stock of artistic ideas, characteristic of the people in question. 
In their secular paintings on, say, wind-screens or robes the 
Plains Indians are capable of vivid representations of mili- 
tary exploits: here the owner is depicted driving off a herd 
of the enemy’s horses, there he is holding his own against a 
hostile group and striking one foeman with a feathered 
spear. Let us recall that such scenes are indeed taken from 
actual life but are theoretically often mere fulfillments of 
the visions that lent sanction to the war expeditions de- 
lineated. It is accordingly not a little noteworthy that in the 
avowedly sacred paintings no such composition occurs. An 
Omaha has a vision of deer and he paints one of these ani- 
mals on either side of his lodge door; he sees two stars and 
the new moon, and a crescent flanked by two four-pointed 
figures appears on his robe; and when he has a vision of 
horses he represents on his tent cover horsetracks and horse 
tails. It is not that human figures are lacking,—a red circle 

262 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

symbolizing the sun may harbor a man shaking a dewclaw 
rattle; it is not that all sacred decorations are equally simple, 
—on one Omaha lodge a row of bear-paw prints is topped 
by a quartette of differently colored lightning lines, above 
which a circle stands for the bear’s cave. However, adven- 
tures that are quite within the native craftsman’s capacity are 
not reproduced but merely suggested in the religious art of 
these tribes. The ideas may be identical, but their expression 
differs : on a Crow robe devoid of religious value the enemy 
is shown shooting at the hero, but is struck by him; on a 
sacred shield from the same tribe the glancing off of bullets 
is symbolized by a series of lines. | 

It would certainly be rash to deny that the Plains Indians 
ever applied principles of composition current among them 
to the religious domain, yet the fact that in several dozen 
samples examined at random not one exemplifies the assimi- 
lation of the realistic style cannot be without significance. 
In his treatise on the Ghost Dance Mr. Mooney, it is true, 
reproduces two specimens that apparently contradict my ob- 
servations,* but a closer scrutiny disposes of the difficulty. 
One of them purports to depict a Kiowa seer’s experience 
and really goes much further in the direction of pictorial 
composition than the Omaha illustrations described above. 
Yet the entire upper third of the picture consists in a mass 
of strokes wholly unintelligible without a special interpre- 
tation, which connects them with the prairie and buffalo. 
The remainder is, indeed, almost self-explanatory, yet there 
is a total want of that spirited realism distinctive of the bet- 
ter Plains Indian paintings. Now this charge cannot be 
leveled against the second painting, which delineates faith- 
fully and graphically a group of Cheyenne and Arapaho 
Ghost Dancers. But here another point enters. In what 
sense are we dealing with a genuinely religious picture? 

RELIGION AND ART 263 

There is of course the representation of a religious scene, 
but interestingly enough it is not the work of a votary of 
the tribes in question, but that of a Ute captive. There is 
not the slightest suggestion that the painting had any re- 
ligious value for its maker, who may well be supposed to 
have merely exercised an observant foreigner’s curiosity and 
to have given rein to a purely artistic impulse. 

Perhaps we can safely go a step further and offer a 
plausible suggestion for the difference between the secular 
and the religious art of these people. The overpowering 
sense of communion with the supernatural may evoke a de- 
sire for outward representation without requiring more than 
a suggestive memento of the wonderful experience. In 
other words, it is not necessary to draw the supernatural 
patron in the act of addressing his suppliant and conferring 
upon him some longed-for boon. Just as a chicken-hawk 
feather becomes sacred not because it is identical with the 
object of the vision, let alone with the giver of the blessing, 
but because of its association with the ultimate fount of 
the religious emotion felt, so the merest outline commemo- 
rating the great event acquires a derivative holiness as a_ 
symbol that may or may not merge in the total memory 
image of the mystic exaltation. 

A parallel difference in secular and sacred art style has 
been noted by Mr. Jochelson.° As producers of miniature 
carvings in wood, ivory, or whalebone, the Koryak of east- 
ern Siberia stand perhaps supreme among the unlettered 
peoples of the globe. Even complicated tasks, such as the 
representation of a pair of wrestlers or of a sledge with 
driver and dogs, are successfully executed by the native sculp- 
tor. One striking illustration furnished by the Russian 
investigator veritably has some connection with the reli- 
gious sphere: the artist exhibits a shaman beating the drum 

264 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

emblematic of his office and even reproduces the gleam of 
ecstasy on his subject’s face. But, as in the case of the 
Ute painting of an alien ceremony, the work of art is a 
work of art devoid of sacred meaning. If, now, we turn to 
objects of definitely religious value among the Koryak, we 
receive a rude shock: the makers of these charms and idols 
and holy fire-making apparatus seem to belong to a realm 
of artistic endeavor utterly and hopelessly inferior to that 
of their fellow-tribesmen when intent on solving a purely 
esthetic problem. For example, the wooden bear carved 
for the occasion of the Bear festival is of a crudity that 
simply beggars description when placed side by side with 
what is done for the sheer love of carving. 

Mr. Jochelson is inclined to explain the disparity by the 
vagueness of primitive man’s conception of his supernatural 
anthropomorphic beings, but I am not convinced that the 
whole or even the main solution is to be sought in this direc- 
tion. For one thing, some of these beings are made suffici- 
ently definite in tribal mythologies; again, the manufacturer 
of sacred carvings, as indicated by the case of the bear, may 
fail no less as an artist when he attempts the well-known 
animal form, even among so skillful a people as the Koryak. 
It seems simpler and more plausible to assume that the na- 
tive, in certain moods, ignores the ideals of art for the plain 
reason that his attention is riveted to other ends. Take, for 
example, the birch-bark records associated with the Mystic 
Rite of the Ojibwa about Lake Superior. The drawings, 
incised upon bark with a pointed piece of bone, are often 
exceedingly crude, but it is hardly because of the vague con- 
ceptions of the supernatural beings, since the like deficiency 
is noticeable in the pictures of such familiar creatures as the 
wolf or bear. As a matter of fact, when we compare the 
several records published, it becomes clear that each artist 

RELIGION AND ART 265 

has consistently attacked as a whole the problem confront- 
ing him; he does not discriminate between supernatural 
beings and phenomena of every-day existence: everything 
seems, as it were, cast in a single mold. Thus, the Red 
Lake chart reproduced by Hoffman is throughout charac- 
terized by a neatness that, despite its schematism, sets it off 
favorably from the uniform slovenliness of the Mille Lacs 
record, while a third specimen displays a distinct effort 
towards not merely symbolic but pictorial delineation and 
succeeds in conveying a sense of movement no less in the 
drawing of the drumming Great Spirit than in that of a 
similarly occupied priest. If even in the last-mentioned 
sample the execution falls manifestly below the draftsman’s 
technical capacity, it is presumably because the primary pur- 
pose of the charts is mnemonic, so that artistic finish would 
be a work of supererogation, perhaps the veriest preciosity. 
It is none the less interesting to observe how, presumably 
without set purpose, native talent or the esthetic conscience 
may assert itself in individual instances.® 

In connection with these charts and similar phenomena 
of other regions their esoteric character should not be over- 
looked; they are not exposed to the public gaze, and “there 
does not appear to be a recognized system by which the 
work of any one person is fully intelligible to another.” It 
may well be that the lack of definition in the products of 
religious art is often co-determined by deliberate shrouding 
in mystery. In some instances, other motives may operate 
in the same direction: as Professor Boas once suggested, 
“the very sacredness of the idea represented might induce 
the artist to obscure his meaning intentionally, in order to 
keep the significance of the design from profane eyes.” ” 

Have we, then, hit upon one of those general laws which 
modern ethnology, to the disgust of outsiders, is so reluc- 

266 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

tant to proclaim? Does religion by some inherent necessity 
exert a deleterious influence on art or, at least, on realism? 
A glance at the history of Egypt demonstrates the shallow- 
ness of such a formulation. It is true that, in the words of 
the late Professor W. Max Miiller, “adherence to tradition 
constituted an especially grave barrier to artistic develop- 
ment,” that “the figures of the gods always preserved, more 
or less, the stiff and—in some details—childishly imperfect 
style of the early period.”’ But on the other side may be 
cited “the marvelous portrait sculpture of the Pyramid Age,” 
intimately correlated with religious conceptions and plaus- 
ibly adduced by Wundt to demonstrate the effectiveness, nay, 
possibly omnipotence, of religious factors in leading to a 
higher stage of individualistic representation.* Religion 
and art are both too intricate to admit of an “either-or”’ type 
of interaction: even in the same society and at the same 
time contradictory currents may well be seen according to 
the phase of the phenomena envisaged. 

To return to lowlier planes of culture, there is an addi- 
tional way of accounting for the slovenliness of pictorial 
or plastic art when associated with the sacred. Besides 
these arts there are other means of esthetic expression,— 
those corresponding to our drama. The Menomini, who had 
been blessed by supernatural buffalo, would assemble twice 
a year, and execute a dance with a buffalo headdress, “‘imi- 
tating the pawing, bellowing, and hooking, of the buffalo.” ® 
Such dramatic performances will engage our attention a 
little later. In the present context the point to note is that 
they are a potentially stronger means of emotional attach- 
ment to the Sacred than the feather or painted figure sym- 
bolic of a vision, for while the latter, when once put on or 
executed, respectively, may leave the owner in a quite pas- 
sive state the animal dance involves an active identification 

RELIGION AND ART 267 

with the object of religious veneration. But to what extent 
such a means for the expression of the religious idea may 
have been previously established and may serve adequately 
to fulfill the esthetic urge is a question that can only be 
answered by viewing ail the phases of a tribal culture in uni- 
son; and apart from such synthetic surveys any generaliza- 
tion is almost sure to miss the mark. 

RETROACTIVE INFLUENCE OF ART 

If art derives much of its subject-matter from religion 
and may even in some instances draw technical advantages 
from the association, it is not the less true that religion in 
turn may draw sustenance from art. Nor is it difficult to 
determine the general character of this retroactive influence. 
Let any one attempt to draw, let alone model a house, from 
no matter how good a verbal description: there will be in- 
numerable details that must be defined yet remain inde- 
terminate in the directions. All the more will this apply to 
the case of human physiognomy. Hence an artist who 
should wish to depict with precision the popular conception 
of a given supernatural being is bound to rely upon his 
individual fancy to fill in the lacking details. That there 
is no necessity for his conceiving his task from this angle at 
all, that he may be content with mere sketchiness or sym- 
bolism, has already been demonstrated. But as soon as an 
esthetic impulse goads him into different paths, he may 
come to create a type that at once synthesizes the essentials 
of current belief, without contravening them in any par- 
ticular, and yet at the same time adds a series of strokes 
that may not merely shade but materially alter the pre- 
existing picture. So long as things go no further, the new 
image is no more than an individual version of the general 

268 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

norm. But as soon as that variant, whether through its 
maker’s prestige or through priestly patronage, is elevated 
to the position of a standard representation, it becomes it- 
self thenceforward a determinant of the popular conception. 

To take a simple example, there is a widespread belief 
in North America that thunder is caused by a large bird. 
So long as this notion is merely transmitted by oral tradi- 
tion it may remain quite vague. But when a native at- 
tempts to incise his conception on birch-bark or to carve 
it in a wooden mask, he will naturally add distinctive fea- 
tures that make of the Thunderbird an eagle, or a hawk, or a 
nondescript product of fancy. Now such identification may 
have far-reaching consequences, for it would naturally tend 
to raise, say, the eagle to a level of sanctity that did not 
originally belong to it and cannot well belong to it where, 
as among the Nootka of Vancouver Island, the Thunder- 
bird does not correspond to any actual species. Moreover, 
if two or more distinct representations are both accepted, 
a dual or multiple conception of the being is fostered, as 
when the Menomini now picture the Thunderers in human 
form, now again as birds, and arrive at the notion that the 
eagles are related to the Thunderers.*° 

The reaction of pictorial representation on mythology 
is strikingly exemplified by the story of the Egyptian deity 
Qeb (Geb). Artists depicting him in erect posture showed 
a goose perched on his head, and later theologians accord- 
ingly construed this earth-god into a huge gander, who, with 
divine indifference to sexual disabilities, laid the solar egg. 
As a matter of fact, the goose was primarily nothing but the 
hieroglyph forming an abbreviation of Qeb’s name.™ 

Fetichism furnishes one of the most instructive examples 
of the interrelationship under discussion. At least in one 
of the regions regarded as preéminently characterized by 

RELIGION AND ART 269 

fetichism—in the Congo, including Loango—the connection 
differs fundamentally from what might be expected. That 
is to say, a fetich is not the execution of the craftsman’s 
conception of some divine being; but among the legion of 
human effigies produced in this region of carvers some speci- 
mens are selected for sanctification: the representation of 
a human figure “is not an effective fetich until it has been 
through the hands of the medicine-man and received its 
power from him.” What confers upon the object its super- 
natural potency is solely the mysterious spell sung over it 
or the substance, wonder-working in its own right like the 
ngula paint, thrust into a ventral cavity. Hence, only a 
moderate percentage of the human or animal figurines are 
in reality fetiches. On the other hand, the sanctifying tech- 
nique can manifestly be applied to quite different objects,— 
to artifacts not suggesting the human form or to inanimate 
phenomena of the surrounding world, a stone, a tree, a cross- 
road. Any object can become a “‘fetich” if only it has been 
ritualistically consecrated. 

By dint of the wizard’s incantations an inert mass comes 
to acquire an altogether remarkable but specialized potency : 
it may ward off a fever or grant invulnerability, render its 
owner invisible or banish a plague of grasshoppers. 

Now it is a matter of considerable interest to find a 
close correlation between the development of wood-carving 
and the occurrence of anthropomorphic and theromorphic 
figures. If for convenience’ sake we restrict the term “fet- 
ich” to such effigies as these and call other objects of gener- 
ically similar sacred character “amulets,” we find that amu- 
lets predominate markedly in the Uele and Ubangi districts, 
while the Lower Congo, the Kasai and Kwango districts 
display an incomparably greater abundance of fetiches. 
Thus, the Tervueren Museum near Brussels has 73 fetiches 

270 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

from the Maritime Region but not a solitary amulet; while 
from the Uele there are 27 amulets and no fetiches, from the 
Ubangi 16 amulets and a single fetich. The distribution 
of the two is clearly one of mutual exclusiveness; and it 
coincides definitely with the efflorescence and the decay of 
woodwork in the Congo. In other words, the prevalence of 
an artistic technique determines the outward form of re- 
ligious objects. 

But we can perhaps safely go a step further. It is all 
very well for our anonymous authority to say that amulet 
and fetich “sont deux expressions matérielles d’un senti- 
ment uniforme.” Generically, no doubt they are; and per- 
haps they may be even more specifically in special cases. But 
as we turn the plates illustrating the Tervueren collections, 
the thought inevitably obtrudes itself that in a strict sense 
this cannot always be true. A whistle, a bit of horn, or a 
pebble in the nature of the case is incapable of arousing the 
set of ideas evoked by the image of a woman nursing an 
infant, of a man bending over a drum, or of the grotesquer- 
ies connected with the representation of sex organs. When 
what mere artistic fancy has created is hallowed by the 
fetich-monger’s chant or pigment, the craftsman’s fantasies 
adhere to and aid in molding the popular conception of 
the mysterious. Take a concrete case from the Kwango, 
for which a series of obviously related figures have been 
pictured, the extremes representing, respectively, a physiog- 
nomy with slightly tilted nose and a full-fledged recurved 
proboscis. Assuming that the more realistic effigy is the 
earliest, we can readily imagine how esthetic playing with 
the motive of the up-turned nose led to the ludicrous exag- 
geration of this feature, which by consecration and personi- 
fication might become one of the attributes of a nascent 
deity.” 

RELIGION AND ART 271 

However, the art that has probably contributed in by far 
the greatest measure to the conceptual tenor of religion is 
literature,—in that unwritten form, of course, represented 
by orally transmitted folk-tales. For, though the outward 
shape of folklore heroes may remain inadequately defined 
without the aid of plastic and pictorial delineation, their 
intellectual and moral characters can be determined with in- 
comparably greater precision through the medium of nar- 
rative. 

As we have seen in a previous chapter, the influence of 
literary fancy on religion is also championed by Andrew 
Lang and Father Schmidt, but in a sense rather different 
from the one I should here suggest. Assuming an archaic 
concept of an ethically pure Creator, they assert that this 
noble ideal has been covered with a debasing veneer of an- 
thropomorphic simplicity and drollery, nay, ribaldry. It is 
not easy for me to understand how a sharply defined replica 
of our own monotheistic ideal can fail to withstand whatever 
lure there may be in folkloristic fantasies. On the other 
hand, it seems entirely possible that in fulfillment of dis- 
tinct human demands there should develop in mutual inde- 
pendence the comic episodes of a trickster cycle and the 
shadowy character of a creative being; that the origin of 
specific phenomena in society or the universe should be 
ascribed to the well-known trickster; and that this common 
element of creativeness should lead to a fusion and con- 
fusion of the two characters till not even the most devout 
Crow can state with assurance that the earth was made by 
the Sun rather than by Old-Man-Coyote. My point is that 
such amalgamation and consequent obscurity would be in- 
conceivable if the primary notion of the Sun were that of 
an ethically immaculate Supreme Being; but that a vaguely 
and only incidentally beneficent creator can well be credited 

272 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

with even the more grotesquely offensive exploits of a 
trickster. 

Irrespective of this moot-problem, it is easy to illustrate 
how literature may color the aspect of religious figures by 
comparing two versions of a Shoshonean solar myth re- 
corded by me among the Lemhi Shoshoni of Idaho and 
their congeners, the Southern Ute of Colorado, respectively. 

According to the Shoshoni, the sun was at one time so 
close to the earth as to burn people to death. A council was 
summoned, and the Indians delegated Cottontail to shoot 
the Sun. He concealed himself, and as the Sun rose Cot- 
tontail let fly arrow after arrow, but without avail, for they 
were all consumed by the Sun’s heat. At last he used his 
fire-drill and with it killed the Sun, who in falling burnt 
yellow spots on his enemy’s neck and legs. The corpse was 
cut open, the gall was extracted, and then another tribes- 
man raised the sun to his present height. 

It is clear that the narrator’s conception of the solar being 
fluctuates between that of a mortal with human organs, and 
a material body with the characteristic store of heat; and 
also that the Sun plays throughout a purely passive part. 
Now contrast the Ute myth: 

Cottontail was wandering about, slaying people. He 
lay in ambush for the Sun. When the arrows shot against 
his enemy were burnt up, he took a club and with it knocked 
off a piece of him, which caused a conflagration. Fleeing 
from the fire, he sought refuge under a certain fireproof 
weed, which protected him, so that only a little yellow spot 
was made on his neck. But as Cottontail walked on the 
hot ground, his legs burned off. Finally Sun caused a 
snowfall that put out the fire. Now, however, Sun punished 
his enemy by transforming him into a rabbit and decreeing 

‘RELIGION AND ART 273 

that thenceforth it should be easy for any one to track him 
in the snow. 

First of all, it is of course clear that we are dealing with 
variants of a single Shoshonean myth centering in the an- 
tagonism of Sun and Cottontail. Now, whether we assume 
the Ute or the Shoshoni version as approximating more 
closely the archetype of the tale, an effect of the story on 
the religious notion of the Sun can be plausibly argued. 
Let us postulate, in conformity with Lang’s scheme, the 
greater antiquity of the Ute myth, in which the Sun ap- 
pears as a comparatively dignified, active, powerful, and 
avenging transformer. Then the Shoshoni, by modifying 
the incidents and the motivation of the conflict, have appre- 
ciably debased the earlier picture of the solar god. If the 
alternative hypothesis is entertained, the Ute have seconda- 
rily embellished it. 

I am not at all disposed to deny that the facts admit of 
a somewhat different formulation. It may very well be that 
unless the Ute had entertained a pre€xisting conception of 
the Sun as a powerful deity they would not have developed 
the tale in their distinctive way; and that the absence of a 
like conception paved the way for the Shoshoni variant. 
Such intricate inter-relations are precisely what I contend 
for; and my point at present is merely that the mythopeic 
imagination working with the traditional religious stock- 
in-trade may sensibly affect the core of the religious senti- 
ment, may tend to a shifting of the center of gravity, so to 
speak. If a story-teller has adequate authority to establish 
his individual version as the standard, then it may appreci- 
ably modify the reactions to traditional sacred figures, add- 
ing to the sanctity of some, detracting from that of others 
by the definiteness of the picture thus impressed on the 

274 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

auditors. To exemplify the power of the literary fancy in 
this direction we may once more revert to the Crow. For 
some Crow Indians the legendary Old-Woman’s-Grandson, 
slayer of monsters, is a deity prayed to for help on the vision- 
quest. Some, in other words, have become more deeply 
impressed than others by this literary figure and ascribe to 
him definite divine powers. It might be said that this is 
merely due to his being conceived as the child of the Sun. 
But what is this notion itself, of solar offspring, if not the 
result of literary fancy? 

CEREMONIAL DRAMA 

The naive way of interpreting the festivals of primitive 
peoples is to accept as authentic the explanations of the par- 
ticipant. Thus, the pledger of a Crow Sun Dance desires the 
death of an enemy; hence the ceremony must be a prayer 
for revenge. The Cheyenne pledger wishes to insure a 
sick relative’s recovery; hence the ceremony is a prayer for 
health. Correspondingly simple views might be advanced 
with regard to the Hawaiian Luakini or the Tongan Har- 
vest ceremony and a host of other equally elaborate per- 
formances in other parts of the world. 

Interesting as aboriginal theories as to aboriginal conduct 
invariably are, they are no more to be accepted unmodified 
in matters of psychology than in matters of history: 
the native does not know his motives and those of his 
collaborators any more than other folk do, and they are 
only revealed by a critical analysis of his and their be- 
havior. The subject is a large one, and at present I am 
merely concerned to prove the co-existence of latent esthetic 
factors where many recognize only the patent religious 
ones. 

RELIGION AND ART 275 

Take the case of the Crow Sun Dance, on which informa- 
tion is relatively full.* According to native theory, the 
essence of the ritual lies in the vision-quest of a mourner 
thirsting for revenge. Instead of relying on a revelation to 
be secured by his own efforts, he resorts to the possessor of 
a sacred doll, whose power is expected to grant his prayer. 
So far the conception corresponds entirely to a familiar 
Crow procedure; the only varying feature lies in the specific 
character of the holy object, but that would differ in any 
case according to the shaman’s personal “medicine.” Why, 
however, all the pother? Why do not this pair of main per- 
formers, the shaman and the mourner, go about their business 
along the lines of the ordinary routine of a war expedition? 
Why is it necessary to involve the whole tribe for a period 
of months? Why must a special lodge be erected with the 
assistance of all the men? Why do dozens of young men 
fast and torture themselves uot in order to help the mourner 
gain his desired end but to achieve their own longing for a 
vision craved for purposes strictly their own? Why do 
noted warriors recite and represent their deeds and receive 
cooked buffalo tongues as a reward of past bravery? 

It is perfectly obvious that to characterize this composite 
performance as a prayer for revenge is to fall prey to a 
rationalistic simplification of the facts. Doubtless that mo- 
tive is a powerful one for the supplicant, yet even for him 
it is not the only one. It is obviously different for the 
fellow-fasters, though their participation still bears a defi- 
nitely religious stamp. But what of the hundreds of on- 
lookers, now hurrying to bring and raise the lodge-poles, now 
philandering with their sweethearts during a period of privi- 
leged license, now boasting of their prowess or engaging in 
a sham combat? Part of the time, no doubt, they are held 
awe-struck and spellbound in the presence of a prospective 

276 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

communion with the supernatural. But for the rest they are 
thrilled as onlookers or supernumeraries of a spectacular play 
on the grandest scale within the tribal comprehension; and 
if all the complex machinery hinted at rather than described 
above is set in motion, it is because the alleged cause of the 
vast undertaking is in a sense nothing but its occasion. 
Even the main performers are not of course unaffected by 
the display of general activity: whatever else they may be 
doing, they are unconsciously playing a part for the ap- 
proval of an audience. Thus, each and every one participat- 
ing in the Sun Dance is partly affected by esthetic, extra- 
religious motives. To assert from this point of view that 
“ceremonialism exists for ceremonialism’s sake’ is not to 
forgo a psychological formulation, as an otherwise friendly 
critic oddly imagines,** but to penetrate beyond the obvious 
interpretation of religious behaviorism. 

REFERENCES 

1 Harrison. 

2 Wundt : 103, 221, 230, 484, 504. 

8 J. O. Dorsey: 394-400. 

4 Mooney: plates CVII, CIX. 

5 Jochelson, 1905-1908: 33, 88, 646 sq., 668. 

® Hoffman: plates III, IV, VIII. 

7 Boas, 1903. 

§ Miller: 12. Breasted: 179. Wundt: 215 f. 

® Skinner, 1915 (a): 202, 

10 Skinner, 1913: 74-78, 99, 102, 104 sq. 

11 Miller: 42, 368. 

Notes analytiques: 149 sq., 161, 212, 219, 239, 248; plates 
XXX, XLVII. Weeks, 1913: 254; id., 1914: 232 sq. Pechuel- 
Loesche. 

18 Lowie, 10143-id., 1915. 

14 Bartlett; 202. 

CHAPTER XII 
ASSOCIATION 

INDIVIDUAL AND SocrtaL ASSOCIATIONS 

In a previous chapter I have pointed out how largely the 
thoughts and the behavior of individuals are determined by 
factors arising not from the inborn characteristics of the 
thinker or actor but from the cultural conditions affecting 
all the members of his group jointly. This principle can be 
amply illustrated by the associations of ideas that appear in 
different societies, for though such associations have been 
commonly studied only from the point of view of individual 
psychology it is not difficult to prove that exclusive atten- 
tion to this aspect of the phenomenon fails to bring adequate 
illumination. This, indeed, is fully recognized by Profes- 
sor Hoffding, the Danish psychologist, who expresses him- 
self as follows: 

Associations of ideas may . . . be so firm and constant that it 
is forgotten out of what elements they have arisen. Some of 
the greatest mysteries in the province of psychology owe their 
origin to such deeply rooted associations of ideas, the begin- 
ning and history of which have been forgotten . . . that which 
presents itself to us as a unity and as necessarily coherent, may 
yet have arisen from the fusing of different elements. It de- 
mands therefore a deeper and more extensive psychological 
analysis than the dogmatizing psychology enters into. Such an 
analysis finds an especial application in the associations which 
have not been formed in the actual consciousness of the individ- 
ual, but are the bequest of earlier generations. . . 7 

277 

278 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

The fusion of originally distinct elements alluded to by 
the Scandinavian scholar will be considered in a later sec- 
tion of this chapter. What concerns us at present is the 
extent to which the association of ideas presented by a 
given person can be accepted as a genuinely individual men- 
tal product or as one functionally dependent on his social 
heritage. Perhaps we can most profitably approach the 
question by considering Kent and Rosanoff’s studies in word 
association, which by many of their colleagues are regarded 
as classical. After preliminary experimentation these 
authors hit upon a list of one hundred words and recorded 
the ideas associated with those of the list by a thousand 
normal subjects. Thus 191 individuals thought of “table” 
in response to “chair,” while only a single one gave as his 
reaction “office.” Treating the results secured as a standard 
for testing other subjects, the investigators distinguish as 
“common” those reactions represented in their tables, while 
those not found there are called “individual,” though not 
necessarily abnormal.” To what extent is it possible to ap- 
ply a similar technique to anthropological material? Scan- 
ning Kent and Rosanoff’s list, we are first of all impressed 
with the necessity of restricting its use to persons living 
under similar cultural conditions. Apart from the fact that 
certain abstract ideas, such as “music,” might not have 
equivalents in other cultures, the reactions to the concept 
would inevitably differ in other civilizations. For instance, ' 
“piano,” “violin,” “harmony,” “Merry Widow” would be ex- 
cluded. It might be easy to suggest plausible equivalents in 
the second culture, but their precise value would be highly 
problematical. The utility of mass investigations of this 
sort rests on the exposure of all individuals to a comparable 
educational environment. This may be illustrated from 
another angle. Of the American subjects studied by Kent 

ASSOCIATION 279 

and Rosanoff only one responded to the stimulus “tobacco” 
with “stars”; among the Crow, who identify their sacred 
tobacco with the stars, it is safe to assume that considerably 
more than one-tenth of one per cent would have had this 
reaction. Similarly, with the word “eagle”; not a single 
American associated it with “thunder” but in any Crow list 
the two ideas would certainly be coupled with a relatively 
great frequency. Probably some reactions would coincide 
in the two tests: there is no good reason why some Crow 
subjects should not offer as the second member of the pair 
such words as “beak,” “clouds,” “feathers,” or “mountains.” 
But evidently individuality in our psychologists’ sense could 
not be established by the Crow list for Caucasian subjects or 
vice versa: the coupling of “eagle” and “thunder” would 
be “common” for a Crow, “individual” for an American, 
though the investigators’ wise precaution in their Appendix, 
that anything should be reckoned a normal response if sym- 
bolized by the eagle, must not be overlooked. 

Another word of warning must be added: the psychologi- 
cal appraisal of a given association is impossible without a 
consideration of linguistic data. For example, in Kent and 
Rosanoff’s list the “eagle” is linked 568 times with “bird.” 
This would be impossible for the Crow for the simple rea- 
son that the eagle as the bird par excellence is commonly 
designated by the same term as the whole zoological class. 
Again, the constellation of the Dipper is preéminently as- 
sociated by the Crow with the number seven. Thus, the 
Dipper appears to Lone-tree in a vision as a man but is 
identified when he rises, exposing the seven stars on his 
queue; and so, when Lone-tree subsequently goes through 
a rite to aid a woman he summons six other men, “for with 
them I should make seven, and there are seven stars in the 
Dipper.” Again, Hillside’s brother sees the constellation 

280 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

as seven persons singing songs for him. Still another vision- 
ary infers that four visitants are the Dipper because they 
sing seven songs for him; and when he organizes a ceremony 
on the basis of his revelation, he assembles seven married 
couples. The last two instances are especially interesting, 
for they show that so long as the number seven appears in 
some fashion no incongruity is felt in the representation 
of the Dipper.® 

Now, plausible as this association may seem, there is no 
obvious reason for the exceptional emphasis on the numerical 
aspect of the constellation until we find that the Dipper in 
Crow is simply called “Seven Stars,” so that we are not 
dealing with an ordinary association of distinct ideas at all. 

These examples show how important it is to take into 
account the linguistic data involved. This is indeed obvi- 
ous when we recall that in Dr. Jung’s experiments with Swiss 
subjects such external factors as similarity in sound (green- 
greed) or the conventional coupling of terms in set phrases 
(assault-battery) played an important part.* 

The systematic study of individual associations among 
illiterate peoples is hardly even in its infancy, but an un- 
published series collected by Dr. Spier among the Havasupai 
of Arizona strongly impresses one with the psychic unity 
of mankind as regards the principles at work in producing 
responses from cue words. Thus, there is “‘codrdination” 
in uniting concepts both of which belong to the same general 
head, but also “contrast,” “predication,”’ and, as might be 
expected, some residual instances remain obscure. At all 
events, there is every reason to look for an explanation of 
the associations of primitive folk towards the same psycho- 
logical principles operative among ourselves. 

A fruitful line of research lies in the study of variants of 
myths and prayers. Sometimes these may be so stereotyped 

ASSOCIATION 281 

that for generations not the slightest alteration has been 
permitted. This, for example, is reported for some Hawai- 
ian hymns, a phenomenon in harmony with Polynesian for- 
malism. But elsewhere some latitude is allowed, and the 
resulting substitutions may repay study from more than one 
angle. We can thus examine the versions of the same myth 
told by two different narrators. We can also profitably ex- 
amine the variations in the same individual’s account at dif- 
ferent times, for that will indicate the range of ideas evoked 
in one person by a fixed stimulus. At a certain stage of 
the Crow Tobacco ceremony a warrior is supposed to come 
running and to report what he has seen on a raid and on 
the return journey. At three different times Gray-bull dic- 
tated to me in his own language the actor’s speech. There 
is of course far-reaching similarity, yet enough difference 
to prove that the form was not standardized. Thus, in all 
three versions the speaker stresses the abundance of the To- 
bacco crop and of the wild cherries, but only once uses a 
superlative in that connection, which accordingly is a dis- 
pensable element. In all three variants an enemy is killed, but 
while the narrator twice reports how he captured a gun the 
third account substitutes the striking of a blow: these were 
both conventional deeds of valor and evidently reckoned as 
equivalent. That is, the cue “victorious exploit” might 
arouse in Gray-bull’s mind either “gun-capture” or “blow.” 

Such individual interpretations are significant even for 
a purely cultural inquiry because the traditional associations 
described by Hoffding have not always been traditional, and 
whenever we observe a deviation from the norm we have 
before us a possible starting-point for a cultural innovation. 
Unfortunately, when a given traditional association con- 
fronts us, it is often wholly enigmatic from a psychological 
point of view, that is to say, no hint remains of the principle 

282 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

on which the underlying ideas were ever linked by any in- 
dividual mind. It is easy enough to proceed from cue to 
reaction, but to work backwards is more difficult, just as it 
is harder to extract a cube root than to raise a number to the 
third power. Still there are degrees of obscurity, and at all 
events a brief discussion of some instances may illuminate 
the nature of the problem. 

To begin with a difficult case, Dr. Spier tells me that 
among the Havasupai of northern Arizona a woman will 
not scratch her head with her fingers during either menstrual 
seclusion or the period preceding and following childbirth; 
instead she uses a special head-scratching stick. Evidently 
there is here a firm association between certain important 
periods in a woman’s life and the desirable mode of scratch- 
ing her head; and since it is not a sporadic habit but a gen- 
eral observance, it would be vain to seek for the origin of 
the custom in the mental reactions of individual tribesmen. 
As a matter of fact, we should have to go much further back 
than tribal history, for comparison with other peoples proves 
that the practice is found among the Pima of southern 
Arizona, in California, British Columbia, and, indeed, among 
the Menomini of Wisconsin and the Yuchi of South Caro- 
lina.” Evidently the usage is of fair antiquity and has spread 
from tribe to tribe over a wide area. At some time and 
place the association must have sprung into existence in some 
individual brain and struck a responsive chord in the social 
environment; but what may have produced this original 
association eludes our scrutiny. 

The psychology of associations is not always equally 
opaque. The Jagga of East Africa view multiple births with 
alarm as portending bad luck: triplets are accordingly killed, 
their mother being despised as though guilty of a heinous 
crime, while in case of twins one of the infants is regularly 

ASSOCIATION 283 

strangled. Obviously the same qualification holds here 
as in the preceding case: we are dealing not with an idiosyn- 
crasy but with a rule imposed by tradition. Nevertheless, 
here the motive does not lie wholly shrouded in mystery, and 
we can apply with some show of plausibility the explanation 
given for a similar custom in Central Australia, to wit, that 
twins “are usually destroyed at once as something uncanny.” 
In other words, the Negroes, like the Australians, may have 
reached the conclusion that what was out of the ordinary 
was necessarily weird and pregnant with evil potency. 
However, further study would show that even among fel- 
low-Bantu tribes the interpretation does not conform to 
that of the Jagga, is indeed antithetical inasmuch as twins 
are viewed as omens of good fortune. Yet a modification 
of our hypothesis would bring the new facts into line with 
a generic interpretative principle: we may assume that the 
Extraordinary is potentially ambivalent, that it may be cred- 
ited with either a mysterious power to confer benefits or 
a weird tendency to destroy, and which of the alternatives 
prevails is a matter of chance according to the specific cir- 
cumstances surrounding the origin of the custom. Of course, 
such a general interpretation not only leaves undetermined 
the path actually followed but also fails to account for speci- 
fic ideas reported, such as the Nootka notion that twins are 
intimately connected with the salmon, which Mrs. Spier 
informs me also occurs among the Klallam.® 

There are, however, still other cases in which the processes 
seem so transparent that it requires hyper-skepticism to doubt 
the patent cause of an association. Thus, granting that 
the hands are brought into juxtaposition with the idea of sex 
differentiation, we understand at once why a Thonga con- 
nects the left hand with the female sex and the right with 
males.?. Traditional though the association may be, 

284. PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

we see at once its aptness, the motive for its currency and 
for its invention. 

Among the constantly recurring associations may be noted 
those by which a specific value is attached to certain num- 
bers. It has been pointed out that the Crow, for example, 
like the majority of North American tribes, regard four 
as the mystic number, while the Paviotso ascribe similar 
significance to five. While it is of course impossible to 
give an ultimate explanation of numerical associations found 
in a given tribe, we are in a position to range these phe- 
nomena with comparable psychological manifestations of 
educated Europeans. In his well-known Inquiries into Hu- 
man Faculty and its Development Francis Galton records 
that he himself associated even numbers with the male sex, 
while his informants frequently invested numbers with defi- 
nite personalities—one of them described Three as a good 
old friend, another as a treacherous sneak, and so forth. 
As a boy I myself had a special fondness for both Three and 
Four, but felt that somehow Three was closer to me so that 
I rather resented its inferiority to Four. 

In correlating the ethnographic data with the Galtonian 
phenomena it is necessary to define exactly what is meant. 
There is not the slightest reason to suppose that an individual 
Crow has a greater inborn tendency to view four as sacred 
than a random Caucasian: if he so regards it, it is because his 
reaction is predetermined by the cultural tradition that he 
has shared from early childhood. The psychological ex- 
planation of a particular Crow’s attitude towards four has 
probably nothing to do with his individual mental reactions 
to the number, but solely with his individual reaction to 
any social norm whatsoever. But at some time some one 
must have had a differential feeling for four as compared 
with other numbers and created the present standard by his 

ASSOCIATION 285 

personal prestige; and it is that pre-normative individual 
reaction which we can with some show of reason connect 
with the data gathered by Galton. A subsidiary and per- 
haps even equally important source of mystic numbers has 
been suggested by Boas, to wit, the esthetic satisfaction 
derived from rhythmic repetition, so that the difference in 
sacred numbers would correspond to a difference in favor- 
ite rhythms.® 

In this context it may be well to point out that modern 
psychology notes a variety of associations as more or less 
commonplace in our own society that are not one whit less 
fanciful than some of those recorded among illiterate peo- 
ples. The late Miss Josephine Meyer, reader of the Theater 
Guild in New York, told me that she associated all manner 
of ideas with the letters of our alphabet: ‘““P” appeared to 
her as the most gentlemanly, “‘m” as the mother of ‘“n,” 
and so forth. Under this heading, of course, comes the 
phenomenon latterly described as “synesthesia,” of which 
colored audition is the commonest form. One of Galton’s 
correspondents associated letters of the alphabet with definite 
colors and conversely read words into color patterns, another 
always associated Tuesday with a gray sky color, and Friday 
with a dull yellow smudge. It is an undecided question 
whether such associations represent an innate idiosyncrasy: 
Woodworth suggests as the likelier guess “that the extra 
sensations are images that have become firmly attached to 
their substitute stimuli during early childhood.” ° 

SYMBOLISM 
The types of association last considered naturally lead to 

a discussion of symbolism. If, say, a certain object or idea 
invariably appears in connection with a certain color, the 

286 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

color can come to acquire symbolic value and will evoke the 
image or concept of its regular concomitant. Sometimes an 
association of this character is indirect, that is, the sym- 
bol is not immediately associated with the basic emotional 
value but only through a series of intervening links. Thus, 
a species of snake among the Andamanese is an emblem of 
well-being not in its own right, as it were, but because it is 
associated with honey, which besides its intrinsic attractive- 
ness is again associated with the season of fine weather. 
Similarly, the Western Dakota may represent the whirlwind 
by narrow upright figures that directly stand for the chrysa- 
lis of a moth from which the whirlwind is derived.*® 

It would be worth while to determine by an extensive 
survey of the world to what extent certain of the simpler 
forms of symbolism are rooted in the general mental con- 
stitution of mankind. For example, is red, as A. R. Brown 
suggests, a general emblem of activity and force because of 
its dynamogenic potency? ‘The idea is attractive, yet we 
must be on our guard against assuming that even in the 
simplest cases the interpretation is fully determined. Thus, 
there is for ws a natural fitness in the Omaha custom of 
representing a vision of the Night by blackening part of 
the lodge-cover ; and similarly we understand at once why a 
Menomini boy on his puberty fast should blacken his face 
to indicate sadness and thus arouse the compassion of the 
powers he is supplicating. But the very fact that black is 
so readily connected with death makes it possible to con- 
vert it from a symbol of grief into one of joy; and accord- 
ingly we find that the Crow warriors who had slain an enemy 
returned with blackened faces as a sign of victory. 

Interesting as such reflections are from a psychological 
point of view, for our present purpose they must yield pre- 
cedence to another, to wit, the religious value of the symbol. 

ASSOCIATION 287 

The significance of the cross in Christianity or the lotus- 
flower in Buddhism is too well-known to require more than a 
passing reference. That there are parallel instances in primi- 
tive life is clear from the example, several times quoted, of 
the significance attached to a feather revealed in a Crow 
vision. This case is a favorable one for elucidating the 
source of the symbol’s value. It is too readily assumed that 
since the symbol stands for something else, its potency is 
derivative from that something, and the overshadowing 
influence exerted by an apparently secondary phenomenon 
remains rather enigmatic. Thus, the spontaneous emotion 
evoked by the flag of one’s country is not easily explicable 
on this view, nor the Crow’s appraisal of his feather as “the 
greatest thing in the world.” In both cases the difficulty 
lies in the assumption of an inapplicable psychological atti- 
tude. Only in an intellectualistic sense does the flag or feather 
represent an ulterior entity of higher order; on the affective 
plane, either represents nothing apart from itself but forms 
an integral part of an invaluable indivisible emotional ex- 
perience that immediately asserts itself with all the force of 
an unanalysable manifestation of the Extraordinary in 
the special form of the Sacred. This reaction appears clearly 
in a statement made by an Hidatsa woman to the effect that 
Indian corn and the wild geese were one and the same 
thing. It was not that she was of pre-logical mentality in 
Lévy-Bruhl’s sense, that is, incapable in ordinary life of 
separating the idea of the plant from that of the birds, but 
that in the given context both were associated in the same 
sacred complex and stood for that complex: whether one or 
the other cue was used to evoke the essential emotional 
state, was a matter of complete indifference. 

288 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

RATIONALIZATION 

Whatever sins may have been committed in the name of 
psycho-analysis, it has the great merit of having clearly 
brought out and duly stressed the concept of “rationaliza- 
tion,” than which few principles are more important for 
an understanding of human behavior. It is a fact of con- 
stant observation in daily life, in the psychiatric clinic, and, 
we may add, among primitive peoples, that man is not so 
much a rational as a rationalizing creature. That is, he does 
not act or work towards conclusions by the careful sifting 
of evidence but acquires them by some irrational process, 
subsequently glossing over the logical delinquency by secon- 
dary apologetic argumentation. Religion, with its predomin- 
antly emotional basis, is naturally a favorite haunt of ra- 
tionalizers ; but in turn it supplies some of the basic schemes 
for rationalizing conduct of a primarily nonreligious nature. 
Let us consider the latter case first. 

Where, as among the Crow and their neighbors, the vision 
assumes a dominant position in religion, its scope may easily 
be extended so as to embrace potentially any and every 
phase of human existence. Not only does the vision become 
the theoretical origin of every ceremonial, nay, of every 
deviation in ritualistic detail, or of such markedly abnormal 
behavior as that of the berdache, but success and failure are 
interpreted in terms of the basic concept and, consistently 
enough, every war-raid may require the sanction of a super- 
natural urging. ‘White men,” says the Indian, “have ideas; 
the Indians have visions ;” or he may even go so far as the 
Blackfoot who told Dr. Wissler that the inventor of the 
phonograph must have had a vision of the instrument and 
received a circumstantial description of its mechanism. 
Among the Western Dakota the mythical Double Woman as 

ASSOCIATION 289 

a culture-heroine is supposed to have instructed a woman 
through dreams in the art of decorative design composition: 
sometimes the entire piece of work is exhibited in finished 
condition, sometimes the design appears on a rock or cliff. 
By a transparent association twin sisters are believed to 
dream similar designs, though sometimes other Indian women 
may get like dreams also derived from the same mythic 
source. “Such designs are copied by other women, and thus 
become a part of the art common to all.” But an examination 
of putative dream designs convinced Wissler that they did 
not differ in principle from other designs, and it is perfectly 
obvious that certain mystically inclined individuals ascribe a 
supernatural origin to esthetic notions derived from the 
traditional stock of art patterns and modified by such minor 
variations as their own taste and fancy suggested: 

A dream design is . . . not so much a distinct type of design 
as an illustration of the manner in which Dakota philosophy ac- 
counts for the origin of the present styles of decorative art." 

Among the most delicious rationalizations on record is 
that by which the Masai of East Africa justify their con- 
tempt for the blacksmiths’ guild,—the pariah caste of their 
society. The blacksmiths, it is alleged, tempt the Masai 
to commit bloodshed by the implements they manufacture, 
hence they merit ethical condemnation. In order to ap- 
preciate the full extent to which this is mere mockery of a 
genuine reason, it is necessary to recall that the Masai are 
one of the most warlike peoples of Africa and that success- 
ful preying on their neighbors is a prerequisite to social 
prestige in their community. Of the same piece is the war- 
rant alleged by them for the undertaking of these hostile 
raids: God, they say, gave all the cattle in the world to the 

290 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Masai; if their Bantu neighbors would not exhibit such re- 
luctance in giving up the livestock in their possession, the 
Masai would not be driven to recover their property by 
force. Here cupidity is plainly rationalized by an appeal to 
the Divine Will.’? 

In many mythologies of primitive peoples there figures a 
character generally described as the culture-hero, that is, 
the inventor or discoverer of useful arts and other cultural 
phenomena. It is by no means certain that this personality 
always bears a “religious” character in the sense adopted 
in this book, but in many instances this is undoubtedly the 
case. Now the type of explanation offered by the natives 
to explain the origin of, say, fire-making or pottery is readily 
extended to other elements of social life, such as social 
rules and prohibitions. A Crow will thus naturally refer 
to Old-Man-Coyote the institution of the “joking-relation- 
ship,” by which a man may play practical jokes on certain 
specially defined persons in the tribe. 

Psychologically, all such cases do not of course differ 
from those in which the phenomenon that is accounted for 
in religious terms belongs itself to the religious category. 
Thus, the Crow justifies even so trivial a matter as the use 
of a specific type of facial paint in a rite by a corresponding 
revelation. Sometimes the generic motive of finding a ra- 
tionalization in accordance with the current type of ex- 
planation is skillfully wielded on behalf of egotistic motives. 
When a Plains Indian or a Menomini shaman cannot con- 
ceive the possibility of giving away his ceremonial preroga- 
tives even to his own children because his supernatural pa- 
tron prescribed that he must receive compensation therefor, 
the case is obvious. For it is greed that would subconsciously 
project such a stipulation into the subjective experience, no 
matter how honestly the native may plead a supernatural 

ASSOCIATION 291 

decree. Probably some of the specific taboos so commonly 
recorded among these Indians permit of a somewhat similar 
interpretation. Thus, One-blue-bead remarked to me: 

My medicine forbids me to make myself bleed, for example, 
to cut off my fingers ; and if meat has blood on it, I won’t eat it. 
At the time of my vision I was told not to eat blood and not to 
make myself bleed. 

I think we can plausibly assume that the Crow witness had 
a personal idiosyncrasy relating to blood and, especially, a 
repugnance to the self-torture so prominent in his tribe. 
Auto-suggestion was perhaps strong enough to conjure up 
the coveted vision without the hateful laceration or finger- 
cutting, and rationalization would provide an excellent war- 
rant from the aboriginal point of view for avoidance of the 
customary usage. 

The rationalizing tendencies are especially conspicuous in 
the alleged origin and purpose of ceremonial, a subdivision 
of the subject sufficiently important to merit separate treat- 
ment. 

Ritruvauistic Mytus AND RitTuAListic ENps 

The ceremonials of primitive peoples often receive an 
etiological and a teleological justification: they are avowedly 
performed because of events set forth in an explanatory ori- 
gin myth and for a definite, plausible purpose,—say, as a 
thanksgiving for past favors or as a prayer for the public wel- 
fare. However, it can be proved beyond the possibility of 
doubt that many of these explanations are rationalizations 
which have nothing to do with the real history of the case. 
This is obvious where the entire ceremonial is simply pro- 

292 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

jected into the past as the ritual taught by a supernatural 
being or clandestinely observed by the founder as it is per- 
formed by supernatural beings. Furthermore, as Ehren- 
reich among others has pointed out, we find again and again 
that like rituals of neighboring peoples are linked with ut- 
terly distinct myths: the similarity of the procedure is so 
great that it cannot have been evolved more than once, hence 
it must have spread from one tribe to another so that except 
in the center of dissemination the explanatory myths must 
by logical necessity be afterthoughts; “and, with the possi- 
bility of such explanation established, it becomes psycho- 
logically justifiable to treat the residual case as falling under 
the same category.” ** 

The mode of reasoning applied here coincides absolutely 
with that which holds for the interpretation of other ex- 
planatory myths, of which the ritualistic legends under dis- 
cussion form only a special subdivision. For instance, the 
Navaho of Arizona tell a quaint story ostensibly accounting 
for the color of the coyote’s eyes. The Coyote of their tradi- 
tions learnt the trick of sending his eyes out of their sockets 
and recalling them, but was warned not to try the perform- 
ance too frequently. Casting prudence to the winds, he dis- 
obeyed and lost his power of recovery, but after wandering 
about in blindness he secured orbs of pine gum, whence his 
yellow eyes to-day. If this were the only version of the 
story, we might accept the naive assumption that the natives, 
struck with the coyote’s appearance, excogitated a series of 
episodes to account for it. But the Arapaho of Wyoming 
tell the same story with a different ending: their blind hero 
dupes Mole into lending him his eyes, whence the mole’s 
blindness to-day.* The stable elements of the two variants 
cannot possibly be derived from these two utterly diverse 
points of departure; and when still other versions are dis- 

ASSOCIATION 293 

covered without any explanatory feature, the case is clear: 
the plot alone has been diffused from a common center, and 
in several instances distinct explanatory afterthoughts have 
been added. 

Now, as hinted above, the situation is precisely similar 
when we are dealing with ritualistic myths: the persistent 
element corresponding to the stable plot of the “Eye-jug- 
gler” story is the fixed procedure, while the legendary justi- 
fication is the equivalent of the explanatory frill at the end. 
Having stated the proposition in general terms, it remains 
to furnish some illustrations from the well-nigh inexhausti- 
ble material at hand. In this connection it would be artificial 
to separate the mythical and the teleological justification of 
ceremonial since both frequently belong to the same type of 
psychological manifestations. 

Among some of the Australian tribes the rite of knocking 
out teeth is an integral part of the boys’ initiation, which 
here as in New Guinea constitutes a festival of the first order 
of importance. But in Central Australia the usage appears 
without this context and at least two wholly different justifi- 
cations are offered. The Kaitish nowadays merely practice 
the custom in order to improve their personal appearance, 
but explain that in the mythical period teeth were knocked 
out because the water tasted better without one of them. 
On the other hand, the Tjingilli knock out teeth towards the 
close of the rainy season and throw the tooth into a water- 
hole so that it may drive the rain and clouds away. The 
Gnanji not only expect the cessation of rain but an increase 
of water-lilies to follow a similar procedure.” 

To take an equally simple case from America, the sacri- 
fice of a finger-joint to propitiate the beings from whom a 
revelation is sought figures as a fairly widespread Plains In- 
dian custom, being found among the Crow, Mandan, Ari- 

294. PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

kara, and Hidatsa. But the same practice occurs in this 
area as a token of mourning. Indeed, among the Crow the 
women usually cut off their fingers in connection with mortu- 
ary rites while the men go through the performance when 
fasting for a vision. Whichever of the objects is the older, 
a re-adaptation of the purpose has occurred. 

To turn to more pretentious rituals, the Crow share 
with their Blackfoot neighbors a ceremonial planting of 
sacred Tobacco sufficiently similar to exclude independent 
invention. According to the most popular Crow version, the 
discovery of the Tobacco dates back to the separation from 
the Hidatsa, when one of two brothers was adopted by the 
stars, with which the Tobacco is somehow identified, and re- 
ceived instructions as to the ceremony. But with the Black- 
foot the Tobacco is part and parcel of the Beaver ritual, 
transmitted originally by a Beaver who after abducting a 
married woman indemnified her husband by sending her 
back with the Beaver bundle.*® 

Again, Tozzer and Haeberlin have proved that the Navaho 
and the Hopi of Arizona go through an extraordinarily simi- 
lar series of ritualistic details, such as the use of prayer- 
sticks, a specific type of mask, the swinging of a bull-roarer. 
To doubt that these identities are due to borrowing would be 
madness; yet the motive is quite distinct. ‘While the great 
Navaho ceremonies are all focused on the healing of the 
sick, those of the Hopi are obviously directed on the produc- 
tion of fertility for the fields.” The Hopi bull-roarer, for 
example, is twirled as a magical instrument for procuring 
rain; the Navaho shaman applies the same object to the pa- 
tient’s body by way of curing him. MHaeberlin has further 
illustrated his point by the ceremonial associations of a 
widespread game,—that of hurling a dart at a rolling hoop. 
The hunting tribes of the Plains play the game for the pur- 

ASSOCIATION 295 

pose of magically calling buffalo, the hoop sometimes repre- 
senting the animal, which is symbolically slain by the dart 
touching it. But with a similar ceremonial pastime the Hopi 
connect their favorite concept: the act of shooting the dart 
typifies lightning striking in a cornfield, ‘an event which is 
regarded as the acme of fertilization.” 1” 

One of the most striking illustrations of the principle here 
expounded is provided by the Sun Dance, as has been con- 
vincingly demonstrated by Spier.** Performed by about 
twenty Plains Indian tribes, this festival displays a remarka- 
ble stability as to objective traits. For example, in most in- 
stances the participants engage in spectacular self-torture; a 
tree designed for use in the ceremonial structure is com- 
monly scouted for, felled, and struck as though it were an 
enemy; more than half of the tribes erect an altar of which 
a buffalo skull forms the most conspicuous object; and so 
forth. Contrasted with such similarity of behavior, there is 
a striking disparity as to avowed purpose. A Crow, as we 
have seen, pledged a performance exclusively to secure a 
vision promising him revenge for the slaying of a kinsman. 
An Arapaho did so normally to gain aid in sickness or dan- 
ger threatening his family. Among the Ponca, individual 
vows did not figure at all; the dance was executed annually 
by a fraternity of Thunder men at the chief’s behest. Per- 
haps the best possible example is provided by a compari- 
son of the Arapaho and Cheyenne performances, which are 
so similar that “members of one tribe find no difficulty in 
participating in the dance of the other, for even the larger 
differences relate only to details.” Yet neither the etiologi- 
cal myths nor the teleological explanations show like agree~ 
ment. The Cheyenne explain that the culture hero entered 
a mountain resembling the Sun Dance structure and was 
there instructed in the ceremony, which on his return rescued 

296 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the people from starvation; while the Arapaho account is 
merged in their general origin myth with emphasis on the 
flat-pipe that figures as their great sacred object. As for the 
end sought, it is true that in both instances the initiative is 
taken by an individual vowing a dance to avert danger; but 
with the Cheyenne the main point is to reanimate the earth 
and its life, for example, to call the buffalo. This,is of 
course the main point only from the angle of priestly of- 
ficialdom; for we saw in the preceding chapter how varying 
are the motives in a large ceremony of this type, and that 
among them purely or preponderantly esthetic factors play a 
large part. 

Some tribes manifest an interesting tendency to use for 
purposes of etiological rationalization folk-tales that are 
otherwise devoid of ritualistic meaning. For example, the 
Heiltsuk of British Columbia explain the establishment of 
the Cannibal society by reciting the story of the woman who 
gave birth to dogs,—a plot told by the Eskimo, the Northern 
Athabaskans, and even other Northwest Coast tribes without 
thought of ceremony. In the Plains area the Blackfoot and 
the Hidatsa exhibit the same inclination. Thus, the Hidatsa 
do not content themselves with ascribing certain offerings 
planted by the bank of the Missouri to the dictates of a local 
snake-deity, but connect the rite with the tradition of a 
young man who burnt his way through a gigantic snake lying 
in his path, ate of the flesh thus cooked, and in consequence 
was himself transformed into a serpent. Fully half a dozen 
of the neighboring groups have the same narrative as a mere 
folk-tale. 

Similarly, the Hidatsa Bird ceremony is not merely traced 
to the favor of supernatural birds but is connected with one 
of the most widespread mythological motives on the conti- 
nent,—the unremitting warfare between the Thunderbirds 

ASSOCIATION 297 

and a water-monster. The method of fitting this conception 
into a ceremonial context will repay analysis. To tell the 
myth as it is known to the participants in the ceremony: the 
Thunderbirds once carried a good Hidatsa hunter, Packs- 
antelope, to their mountain in order to get his assistance 
against a water-snake destroying their young. He suc- 
ceeded in slaying the monster for them, was transformed 
into one of their number, and killed various powerful beings 
until a supernatural denizen of the Missouri seized him, 
changed him back into human shape, and dismissed him 
with the command to make a ceremony in honor of the 
Thunderers but to put his captor in a place of distinction 
therein. All the deities came the following year and gave 
Packs-antelope detailed ceremonial instructions, as well as 
the Bird bundle with the correlated chants. The proper 
performance of the ritual of course ensures good crops, 
plenty of game, and victory. 

Now, obviously, it is exclusively the circumstantial 
speeches of the divine visitants telling Packs-antelope how 
to paint the sacred contents of the bundle, what articles to 
combine, what chants to sing, that in any real sense account 
for the Bird ceremonial. The plot of the familiar story ex- 
plains nothing in the ceremony but is prefixed to the essen- 
tial part of the explanation. The Hidatsa might just as 
well whittle down the lengthy narrative to a report of the 
directions supplied to the founder. But this is looking at it 
from the outsider’s point of view. However tenuous may 
be the thread connecting tale and ritual, the owner of the 
bundle regards both as an inseparable unit to be transmit- 
ted only as the prerogative of initiates; and accordingly the 
tale of the Thunderbirds and the water-monster is lifted to 
a level of esoteric sanctity by its association with the cere- 

mony. 

298 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

It is thus possible that priestly adaptation can convert fic- 
tion into a sacred myth. The plot, it should be noted, is 
sometimes not merely found in non-ritualistic setting in 
other tribes but may appear in an esoteric and an exoteric 
form within the same group. Thus, the Menomini of Wis- 
consin tell of their hero Ma’nabus and explain how the gods 
destroyed his brother Wolf by dragging him below the ice. 
Turning into a tree, the hero shoots two of the slayers, who 
flee wounded and cause a deluge. He finds safety in flight, 
and, disguising himself in a flayed old woman’s skin, he suc- 
ceeds in killing his wounded enemies and, despite a second 
flood, manages to escape. However, when a novice is 
adopted into the great secret society of the tribe, a dif- 
ferent twist is given to the narrative: the hero bulldozes 
the gods into teaching him the sacred cult as a peace-offer- 
ing. 

In the cases cited the ritualistic association rather tends to 
spoil good fiction by a great deal of prosy recital of cere- 
monial trivialities (from our point of view). This esthet- 
ically unfavorable development, however, is not the only 
possible one. As Boas has indicated, the priest may act as 
a creative artist and weld into a unified whole the hitherto 
disjointed narratives current among his people. That such 
systematization occurred among the Polynesians, has al- 
ready been shown. To what extent such intellectual feats 
remain on the plane of artistic virtuosity or acquire genu- 
inely religious value, will naturally vary in different cases,— 
nay, possibly even for different individuals.” 

Enough has been said to elucidate the character of the 
rationalistic tendency in connection with ritual. Its spon- 
taneous self-assertiveness is perhaps most amusingly ex- 
hibited when the zest of justification makes the same people 
offer quite distinct reasons for the same behavior. Thus, in 

ASSOCIATION 299 

the Scalp Ceremonial of the Zufii in New Mexico, men offer 
prayer-sticks to the ants as well as to the war gods. A triple 
motive is alleged: the ants are constantly fighting; they help 
people by removing their tracks; they make many people at- 
tend the ceremony,—as many people as there are ants.*?_ Evi- 
dently, any and every path of association can be used as a 
warrant for what one wants to do or is used to doing. This 
leads us to our next topic. 

SECONDARY ASSOCIATION AND GROWTH OF CEREMONIAL 

The process of rationalization forms part of a still wider 
psychological category, that of secondary association. This 
is best explained by setting it over against its opposite. If 
an individual child spontaneously connects, say, the number 
four with the notion of benevolence or intimacy, the asso- 
ciation may be illogical but it is psychologically primary. 
Similarly, when an artist attempts to represent a specific re- 
ligious conception in a given technique, the association, so 
far as the finished product is concerned, must be reckoned 
primary. For though the concept and the technique can and 
do exist separately, this particular work flows directly from 
and is primarily determined by the preéxisting idea. This 
is not true where, as in Congolese fetiches, the effigy is exe- 
cuted independently of religious motives and only acquires 
sacred character by subsequent consecration. Again, if the 
Eye-juggler story in its Navaho version really sprang from 
the craving for a causal interpretation of the coyote’s eyes, 
we should have a primary connection of plot and explana- 
tory close. 

Thanks to Professor Boas, the overshadowing importance 
of secondary association in art, in ritual, and in mythology 
is no longer ignored. Of the fact of its constant occurrence 

300 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

in every realm of culture there can be no question, and the 
preceding pages furnish abundant illustrative material, for 
example, in the sections devoted to the growth of the Peyote 
and the Ghost Dance cults. At present we are less inter- 
ested in proving what has been amply demonstrated than in 
offering some suggestions as to why specific associations de- 
velop secondarily, and what are the psychological implica- 
tions of such syncretism. 

Since the association must invariably go back to processes 
in a single mind, the mental operations observed will nat- 
urally be those described in textbooks of psychology, even 
though certain social determinants must be taken into account 
if the phenomenon is to be described in its totality. 

In this connection may be cited a suggestive instance of 
ceremonial borrowing. Most of the northern Plains tribes 
have a well-developed series of military associations, which 
in some cases are almost wholly secular, while in others they 
clearly bear a religious character. In investigating the so- 
cieties of the Oglala, a branch of the Western Dakota, Dr. 
Wissler discovered that according to native tradition the 
Badger dance society was modeled on its Crow namesake. 
This statement was very puzzling to me since no such per- 
formance had been noted among the Crow. But examination 
of the native word for badger showed that it was practically 
identical with the Hidatsa and Crow word for the kit-fox, 
from which one of the best-known organizations of the area 
gets its designation. Comparison of the regalia and modes 
of ceremonial organization indicates that the Oglala bor- 
rowed the Kit-fox dance of the Hidatsa or Crow and naively 
interpreted the alien name as though it were a vocable of 
their own tongue.” 

Here, then, the similarity in sound between two words of 
different meaning in their respective vocabularies led to the 

ASSOCIATION 301 

association of the name “Badger” with a combination of cere- 
monial features originally linked with a quite distinct name. 
This association in turn had interesting results, for from 
the primitive point of view there is a good deal in a name. 
The borrowed complex was ipso facto distinguished from an 
older Dakota dance of essentially similar nature, and still 
another association was added: the members were exhorted 
to imitate their eponym in putting up a strenuous fight! One 
can easily conceive additional rationalizations developing in 
the most spontaneous fashion: how some Oglala who had 
forgotten the alien derivation of the dance might ascribe its 
origin to a revelation granted by a supernatural badger, how 
members would come to carry badger skins, and what not. 
As a matter of fact, the name was actually interpreted to 
refer “to the characteristic grimaces and growlings of the 
badger when attacked.” 

The case cited suggests, then, a ready mode for the elabo- 
ration of a ceremonial complex. We can understand why 
some of the dozen tribes of the same region practicing the 
Kit-fox dance should wear necklaces of the animal’s skin, 
why some should put on headbands set with kit-fox jaws. 
There is a similar fitness in the wearing of horned buffalo- 
skin headdresses or masks by the Bull dancers of the area, 
in their imitating buffalo in their sounds and movements; 
and again it is obvious why the Mosquito society of the 
Blackfoot should buzz and scratch, ‘The association is not 
only one that may automatically arise in an individual mem- 
ber’s mind by the principles of similarity and contiguity but 
will commend itself to his fellow-members by its simplicity 
and plausibility even if he should not happen to exercise any 
unusual influence. 

An irrational juxtaposition can be quite as effective in 
welding disparate features into a firm unit. I am not al- 

302 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

luding here to such cases as the union of maize and the wild 
geese by the Hidatsa Goose association, for here the com- 
mon relationship to a deity they both symbolize adequately 
accounts for the phenomenon. I am referring rather to the 
strange hodgepodge of songs, material objects, and prac- 
tices that are associated with the typical American Indian 
medicine-bundle. Wherever the vision concept is conspicu- 
ous, as ‘among the Crow, the integration is easily effected 
through its instrumentality. For example, between the 
sacred Tobacco planted by the Crow and the strawberry there 
is no logical relation: but the two became connected be- 
cause Medicine-crow, a member of the Tobacco society, 
saw the Tobacco in human form wearing crowns of straw- 
berries. 

Again, the Menomini of Wisconsin have an official theory 
to the effect that their composite bundles are each the in- 
divisible gift of a benevolent deity. But Mr. Skinner has 
rendered it at least highly probable that the observed com- 
plexity is the result of secondary association, and he has 
shown how this can quite naturally come about. A little 
boy, on the assumption of a mystic bond with the Thunder, 
often receives from his parents a small club as a symbol of 
that tie; when he fasts for a vision at puberty, additional 
charms may be prescribed by his guardian spirit, and still 
others can be acquired in later life. ‘What is to hinder these 
various charms, when they become too numerous for con- 
venience in carrying, from being made into one large package 
or bundle combining the power of all?” Such piecemeal ac- 
cretion through a sequence of revelations is admitted by the 
Sauk and Fox, neighbors and fellow-Algonkians of the 
Menomini. Nay, among the latter themselves Mr. Skinner 
once bought the mingled remains of what had been three dis- 
tinct bundles. The contents had become mixed by accident, 

ASSOCIATION 303 

and since nice assortment was impracticable the whole was 
preserved as a unit. 

If the bundle had been handed down for several generations 
more, until the accident of the confusion had been forgotten, 
who can doubt but that its final owner would have looked upon 
it as a universal bundle of great power? And what more nat- 
ural than to ascribe its origin, as a whole, to one of the great 
beneficent powers, Ma’nabus, for instance ? 78 

In other words, by the legerdemain of a rationalizing ori- 
gin myth elements of the utmost heterogeneity can be welded 
into an inseparable whole. 

Such a secondary combination of originally disparate fea- 
tures is particularly likely where the idea holds sway that a 
given ceremonial prerogative can be bought and sold. Ac- 
cording to Maximilian Prince of Wied-Neuwied, the Hi- 
datsa Stone Hammer organization purchased the Hot Dance 
from a neighboring tribe, the Arikara. Now the Stone 
Hammers formed a group of young men carrying lances 
stuck through a perforated stone bearing designs emblematic 
of celestial beings; they were expected to be brave in battle 
and were licensed to steal food from their fellow-tribesmen, 
—if not caught. The Hot Dance, on the other hand, has 
for its most characteristic feature the trick of thrusting one’s 
bare arm into a kettle of boiling water.** Thus, a purely ex- 
ternal bond came to unite two separate groups of ideas and 
activities, which nevertheless might in course of time have 
fused inextricably and been combined through the rationaliz- 
ing process. 

Under certain conditions secondary association is the re- 
sult of substitution. It is quite true that the primitive mind 
in general resents a departure from the traditional norm, 
but even among so conservative a people as the Polynesians 

304 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the overshadowing influence of a strong will-power in a 
man of authority was shown capable of wiping out a cus- 
tom of hoary antiquity; and in the Plains the vision of a 
leader was sufficient sanction for a change in routine. How- 
ever, I am not so much concerned now to illustrate substitu- 
tions due to great prestige as rather the changes inevitably 
arising through novel conditions. Assuredly there is a 
healthy preference for the good old way, but even where de- 
parture from it appears a venturesome enterprise the con- 
flict, whether to perform with some modification or not at 
all, will often be decided in favor of the former alternative. 
Thus, in the summer of 1916 I witnessed the Hopi of Oraibi 
village perform the Snake Dance without any of the Ante- 
lope priests traditionally expected to go through certain ac- 
tivities. A schism dividing the villagers had left the vic- 
torious party in possession of their habitations but without 
one of the two sacred brotherhoods that ought to codperate 
in the ceremony: accordingly, some of the Snake priests 
took over functions not “properly” belonging to them. The 
case is doubtless typical of much ritualistic history. A still 
more instructive example has been discussed by Dr. Spier. 
Among the Arapaho a “flat-pipe” represents the most highly 
venerated object, and its keeper naturally acts as the master 
of ceremonies in the Sun Dance. But in the Oklahoma 
branch of this people the tribal palladium was lacking, and 
a sacred wheel, such as played only a subordinate part in 
Wyoming, rose to ascendancy and “acquired an enhanced 
value, until it is to-day, in the eyes of the southern Arapaho, 
next to the tribal pipe the most sacred possession of the 
tribe,."* 

As an accompaniment of diffusion secondary associations 
may develop not only without arousing antagonism but even 
without entering consciousness. A tribe borrowing an alien 

ASSOCIATION 305 

dance does not and cannot copy it with photographic exact- 
ness. For one thing, the learners may not have been ini- 
tiated into the esoteric or subjective aspects of the perform- 
ance. For another, even if they were, certain features could 
not possibly be transplanted. Thus, the Plains Indian tribes 
have in part military societies graded in a series, in part co- 
ordinate societies of otherwise similar character. But if a 
people lacking the hierarchical grading patterned a rite no 
matter how closely upon that performed by one of the graded 
associations, essential elements would have to be omitted, to 
wit, the relations of the society to its neighboring grades. 
But what is true negatively also holds in a positive way: a 
native observer not merely eliminates what he cannot assimi- 
late, he also amplifies what he borrows in harmony with his 
received notions of ritualistic propriety, never dreaming per- 
haps that he is adding to the borrowed feature something 
alien to the borrowers, nay, conceivably militating against 
their ceremonial ideals. Thus, the military societies of the 
Hidatsa and Mandan were all entered by purchase of mem- 
bership rights. Hence if any addition was to be made to 
the system, it was possible only by making purchase a sine 
qua non: a dance borrowed from, say, the Crow, where no 
such idea was in vogue for performances of this category, 
was perforce altered by a sort of analogic leveling to the 
Hidatsa pattern. 

Now it is a significant observation that the ritualistic pat- 
tern of a tribe may embrace not merely the characteristics of 
observances but the very purposes for which the ceremonial 
is performed ; or, to be more precise, for which it is avowedly 
performed. Thus, the Arapaho have eight major cere- 
monies, each and every one of which is initiated only as the 
result of a pledge made to avert danger or death. In short, 
because of the standardization of rationalizing about cere- 

306 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

monial aims, ceremonial activity has become firmly linked 
with one particular type of explanation. The inevitable con- 
sequence will be that when any new set of comparable ob- 
servances is introduced its rationalization will follow the 
path of least resistance, that is, will fall into the accustomed 
groove. In principle, this of course exactly parallels the 
etiological pattern characteristic of the region, the inclina- 
tion, so often emphasized above, to derive anything and 
everything from a visionary experience. When my Hidatsa 
informants did not know of a vision-myth to account for a 
given ritual, they quite automatically inferred that the cere- 
mony was not of native origin. I encountered an instruc- 
tive case among the Crow. These people had within recent 
times adopted a Pipe ritual from the Hidatsa and had dis- 
covered that the sister tribe lacked the Crow Tobacco cere- 
mony. These facts were introduced into the legend account- 
ing for the separation of the two groups by the assumption 
that when the division occurred the founder of the Crow 
tribe was blessed with a revelation of the Tobacco, the 
founder of the Hidatsa tribe with that of the sacred Pipe. 
The assurance with which this rationalization was advanced 
is rather amusing because the Hidatsa themselves, far from 
claiming authorship of the Pipe ritual, say that they ob- 
tained it from the Arikara. That was a possibility the Crow 
rationalizer had not considered: his craving for a causal ex- 
planation for certain differences in religious behavior between 
two branches of a once undivided people was adequately sat- 
isfied when he had applied the approved formula. 

Can we define the phenomena described above in more 
definitely psychological terms? Always with the under- 
standing that an association occurring in the individual 
psyche does not forthwith become a cultural fact but can 
only be converted into one where the relations of the individ- 

ASSOCIATION 307 

ual mind to its social environment are favorable, we can 
proceed to an analysis of the initial association. To take 
a concrete example, all the Arapaho military organizations 
performed ceremonies to ward off danger, but some of these 
are demonstrably of alien origin. Now what happened when 
one of these foreign ceremonial complexes was adopted into 
the Arapaho scheme? There was evidently what psycholo- 
gists generally call association by similarity and contiguity: 
the complex was at once put into the same category as cer- 
tain well-established ceremonies and whatever general fea- 
tures were linked with these were thus automatically joined 
to the newcomer. This implies a partial blindness—doubt- 
less only in the rarest cases a willful blindness—as to the 
phenomenon assimilated. Attention is concentrated on like- 
ness to familiar performances, specific differences are of 
course noticed but merely as constituting a pleasing variation 
in detail: the new ceremony is merely a novel embodiment 
of the current “idea” of ceremonialism in a Platonic sense. 
Hence there is what Professor Woodworth has called the 
“response by analogy,” based on the neglect of everything 
in the borrowed elements that cannot be forthwith adapted 
to the norm. 

Now the perception of such similarity provides the cue for 
secondary association in many circumstances that do not in- 
volve contact of separate groups; and here lies in my opinion 
one of the most effective instrumentalities for the elabora- 
tion of ceremonial routine. This may be illustrated by a 
series of otherwise widely divergent cases. 

It was a rule among the Hidatsa that in the collective pur- 
chase of membership in a military society each purchaser 
should select an individual ‘father’? who was to be feasted 
and presented with special gifts during the period of pre- 
liminary instruction; and this “father” was chosen from 

308 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

among the kinsmen of the novice’s real father. Why this 
connection between acquiring a particular group of cere- 
monial rights and the special favoring of patrilineal rela- 
tives? For the simple reason that, quite apart from any 
ritualistic activity, these paternal kinsfolk were according to 
Hidatsa (as well as Crow) usage preéminently those tribes- 
men whom it was proper to honor, entertain, and present 
with gifts when a warrior returned with booty. When, 
therefore, a Hidatsa found himself in a situation in which 
entertainment and donations were called for, he naturally 
singled out for such differential treatment some one who in 
the normal events of life would be so distinguished. The 
bond between a particular military society complex and the 
honoring of the father’s kinsman was a wholly adventitious 
one: the situation, however, happened to furnish the cue 
for a typical response by analogy. 

Let us change the scene and revert to the Papuan initia- 
tion festivals described in an earlier chapter. How comes it 
that a performance purporting to admit youths to the ad- 
vantages of full-fledged citizenship and to strike terror into 
the hearts of the women should be combined, of all things, 
with a pig-market? As a matter of fact, there is more than 
one tertium quid comparationis. Pigs are fattened in any 
event for the initiation feast, hence why not sell some of 
them and draw profit as well as amusement and edification 
from the affair? Again, initiation is an occasion that unites 
all neighboring tribes, and the same holds for a market; 
what then more natural than to hit two birds with one 
stone? The apparently strange association of athletic games 
with the most sacred Polynesian festivals is probably amena- 
ble to an analogous explanation. 

It should never be forgotten that when a feature is thus 
brought into a new context it may thereby assume a charac- 

ASSOCIATION 309 

ter very different from that borne in isolation. For exam- 
ple, the games played by some Plains Indian tribes in the 
Ghost Dance became holy not because they were such in 
themselves but because they suggested and symbolized the 
old life that had become hallowed in the reaction against 
Caucasian aggressiveness. 

In North America, where information is relatively ample, 
the growth of elaborate festivals by successive accretion 
through response by analogy can often be traced step by 
step. Thus, there is no logical connection between initiation 
into a society devoting itself to the planting of sacred To- 
bacco and the formal recital of an individual brave’s war 
record; yet when an adoption occurs among the Crow, the 
entrance into the lodge is uniformly preceded by such a nar- 
rative. “The reason is fairly clear. At every festive gath- 
ering of the Crow there is a recital of war deeds; the To- 
bacco initiation produces such a gathering, which elicits the 
customary concomitant ; and thus the coup-recital becomes a 
feature of the Tobacco adoption ceremony.” 

The at first bewildering complexity of, say, the Sun Dance 
becomes intelligible when we apply this principle of interpre- 
tation, as has been done by Dr. Spier,”° whose examples can 
easily be multiplied. Thus, at a certain stage in the Crow 
performance distinguished young men point sharpened poles 
at the cooks of the buffalo tongues prepared during the fes- 
tival. This is obviously because of the license widely granted 
to braves on the Plains of appropriating whatever food took 
their fancy. The interminable recital of war exploits at 
various stages of the Crow and Dakota ceremonies simply 
represents the usual procedure on a public occasion. If the 
first tree felled for the dance structure is shot at and formally 
struck by the bystanders, nothing is more obvious consider- 
ing that it symbolizes the enemy, hence evokes the traditional 

310 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

formal charge. The Arapaho share with a few other tribes 
the notion that a ceremonial superior may be conciliated by 
the surrender of one’s wife, and since the typical relation- 
ship of ceremonial hierarchy obtains between the Sun Dance 
pledger and his “grandfather” the offering is made in this 
connection also. As Spier clearly shows, such amplification 
implies merely a greater or lesser drawing on the tribal stock 
of procedure, and it is not difficult to understand why inno- 
vation along such familiar lines does not evoke resentment 
but is readily converted from the momentary promptings of 
a cue supplied to an individual mind into a part of the estab- 
lished procedure. Why should any one voice objections if a 
pipe hitherto handled in silence at a certain stage is suddenly 
offered with traditional prayers to the Four Quarters? And 
if four is the mystic number, what limit is there to the un- 
opposed quadrupling—and consequent impressive lengthen- 
ing—of any integral feature? 

The processes of association are of course the same when 
no particular behavior is involved, when we are dealing with 
the elaboration not of ceremonial but of mythical concepts. 
So many illustrations are provided by the material cited in 
this book that a case or two will suffice for explicit discus- 
sion, To take a hackneyed instance, as soon as a being as- 
sociated with a natural phenomenon, say, the sun or sky, or 
a wind, is clearly envisaged as possessing human character- 
istics, even though in magnified form, there will naturally 
arise through association a tendency to ascribe to him an- 
thropomorphic traits. That is why, even according to Mr. 
Man’s report, the Andamanese god Puluga (Biliku) eats, 
drinks, sleeps, and begets children. Similarly, it is not dif- 
ficult to understand why the ancient Egyptians evolved di- 
vinities in triads of father, mother, and son. In some of 
the visionary experiences recorded among the Crow the 

ASSOCIATION 311 

mental operations are quite transparent. Lone-tree’s identifi- 
cation of the Dipper by the seven stars in his queue has al- 
ready been described. Again, an old man is represented as 
being visited by four men and since each has a star in front 
of him he knows that it is the stars that are blessing him. 
But while the first man sings four songs, the others merely 
sing one apiece. “This made seven songs in all, accordingly 
the visionary believed these men were the Dipper.”’ 

It is of course artificial to separate ideation and behavior. 
The way in which they are always potentially interdependent 
is seen in the last case when the visionary in conformity with 
his revelation unites seven persons for a joint ritualistic 
enterprise.”” 

A somewhat perplexing category of associations, both in 

myth and in ritual, rests on the principle of antithesis rather 
-than similarity, It is clear from an inspection of the evi- 
dence from individual psychology that different ideas have a 
very unequal power of evoking their opposites: for instance, 
of Kent and Rosanoff’s subjects only 37 responded “high” 
to stimulus “deep,” while fully 365 coupled “hard” with 
“soft.” In other words, whatever individual differences 
may exist in this respect are shrouded by other effective 
causes. It is thus anything but easy to work backwards 
from an empirically noted linkage of contraries to the con- 
ditions favoring such a result. Nevertheless some observa- 
tions may be made that are not wholly futile. 

In the first place, it may be possible to show that the an- 
tithesis is more apparent than real. For instance, some 
writers have been puzzled by the dual personality of a cre- 
ator or hero, as in the case of the Crow Indians’ Old-Man- 
Coyote. I have already expressed the opinion that if the 
creator were really conceived as a definitely ethical personal- 
ity such extravaganzas of unsocial conduct as are constantly 

252 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

ascribed to him are not intelligible, whatever allowances may 
be made for primitive inconsistency. But Professor Boas 
has solved many cases of this sort by demonstrating that the 
creator’s or hero’s feats are not, as our preconceptions impel 
us to believe, prompted by altruism at all. 

Even in his heroic achievements he remains a trickster bent 
upon the satisfaction of his own desires. . . . He liberates the 
sun, not because he pities mankind, but because he desires it; 
and the first use he tries to make of it is to compel fishermen to 
give him part of their catch. He gets the fresh water because 
he is thirsty, and unwillingly spills it all over the world while he 
is making his escape. He liberates the fish because he is hungry, 
and gets the tides in order to be able to gather shell-fish.?* 

More difficult are those instances in which a sacred rite is 
combined with an exhibition of buffoonery, obscenity, or at 
least with what seems a logically inconsistent exhibition of 
levity. Wundt has expressed the theory that burlesque fol- 
lows in the wake of solemnity. He is willing to concede 
that this transition is very old; indeed, he contends that it 
is found among all peoples in no matter how rude a state 
of culture. Two psychological factors are said to produce 
the transformation. On the one hand, the sacred perform- 
ance from the very start harbored an element of pleasure 
inseparable from song and dance; and this secular feature is 
strengthened as the primary religious motive fades away. 
But, secondly, since this does not wholly vanish, the feeling 
of pleasure is accentuated by the sense of contrast. He gives 
as an example that of the once awe-inspiring mask, which be- 
comes comical as the belief in its supernatural potency wanes. 
When the mummer removes his mask and distorts his own 
features into a grimace, the humorous effect is enhanced be- 
cause this action dispels whatever fear may linger in connec- 

ASSOCIATION 313 

tion with the false face. To this antithesis of dread and re- 
laxation a second feeling of contrast is added, viz., that be- 
tween the real human face and its imitation. Thus, from 
Wundt’s point of view the comic, however widespread and 
ancient, is a derivative phenemenon that invariably presup- 
poses the serious since it implies the inversion of a preceding 
serious impression.”® 

It is quite possible to accept the theory that the comic 
rests on a feeling of contrast without admitting the special 
conclusion that burlesque is invariably the outgrowth of a 
sacred rite. An Andamanese shaman known by Professor 
Brown performed a pantomimic dance patterned on what he 
had seen when on a visit to the world of spirits. The kind 
of thing he did that aroused great amusement among the 
spectators was to feign having hurt his leg by violent danc- 
ing or to imitate the step of the women’s dance.*® The hu- 
mor of the situation clearly consists not in the degradation 
of a lofty effect but in the transparent contrast of reality 
and pretense. So in a Hopi dance I have witnessed the spec- 
tators bursting into derisive shouts when a woman attempted 
to shoot an arrow: between archery and the feminine sex 
there is an incongruity in the native mind, and the real or 
assumed awkwardness of the female archer precipitates 
laughter. It may of course be said that the real act of shoot- 
ing is serious business, which suffers degradation by mock- 
practice. But that is very different from deriving the buf- 
foonery appearing in ritual from the serious element in ritual 
by an inherent process of transformation. Wundt ignores 
the possibility that the humorous element, while of course 
inseparable from human life as a whole, may very well ap- 
pear unconnected with any religious ceremony, The question, 
then, for us is not how the comic may arise from the sacred, 
but why drollery such as figures in the non-ceremonial life 

314 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

of the people may be injected into situations of such solem- 
nity as apparently to preclude such secondary association. 

It may not be out of place to describe one concrete exam- 
ple of such non-ceremonial comic performances. Among the 
Crow Indians the clowns are not permanently organized but 
appear when the people are assembled in large numbers,— 
in recent times during the Fourth of July festivities. They 
not only make themselves unrecognizable, wearing a black- 
ened mask, but affect the acme of ugliness in their appear- 
ance; for instance, mud is used in place of body-paint, their 
musician beats a torn drum, their horse is the most crooked- 
legged and swollen-kneed in camp. They walk as if lame, 
and their feigned clumsiness of movement precipitates gen- 
eral mirth. One of their number dresses like a woman, and 
his clothes are stuffed so as to simulate pregnancy; this 
clown rides double with “her husband.” All kinds of buf- 
foonery are perpetrated: the actors mock people in the audi- 
ence irrespective of their distinction; they dance as ridicu- 
lously as possible; and the horseman in mounting purposely 
overleaps so as to fall, whereupon he acts as if seriously in- 
jured; and in answering questions as to their home the 
clowns may indicate that they have journeyed for hundreds 
of days to get to the camp. In addition, there was formerly 
a pantomimic representation of sexual intercourse by “hus- 
band” and “wife.” * 

A personal observation may help to elucidate our general 
psychological problem. In 1911 a group of these clowns 
rode up to the dance house, where the Hot Dance was being 
performed, dismounted, and to the amusement of all specta- 
tors joined in the dance. Now this intrusion, though possi- 
bly it had never occurred before, is in no sense enigmatic. 
For the Hot Dance had long lost among the Crow whatever 
religious significance it once had, so that the clowns were 

ASSOCIATION 315 

‘merely adding a special feature to the amusement program. 
But further, granting that the idea of playing the clown had 
occurred at this particular time, nothing was more natural 
than that the clowns should proceed to the dance house, 
where most of their prospective audience were gathered. 

It is otherwise when such clownishness is coupled with be- 
havior of the utmost solemnity, and then we are confronted 
by the problem under discussion. This does not happen to 
occur in representative form among the Crow, but examples 
from elsewhere abound. Whether the Maidu of the Sacra- 
mento Valley in central California are holding a spiritistic 
meeting or celebrating one of their ceremonial dances, the 
clown has a part officially not less recognized than the sha- 
man’s. ‘He apes the shaman’s actions and speeches, tries to 
make his audience laugh, and gives an exhibition of gluttony 
only checked with great difficulty by the shaman’s reproaches. 
This character is strongly reminiscent of certain function- 
aries in the ritual of the Pueblo tribes of Arizona and 
New Mexico. I have myself seen clowns of the Tewa 
village on the First Hopi Mesa entertaining spec- 
tators by their voracity, practical joking, and every other 
kind of farcical action while a serious masquerade dance 
was going on, and even mimicking the priests in asperging 
the mummers with corn meal. But perhaps the most in- 
structive data are supplied by the Zufii of New Mexico, and 
a brief description of the relevant data seems desirable. 

All Zufii males enter a rain-making and mask-wearing so- 
ciety, which is ceremonially distinct from a series of medical 
and magical associations admitting both sexes and without 
compulsory membership. Buffoonery is intimately con- 
nected with both types of religious activity. During the 
public performances of the Masked Dancers appear a group 
of annually chosen clowns, the Koyemshi, who mimic the 

416 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

celebrants, deride one another’s appearance, indulge in ob- 
scene raillery, play games, pretend being frightened at some 
child in the crowd, fall to loggerheads with one of the fra- 
ternities, and otherwise seek to amuse the spectators. Not- 
withstanding their distinctness from the Koyemshi in 
point of organization, the doctoring fraternity known as 
Newekwe (Galaxy) is often connected with the Koyemshi 
in public pleasantries. This association is plausible enough 
considering the comic pantomime correlated with both 
groups. The Newekwe, however, have as a distinctive fea- 
ture obligatory eating of filth, members vying with one an- 
other as to the amount consumed. This is only one of a 
series of equally repulsive actions, from our point of view, 
such as the drinking of urine and the biting off of the heads 
of living mice. Nevertheless, this same organization prac- 
tices the typical rituals of other sacred fraternities, erects 
an altar, indulges in ceremonial smoking, and constructs 
prayer plumes.** 

Among the Plains Indians the contrast is of a rather dif- 
ferent kind. Thus, in the Crazy Dance of the Arapaho the 
performers “act in as extravagant and foolish a manner as 
possible, and are allowed full license to do whatever they 
please”: they annoy every one in camp, some impersonate 
animals which their comrades shoot at, aiming backward 
over their shoulders; indeed, all do directly the opposite of 
what would be expected from a rational being. Thus, if a 
dancer is carrying a heavy load he pretends that it is negli- 
gible, while a light one is treated as though it were a ter- 
rible burden; and all members “talk backward,” that is, 
say exactly the opposite of what they mean. Further, the 
Crazy Dancers rush into a fire specially built for the purpose 
and trample it out. They have a root possessing the virtue 
of paralyzing man and beast: using it against a rattlesnake, 

ASSOCIATION 317 

for example, they can make him unable to coil.22 These 
features recur in varying combinations among many tribes 
of the same region, as a few examples will amply demon- 
strate. The Crow had “Crazy Dogs’ who said the reverse 
of what they meant and were pledged to foolhardiness in bat- 
tle. In the Dog society of the Hidatsa the officers distin- 
guished from the rank and file as “Real Dogs” also used 
backward speech, were expected to be particularly brave, 
and acted contrary to normal ways, for instance, by walking 
about practically naked in the winter time. They also took 
out meat from a kettle of boiling water without injury to 
their arms or hands. This last-mentioned trick was in the 
highest degree characteristic of the Heyoka organization of 
the Dakota, whose general motto was to defy natural con- 
duct and normal custom. They would pretend to be cold 
in summer and hot in winter, would assist women in cook- 
ing, might face west instead of east in a Sun Dance, and al- 
together played the part of buffoons. Nevertheless, the so- 
ciety had a definitely religious setting. The members the- 
oretically modeled themselves on a being or group of beings 
from whom the organization derived its name, and partici- 
pation depended on a particular type of vision,—indeed, was 
compulsory for those having such visions lest they be killed 
by thunder. 

I am of opinion that the phenomena cited proceed from 
diverse psychological motives and that successful grappling 
with the question at issue will only begin when we cease to 
lump together all so-called clownish behavior under a single 
head. For one thing, the fire-dance of the Arapaho and 
the kettle-trick of the Dakota and Hidatsa are probably not 
to be confounded with buffoonery at all. True, they imply 
an apparently irrational defiance of the laws of nature. In 
reality, however, the point of these performances lies in the 

318 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

immunity of the actors from the effects that would normally 
be expected; in other words, they are demonstrating their 
supernatural powers, a thing very different from clownish- 
ness. Secondly, the reckless bravery of certain men in the 
military societies, such as the Hidatsa Real Dogs, is also in 
the nature of a demonstration, though of a different sort: 
the actor proves that he possesses in an exalted degree a trait 
incumbent on all tribesmen in milder form. Yet in this case 
we can see how comic elements might easily develop inci- 
dentally. Suppose that the name “Crazy Dog” is once ap- 
plied to a Crow who has undertaken the vow of foolhardi- 
ness; then the very name will suggest certain modes of con- 
duct and correlated modes of treatment. “As these dogs 
act when they see a cow, so he acted in sight of the buffalo. 
. . . When they went ona hunt, the people regarded him as 
a dog.” The mad ignoring of danger obligatory in sight 
of the foe might be extended to like conduct in camp: as a 
Crazy Dog walked straight towards the enemy irrespective 
of consequences, so he would ride directly into the midst of 
a group of tribesmen unless shooed away as a dog. The 
suggestions of the word “crazy” would also account for 
backward speech and all manner of eccentricity. In this 
way, some of the farcical proceedings can be interpreted not 
as the effect of religious degeneration but as casual ramifi- 
cations of military ideas; and they appear in the religious 
context merely because these military ideas are linked with 
religious ones. 

As for the buffoonery of the Koyemshi, we may fall back 
upon a principle previously used to account for ceremonial 
amplification. If some slapstick sort of comedy exists in a 
tribe independently of sacred connections and is more or less 
regularly evoked by a specific condition, then the occur- 
rence of the proper cue in the course of some holy ritual 

ASSOCIATION 319 

may set in motion the machinery of clownishness without 
any one’s resenting the intrusion as anomalous. 

All this must be taken as purely tentative and at best cov- 
ers only a part of the field. It is, however, useful to point 
out the existence of problems and also that they are at least 
in principle not altogether insoluble. 

REFERENCES 

1 Hoffding, 1893: 152. 

2 Kent and Rosanoff. 

3 Lowie, 1922: 334, 391; id., 1915: 41; id., 1919: 185. 

4 Jung: 27 sq. 

°R. F. Benedict: 79. 

® Gutmann: 88 sq.; Spencer and Gillen, 1904: 609. Sapir, 
1922. 

*Junod: 11, 376. 

8 Boas, 1914: 409. 

® Woodworth: 376. 

10 Brown: 316. Wissler, 1904: 236. 

11 'Wissler, 1904: 247. 

12 Merker : 196. 

18 Ehrenreich: 84. Lowie, 1914: 608. 

14 Matthews, 1897: 90. Dorsey and Kroeber: 51. 

18 Spencer and Gillen, 1904: 588 sq. 

16 Wissler, 1908: 74 sq., 78 sq. 

17 Haeberlin: 9, 47. 

18 Spier. 

19 Skinner and Satterlee: 253-263. 

20 Boas, 1914: 403. 

21 Parsons, 1924. 

22 Towie, 1913 (a): 109. 

28 Skinner, 1913: 92. 

24 Lowie, 1913 (c) : 232, 252. 

25 Spier: 515 f. 

320 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

#6 Spier: 513. 

27 Lowie, 1919: 185; id., 1922: 334. 

28 Boas, 1914: 395. 

29 Wundt: 588 sq. 

80 Brown: 164. 

31 Lowie, 1913 (b) : 207. 

82 Dixon, 1905: 271, 315. Stevenson: 224, 235, 261, 276, 
429 sq. 

83 Kroeber, 1902-1907 : 188-196. 

84 Lowie, 1922: 193; id., 1913 (c) : 288; id., 1913 (a): 1133 
Wissler, 1912: 82. 

CHAPTER XIV 
CONCLUSION 

In the Introduction I offered a tentative definition of re- 
ligion; and in concluding it seems desirable to reéxamine it 
and to consider its implications. Let me reaffirm, first of all, 
my skepticism as to the adequacy of any definition purport- 
ing to summarize the totality of phenomena labeled “Reli- 
gion.” Why, indeed, should any one spread over several 
hundred pages what could be compressed into a single pithy 
sentence? The student of religion is, in this respect, neither 
more nor less favorably situated than, say, a biologist whose 
labors cannot be summarized by definitions of Life. My 
position from the very start has been a psychological one: 
in other words, I have tried to bring under a common head 
phenomena that from a psychological point of view belong 
together as set over against the rest of the universe. I re- 
ject the parochialism of Fielding’s parsons because Presby- 
terianism and Episcopalianism are psychologically more akin 
to each other than either is to atheism; I exclude Leibnizian 
logic-chopping because the mental processes it involves are 
distinct from those predominant in undoubtedly religious 
manifestations; I include magic and religion under a com- 
mon head in so far as both display the same or similar atti- 
tudes. 

My definition, then, is not meant to be an adequate but a 
minimum definition of the psychological correlates of re- 
ligion; it merely attempts to disengage the least common de- 
nominator in all religious phenomena, Like Durkheim I de- 

321 

322 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

rive this common element from a dichotomy of the universe; 
but, following Marett rather than Durkheim, I see this 
dichotomy not in the arbitrary division of the Sacred from 
the Profane but in the differential response to normal and 
abnormal stimuli, in the spontaneous distinction thus created 
between Natural and Supernatural, which does not require 
any preéxisting abstract formulation of “nature.” The re- 
sponse is that of amazement and awe; and its source is the 
Supernatural, Extraordinary, Weird, Sacred, Holy, Divine. 
Possibly in contradistinction from Dr. Soderblom, I am in- 
clined to regard the last three adjectives as denoting an ex- 
ceedingly common special form of the Extraordinary rather 
than as quite co-extensive with the Extraordinary as a mini- 
mum reality corresponding to the religious sentiment. I 
agree with him, Drs. Marett and Thurnwald, not to men- 
tion others, in regarding the recognition of a personal cor- 
relate of that sentiment as unessential, though of course it 
also is very frequent. 

It may of course be objected that without the customary 
concept of divine personality there cannot be any psychologi- 
cal equivalent to Religion. But let the skeptics beware of 
Parson Adams’s fallacy. The question at issue is at bottom 
one of logical classification on the basis of empirical find- 
ings. It is by no means indispensable that we should all 
classify in precisely the same way, but it is highly desirable 
that we should understand the basis of one another’s classifi- 
cations. Hence, at the risk of repeating what has already 
been expressed in one way or another, I will state the 
grounds for putting into the category of religion some 
phenomena others are accustomed to exclude. 

If I correctly comprehend the facts, the most vital part of 
Crow religion is independent of the personality of the super- 
natural beings but consists in the memory of an ineffable ex- 

CONCLUSION 323 

perience of an extraordinary character: it is the Extraor- 
dinary nature of this subjective experience that hallows its 
objective correlates, lifting them, too, into the empyrean of 
the Extraordinary, usually with the affective tinge peculiar 
to the Sacred. Among the Ekoi I do not find that the im- 
personal njomm inspire generically different emotions from 
those connected with njomm definitely conceived as personal. 
The mystic power of a set of words evokes reactions in a 
Polynesian community that cannot be surpassed in point of 
solemn awe, if they are ever equaled, by the dignity of their 
major deities; and in ancient Egypt the occult name might 
rank as greater than the highest gods themselves. Nay, even 
when we are dealing with the personal supernatural beings 
there may be evidence that it is not the element of personality 
that is significant but a specific impersonal attribute. How, 
for example, shail we interpret Junod’s statement that the 
maximum devotion among the Thonga is shown by those 
natives who have been freed by exorcism from Zulu spirits 
possessing them? Why are the normal tribesman’s prayers 
and offerings to his own ancestors mechanical by compari- 
son with the fervor of the neurotic who lacks the goad of 
filial piety? It is because the latter has had what the other 
cannot directly experience,—the thrill that here, as in the 
case of the Crow, apotheosizes its concomitants. Gods are 
prized as manifestations of the Extraordinary in direct 
proportion to their extraordinariness from a subjective point 
of view. 

It is certainly a matter worth noting that two distinguished 
thinkers who start from a concept of religion that does not 
coincide with mine but who also adhere to a psychological 
position, arrive at a conclusion generically similar to mine, 
that is, feel the necessity of setting aside the conventional 
boundaries of the religious field. For Hoffding, religion is 

324 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the feeling determined by “the fate of values in the struggle 
for existence,” and he concludes his inquiry as follows: 

If this be so, we must not ignore the possibility that this 
underlying element of religion may exist and operate without 
expressing itself either in myth, dogma, or cult.* 

Again, James defines religion as a total reaction upon life 
when involving a solemn, serious and tender attitude; and 
the divine, according to him, is that primal reality to which 
the individual thus responds. He not only is willing to ac- 
knowledge non-theistic Buddhism as a religion but goes so 
far as to say that 

the more fervent opponents of Christian doctrine have often 
enough shown a temper which, psychologically considered, is in- 
distinguishable from religious zeal.? 

In other words, as soon as a psychological position is as- 
sumed, it becomes clear that the most divergent objects, nay, 
the very negation of what is ordinarily felt to be the objec- 
tive of religious devotion, can become invested with religious 
value, that is, can evoke responses psychologically indistin- 
guishable from those evoked by universally acknowledged 
religious objects. This is evidently an opinion shared by 
Durkheim in what seems to me much the soundest part of 
his book. Since the implications of this view are not yet 
fully recognized, a few examples may be cited for purposes 
of illustration. 

With the spread of free-thought many children nowadays 
learn an evolutionary account in place of the Biblical story 
of creation. The truth or falsity of either is not under dis- 
cussion here, merely the psychological attitude engendered. 
That is identical in the two cases: since the age of the learner 

CONCLUSION 325 

precludes an appreciation of the pros and cons, the secular- 
ist’s child imbibes evolution in the same spirit of docile ac- 
ceptance with which the fundamentalist’s child accepts 
the Scriptural account. Evolution for him represents a 
set of dogmas. These belong to the Extraordinary half 
of the universe of experience because they are acquired 
in a manner distinct from that of conclusions reached by 
personal inquiry and critical reasoning. Moreover they are 
emotionally tinged by the associations of early childhood. 
When these dogmas are challenged in later life, there is ac- 
cordingly the same shock that characterizes an affront to 
orthodoxy or the infraction of a taboo. Nay, the very pres- 
entation of favorable arguments may produce a feeling of 
discomfort. So long as Evolution remains an unanalyzed 
mysterious complex of ideas sanctified from boyhood, it is 
taboo, set apart from the operations of logical thinking. At- 
tempt to prove it, and the very need for proof is bound to 
shake confidence: the beliefs are transplanted to the sphere 
of the workaday world, hence they become noa. Besides 
there always lurks the disagreeable suspicion that what can 
be proved by ordinary reasoning might also be disproved by 
the same processes in the light of wider knowledge. 

All the mental processes outlined above in the study of 
primitive religion are traceable in avowedly rationalistic 
literature. The case of Ernst Haeckel, for many years the 
leader of German Darwinism, is instructive. An unbiased 
reader of his popular book on The Riddles of the Universe 
readily perceives that he is not dealing with a colorless pres- 
entation of scientific theory. The author has had a mystic 
thrill from the philosophical extension of an evolutionary 
point of view. Unification of isolated biological data, such 
as every scientific research has for its aim, has led to the 
emotionally gratifying postulate of unity in the whole of 

326 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

the universe, of “monism.”’ But this term does not bear the 
meaning attached to it in philosophical nomenclature; it is 
surcharged with affective significance. It becomes a symbol 
of the soul-satisfying vision and a means for gathering under 
a common head what is independently felt to be valuable,— 
very much as the Crow Indian secondarily associates his life 
values with a visionary experience. Haeckel’s letters to his 
parents during the years of adolescence * prove that no such 
mutation as superficial observers have indicated ever took 
place in Haeckel’s mental development. His attitude, from 
first to last, was psychologically identical,—the attitude of 
an esthetical, sentimental man yearning for some sort of 
awe-inspiring mystery in the universe. When the Protestant 
God of early manhood was superseded by the Principle of 
Causality or the Law of Substance of later years, there was 
a mere substitution of scientific for theological phraseology, 
for the scientific terms did not correspond to the concepts of 
exact science. To align the ardent Haeckel with his dispas- 
sionate preceptor Virchow, both when they met as student 
and professor and in their later tilts in evolutionary debate, 
is to observe the profound effect of individual variability in 
men exposed to similar external influences. Further, the 
phenomenal vogue of Haeckel’s teachings illustrates the in- 
fluence a powerful personality appearing at an opportune 
juncture can exert on thousands of followers. 

The investigation of Socialism, not as a system of eco- 
nomic thought or of social reform, but exclusively as a 
phenomenon of social psychology, likewise presents many 
points of interest of which only one need be mentioned 
here. 

In 1877 there appeared a rather technical book devoted to 
the evolution of forms of marriage and other sociological 
phenomena,—Lewis H. Morgan’s Ancient Society, The 

CONCLUSION 327 

author certainly would not have subscribed to many doc- 
trines of classical Socialism, but the then leaders of the Ger- 
man movement were attracted by some aspects of the work, 
had it translated into German, and made it an integral part 
of Socialistic doctrine. In this way, specific doctrines which 
in themselves had no connection with the objects of Social- 
istic propaganda became, by secondary association, sacrosanct 
in the eyes of Socialistic orthodoxy, for the whole book had 
become a symbol of the emotional complex that primarily 
constituted Socialistic psychology. For example, Morgan 
had insisted that the monogamous family must have de- 
veloped slowly out of preceding stages, the earliest being one 
of complete promiscuity, which was followed by group mar- 
riage. If some innocent ethnologist pointed out that the 
rudest peoples were often monogamous, he was fortunate 
if Socialistic critics did not charge him with deliberate falsifi- 
cation of facts, but merely with an inveterate Philistine 
prejudice that made him project bourgeois morality into 
primitive social life. JI myself once discussed the kinship 
systems of certain Indian tribes with an intelligent Russian 
lady and tried to explain that my observations did not bear 
out Morgan’s contentions. The answer was that they must 
have changed since Morgan’s day as a result of modern con- 
ditions. To understand the absurdity of this rationaliza- 
tion ad hoc, we must recollect that it is of the very essence of 
Morgan’s system that kinship terms are preserved with the 
utmost tenacity, survive the wreckage of social systems, and 
can thus be used to reconstruct social usages dating back not 
centuries but millennia. Orthodoxy does not change in 
character with a change from ecclesiastical to secular 
dogmas: its invariable correlate is “a temper which, psycho- 
logically considered, is indistinguishable from religious zeal.” 

The examples considered above happen to belong to the 

328 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

field of “radical’’ movements, but secular movements with a 
deliberately or, at least, predominantly conservative bias dis- 
play precisely the same psychology. Thus, admirers of a 
powerful State glorify their ideals with all the fanaticism 
of religious enthusiasts and evolve a mythology of their 
own, with its symbols and rationalizations ; and eugenics was 
heralded by its founder himself as a substitute for traditional 
religion. We are, however, not concerned with appraising 
these several religions; we are interested merely in register- 
ing the fact that there persists, apart from universally recog- 
nized forms of religion, a sentiment analogous to that asso- 
ciated with them. This sentiment, then, is independent of 
a definable object but capable of concentrating on any object 
and by such concentration creating its Supernatural, while 
by secondary association all manner of other objects may be 
gathered within the scope of the Supernatural. 

This conclusion gives a sufficiently clear answer to the 
query so often raised in recent decades, whether religion is 
likely to outlast the apparently triumphant spread of scien- 
tific enlightenment. If religion is understood in our sense, 
then assuredly it will survive, for history shows merely a 
transfer of the religious sentiment to new manifestations 
of the Extraordinary or Holy, never an extinction of the 
sentiment itself. Science itself—not as the ideal of the great- 
est scientists but as the actual phenomenon of culture-history 
—exhibits the unremitting sloughing off of folk-beliefs and 
their unremitting regeneration when the thoughts of the bold 
innovator turn into the sanctified formule of his disciples,— 
when they accept as Extraordinary or taboo what he estab- 
lished by defying the traditional taboos of his time. 

But even if religion is conceived in the customary fashion, 
there is no obvious warrant in history for presaging its ex- 
tinction. Personal deities have certainly made a powerful 

CONCLUSION 329 

appeal in a variety of distinct societies, and there is no rea- 
son for assuming that within any measurable span of time 
such concepts will fail to satisfy the religious longings of a 
large portion of mankind. What is more, it is likely that in 
our own civilization some of the very forces that have been 
most active in combating organized religion in the immediate 
past will rally to its defense. “The excesses of nationalistic 
State worshipers, coupled with the charlatanism of race-the- 
orists who ignorantly pretend to knowledge no living man 
possesses or even deliberately falsify biological data, may 
well raise a doubt among humanitarian liberals of the type of 
John Morley, whether the perverse adoration of brute force 
is a preferable substitute for a faith and a Church never 
wholly devoid of spiritual elements. 

From a purely intellectual poirit’of view, too, the attitude 
towards established religion on the part of professed ration- 
alists is likely to acquire a serenity hardly to be anticipated 
a generation ago. On the one hand, the traditional time- 
honored allegations against organized religion are apprecia- 
bly reduced in the light of sane historical inquiry: from 
Mach we learn that it was, above all, the inveterate spon- 
taneous human adherence to tradition rather than the ex- 
ternal pressure of a hostile Church that arrested progress in 
the physical sciences. But historical-mindedness cannot stop 
at this point. If it is the anthropologist’s first duty to study 
his Crow or Ekoi with the maximum possible of sympa- 
thetic insight; if practices from our point of view judged 
absurd or repulsive are examined without an attempt at ad- 
verse comment; would it not be strange if he assumed to- 
wards the majority sharing his own culture an attitude of 
lofty or at best good-natured disdain? The thinker who de- 
clines to pass judgment on the Ekoi belief in sorcery or on 
Congolese fetichism cannot consistently denounce as “idola- 

330 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

trous” the observances of fellow-citizens whose conceptions 
of the Divine happen not to coincide with his own. 

An unbiased view of human history also leads to a re- 
vision of the received rationalist program of future progress. 
We cannot lay down as a uniformly desirable goal that 
purely intellectual enlightenment which so powerfully stirred 
the spirits of many worthy thinkers of the last century. As 
Cornelius has well said, not the acquisition of intellectual 
insight but the unfolding of human individuality into an 
harmonious work of art constitutes the supreme and uni- 
versal human task. Let those whose Divine lies in the pur- 
suit of demonstrable truth pursue their way unhindered by 
external obstacles, but let them not foist on others an atti- 
tude peculiar to themselves. Thus this book closes with a 
note often struck in the preceding pages,—with a recognition 
of the importance of individual differences. 

REFERENCES 

1 Hoffding, 1906: 109. 
2 James: 35. 
8 Haeckel. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Note.—This Bibliography includes all the literature cited in 
this work. The following abbreviations are used to designate 
serial publications : 

A.F.L., Mem.—Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society. 

Amer. Anth.—American Anthropologist. 

Amer. Anth., Mem.—Memoirs of the American Anthropologi- 
cal Association. 

A.M.N.H.—Anthropological Papers of the American Museum 
of Natural History. 

A.M.N.H., Bull—Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History. 

A.M.N.H., Mem.—Memoirs of the American Museum of Nat- 
ural History. 

B.A.E—Annual Report of the Bureau of (American) Eth- 
nology. 

B.A.E., Bull—Bulletin of the Bureau of (American) Eth- 
nology. 

J.A.F.L.—Journal of American Folk-Lore. 

U.C.—University of California Publications in American 
Archeology and Ethnology. 

Z.£.E.—Zeitschrift fir Ethnologie. 

Bamler, G. 

1911. Tami; in Neuhauss, 111, 489-566. 
Bartlett, F. C. 

1923. Psychology and Primitive Culture. New York. 
Beckwith, M. W. 

1919. The Hawaiian Romance of Laieikawai. 33 B.A.E., 

285-666, 
331 

232 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Benedict, Laura Watson. 
1916. A Study of Bagobo Ceremonial, Magic and Myth. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, xxv. 
Benedict, Ruth Fulton. 
1923. The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America. 
Amer. Anth. Mem., no. 29. 
Bleek, W. H. I. and Lloyd, L. C. 
IQII. Specimens of Bushman Folklore. London. 
Boas, Franz. 
1894. Chinook Texts. Washington. 
1903. The Decorative Art of the North American Indians. 
The Popular Science Monthly, 481-408. 
1914. Mythology and Folk-tales of the North American In- 
dians. J.A.F.L., xxvu, 374-410. 
1916. Tsimshian Mythology. 31 B.A.E. Washington. 
Bogoras, W. 
1909. The Chukchee: A.M.N.H., Mem., x1, Leiden, 
Breasted, J. H. 
1912. Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient 
Egypt. New York, 
Brown, A. R. 
1922, The Andaman Islanders. Cambridge. 
Buschan, Georg. 
1922. Illustrierte Vélkerkunde, 2 vols. Stuttgart. 
Collocott, E. E. V. 
1921. The Supernatural in Tonga. Amer. Anth., 415 sq. 

Czaplicka, M. A. 
1914. Aboriginal Siberia. Oxford. 

Densmore, F. 
1922. Northern Ute Music. B.A.E., Bull. 75. Washington. 

Dixon, R. B. 
1905. The Northern Maidu. A.M.N.H., Bull. XVII, 119-346. 
1907. The Shasta. A.M.N.H., Bull. xvr, 381-498. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 333 

Dorsey, G. A., and Kroeber, A. L. 
1903. Traditions of the Arapaho. Field Museum Publications 
81. Chicago. 
Dorsey, J. O. 
1894. A Study of Siouan Cults. 11 B.A.E., 351-544. Wash- 
ington. 
Dumarest, F. 
1922. Notes of Cochiti, New Mexico. Amer. Anth. Mem., 
VI, 135-230. 
Durkheim, E. 
1912. Les formes élémentaires de la vie réligieuse; le sys- 
téme totémique en Australie. Paris. 
Ehrenreich, P. 
1910. Die allgemeine Mythologie und ihre ethnologischen 
Grundlagen. Leipzig. 
Erdland, P. A. 
1914. Die Marshall-Insulaner. Anthropos-Bibliothek. Min- 
ster i. W. 
Frazer, J. G. 
1922. The Golden Bough. London. 
Gill, W. W. 
1876. Myths and Songs from the South Pacific. London. 
Goldenweiser, A. A. 
1917. Religion and Society. Journal of Philosophy, Psychol- 
ogy, and Scientific Methods, x1v, 121 sq. 
1922. Early Civilization. New York. 
Gomes, Edwin H. 
1911. Seventeen Years Among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo. 
Philadelphia. 
Gutmann, Bruno. 
1909. Dichten und Denken der Dschagganeger ; Beitrage zur 
ostafrikanischen Volkskunde. Leipzig. 
Haeberlin, H. 
1916. The Idea of Fertilization in the Culture of the Pueblo 
Indians. Amer. Anth., Mem., 111, 1-55. 

334 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Haeckel, Ernst. 
1921. Entwicklungsgeschichte einer Jugend; Briefe an die 
Eltern 1852-1856. Leipzig. 
Harrison, Jane. 
1913. Ancient Art and Ritual. New York. 
Hearne, Samuel. 
1795. Journey from Prince of Wales Fort in Hudson’s Bay 
to the Northern Ocean. London. 
Hoffding, Harald. 
1893. Outlines of Psychology. London. 
1906. The Philosophy of Religion. London. 
Hoffman, W. J. 
1891. The Midewiwin or “Grand Medicine Society” of the 
Ojibwa. 7 B.A.E., 143-300. 
Holmes Anniversary Volume. 
1916, Anthropological Essays presented to William Henry 
Holmes. Washington. 
Howitt, A. W. 
1904. The Native Tribes of South-east Australia. London. 
James, William. 
1902. The Varieties of Religious Experience. New York. 
Jenness, D. 
1922. The Life of the Copper Eskimo. Ottawa. 
Jochelson, W. 
1905-1908. The Koryak. A.M.N.H., Mem., x. Leiden. 
1910. The Yukaghir and the Yukaghirized Tungus. 
A.M.N.H., Mem., x11, 1-133. Leiden. 
Jones, William. 
1919. Ojibwa Texts. Publications of the American Ethno- 
logical Society, vol. viz, pt. 2. New York. 
Jung, C. G. 
1919. Studies in Word-Association. New York. 
Junod, H. A. 
1912. The Life of a South African Tribe. 2 vols. Neuchatel. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 335 

Kent, Grace Helen and Rosanoff, A. J. 

1910. A Study of Association in Insanity. Reprinted from 
American Journal of Insanity, vol. xvi, nos. 1 and 2. 
Baltimore. 

Koch-Griinberg, Th. 

1909. Zwei Jahre unter den Indianern. Reisen in Nordwest- 

Brasilien. Berlin. 
Koppers, Wilhelm. 

1921. Die Anfange des menschlichen Gemeinschaftslebens. 
Gladbach. 

1924. Unter Feuerland-Indianern. Stuttgart. 

Kroeber, A. L. 
1902-1907. The Arapaho. A.M.N.H., Bull. xvu, 1-229, 
279-454. 
1916, Thoughts on Zufii Religion; in Holmes Anniversary 
Volume, 269-277. 
1922. Elements of Culture in Native California. U.C., vol. 
13, 259-328. 
1923. Anthropology. New York. 
Lang, Andrew. 

1901. Magic and Religion, London. 

1909. The Making of Religion. 3rd. edition. London. 
Lehner, Stefan. 

1911. Bukaua; in Neuhauss, 111, 397-485. 
Lowie, R. H. 

1909 (a). The Northern Shoshone. A.M.N.H., 11, 165-302. 

1909 (b). The Assiniboine. A.M.N.H., Iv, 1-270. 

1912. Social Life of the Crow Indians. A.M.N.H., 1x, 179- 
247. 

1913 (a). Dance Associations of the Eastern Dakota. A.M. 
N.H., x1, 105-142. 

1913 (b). Military Societies of the Crow Indians, A.M. 
N.H., x1, 145-217. 

1913 (c). Societies of the Hidatsa and Mandan Indians. 
A.M.N.H., x1, 221-358. 

336 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

1914. Ceremonialism in North America. Amer. Anth., 602- 
631. 
1915. The Sun Dance of the Crow Indians. A.M.N.H., xv1, 
1-50. 
1919. The Tobacco Society of the Crow Indians. A.M.N.H., 
XXI, IOI-200. 
1922. The Religion of the Crow Indians. A.M.N.H., xxv, 
309-444. 
Lublinski, Ida. 
1920-1921. Der Medizinmann bei den Naturvolkern Sud- 
amerikas. Z.f.E., 234-263. 
Malo, David. 
1903. Hawaiian Antiquities. Honolulu. 
Marett, R. R. 
1914. The Threshold of Religion. 2nd. edition. London. 

Mariner, William. See Martin, J. 

Martin, J. 

1820. An Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands in 
the South Pacific Ocean, compiled and arranged from the 
extensive communications of Mr. William Mariner. Bos- 
ton. 

Martius, C. Fr. Ph. von. 

1867. Beitrage zur Ethnographie und Sprachenkunde Ameri- 

kas zumal Brasiliens. 2 vols. Leipzig. 
Matthews, Washington. 

1877. Ethnography and Philology of the Hidatsa Indians. 
Washington. 

1897. Navaho Legends A.F.L., Mem., v. Boston. 

Merker, M. 
1910. Die Masai. Berlin. 

Mooney, James. 
1896. The Ghost Dance Religion, 14 B.A.E., pt. 2. Wash- 
ington. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 337 

Morice, A. G. 
1906. The Canadian Denes. Annual Archeological Report. 
Toronto. 
Miller, W. Max. 
1918. The Mythology of All Races, vol. x11, 1-245 ; Egyptian. 
Boston. 
Neuhauss, R. 
1911. Deutsch Neu-Guinea. Berlin. 3 vols. 
Notes analytiques sur les collections ethnographiques du Musée 
du Congo. 1. 1902-1906. Brussels. 
Parker, K. Langloh. 
1905. The Euahlayi Tribe. London. 
Parsons, 1.'C. 
1922. (Editor.) American Indian Life. New York. 
1924. The Scalp-Dance at Zufii (in press). Amer. Anth., 
Mem. no. 31. 
Pechuel-Loesche, E. 
1907. Volkskunde von Loango. Stuttgart. 
Perry, W. J. 
1923. The Children of the Sun: a Study in the Early His- 
tory of Civilization. New York. 
Radin, Paul. 
1914 (a). A Sketch of the Peyote Cult of the Winnebago ; 
a Study in Borrowing. Journal of Religious Psychology, 
VII, I-22. 
1914 (b). Religion of the North American Indian. J.A.F.L., 
XXVII, 335-373. 
1920. The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian. U.C., 
vol, 16, 381-473. 
1923. The Winnebago Tribe. 37 B.A.E. Washington. 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres 
Straits, vol. v, 1904. Cambridge. 
Rivers, W. H. R. 
1914. The History of Melanesian Society, 2 vols, Cam- 

bridge. 

338 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Roth, Henry Ling. 
1896. The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo. 
London. 
Roth, W. 
1897. Ethnological Studies Among the North-West-Central 
Queensland Aborigines. Brisbane. 
1915. An Inquiry into the Animism and Folk-Lore of the 
Guiana Indians. 30 B.A.E., 117-384. 
Russell, Frank. 
1908. The Pima Indians. 26 B.A.E., 3-390. Washington. 
Sapir, Edward. 
1907. Religious Ideas of the Takelma Indians. J.A.F.L., 
XX, 33-49. 
1922. Vancouver Island Indians ; in Hastings, Encyclopedia 
of Religion and Ethics., vol. x11. 
Schmidt, Wilhelm. 
1908-1909. L’origine de l’idée de Dieu ; in Anthropos, 1m, rv. 
1913. Kulturkreise und Kulturschichten in Siidamerika. 
Z.{£.E., 1014-1124, 
Schmiedel, P. W. 
1906 (a). Das vierte Evangelium gegeniiber den drei ersten. 
Tubingen. 
1906 (b). Evangelium, Briefe und Offenbarung des Jo- 
hannes. Tiibingen. 
Scott, E. F. 
1909. The Historical and Religious Value of the Fourth 
Gospel. Boston. 
Shooter, Joseph. 
1857. The Kafirs of Natal and the Zulu Country. London. 
Skeat, W. W., and Blagden, C. O. 
1906. Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula. 2 vols, London. 
Skinner, A. B. 
1911. Notes on the Eastern Cree and Northern Saulteaux. 
A.M.N.H., 1x, 1-177. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 330 

1913. Social Life and Ceremonial Bundles of the Menomini 
Indians. A.M.N.H., x1m, 1-165. 

I915 (a). Associations and Ceremonies of the Menomini In- 
dians. A.M.N.H., x11, 167-215. 

1915 (b). The Indians of Greater New York. Cedar Rapids, 
Towa. 

1920. Medicine Ceremony of the Menomini. Indian Notes 
and Monographs, tv, 15-188. 

Skinner, A., and Satterlee, J. V. 

1915. Folklore of the Menomini Indians. A.M.N.H., xu, 
223-546. 

Smith, E. W. and Dale, A. M. 

1920. The Ila-speaking Peoples of Northern Rhodesia. 2 
vols. London. 

Sdéderblom, Nathan. 

1916. Das Werden des Gottesglaubens; Untersuchungen 

uber die Anfange der Religion. Leipzig. 
Speck, F. G. 

1909. Ethnology of the Yuchi Indians. University of Penn- 
sylvania, Anthropological Publications of the University 
Museum, 1, 1-154. Philadelphia. 

Spencer, B., and Gillen, F. J. 
1899. The Native Tribes of Central Australia. London. 
1904. The Northern Tribes of Central Australia. London. 
Spier, L. 

1921. The Sun Dance of the Plains Indians: Its Develop- 

ment and Diffusion. A.M.N.H., xiv, 451-527. 

Stevenson, M. C. 
1909. The Zufii Indians, 23 B.A.E. 

Stoll, O. 
1904. Suggestion und Hypnotismus in der Volkerpsycholo- 

gie. Leipzig. 
Sumner, W. G. 
1919. War and Other Essays. New Haven. 

340 PRIMITIVE RELIGION 

Swanton, J. R. 
1908. Social Condition, Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship 
of the Tlingit Indians, 26 B.A.E., 391-485. Washington. 
191I. Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley. 
B.A.E., Bull. 43. 
1918. An Early Account of the Choctaw Indians. Amer. 
Anth., Mem. v, 53-72. 
Talbot, P. Amaury. 
1912, In the Shadow of the Bush. London. 
Teta t: 
1909. The Shuswap. A.M.N.H., 1v, 443-789. Leiden. 
Thouless, Robert H. 
1923. An Introduction to the Psychology of Religion. New 
York. 
Thurnwald, Richard. 
1922 (?). Psychologie des primitiven Menschen. Handbuch 
der vergleichenden Psychologie, 1, 147-320. Miinchen. 
Tregear, E. 
1904. The Maori Race. Wangani, New Zealand, 
Tylor, E. B. 
1865. Researches into the Early History of Mankind and 
the Development of Civilization, London, 
1881. Anthropology. New York. 
1913. Primitive Culture. 2 vols. London, 
Walker, J. R. 
1917. The Sun Dance and other Ceremonies of the Oglala 
Division of the Teton Dakota. A.M.N.H., xv1, 51-221, 
Wallis, W. D. 
1918. Messiahs: Christian and Pagan. Boston. 
Weeks, John H. 
1913. Among Congo Cannibals. Philadelphia. 
1914. Among the Primitive Bakongo. Philadelphia. 
Wissler, C, 
1904. Decorative Art of the Sioux Indians. A.M.N.H., 
Bull., xvi11, 231-277, 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 341 

1908. Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians. A.M.N.H., u, 
1-164. 
1911. The Social Life of the Blackfoot Indians. A.M.N.H., 
VII, 1-64. 
1912. Societies and Ceremonial Associations in the Oglala 
Division of the Teton-Dakota. A.M.N.H., x1, I-99. 
Woodworth, R. S. 
1921. Psychology. New York. 
Wundt, Wilhelm 
1919. Volkerpsychologie, 3. Band: Die Kunst. Leipzig. 

Le ay, ; : : ; 
i gt i, y) } /} , t {] ‘i i Pp ? i 
a Mi i “i , ae 7 
7 / ‘3 a a) i ) a m4 s : 
; y ae i ons é 

t Pray ‘ 
eel ee ee 

INDEX 

Ancestor-worship, lacking in North 
America, 175; present in Africa, 
China, Siberia, 174. 

Andamanese, souls, 100; high-god 
concept, 129-131; magical prac- 
tices, 144; sibless, 157; regula- 
tions for menstruant, 216; 
dreams, 225; dreams significant 
for shamanism, 241 ; shaman, 313. 

Animatism, Marett’s definition, 
134; non-religious, 134. 

Animism, definition, 99; discussion 
of Tylor’s theory, 106-115. 

Arapaho, older ceremonies re- 
placed by Ghost Dance, 1097; 
Peyote Cult, 200; Ghost Dance 
leaders, 255; Sun Dance, 295; 
Ceremonies, 305-306; Crazy 
Dance, 316. 

Art, designs revealed in visions, 
Siouan, 260-261; Omaha, 262; 
secular and _ religious style, 
Plains, 263, Koryak, 263-264, 
Ojibwa, 264-265. 

Association, of ideas, Crow cp. 
American, 278-280; Havasupai, 
280. ~ 

Australians, not rudest savages, 
144; magic, 145-146; totemism, 
153-154; privileges of old 
women, 217; attitude toward 
multiple births, 283. 

Bagobo, concept of soul, 103-104. 

Bear Cult, in Siberia and America, 
181-182, 

Benedict, R. F., on guardian spirits, 
123, 170; criticism of Durkheim, 
on basis of American data, 158; 
on vision in North America, 171; 
on ghosts, 175. 

343 

Berdache, in Siberia and America, 
181; Crow, 243-244; Chukchi, 
244; Borneo, 245. 

Boas, on religious art, 265; secon- 
dary association, 299; on mytho- 
logical trickster, 312. 

Brown, on Andamanese, 129-131; 
on Andamanese shaman, 313. 

Bull-roarers, in ceremonials, 
Bukaua, 67; named for dead, 
69, 70; diffusion of, 70; Navaho, 
Hopi, 294. 

Bushmen, religion, 131-132; magic, 
145; sibless, 158; treatment of 
adolescent girl, 216. 

Ceremonialism, Ekoi cp. Crow, 49; 
men’s organization in, Ekoi, 50; 
Crow Sun Dance, 275-276; 
growth of, 299-319; buffoonery 
in Zufii, 315-316. 

Charms, used at pig market, 
Bukaua, 58, 59; love, Bukaua, 
61. 

Chinook, theory of disease, 177; 
restrictions of adolescent girl, 
214. 

Cosmogony, Man- 
gaian, 84. 

Crow, religion, 3-32, 322-323, cp. 
Ekoi, 52-53, Bukaua, 73, Polyne- 
sian, QI, 96; attitude toward 
spirits cp. Winnebago, 136; sub- 
jectivism, 151; attitude toward 
sun, 169-170; Sun Dance, 108, 
275-276; no sex difference, 206- 
207; access to spirits, 222; sen- 
sory types, 230; personality of 
leader, 248-251; sacred numbers, 
284; symbolism, 287; clowns, 
314; Crazy Dogs, 317. 

Crow, 28-30; 

344 

Dakota, ghost dance, 188-190, 101, 
192, 193, 194, 195; concept of 
soul, 104; concept of disease, 
176; Badger dance society, 300. 

Disease, theories of, 176-180. 

Divination, Ekoi, 34-35; Polyne- 
sian, 92, 93; Thonga, 141-143; 
not universal, 146; in Siberia, 
173. 

Dreams, equivalent to visions, 
Crow, 8; appearance of deceased 
in, Polynesian, 86-87; conven- 
tionalization of, Crow, 225-229; 
source of decorative composition, 
289 

Durkheim, objections to Tylor’s . 

theory of animism, 108; criticism 
of Tylor, 109, 113; on dreams, 
III; division of universe into 
Sacred and Profane, 148-149, 150, 
153-157; minimum definition of 
religion, 153; criticism of, 160- 
163. 

Ekoi, religion, 33-53, 
Crow, Tami, Bukaua, 
women’s disability, 207-208. 

Ethics, relation to religion, Crow, 

323; CD. 
733 

29. 
Euahlayi, high-god, 145-146. 

Fetishism, Congo, 268-270. 
Folklore, effect on religion, 271- 

274; myths and ritual, 291-299. 
Frazer, on magic, 137-147. 

Galton, on psychological variability, 
225; on numerical associations, 
284-285. 

Ghost dance, description of Teton 
Dakota, 188-190; historical cir- 
cumstances of, 190-194; ethno- 
logical and historical interpreta- 
tion, 195-200, 

Ghosts, Ekoi attitude toward, 
40-42; not tutelaries in North 
America, 175. 

INDEX 

Goldenweiser, on religion and 

magic, 147-148; criticism of 
Durkheim, 157-159, 160, 161, 
162. 

Haeckel, on evolution, 325-326. 

Harrison, on sources of Greek 
drama, 250. 

Havasupai, association of 
280; head-scratching, 282. 

Hidatsa, purchase of hereditary 
bundles, 17; four souls, 104; 
symbolism, 287; Bird ceremony, 
296-297 ; Goose Association, 302; 
military societies, 305, 307-308. 

HOffding, on association of ideas, 
277; definition of religion, 323- 
324. 

Jabim, life after death, 59; feuds 
suspended, 68. 

Jagga, concept of soul, 100; atti- 
tude toward multiple births, 282. 

James, definition of religion, 324. 

Kai, feuds suspended, 68. 

ideas, 

Lang, criticism of Tylor, 119-122; 
on folklore and religion, 271, 

273. 
Life after death, Bukaua, 59; 
Jabim, 59; Tami, 64. 

Magic, imitative, Bukaua, 54, 55; 
formule, 55; contagious, Bukaua, 
57, 58; summary of, Bukaua, 58, 
59; importance in Maori life, 94; 
definition, 136; relation to science, 
137, to religion, 138, 146, 151. 

Man, E. H., on Andamanese, 129- 
131. 

Mana, Oceanian concept of, 75, 76; 
likeness to maxpé of Crow, 
njomm of Ekoi, 76. 

Marett, on religion, XVI, definition 
of animatism, 134; criticism of 
Frazer on magic, 140; on re- 
ligion and magic, 147-148; criti- 
cism of Durkheim, 149. 

INDEX 

Menomini, souls, 103; magic, 175; 
bundles, 302. 

Messiahs, ghost dance, 191-200; 
African, 251-253; personality of, 
253-254. 

Ordeal, for witches, Ekoi, 35. 

Paviotso, home of Wovoka, i91; 
ghost cult of, 193; ghost dance 
cp. Dakota, 195-196. 

Pawnee, star cult, 161. 

Perry, criticism of Tylor based on 
G. Elliot Smith’s theory, 114. 
Peyote cult, Christian elements, 
200; introduced among Winne- 
bago by Rave, 201-204; innova- 

tions by Hensley, 202-204. 

Priests, none among Crow, 14-15; 
trances of, Polynesia, 88-99. 

Puberty, rites of Bukaua, 66; dif- 
fusion of rites, 71; period of 
conversion, 218-219. 

Radin, on interpretation of North 
American religion, 120, 123; on 
Winnebago puberty fast, 232- 
234. 

Rank, significance of, Polynesia, 
76-78. 

Sacred numbers, Crow, 284; Pavi- 
otso, 284. 

Sacrifice, bloody, in America, 173. 

Schmidt, high-god concept, 127- 
131; on development of religion, 
167-169; on folklore and religion, 
271. 

Semang, high-god, 124; magic, 
145. 

Sensory types, 224-230. 

Sex and religion, 245-246. 

Shamans, relation to client, Crow, 
16; rivalry between, Crow, 17; 
importance of, in Siberia, 173; 
hysterical temperament, Chukchi, 
242. 

345 

Shoshoni, life principle, 101-102; 
sun myth, 272. 

Siberia, cp. America, 173. 

Séderblom, definition of religion, 
xvii, 322. 

Sorcerers, bodily transformation 
of, Ekoi, 33. 

Souls, Ekoi conception of, 40-41; 
Bukaua, 59; Tami, 65; Jagga, 
100; Andamanese, 100; Sho- 
shoni, 101; Bagobo, 103-104; 
number of, related to sacred 
number, 105; concept of dis- 
cussed, 99-106; kidnaping of, 
177-178. 

Spencer and Gillen, on Central 
Australians, 145, 146. 

Spier, association of ideas, Hava- 
supai, 280; head-scratching, 
Havasupai, 282; on Sun Dance, 
295, 304, 309-310. 

Sun, object of supplication, Crow, 
20-22; Dance of Crow, 27, 275- 
276; myth, Shoshonean, 272, Ute, 
272; Dance, Cheyenne, Arapaho, 

205. 

Supernatural beings, Crow, 18-23; 
Ekoi, 46-48; Bukaua, 60; Tonga, 
82, 83; Hawaii, 83; systematized 
by priesthood, 8r. 

Swanton, on sib organization in re- 
lation to totemism, 158. 

Sweatlodge, in Crow ritual, 23-24. 

Symbolism, 285-287. 

Taboo, Polynesian concept of, 78- 
81; negative magic, 137-138; dic- 
tated by vision, Crow, 291. 

Takelma, black magic, 175; con- 
ception of disease, 176. 

Tami, spirits, 61, 62; life after 
death, 64; souls, 65; feuds sus- 
pended, 68; bull-roarers, 70; 
rituals, 71, 72; religion cp. Ekoi, 

73- 

Thonga, divination, 141-143; no 
sun worship, 161; women magi- 
cians, 208. 

346 

Thunderbird, in North American 
art and religion, 268. 

Tobacco, society, ritual of, 24-27; 
raised for religious purposes 
only, 24; society, history of, 294. 

Tonga, concept of souls, 77; super- 
natural beings, 82; iconoclastic 
king, 236-237, 238-230. 

Tylor, definition of religion, xiv; 
criticism of, xv; on animism, 
99; on soul, 102; criticism of 
theory of animism, 106-110; in- 
fluenced by Evolutionary theory, 
116-117; separates religion and 
magic, 137; on theory of disease, 
180. 

Vision, Crow, quest of, 4-8; faith 
in, 8-10; physical cause of, 11; 
imagery in, 12; tribal influence 
on, 13; functions defined by, 15; 
distribution in North America, 
171; importance of, 288. 

INDEX 

Winnebago, tobacco offering as 
magic, 139-140; attitude toward 
spirits cp. Crow, 136; Peyote 
cult, 201-204; fasting regulated 
by elders, 223-224; fasting ex- 
perience, 232-234. 

Witchcraft, psychology of, Ekoi, 
30-40. 

Women, debarred from religious 
activity, Australia, New Guinea, 
205; shamans, Northern Cali- 
fornia, 206; lesser shamans, 
Chukchi, 208; restrictions of, 
Anvik, 210; treatment of, during 
menstruation, 211-217. 

Wovoka, prophet of Ghost Dance, 
191; orders to Dakota, 255; im- 
pression on visitors, 254-255. 

Yahgan, cp. North American In- 
dians, 172. 

THE END 

291 
L91& Lowie, Robert Harry 
Primitive religion. 

7094-3 

OEMCO 

ahi 

Cs 

was 

ESRI
