Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


PRE-HISTORIC    TIMES,


ANCIENT   REMAINS,


MANNEBS  ANB  CUSTOMS  OF  MODERN  SAVAGES;


WILLIAMS  AND   NOEGATE,

14,    HENRIETTA   BTBEET,   COVENT   GARDEN,   LONDONi

30,  flODTH  FREDERICK  STREET,  EDINBURGH.

1866.

\Tht  Itipht  0/  li-aiialatioM  M  JZw«rv«i.]


Ham

SCICNCCi

LiBRAinr


IWLLOMTOLeCIV  UBFlAlt»

Gfft  of  C.  A.  Kofoid


HEATFOBD:

PltnfTlD  BT  STBraSH  AVfTTN.


AS

PEEFACE.


TN"  this  book  I  present  to  the  public  some  essays
appeared  in  the  "Natural  History  Review/'  viz.,
that   on

The  Danish  Shell-mounds,  in  October,  1861.

The  Swiss  Lake-dwellings,  in  January,  1862.

The  Flint  Implements  of  the  Drift,  in  July,  1862.

North  American  Archseology,  in  January,  1863.

Cave-men,  in  July,  1864.
Messrs.  Williams  and  Norgate  suggested  to  me  to
republish  these  articles  in  a  separate  form,  and  I  was
farther  encouraged  to  do  so,  by  the  fact  that  most  of
them  had  re-appeared,  either  in  France  or  America.
The  conductors  of  the  ^^Annales  des  Sciences  Na-
turelles  "  did  me  the  honor  to  translate  those  on  the
Danish  Shell-mounds,  and  the  Swiss  Lake-dwellings.
The  latter  also  appeared  in  "  SiUiman^s  Journal ;"  and
the  article  on  American  Archaeology,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  last  paragraph,  was  reprinted  in  the  ^*  Smith-
sonian Eeport,  for  1862."


Tl  PREFACE.


At  first  I  only  contemplated  reprinting  the  papers
as  they  stood,  but  haying,  at  the  request  of  the
managers,  delivered  at  the  Boyal  Institution  a  short
course  of  lectures  on  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  it  was
thought  desirable  to  introduce  -the  substance  of  these,
so  as  to  giye  the  work  a  more  complete  character.

My  object  has  been  to  elucidate,  as  &r  as  possible,
the  principles  of  pre-historic  archaeology ;  laying  spe-
cial stress  upon  the  indications  which  it  affords  of  the
condition  of  man  in  primeval  times.  The  tumuli,  or
burial  mounds,  the  peat  bogs  of  Hub  and  other  coun-
tries, the  Kjokkenmoddings  or  shell -mounds  of
Denmark,  the  Lake-habitations  of  Switzerland,  the
bone-caves,  and  the  river-drift  gravels,  are  here  our
principal  sources  of  information.

In  order  to  qualify  myself,  as  far  as  possible,  for
the  task  which  I  have  undertaken,  I  have  visited  not
only  our  three  great  museums  in  London,  Dublin,
and  Edinburgh,  but  also  many  on  the  Continent ;  as,
for  instance,  those  at  Copenhagen,  Stockholm,  Lund,
Mensburg,  Aarhuus,  Lausanne,  Basle,  Berne,  Zurich,
Yverdon,  Paris,  Abbeville,  etc.,  besides  many  private
collections  of  great  interest,  of  which  I  may  particu-
larly  specify  those  of  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  Messrs.
Christy,  Evans,  Bateman,  Eorel,  Schwab,  Troyon,  Oil-


PKXFAGB.  TU


lieron,  Uhlmaim,  Desor,  and  lastly,  the  one  recently
made  by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet  in  the  bone-oaves  of
the  Dordogne.

Bometinies  alone,  and  sometimes  in  company  with
Measrs.  Prestwich  and  Evans,  I  have  made  numerous
viedtB  to  the  valley  of  the  Somme,  and  have  examined
almost  every  gravel  pit  and  section  from  Amiens  down
to  the  sea.  In  1861,  ynth  Mr.  Busk,  and  again  in
1863,  I  went  to  Denmark,  in  order  to  have  the  ad-
vantage of  seeing  the  Kjokkenmoddings  themselves.
Under  the  guidance  of  Professor  Steenstrup  I  visited
several  of  the  most  celebrated  shell-mounds,  particu-
larly those  at  lEavelse,  Bilidt,  Meilgaard,  and  Fanne-
rup.  I  also  made  myself  familiar  with  so  much  of  the
Danish  language  as  was  necessary  to  enable  me  to  read
Hie  various  reports  drawn  up  by  the  Kjokkenmodding
committee,  consisting  of  Professors  Steenstrup,  Wor-
saae,  and  Forchhammer.  Last  year  I  went  to  the
n<»rth  of  Scotland,  to  examine  some  similar  shell-
mounds  discovered  by  Dr.  Gordon,  of  Bimie,  on  the
shores  of  the  Moray  Firth,  which  appear,  however,  to
belong  to  a  much  later  period  than  those  of  Denmark.

In  1862  M.  Morlot  very  kindly  devoted  himself  to
me  for  nearly  a  month,  during  which  time  we  not  only
visited  the  principal  museums  of  Switzerland,  but  also


VIU  PREFACE.


several  of  the  Lake-habitations  themselves,  and  par-
ticularly those  at  Morges,  Thonon,  Wauwyl,  Moossee-
dorf,  and  the  Pont  de  Thiele.  In  addition  to  many
minor  excursions,  I  had,  finally,  last  sprmg,  the
advantage  of  spending  some  time  with  Mr.  Christy,
among  the  celebrated  bone-caves  of  the  Dordogne.
Thus  by  carefully  examining  the  objects  themselves,
and  the  localities  in  which  they  have  been  found,  I
have  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  more  vivid  and  correct
impression  of  the  facts  than  books,  or  even  museums,
alone  could  have  given.

To  the  more  strictly  archeBological  part  of  the
work  I  have  added  a  chapter  on  the  Manners  and
Cfustoms  of  Modem  Savages,  confining  myself  to
those  tribes  which  are  stiU,  or  were,  when  first  visited
by  travellers,  ignorant  of  the  use  of  metal,  and  which
have  been  described  by  competent  and  trustworthy
observers.  This  account,  short  and  incomplete  as  it
is,  will  be  found,  I  think,  to  throw  some  light  on  the
remains  of  savage  life  in  ages  long  gone  by.

Fully  satisfied  that  religion  and  science  cannot  in
reality  be  at  variance,  I  have  striven  in  the  present
publication  to  follow  out  the  rule  laid  down  by  the
Bishop  of  London,  in  his  excellent  lecture  delivered
last  year  at  Edinburgh.    The  man  of  science,  says  Dr.


PIIBFACS.


Tait,  ought  to  go  oa,  ^^  honestly,  patiently,  diffidently,
observing  and  storing  up  his  ohservations,  and  carry-'
isg  his  reasonings  imfiinohingly  to  their  legitimate
condnsions,  eonvinced  that  it  would  be  treason  to
the  nugesty  at  cmoe  of  science  and  of  religion  if  be
sought  to  help  ei&iw  by  swerying  erer  so  little  from
the  stmigfat  rule  of  truth.^'  *

Ethnology,  in  fact,  is  passing  at  joesent  through
a  phase  from  which  other  Sciences  hare  safsly
emerged,  and  the  new  views  with  reference  to  the
Antiquity  of  Man,  though  still  looked  upon  with
distrust  and  apprehension,  will,  I  doubt  not,  in  a
few  years,  be  regarded  with  as  little  disquietude  as
are  now  those  discoveries  in  astronomy  and  geology,
which  at  one  time  excited  even  greater  opposition.

I  have  great  pleasure  in  expressing  my  gratitude
to  many  archaeological  friends  for  the  liberal  manner
in  which  their  museums  hare  been  thrown  open
to  me,  and  for  much  valuable  assistance  in  other
ways-  My  sincere  thanks  are  due  to  Professor
Steenstrup  for  many  of  the  figures  by  which  the  work
is  illustrated.  Others,  through  the  kindness  of  Sir
W.  E.  Wilde,  Mr.  Franks,  and  Dr.  Thumam,  have


*  Lecture  on  Sdence  and  BeTelation,  deliTerod  at  Edinburgh.   See  The  Tim$tf
Norember  7th,  1864.

h


PREFACGB.


been  placed  at  my  disposal  by  the  Society  of  Anti-
quaries,  and  the  Boyal  Irish  Academy.  To  Professor
Steenstrup,  Dr.  Keller,  M.  Morlot,  and  Professor
Butimeyer,  I  am  indebted  for  much  information  on
the  subject  of  their  respective  investigations.  Finally,
Mr.  Busk,  Mr.  Evans,  and  Professor  Tyndall  have
had  the  great  kindness  to  read  many  of  my  proofs,
and  I  am  indebted  to  them  for  various  valuable
suggestions.

Ohiselhusst,

I^bruarif,  1865.


Note. — ^In  his  celebrated  work  on  the  '^  Antiquity  of  Man/'  Sir
Charles  LyeU  has  made  much  use  of  my  earlier  artides  in  the
''Natural  History  Eeview,"  frequently,  indeed,  extracting  whole
sentences  yerbatim,  or  nearly  so.  But  as  he  has  in  these  cases
omitted  to  mention  the  source  from  which  his  quotations  were
deriyed,  my  readers  might  naturally  think  that  I  had  taken  yery
unjustifiable  liberties  with  the  work  of  the  eminent  geologist.  A
reference  to  the  respectiye  dates  will,  howeyer,  protect  me  from  any
such  inference.  The  statement  made  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  in  a
note  to  page  11  of  his  work,  that  my  article  on  the  Danish
Shell-mounds  was  published  aft&r  hii  aheeU  weri  written^  is  an
inadyertence,  regretted,  I  haye  reason  to  beUeye,  as  much  by  its
author  as  it  is  by  me.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTEB  I.

ON  THB  UBB  OF  BBONZB  IN  ANCIENT  THCES.

Difiiion  of  Pre-historio  archsBology  into  four  periods — First  disoorery  of  metal
—Copper — ^Tin — ^Iron— Allnsioiur  to  bronze  by  ancient  writers — ^Finds  of  the  Iron
age — ^Tiefenao — ^Nydam — Thorsbjerg' — ^Finds  of  the  Bronie  age^Bronie  and  iron
arms  not  foond  together — Objects  characteristic  of  the  Bronse  age — ^Bronse
celts — ^Modes  of  handling— Bronae  swords — ^Bronxe  daggers,  spear-heads,  arrows,
fish-hooks,  sickles — ^Bronse  knives — ^Basor  knives — ^Bronze  bracelets — Bronse
pins — Gold  ornaments — Character  of  ornamentation — ^Tamolos  of  Treenhoi—
Dress  in  the  Bronse  age— Dress  of  a  chief  in  the  Bronze  age— Mode  ef  bnrial.

CHAPTEE   11.

THB  BBONZB  AGE.

Similarity  of  bronze  implements  in  different  countries — ^Bronze  implements
not  of  Boman  origin — ^Referred  by  some  archsaologists  to  the  Phoenicians — Phoe-
nician voyages — ^Hinulco— Pytheas — ^Thole  supposed  by  Kilsson  to  be  Norway —
Phoenician  colonies  and  commerce — Bronze  composed  of  copper  and  tin — ^Tin
obtained  from  Cornwall — ^Amber  from  German  Ocean — ^Baal  worshijr  in  Northern
Europe— Question  still  donbtfnl — ^Bronze  age  civiUsation — Bronze  age  archi-
tecture— Stonehenge— Abnry — Silbnry  Kill  more  ancient  than  the  Boman  road
— Stone  circles — Stone  circles,  etc.,  in  India — Stone  circles  in  Palestine  and
Algeria*

CHAPTEB  ni.

THE  USE  OF  8T0NB  IN  ANCIENT  TI1CB8.

The  great  abondance  of  stone  implements — Stone  nsed  after  discovery  of  metal
->*Material  preferred  for  stone  implements— Fractore  of  flint— Flint  flakes —
Stone  hatchets — Scrapers — ^The  small  axes  of  the  SheU-mOnnds — ChiseU»— Spear-
heads—Daggers— Slingstones — ^Arrow-heads — ^Manu&ctore  of  flint  implements
—Bone  implements— Danish  ooastfinds — ^Flintflnds.


Xll  00NTENT8.


CHAPTEB  lY.

TUMULI.

Pre-hifltorio  tamoli— Tomuli  mentioned  in  ancient  history— Besexnblanoe
between  the  chambered  tomnli  and  the  dwellings  of  some  Arctic  nations — Objects
bniied  with  the  dead  not  always  intended  for  actaal  ose— Tabulated  interments
— ^Models  of  implements  sometimes  bniied — Barrows  of  different  periods —
Difficulty  of  determining  the  period  to  which  a  barrow  belongs — Statistics-
Treatment  of  the  corpse— Description  of  a  Danish  tomulns-TOf  a  barrow  at
West  Kennet — Stone  implements  and  pottery  from  the  tomuH  at  West  Kennet —
Tomnli  of  modem  savages — Sepulchral  pottery— Bones  of  aniinalfl  found  in
tumuli— Sepulchral  feasts — Sacrifices— Pre-historio  races  of  men.

CHAPTER  V.

THE  LAKE-HABITATIONS  OF  SWTTZEBLAMD.

lAke-habitations  mentioned  by  Herodotus — Grannoges  of  Ireland — Pile*
dwellings  in  various  parts  of  Europe— Pile-dwellings  still  used  in  various  coun-
tries— ^Pile-dweUings  found  in  most  of  the  Swiss  lakes— Structure  of  the  huts —
Attempt  to  make  a  oensus— Construction  of  the  platforms — ^Description  of  the
remains  at  Wauwyl — ^Weapons  and  implements  of  the  lake -dwellers— Axes —
Knives— Arrow-heads — Spindle-whorls— Flint  flakes,  etc. — ^Material  used  for
stone  implements— Bone  implements— Pottery— Manufactures  of  the  Stone  period
—Comparison  of  the  piles  belonging  to  the  Stone  and  Bronse  ages — ^The  fauna  of
the  Swiss  lake-dwellings— Stag— Boai^— Bull— Goat— Sheep— Dog— Table  of  the
animal  remains — Birds — ^Absence  of  the  rat,  mouse,  and  cat — Comparison  of
bones  belong^ing  to  wild  and  domesticated  races — ^Baces  of  oxen — ^Absence  of
extinct  species — ^The  aurochs  and  elk,  ibex  and  bear — General  character  of  the
&una— The  flpra  of  the  Pfahlbauten — Scarcity  of  human  bones— Lake -habita-
tions of  the  Bronse  age— Objects  of  bronze— Use  of  pile-buildings  as  magarines
—Sacred  lakes— Inhabitants  of  the  Pfahlbauten-^Character  of  the  objects  found
in  different  lake-villages — Statistics — Comparison  of  the  different  lake-villages
— Abandonment  of  the  lake-villages— Ohronology.

CHAPTER  VI.

THE  DANISH  KJdKKENM5DDIN0S  OR  SHELL-HOUKDS.

Shell-mounds  at  fint  supposed  to  be  raised  beaches — ^Description  of  the  shell-
mounds — ^Distribution  of  the  shell-mounds — ^SheU-mounds  in  Scotland — SheU-
mounds  in  other  countnes'-Flora  of  the  shell-mounds — Fauna  of  the  shell-
mounds— Fish— ^  Birds  •»  Mammals— Absence  of  certain  bones — Mutilation  of
certain  bones — Shell-mound  builders  not  mere  summer  visitors    Flint  imple-


OONTBNTB.  XUl

mants  from  the  BheIl-moimd»— Mode  of  life  indicated  by  the  Bhell-moonds— The
FnegiauB — ^The  Telation  of  the  Bhell-moimda  to  the  tamoli— The  opiniona  of
Steensfarap  and  Wonaae — The  flint  implements  of  the  shell-monnds^-The
■earcity  of  well-made  flint  implements  in  the  shell-monnds— Antiquity  of  the
■heU-monnds.

CHAPTER  VII.

NOKTH  AlCBBICAlf  ABCHJBOLOGY.

Bibliography — ^Implements— The  use  of  copper — ^Traces  of  ancient  copper  mines
— ^Pottery— Ornaments — ^Earthworks — ^Defensive  enclosures — Sacred  and  Mis-
oellaneoafl  enclosores — ^Earthworks  in  the  Scioto  valley — ^Earthworks  at  CHicle-
fille — Aztalan — ^Modern  earthworks — Sepnlchral  mounds — ^Ancient  modes  of
burial — Sacrificial  mounds — ^The  contents  of  the  sacrificial  mounds— The  Qrave
Creek  mound-— Temple  mounds — Animal  mounds — General  appearance— In-
scriptions— Wampum — The  mound-builders — GKgantie  earthworks — ^Traoes  of
ancient  agriculture — Antiquity  of  the  ancient  remains — Condition  of  the  bones-
American  Forests — ^Indication  of  four  periods — ^Man  and  the  mastodon — ^Dr.
Doaler's  calculation.

CHAPTER  VIIL

GAVB-MBN.

Caye-bear— OiTe-lion — ^Mammoth  and  wooUy-haired  rhinoceros — ^Irish  elk-^
Beindeer— Aurochs — ^Urus — ^Value  of  ca^e-evidence— Ca^es  in  the  Dordogne—
Absence  of  domestic  animals — ^Flint  implements — ^Absence  of  polished  imple-
ments— ^Bude  drawings  and  sculptures — ^Habits  of  the  cave-dwellers — ^The  Belgian
cares — ^Kenf  s  Hole — ^Brixham  Cave — Sicilian  caves — Gibraltar  Cave — ^Aurignac
— ^Wok^  Hole— Cave-men.

CHAPTER  IX.

THB  ANTIQniTY  09  MAN.

H.  Boucher  de  Perthes— Messrs.  Prestwich  and  Evans — Specimen  discovered
in  the  last  century — ^Mr.  Frere*s  discovery  in  1800 — Similar  discoveries  in  other
countries — Scepticism  of  geologists — ^The  questions  at  issue— Evidence  derivable
firom  the  flints  themselves — ^The  fozgeries — ^Peculiarities  of  the  drift  implements
— ^Drift  implements  never  polished — ^Absenoe  of  human  bones— Causes  of  the
scarcity  of  human  bones— Contemporaneity  of  the  mammalian  remaine— The
Somme  valley — St.  Acheul — Organic  remains— Mineralogical  contents  of  the
river-drift  gravels— Objections  to  the  proposed  theory — ^Fauna  of  the  river-drift
gravels — Climate  of  the  river-drift  period — ^Modes  of  accounting  for  the  change
of  dimate — ^Absence  of  marine  remains— ^Inapplicability  of  oatadysms— Altera-
tion of  the  river  level  owing  to  the  excavation  of  the  valley — ^Lo6si— JTauna
of  the  low  level  gravel»-*Peat—Beoapitn]ationr— Lapse  of  time.


XIV  OOimftNTS.

CHAPTER  X.

ON  THB  ▲NnQUTTT  OF  BIAM— CONtUIVeel.

Varietiefl  of  man  represented  on  aooient  Egyiytion  scnlptoreft— The  vegetation
of  Denmark— The  cone  of  the  Tinidre— The  vaUej  of  the  Thi&Ie— The  ralley  of
the  Nile— Hr.  Homer's  Egyptian  researches — ^The  age  of  the  MiwBmippi  delta —
(Geological  changes  in  the  Quatemaiy  period — ^The  Wealden  Talley— Time — The
Engis  skull — ^The  Neanderthal  skull — ^Markings  on  bones  from  the  Pliocene  beds
of  St.  Preet — ^Miocene  man.

CHAPTER  XL

MODERN  8AVAOB8.

Modem  savages — ^No  evidence  of  deg^radation — Hottentots:  Dress;  houses;
implements ;  methods  of  killing  game ;  metallurgy ;  character —  Veddaks  of  Ceylon
^^Jndaman  Islanden — Australians :  Food ;  clothing ;  ornaments ;  rafts ;  imple-
ments ;  hammers ;  knives ;  spears ;  throwing-stick ;  boomerang ;  fire ;  polygamy
superstition ;  burial ;  numbers  —  Taatnanians  —  Feegeeans :  Food ;  weapons
houses;  religion;  canoes;  pottery;  games;  agriculture;  women;  clothes
tattoo ;  burial ;  superstition ;  cannibalism ;  murder — The  Maories :  Food ;  dress
ornaments ;  houses ;  fortifications ;  weapons ;  canoes ;  burial ;  musio ;  character
religion;  oannibaUsm'^TaAt^iM:  Implements;  fish-hooks;  nets;  baskets
mats;  doth;  dress;  ornaments;  houses;  canoes;  musio;  furniture;  weapons
food ;  fire ;  cookery ;  ava ;  a  chief's  dinner ;  solitary  meals ;  surgery  t  burial
burial-places;  religion;  character — The  Tongane,

CHAPTER  Xn.

MODERN  SAYAOBS — CcKtinued,

The  Esquimaux :  Dwellings ;  cookery ;  food ;  fire ;  implements ;  weapons ;  bows
and  arrows ;  spears ;  harpoons ;  modes  of  hunting  and  fishing ;  sledges ;  boats ;
the  kajak  and  umiak ;  dress ;  ornaments ;  musio ;  (fames ;  religion ;  burial ;
character — North  American  Indians :  Drees ;  ornaments ;  the  practice  of  head-
moulding;  religion;  marriage;  character;  cruelty;  infanticide;  implements;
weapons;  canoes;  fire;  dwellings;  agriculture;  food;  burial — The  Paraguay
Indians:  Weapons;  huts;  habits;  religion;  infanticide— JPoto^onvms :  Huts;
dress ;  weapons ;  food ;  burial ;  religion — Fuegians :  Appearance ;  food  and  habits ;

cannibalism ;  absence  of  religion ;  ignorance  of  pottery ;  dress ;  fire.

♦

CHAPTER  Xni.

MODERN  SAVAGES — Conclusion,

The  skilftilness  of  savages — Arrows — Harpoons — Needles — Art — Statues —
Differences  in  the  Stone  age— Different  lines  of  civilisation — ^Differences  in  wea-
pons—Isolation of  savages— Independent  inventions— Differences  in  habits— >


G0NTENT8.  XT

I>iffereiii  lues  of  the  dog^-Fire— Different  methods  of  burial— Carioiu  oiutomB—
Difibrenoes  in  preTalent  80imd»— Different  ideas  of  yirtae— Deification  of  white
men  by  savages — Social  position  of  women — Savages  and  children— Moral  in-
fSntioriiy  of  savages — Intellectual  inferiority  of  savages— Deficiencies  in  nnmera-
turn — Absence  of  religion  among  many  savage  tribes — ^Belief  in  witchcraft-
General  inferiority  of  Savages.

CHAPTEE  XIV.

CONCLUDING    BBMABK8.

'n^e  primitive  condition  of  man — ^Unity  of  the  human  race — ^Natural  selection
applied  to  man — The  inflaence  of  mind — ^Increase  of  happiness  indicated  l^
increase  of  numbers  —  Sofferings  of  savage — Self-inflicted  sufferings — The
blessizigs  of  civilisation— 'The  diminution  of  suffering— 'The  diminution  of  sin —
The  advantages  of  sdenoe— The  future.


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FIGURES.


1.  Cofpper  P  oelt  from  Waterford.    It  ie  0  incliefl  long,  8|  wide  at  the  broader

end,  and  1|  at  the  smaller,  which  is  aboat  l-16th  thiok.
Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  868.

2.  ^^nged  celt,  or  PaalstaTe,  from   Ireland.      The   stops  ai«  hat  slightly

developed.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  878.
8.  Socketed  celt  from  Ireland,  one-third  of  the  actual  sise.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  886.
4-6.  The  <hree  principal  types  of  celts,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are
sappoeed  to  have  been  handled.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  867.

7.  Copi>er  ?  celt  frY>m  Ireland,  one-half  of  the  actual  sise.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Xrish  Academy,  page  868.

8.  Half  of  a  celt  mould  from  Ireland.     It  is  of  mica  slate,  6{  inches  long,  4

wide,  and  presents  upon  the  surfaoe  the  apertures  by  which  it  was  a4justed
to  the  other  half.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  91.

9.  Decorated  oelt  from  Ireland.    It  is  8)  inches  long,  4  wide  at  the  blade  end,

and  half  an  inch  thick.

Cat.  of  Royal  Irish  Academy,  page  866.

10.  Simple  celt  from  Denmark,  one-third  of  the  actual  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mus.  i  KjObenham.    No.  178.

11.  Ornamented  oelt  from  Denmark,  one-third  of  the  actual  sise.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Eong.  Mus.  i  KjObenham.    No.  179.

15.  Socketed  celt  from  Denmark,  one-third  of  the  actual  sise.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mus.  i  ^dbenham.    No.  196.
18.  Iron  sword  from  a  cemetery  at  Brighthampton  in  Oxfordshire,  one-eighth  of
the  actual  sise.

Archseologia,  vol.  xxxviii.,  pi.  2,  fig.  1.
14.  Sword  from  Ireland.     It  is  28}  inches  long.  If  wide  in  the  centre  of  the
blade,  which  is  margined  by  a  grooved  feather  edge.
Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  A(»demy,  page  444.

16.  Sword  from  Sweden,  one-fourth  of  the  actual  sise.

NilsBOn's  Skandinayiaka  Nordens  IJr-invanare,  pi.  1,  fig.  7.

16.  Sword  from  Switserland,  one-fifth  of  the  actual  sise.

In  the  museum  of  Col.  Schwab.  Mitt.  Ant.  G^.  in  Zurich,  Bd.  zii.  H.  8.

17.  Sword  from  Concise  on  the  Lake  of  Neufchatel,  one-fourth  of  actual  sise.

In  the  museum  of  Col.  Schwab.  Mitt  Ant.  Ges.  in  Zurich,  Bd.  ziii.  H.  8.

18.  Sword  from  Scandinavia.

Atlas  fbr  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed,  pi.  iv.,  fig.  42.

19.  Sword  from  Denmark,  found  in  the  Treenhoi  tumulus.

Afb.  af.  Danska  Oldsager  og  Mindesmflsrker,  H.  6.


•  ••


XYIU  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FIGURES.

20.  Sword  from  Denmark,  one-sizth  of  the  acfoal  use.

Nordiflke  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mtu.  i  KjObenhaYii.    No.  121.

21.  Sword  from  Denmark,  one-sixth  of  the  actoal  mze.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Hob.  i  KjdbenhaTn.    No.  128.

22.  Hilt  of  Bword  from  Denmark,  one  fonrth  of  the  actoal  aise.

Nordiake  Oldsager  i  det  Eong.  Mns.  i  EjObehavn.    No.  128.
28.  Hilt  of  sword  from  Denmark,  one-fonrth  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  1  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  KjObenhavn.    No.  127«

24.  Bronze  dagger  blade  from  Ireland.    It  is  10}  inches  long,  by  2}  wide.    The

foor  riTcts  by  which  it  was  fiistened  to  the  handle  are  still  in  sito.
Cat.  of  Royal  Irish  Academy,  page  448.

25.  Bronze  dagger  from  Ireland,  two-thirds  of  the  actoal  size.

Gat.  Royal  Irish  Academy,  page  458.

26.  Bronze  dagger  blade  from  Ireland,  one-third  of  the  actoal  size.

Cat.  of  Royal  Irish  Academy,  page  463.
27'  Bronze  spear-head  from  Ireland.    It  is  11^  inches  long  by  H  broad.
Cat.  of  Royal  Irish  Academy,  page  499.

28.  Bronze  spear-head  from  Ireland.    It  is  13|  inches  long  by  2^  broad.

Cat.  of  Royal  Irish  Academy,  page  496.  ^

29.  Bronze  knife  from  Denmark,  one-half  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  Kj5benhaTn.    No.  167*

80.  Bronze  knife  from  Denmark,  one-third  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  KjObenhavn.    No.  169.

81.  Bronze  knife  from  Denmark,  one-third  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  EjObenhavn.    No.  166.

82.  Bronze  knife  from  the  Lake-village  at  Estavayer,  on  the  Lake  of  Neof-

ohatel,  one-half  of  the  actoal  size.

Keller.    Mit.  der  Antiq.  Ges.  in  Zorich,  Bd.  ziii.  Abth.  2,  H.  8,  pi.  ▼.
fig.  19.
88.  Bronze  knife  from  the  Lake-village  at  Estavayer,  on  the  Lake  of  Neof-
ohatel,  one-half  of  the  actoal  size.

Keller.    Mit  der  Antiq.  Ges.  in  Zorich,  Bd.  ziii.  Abth.  2,  H.  8,  pi.  t.
fig.  20.

84.  Razor-knife  firom  Denmark,  one  half  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  EjObenhavn.    No.  178.

85.  Razor-knife  from  Denmark,  one-half  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  KjObenhavn.    No.  172.

86.  Razor-knife  from  Denmark,  one-haJf  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  EjObenhavn.    No.  171.

87.  Bazor-knife  from  Denmark,  one-half  of  the  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  KjCbenhavn.    No.  176.

88.  Small  bronze  knife  in  a  leather  case,  fr^m  Denmark,  two-thirds  of  the  actoal

size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  EjObenhaTn.    No.  164.

89.  Bronze  knife,  actoal  size.

Nordiske  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Mos.  i  Kjdbenhavn.    No.  170.

40.  Bronze  bracelet  from  Cortaillod  on  the  I^ke  of  Neofchatel,  one-third  of  the

aotoalsize.

Troyon*s  Habitations  Lacostres,  pi.  zi.,  fig.  28.

41.  Bronze  bracelet  from  Cortaillod  on  the  I^ke  of  Neofchatel,  one-third  of  the

actoal  size.

Troyon,  l,c,  pi.  zi.,  fig.  18.


DESCRIPTION   OF  THE  FIGURES.  ZIX

48-15.  Bronie  hBir-pmi  from  the  Swiss  Lakes,  one-half  of  the  actoal  siie.
Keller,  Le,  Zweiter  Berioht,  pi.  8.

46.  Branse  awl  icam  the  Swiss  Lakes,  actual  size.

Keller,  Le.  Zweiter  Bericht,  pi.  8.

47.  Brofiue  needle,  actaal  sue.

Keller,  Le,  Zweiter  Bericht,  pL  8.
4B.  Bvonie  stod,  one-half  of  the  actaal  sise.
Keller,  Le»  Zweiter  Bericht,  pi.  8.
49.  Gold  ioiqae,  cooaisting  of  a  simple  flat  strip  or  band  of  gold,  loosely  twisted,
and  haring  expanded  extremities  which  loop  into  one  another.    It  measures
6}  inches  across,  and  was  found  near  Glonmacnoise,  in  Ireland.
Cat.  of  Bojal  Irish  Academy,  page  74.
60.  Gold  fibula,  one-half  of  the  actaal  sise.     The  hoop  is  very  slender,  the  cups
deep  and  conical.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  56.
51.  Smooth,  massiTe  cylindrical  gold  ring,  with  ornamented  ends,  one-half  of  the
actaal  sixe.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  52.

53.  Gold  fibula,  one-third  of  the  actual  eize.     The  external  surfaces  of  the  cups

are  decorated  with  circular  indentations  surrounding  a  central  indented
spot.  There  is  also  an  elegant  pattern  where  the  handle  joins  the  cups.  It
is  8|  inches  long,  and  weighs  38  ouncee,  being  the  heariest  now  known  to
flxist.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  60.
58.  Woollen  cap,  one-third  of  the  actual  sise.     Found  with  the  bronze  sword,
fig.  19,  in  a  Danish  tumulus.

Af b.  af.  Danske  Oldsager  og  Mindesnuarker.    Madsen,  H.  5.

54.  Another  woollen  cap,  one-third  ofthe  actual  size.  Found  with  the  preceding.

55.  A  small  comb,  one-third  of  the  actual  size.    Found  with  the  preceding.

56.  A  woollen  cape,  one-third  of  the  actual  size.     Found  with  the  preceding.

57.  A  woollen  shirt,  one-third  ofthe  actual  size.    Found  with  the  preceding.

58.  A  woollen  shawl,  one-third  of  the  actual  size.    Found  with  the  preceding.

59.  Apairof  leggings,  one-third  of  the  actual  size.  Found  with  the  preceding.

60.  Staigue  Fort,  in  the  County  of  Kerry.

From  a  model  in  the  collection  of  the  Boyal  Irish  Academy.

61.  Flint  core  or  nucleus  from  which  flakes  have  been  struck.    Jutland.    One-

half  of  the  actual  size.
In  my  own  collection.
68-4.  Three  views  of  a  flint  flake  from  a  KjOkkenmOdding  at  Fannerup  in  Jutland,
one-half  of  the  actual  size,     a  represents  the  bulb  of  percussion,  which  is
also  shown  by  the  shading  in  fig.  68.
In  my  own  collection.
66.  Arrow-shaped  flake  from  Ireland.    It  is  worked  up  at  the  butt  end,  as  if
intended  for  a  handle.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  72.
66-68.  Flakes  from  a  Danish  shell-mound,  actual  size.
In  my  own  collection.

69.  Minute  flint  flake  from  Denmark,  actual  size.

In  my  own  collection.

70.  Sections  of  flakes,    a  is  that  of  a  simple  triangular  flake ;  h  is  that  of  a  large

flat  flake  split  off  the  angle  from  which  the  smaller  flake  a  had  been
previously  taken.    Consequently  the  section  is  four-sided.


XX  DE8CRIFTI0K  OF  THE   FIGUBES.

71.  Stone  oelt  or  hatohet.    It  ia  formed  of  felstone,  is  6}  inches  long  and  2  broad.

Cat,  of  Boyal  Iriah  Academy,  page  41.

72.  Stone  celt  or  hatchet,  actnal  siae.    Foond  in  the  Blver  ShannoA.    One  of

the  smallest  yet  found  in  Ireland.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  45.

73.  Stone  celt  with  a  wooden  handle.    Fonnd  in  the  connly  of  Monaghan.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  46.

74.  Skin  scraper  from  Boordeilles  in  the  soath  of  France,  aotoal  nae.    Found

by  me.

75.  Ditto,  under  aide.

76-78.  Skin  aoraper  need  by  the  modem  Eaquimauz  of  the  Polar  baain  within
Behring's  Straits,  actual  size.  It  was  fastened  into  a  handle  of  fossil  ivoiy.
In  the  collection  of  Mr.  H.  Christy.

79.  Flint  adze  from  the  shell-mound  at   Meilgaard   in  Jutland,  aotaal  size.

Upper  surface.

In  my  own  collection.

80.  Ditto,  under  surfifioe.

81.  Ditto,  side  view.

82.  Modem  New  Zealand  adae,  actual  size.    Upper  surface.

In  the  Britiah  Museum.

83.  Ditto,  under  surfiioe.

84.  Ditto,  side  view.

The  New  Zealand  adze  is  partially  polished ;  this  is  not  the  case  with
the  Danish  adze,  beeauae  flint  naturally  breaks  with  a  smooth
■nrfaoe.  The  projection  a,  in  fig.  81  is  accidental  and  owing  to
aome  flaw  in  the  flint.  They  generally  have  the  under  aide  as
flat  aa  in  fig.  88.

85.  Hollow  chiael  from  Denmark.

86.  Spear-head  from  Denmark.

87.  Flint  dagger,  one-haJf  of  the  actual  aize.   Thia  beautiful  specimen  was  found

in  a  large  tumulus  with  a  aecond  imperfect  dagger,  a  rude  flint  core,  an
imperfect,  crescent-shaped  knife,  one  or  two  flakes,  two  amber  beads,  and
some  bits  of  pottery.    Denmark.
In  my  own  collection.

88.  A  second  form  of  fliint  dagger.    Also  from  Denmark.

89.  Oval  toolstone.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  94.

90.  Triangular  flint  arrow-head,  actual  size.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  19.

91.  Indented  flint  arrow-head,  actual  size.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  20.

92.  Barbed  flint  arrow-head,  actual  size.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  22.
98.  Leaf-shaped  flint  arrow-head,  actual  size.      Showing  the  gradual  passage
into  the  spear-head.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  page  22.

94.  Bone  pin  or  awl  &om  Scotland,  actual  aize.

95.  Bone  harpoon,  actual  size.

Af  b.  af.  Danske  Old  og  Mindesmssrker,  5  Heft.
96*  A  tumulus  of  the  Stone  age  at  Bdddinge  in  Denmark.    It  oontaina  two
chambera.

Nordiake  Oldaager  i  det  Kong.  Mua.  i  KjObenhavn.    PI.  4.


PESCRIPTIOK  OF  THE  FIOURBS.  ZXl

97.  Groand  pUm  of  ditto.
96.  Section  of  ditto.

99.  Gromleoh.    Denmark.

Nordiake  Oldsager  i  det  Eomg.  Mns.  i  XjObeahavB.    PI.  1.

100.  Tomolns.

Nordiflke  Oldsager  i  det  Kong.  Miw.  i  KjflbenhaTn.    PI.  2.

101.  Groond  plan  of  a  eepnlchial  chamber  in  a  large  tomnlos  on  the  Island  of

MSen.

Ann.  for  Nordiake  Old  Eyndighed,  1868,  p.  204.

103.  Braehyoephalio  sknll  from  the  abo^e  tumalva,  one-quarter  of  the  natoml

aise.
108.  Ditto,  ride  view.

I  am  indebted  for  these  two  drawings  to  the  kmdaess  of  my  friend
Mr.  Boflk.

104.  Tnterior  of  the  sepnlchral  chamber  in  the  long  bamyw  near  West  Kennet  in

Watahire.

ArchfiBologia,  toL  xxzviii.,  p.  405.
106.  Flint  scraper  from  the  abo?e  tomalns,  two-tibirds  of  the  aotoal  sue.
ArchsBologia,  vol.  xxxWii.,  p.  406.

106.  Flint  scraper  from  the  aboye  tomolns,  two-thirds  of  the  actual  siie.

Archffiologia,  vol.  zzzriii.,  p.  406.

107.  Flint  f&ake  from  the  above  tamolos,  two-H3urds  of  the  actual  sue.

ArehsBologia,  toL  xxzriii.,  p.  405.

108.  Flint  implement  from  the  above  tomnlns,  twe-thirds  of  tiie  actual  size.

Axchnologia,  vol.  zxxriii.,  p.  405.

109.  Fragment  of  pottery  from  the  above  tomnlos,  two-thirds  of  the  aotoal  size.

ArchflBologia,  vol.  zzxviii.,  p.  405.

110.  Fragment  of  pottery  from  the  above  tamnlns,  actoal  siae,

Archseologia,  vol.  xxzviii.,  p.  405.
111-113.  Fragments  of  pottery  from,  the  above  tomnlos,  two-thirds  of  the  actoal


ArchflBologia,  vol.  xxxviii.,  p.  406.
114.  Fragment  of  pottery,  actoal  size.

ArchsBologia,  voL  xxxviii.,  p.  405.
116.  Urn  from  Flaxdale  barrow.    The  original  is  14  inches  in  height.

Bateman's  Ten  Years'  Diggings  in  Celtic  and  Saxon  Gravehills,  p.  280.
116, 117.  Vases  from  Arbor  Low  in  Derbyshire.

Bateman's  Ten  Years*  Diggings  in  Celtic  and  Saxon  Grravehilla,  p.  288.

118.  Drinking  cop  from  Green  Low.

Bateman'a  Ten  Years*  Diggings  in  Celtic  and  Saxon  Gravehills,  p.  286.

119.  Crannoge  in  ArdaldUin  Loogh,  near  Stokestown,  Coonty  of  Bosoommon.

It  is  oonstrocted  of  stones  and  oak-piling.  The  top  line  shows  the  former
highest  water  level,  the  second  that  of  the  ordinary  winter  flood,  the  third
the  snmmer  level.

Cat.  of  Boyal  Irish  Academy,  p.  226.

120.  Swiss  axe  of  serpentine,  actoal  size.      From  Wangen  on  tiie  Lake  of

Constance.

In  my  own  collection.

121.  SEondle-whorl,  actoal  size.    From  Wangen  on  the  Lake  of  Constance.

In  my  own  collection.

122.  Bone  chisel  P,  aotoal  size.    From  Wangen  on  the  Lake  of  Canstanoe.

In  my  own  collection.


XXU  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FI6UBES.

123.  Piece  of  tisBae,  aotoal  use.    Fiom  Bobeiiliaiuen.

In  my  own  ooUeotion.

124.  Bronze  pin,  actual  aze.

Found  in  a  shell-mound  near  Elgin,  and  now  in  the  mnsenm  at  that
place.
126.  Flint  awl  from  Denmark,  actual  sue.
After  Woreaae.

126.  Lance-head  P  from  Denmark,  actaal  aise.

After  Worsaae.

127.  Lance  head  P  from  Denmark,  actual  oise.

After  Worsaae.

128.  Lance-head  P  from  Denmark,  actaal  size.

After  Worsaae.

129.  Bade  flint  axe  from  Denmark,  actaal  size.

After  Worsaae.
180.  Flat  stone  implement  of  ancertain  use,  actaal  siEe.
!From  the  Cave  at  La  Madelaine.

131.  Stone  implement,  resembling  in  some  respects  those  characteristio  of  the

drift  gravels,  actaal  size.
From  Moastier.

132.  Ditto  seen  from  the  other  side.

133.  Ditto,  side  view.

134.  Poniard  of  reindeer  horn.

From  the  Gave  at  Laogerie  Basse.

135.  Bade  flint  spear-head  from  the  drift  gravel  at  Hozne,  one-half  actaal  size.

After  Frere.    AxchsBologia,  1800,  pi.  ziv.

136.  Ditto,  side  view.

137.  Another  specimen.

After  Frere.    Archssologia,  1800,  pi.  xv.

138.  Ditto,  side  view.

139.  Section  across  the  Valley  of  the  Somme  at  Abbeville,  alter  Prestwioh ;  the

length  is  reduced  to  one-third.

140.  Section  at  St.  Acheul  near  Amiens.

a.  Brick  earth  with  a  few  ang^ular  flints.

b.  Bed  angular  gravel.

c.  Marly  sand,  with  land  and  freshwater  sheik.

d.  Grey  subangular  gravel,  in  which  the  flint  implements  are  found.

e.  Coffin.
/.  Tomb.

141.  Section  taken  in  a  pit  close  to  the  Joinville  station.

b.  Bed  angular  gravel,  containing  a  very  large  sandstone  block.
d.  Grey  subangular  gravel.

142.  Dis^rram  to  illustrate  deposit  o^  lo€ss  and  gravel.

a'.  LoSss  corresponding  to  and  conton4K>raneous  with  the  gravel  a.
b\  Lo6ss.
t^,  Lofcs.

1.  Level  of  valley  at  period  a.

2.  Level  of  valley  at  period  b,
8.  Level  of  valley  at  present.

143.  The  Engis  skull,  viewed  from  above.

144.  Ditto,  viewed  fiom  the  front.

Hazley*B  Man's  Place  in  Natare,  p.  126.


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FIGURES.  XXUl

146.  The  Neanderthal  aknll,  seen  from  the  side,  one-half  of  the  natural  aize.

146.  Ditto,  leen  from  the  side,  natural  siae.

147.  Ditto,  seen  from  above,  natoral  mse,

Hnzley'B  Man's  Place  in  Nature,  page  189.
The  oatlines  from  camera  lacida  drawings  by  ]fr.  Busk ;  the  details  from
the  cast  and  frt>m  Dr.  Fuhlrott's  photographs,    a  glabella ;  b  occipital
protaberance ;  d  lambdoidal  snture.

148.  Australian  boomerang,  one-sixth  of  the  actoal  size.
140.  Australian  dnb,  one-fifth  of  the  actual  sise.

150.  New  Zealand  patoo  patoo,  one-fourth  of  the  actual  size.

151.  Stone  axe  with  wooden  handle,  one-fourth  of  the  actual  size.

152.  SontlL  Sea  fish-hook,  one-half  of  the  actual  size.
15S.  Bsquimanx  arrow-head,  actual  size.

154.  Bsqnimauz  spear-head,  actual  size.

155.  Esquimaux  bone  harpoon,  one-third  of  the  actual  size.
166.  Fuegian  harpoon,  one-half  of  the  actual  size.


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES.


The  three  great  tamnU  at  TJpsala,  popularly  mppoeed  to  be  thoee  of  Odiii«  Thor,
and  Freya.    (FrantUpiece.)

Diagram  of  Abnry.    (To  face  pa^e  5SJ

Plate  I.    (To  face  page  60.J

Fig.  1.  A  flint  axe  from  a  tnmalnB,  one-third  of  the  actoal  sise.

2.  Another  form  of  stone  axe,  with  a  hole  for  a  handle,  one-third  of  the

actoal  size.
8.  A  flint  aaw,  one-haJf  of  the  actaal  size.

4.  A  flint  sword,  one-sixth  of  the  actaal  size.

5.  A  flint  chisel,  one-half  of  the  actaal  size.

6.  One  of  the  "cores*'  from  which  the  flint  flakes  are  splintered,  one-half  of

the  actaal  size.

7.  One  of  the  flakes,  one-half  of  the  actaal  size.

8.  9.  Bade  axes  from  the  EjAkkenmOdding  at  Havelse,  one-half  of  the

actaal  size.

10.  Flint  axe  from  drift  at  Moulin  Quignon,  near  Abbeville,  one-half  of  the

actual  size.

11.  Flint  axe  from  Abbeville,  showing  that  the  part  stained  white  is  parallel

to  the  present  surfaces,  and  that  the  weathering  has  taken  place  since
the  flint  was  worked  into  its  present  shape,  one-half  of  the  actaal  size.
.12.  Sling-stone  from  the  EjOkkenmddding  at  Havelse,  one -half  of  the
actaal  size.

Plate  II.    (To  face  page  268,)

A  flint  implement  found  near  Abbeville,  slightly  reduced.

The  artist  has  been  so  careful  to  present  a  faithful  image  of  this
specimen,  that  he  has  even  copied  exactly  my  rough  memorandum
as  to  the  place  and  date  of  its  discovery.


PRE-HISTORIC    TIMES.


CHAPTER  I.

ON    THE    USE    OF    BRONZE    IN  ANCIENT    TIMES.

rB  first  appearaace  of  man  in  Europe  dates  back  to  a
period  so  remote,  that  neither  history,  nor  even  tra-
dition, can.  throw  any  light  on  his  origin,  or  mode  of  life.
Under  these  circumstances,  some  have  assumed  the  past  to
be  hidden  from  the  present  by  a  veil,  which  time  would
probably  thicken,  but  could  never  remove.  Thus,  the  me-
morials of  antiquity  have  been  valued  as  monuments  of
ancient  skill  and  perseverance,  but  it  has  not  been  supposed
that  they  could  be  regarded  as  pages  of  ancient  history;
they  have  been  recognized  as  interesting  vignettes,  not  as
historical  pictures.  Some  writers  have  assured  us  that,  in
the  words  of  Palgrave,  "  We  must  give  it  up,  that  speech-
less past ;  whether  fact  or  chronology,  doctrine  or  mythology ;
whether  in  Europe,  Asia,  AMca  or  America;  at  Thebes  or
Palenque,  on  Irycian  shore  or  Salisbury  Plain :  lost  is  lost ;
gone  is  gone  for  ever."  While  if  others,  more  hopefully,
have  endeavoured  to  reconstruct  the  story  of  the  past,  they
have  too  often  allowed  imagination  to  usurp  the  place  of
research,  and  written  rather  in  the  spirit  of  the  novelist,
than  in  that  of  the  philosopher.
But  of  late  years  a  new  branch  of  knowledge  has  arisen ;

1


Z  DIVISION  OF  PRE-HISTORIC

a  new  Science  has,  so  to  say,  been  bom  among  ns,  which  deals
with  times  and  events  far  more  ancient  than  any  of  those
which  have  yet  fallen  within  the  province  of  the  archseologist.
The  geologist  reckons  not  by  days  or  by  years;  the  whole
six  thousand  years,  which  were  until  lately  looked  on  as  the
sum  of  the  world's  age,  are  to  him  but  as  a  imit  of  measure-
ment in  the  long  succession  of  past  ages.  Our  knowledge  of
geology  is,  of  course,  very  incomplete ;  on  some  points  we
shall  no  doubt  see  reason  to  change  our  opinion,  but  on  the
whole,  the  conclusions  to  which  it  points  are  as  definite  as
those  of  zoology,  chemistry,  or  any  of  the  kindred  sciences.
Nor  does  there  appear  to  be  any  reason  why  the  methods  of
examination,  which  have  proved  so  successM  in  geology,
should  not  also  be  used  to  throw  light  on  the  history  of  man
in  pre-historic  times.  Archaeology  forms,  in  fact,  the  link
between  geology  and  history.  It  is  true  that  in  the  case  of
other  animals  we  can,  from  their  bones  and  teeth,  form  a  defi-
nite id^i  of  their  habits  and  mode  of  life,  while  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge  the  skeleton  of  a  savage  could  not
always  be  distinguished  from  that  of  a  philosopher.  But  on
the  other  hand,  while  extinct  animals  leave  only  teeth  and
bones  behind  them,  the  men  c^  past  ages  are  to  be  studied
principally  by  their  works ;  houses  for  the  living,  tombs  for
the  dead,  fortifications  for  defence,  temples  for  worship,  im-
plements for  use,  ornaments  for  decoration.

From  the  careftd  study  of  the  remains  which  have  come
down  to  us,  it  would  appear  that  Pre-historic  Archeeology
may  be  divided  into  four  great  epochs.

.  Firstly,  that  of  the  Drift ;  when  man  shared  the  possession
of  Europe  with  the  Mammoth,  the  Cave  bear,  the  WooUy-
haired  rhinoceros,  and  other  extinct  .animals.  This  we  may
call  the  "  Palaeolithic  "  period.

Secondly,  The  later  or  polished  Stone  age;  a  period
characterized  by  beautiM  weapons  and  instruments  made


ARCHJBOLOOY   IlOt)  FOUR  PERIODS.  3

of  flint  and  other  kinds  of  8tone>  in  which,  however,  we
find  no  trace  of  the  knowledge  of  any  metal,  excepting  gold,
which  seems  to  have  been  sometimes  used  for  ornaments.
This  we  may  call  the  ''  Neolithic  "  period.

Thirdly,  The  Bronze  age,  in  which  bronze  was  used  for
aims  and  cutting  instruments  of  all  kinds.

Foorthly,  The  Iron  age,  in  which  that  metal  had  super-
seded bronze  for  anns,  axes,  knives,  etc. ;  bronze,  however,
still  being  in  common  use  for  ornaments,  and  frequently
also  for  the  handles  of  swords  and  other  arms,  but  never
for. the  blades.  Stone  weapons,  however,  of  many  kinds
were  still  in  use  during  the  age  of  Bronze,  and  even  during
that  of  Iron.  So  that  the  mere  presence  of  a  few  stone  im-
plements is  not  ia  itself  sufficient  evidence,  that  any  given
"find  '^  belongs  to  the  Stone  age.

In  order  to  prevent  misapprehension,  it  may  be  weU  to
state,  at  once,  that,  for  the  present,  I  only  apply  this  classifi-
cation to  Europe,  though,  in  all  probability,  it  might  be
extended  also  to  the  neighbouring  parts  of  Asia  and  Africa.
As  regards  other  civilized  countries,  China  and  Japan  for
instance,  we,  as  yet,  know  nothing  of  their  pre-historic
archsBology.  It  is  evident,  also,  that  some  nations,  such  as
the  Fuegians,  Andamaners,  etc.,  are  even  now  only  in  an
age  of  Stone.

But  even  in  this  limited  sense,  the  above  classification  has
not  met  with  general  acceptance ;  there  are  still  some  archaeo-
logists who  believe  that  the  arms  and  implements  of  stone,
bronze,  and  iron  were  used  contemporaneously.

Leaving  the  consideration  of  the  Stone  age  for  future
chapters,  I  shall  endeavour  in  the  present  one  to  show  that,
as  regards  Europe,  the  bronze  arms  and  implements  charac-
terise a  particular  period,  and  belong  to  a  time  anterior  to
the  discovery,  or  at  least  to  the  common  use,  of  iron.  In
support  of  this  we  may  appeal,  firstly,  to  the  testimony  of


4  FIRST  DISOOVEBY  OF  JCETAL«

the  most  ancient  writers ;  and  secondly,  to  the  evidence  of
the  objects  themsdyes.

In  facty  the  weapons  of  bronze,  and  especially  the  swords
and  celts,  are,  not  only  in  form,  but  also  in  ornamentation
very  similar  all  over  Europe,  and  very  different  from  those  of
iron.  And,  though  there  are  many  cases,  in  which  quan-
tities of  arms  have  been  found  together,  there  is  scarcely  an
instance  on  record,  in  which  any  of  these  ^' finds"  has  com-
prised objects  of  the  two  classes.

For  instance,  at  Nidau  in  the  Lake  of  Bienne,  Col.  Schwab
has  obtained  more  than  two  thousand  objects  of  metal  from
the  site  of  an  ancient  Lake- village ;  these  were  abnost  all  of
bronze,  only  three  fragments  of  iron  having  been  met  with,
and  even  these  being  probably  modem.  On  the  contrary,  at
Tiefenau,  near  Berne,  where  a  large  number  of  iron  arms
were  discovered,  including  no  less  than  a  hundred  swords,
not  a  single  weapon  of  bronze  was  foimd.

It  is  probable  that  gold  was  the  metal  which  first  attracted
the  attention  of  man ;  it  is  found  in  many  rivers,  and  by
its  bright  color  would  certainly  attract  even  the  rudest
savages,  who  are  known  to  be  very  fond  of  personal  deco-
ration. Silver  does  not  appear  to  have  been  discovered
until  long  after  gold,  and  was  apparently  preceded  by  both
copper  and  tin,  as  it  is  rarely,  if  ever,*  found  in  tumuli  of
the  Bronze  age ;  but,  however  this  may  be,  copper  seems  to
have  been  the  metal  which  first  became  of  real  importance  to
man :  no  doubt  owing  to  the  fact  that  its  ores  are  abundant
in  many  countries,  and  can  be  smelted  without  difficulty;
and  that,  while  iron  is  hardly  ever  found  except  in  the  form
of  ore,  copper  often  occurs  in  a  native  condition,  and  can
be  beaten  at  once  into  shape.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  N^orth
American  Indians  obtained  pure. copper  from  the  mines  near

*  Horn  feralei,  p.  60,


COPPER.      TIN.      IRON.  O

Lake  Superior  and  elsewhere,  and  liammered  it  at  once  into
axesy  bracelets,  and  other  objects.

Tin  also  early  attracted  notice,  probably  on  account  of  the
great  heaviness  of  its  ores.  When  metals  were  very  scarce,  it
would  naturally  sometimes  happen  that,  in  order  to  make  up
the  necessary  quantity,  some  tin  would  be  added  to  copper,
or  vice  vend.  It  would  then  be  found  that  the  properties  of
the  alloy  were  quite  different  from  those  of  either  metal,  and
a  very  few  experiments  would  determine  the  most  advan-
tageous proportions,  which  are  about  nine  parts  of  copper  to
one  part  of  tin.  No  implements  or  weapons  of  tin,  have  yet
been  found  in  Europe,  and  those  of  copper  are  extremely
lare,  whence  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  advantage  of  com-
bining the  two  metals  was  known  elsewhere,  before  the  use  of
either  was  introduced  into  Europe.  Many  of  the  so-called
"copper  axes,"  etc.,  contain  a  small  proportion  of  tin ;  and
the  few  exceptions  indicate  probably  a  mere  temporary  want,
rather  than  a  total  ignorance  of  this  metal.

The  ores  of  iron,  though  more  abundant,  are  much  less
striking  than  those  of  copper  or  tin.  Moreover,  though  they
are  perhaps  more  easily  reduced,  the  metal,  when  obtained,  is
much  less  tractable  than  bronze.  This  valuable  aUoy  can
very  easily  be  cast,  and,  in  fact,  all  the  weapons  and  imple-
ments made  of  it  in  olden  times,  were  cast  in  moulds  of  sand
or  stone.  The  art  of  casting  iron,  on  the  other  hand,  was
unknown  until  a  comparatively  late  period.

In  the  writings  of  the  early  poets,  iron  is  frequently  charac-
terised by  the  epithet  irokvxpuijTO^,  and  its  adjective,  aiJbrjpeo^,
is  used  metaphorically  to  imply  the  greatest  stubbornness.

While,  however,  these  facts  tend  very  much  to  remove  the
i  priori  improbability  that  a  compound  and  comparatively
expensive  material  like  bronze,  should  have  been  in  general
use  before  such  a  common  metal  as  iron,  we  must,  of  course,
seek  elsewhere  for  evidence  of  the  feu^t.


6  ALLUSIONS  TO  BRONZE   BY  ANCIENT  WRITERS.

Hesiod,  who  is  supposed  to  haye  lived  about  900  e.g.,  and
who  is  the  earliest  European  author  whose  works  have  come
down  to  us,  distinctly  states  that  iron  was  discovered  after
copper  and  tin.  Speaking  of  those  who  were  ancient,  even
in  his  day,  he  says  that  they  used  bronze,  and  not  iron.

rdk  B^l^v  'xciKjeea  fiev  rh/x^a.  ')(aKKeoi  Se  re  oucov
X^^^  ^*  €lf)yd^ovTO  ;  fJbiKa^;  Voirx,  ^^^^  dCSfqfHy;,

His  poems,  as  well  as  those  of  Homer,  show  that  nearly  three
thousand  years  ago,  the  value  of  iron  was  known  and  appre-
ciated. It  is  true  that,  as  we  read  in  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary
of  Greek  and  Boman  Antiquities,  bronze  "  is  represented  in
the  Iliad  and  Odyssey  as  the  common  material  of  arms,  in-
struments, and  vessels  of  various  sorts;  the  latter  (iron)  is
mentioned  much  more  rarely."  While,  however,  the  above
statement  is  strictly  correct,  we  must  remember  that  among
the  Greeks  the  word  irou  (al^po^)  was  used,  even  in  the
time  of  Homer,  as  synonymous  with  a  sword,  and  that  steel
also  appears  to  have  been  known  to  them  under  the  name  of
oBdfAaf;,  and  perhaps  also  of  /cvavo^,  as  early  as  the  time  of
Hesiod.  We  may,  therefore,  consider  that  the  Trojan  war
took  place  during  the  period  of  transition  from  the  Bronze  to
the  Iron  age.

Jjucretius  distinctly  mentions  the  three  ages.     He  says

Arma  antiqua,  manus,  ungues,  dentesque  faenmt
Et  lapides,  et  item  sylyarum  fragmina  rami,
Posterius  ferri  yis  est,  terisque  reperta.
Bed  prior  bbtib  erat,  quam  ferri  cognitus  asus.*

Coining  down  to  more  modem  times,  Eccardf  in  1750,
and  Goguet  in  1758,^  mention  the  three  later  ages  in  plain
terms,§  and  the  same  idea  runs  through  Borlase's  History  of

«  V.  1282.  Arts  et  des  Soiences.    See  Ch.  ir.  and

f  Eccard.     De  origine  et  moribuB  the  preface.

Germanorum.  §  See  Rhind  in  Arch.  Ins.  Jour.  V.

X  Goguet.  De  1* origine  dee  Lois,  de  xiiL


FINDS  OF  THE  IBON  AGE.  7

ComwalL  Sir  Bidiard  Colt  Hoare  also  expresses  the  opinion
that  instruments  of  iron  **  denote  a  much  later  period  "  than
those  of  bronze ;  but  M.  Thomson,  the  founder  of  the  great
museum  at  Copenhagen,  was  the  first  to  apply  these  obserrsr
tions  as  the  basis  of  a  scientific  chronology.

The  date  of  the  introduction  of  iron  into  the  North  of
Europe  cannot  at  present  be  satis£EU)torily  ascertained ;  never-
theless it  is  most  likely  that  the  use  of  this  metal  spread
rapidly  through  Europe.  Not  only  does  it  seem  d  priori
probable  that  such  an  important  discovery  would  do  so,  but
it  is  evident  that  the  same  commercial  organisation  which
had  already  carried  the  tin  of  Cornwall  all  over  our  con-
tinent, would  equally  facilitate  the  transmission  of  iron,  as
soon  as  that  even  more  useful  metal  was  discovered  and
roidered  available.  However  this  may  be,  when  the  armies
of  Bome  brought  the  civilisation  of  the  South  into  contact
with  that  of  the  North,  they  found  the  value  of  iron  already
well  known  to  their  new  enemies;  the  excellence  of  whose
weapons  indicated  very  considerable  progress  in  the  art  of
metallurgy.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to  suppose  that  arms
of  bronze  were  at  that  time  still  in  use  in  the  North,  for,
had  this  been  so,  it  would  certainly  have  been  mentioned  by
the  Boman  writers;  while  the  description  given  by  Tacitus
of  the  Caledonian  weapons  shows  that  bronze  swords  were
no  longer  used  in  Scotland,  at  the  time  he  wrote.  Moreover,
there  are  several  cases  in  which  large  quantities  of  arms  be-
longing to  the  Boman  period  have  been  found  together,  and
in  which  the  arms  and  implements  are  aU  of  iron.  This  argu-
ment is  in  its  very  nature  cumulative,  and  cannot  therefore  be
folly  developed  here,  but,  out  of  many,  I  will  mention  a  few
cases  in  illustration.

Some  years  ago,  an  old  battle-field  was  discovered  at
Tiefenau,  near  Berne,  and  described  by  M.  Jahn.  On  it
were  found  a  great  number  of  objects  made  of  iron ;  such  as


8  TIEFEirATT,

fragments  of  chariots,  bits  for  horses,  wheels,  pieces  of  coats
of  mail,  and  arms  of  various  sorts,  including  no  less  than  a
hundred  two-handed  swords.  All  of  these  were  made  of
iron,  but  with  them  were  several  fibulffi  of  bronze,  and  some
coins,  of  which  about  thirty  were  of  bronze,  struck  at  Mar-
seilles, and  presenting  a  head  of  ApoUo  on  one  side  and  a
bull  on  the  other,  both  good  specimens  of  Gbeek  art.  The
rest  were  silver  pieces,  also  struck  at  Marseilles.  These  coini^
and  the  absence  of  any  trace  of  Boman  influence,  sufficiently
indicate  the  antiquity  of  these  interesting  remains.

Some  very  interesting  '^  finds ''  of  articles  belonging  to  the
Iron  age  have  been  made  in  the  peat  bogs  of  Slesvick,  and
described  by  M.  Engelhardt,  Curator  of  the  Museum  at
Flensborg.  One  of  these,  in  the  Moss  of  I^ydam,  comprises
clothes,  sandals,  brooches,  tweezers,  beads,  helmets,  shields,
shield  bosses,  breastplates,  coats  of  mail,  buckles,  swordbelts,
sword  sheaths,  8(X  swords,  500  spears,  30  axes,  40  awls,  160
arrows,  80  knives,  various  articles  of  horse  gear,  wooden
rakes,  mallets,  vessels,  wheels,  pottery,  coins,  etc.  Without
a  single  exception,  all  the  weapons  and  cutting  implements
are  made  of  iron,  though  bronze  was  freely  used  for  brooches
and  other  similar  articles.*

In  the  /sunmier  of  1862,  M.  Engelhardt  found  in  the  same
field  a  ship,  or  rather  a  large  flat-bottomed,  boat,  seventy
feet  in  length,  three  feet  deep  in  the  middle,  and  eight  or
nine  feet  wide.  The  sides  are  of  oak  boards,  overlapping  one
another,  and  fastened  together  by  iron  bolts.  On  the  inner
side  of  each  board  are  several  projections,  which  are  not  made
from  separate  pieces,  but  were  left  when  the  boards  were  cut  out
of  the  solid  timber.  Each  of  these  projections  has  two  small
holes,  through  which  ropes,  made  of  the  inner  bark  of  trees^

*  See  Lnbbock  in  Kat.  His.  Ber.  Oct.  Eanio  cboracten.  I  had  the  pleasure  of
1863,  and  Stephens  in  Gent.  Mag.  Dec.  Tisiting  this  interesting  spot  with  M.
1868.    On  one  of  the  arrows  were  some      Engelhardt  in  1862,


KTDAIC.  9

were  passed,  in  order  to  fasten  the  sides  of  the  boat  to  the  ribs.
The  rowlocks  are  formed  by  a  projecting  horn  of  wood,  under
which  is  an  orifice,  so  that  a  rope,  fastened  to  the  horn  and
passing  throngh  the  orifice,  leaves  a  space  through  which  the
oar  played.  There  appear  to  have  been  about  fifty  pairs  of
oars,  of  which  sixteen  have  already  been  discovered.  The
bottom,  of  the  boat  was  covered  by  matting.  I  visited  the
spot  about  a  week  after  the  boat  had  been  discovered,  but
was  unable  to  see  much  of  it,  as  it  had  been  taken  to  pieces,
and  the  boards,  etc.,  were  covered  over  with  straw  and  peat,
that  they  might  dry  slowly.  In  this  manner,  M.  Engelhardt
hopes  that  they  will  perhaps,  at  least  in  part,  retain  their
original  shape.  The  freight  of  the  boat  consisted  of  iron
axes,  including  a  socketed  celt  with  its  handle,  swords,
lances,,  knives,  brooches,  whetstones,  wooden  vessels,  and,
oddly  enough,  two  birch  brooms,  with  many  smaller  articles.
Only  those,  however,  have  yet  been  found  which  remained
actually  in  the  boat;  and,,  as  in  sinking  it  turned  partly
over  on  its  side,  no  doubt  many  more  articles  will  reward
the  further  explorations  which  M.  Engelhardt  proposes  to
make^  It  is  evident,  that  this  ancient  boat  was  sunk  on
purpose,  because  there  is  a  square  hole  about  six  inches
in  diameter  hewn  out  of  the  bottom;  and  it  is  probable,
that  in  some  time  of  panic  or  danger  the  objects  contained
in  it  were  thus  hidden  by  their  owner,  who  was  never  able
to  recover  them.  Even  in  recent  times  of  disturbance,  as^
for  instance,  in  the  beginning  of  this  century,  and  in  1848,
many  arms,  ornaments,  household  utensils,  etc.,  were  so  efiec-
tually  hidden  in  the  lakes  and  peat  mosses,  that  they  could
never  be  found  again.  Much  interest  is  added  to  this  vessel
and  its  contents,  by  the  &ot,  that  we  can  fix  almost  their
exact  date.  The  boat  lies,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,
within  a  few  yards  of  the  spot  where  the  previous  discoveries
at  Nydam  were  made,  and  as  all  the  arms  and  ornament^


10  THOR8BJERO.

exactly  correspond,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  they  belong
to  the  same  period.  Now  the  previous  collection  included
nearly  fifty  Boman  coins,  ranging  in  date  from  a.d.  67  to
217,  and  we  cannot  therefore  be  &r  wrong  in  referring  these
remains  to  the  third  century.

A  very  similar  discoyeiy  has  been  made  at  Thorsbjerg  in
the  same  neighbourhood,  but  in  this  case,  owing  to  some
chemical  difference  in  the  peat,  the  iron  has  beien  almost
entirely  removed.  It  may  naturally  be  asked  why  then  this
should  be  quoted  as  an  instance  of  the  Iron  age  P  And  the
answer  seems  quite  satisfactory.  All  the  swords,  lance-
heads  and  axe-blades  have  disappeared,  while  the  handles  of
bronze  or  wood  are  perfectly  preserved,  and  as  the  orna-
ments and  other  objects  of  bronze  are  well  preserved,  it  is
evident  that  the  swords,  etc.,  were  not  of  that  metal ;  and  it
is  therefore  reasonable  to  conclude  that  they  were  of  iron,
more  especially  as  the  whole  character  of  the  objects  resem-
bles that  of  those  foimd  at  Nydam,  and  the  coins,  which  are
about  as  numerous  as  those  from  the  latter  place,  range  from
60  A.D.  to  197 ;  so  that  these  two  great  "  finds ''  may  be  re-
garded as  aknost  contemporaneous.

Not  only  are  bronze  weapons  altogether  absent  from  these
deposits,  but  their  forms  and  the  character  of  the  ornamen-
tation are  very  different  from  those  of*  the  Bronze  age;
resembling  in  some  respects  Roman  arms,  in  others  they
are  quite  peculiar,  and  evidently  representative  of  northern
art.

From  these  and  similar  discoveries,  it  appears  evident
that  the  use  of  bronze  weapons  had  been  discontinued
in  the  North  before,  probably  long  before,  the  commence-
ment of  our  era.  From  the  ease  with  which  it  could  be
worked^  this  metal  was  still  used  for  brooches  and  orna-
ments ;  but  in  the  manufacture  of  swords,  lances,  axes  and
similar  implements,  it  had  been  entirely  superseded  by  iron.


FIKD6  OP  THB   BBONZS  AGE.  11

There  are  many  cases  on  record  of  iron  swords-  with  bronze
handles  or  scabbards,  bat  scarcely  any  instances  of  the
reverse.

Conversely,  as  bronze  weapons  are  entirely  absent  from  the
great  **  finds "  of  the  Iron  age,  so  iron  weapons  are  equally
wanting  in  those  instances  where,  as  for  instance  at  Nidau,
on  the  Lake  of  Bienne,  and  Estavayer,  on  that  of  Neufchatel,
large  quantities  of  bronze  tools  and  weapons  have  been  found
together.

To  sum  up  this  argument,  though  the  discoveries  of  bronze
and  iron  weapons  have  been  very  numerous,  yet  there  is
hardly  a  single  case  in  which  swords,  axes,  daggers,  or  other
weapons  of  these  two  difPerent  metals,  have  been  found  to-
gether ;  nor  are  bronze  weapons  ever  found  associated  with
coins,  pottery,  or  other  relics  of  Roman  origin.  The  value  of
this  evidence  will  better  be  appreciated  after  reading  the  fol-
lowing extract  from  Mr.  Wright's  Essays  on  ArchaDology  :♦

**  All  the  sites  of  ruined  Boman  towns  with  which  I  am
acquainted  present  to  the  excavator  a  numerous  collection  of
objects,  ranging  through  a  period  which  ends  abruptly  with
what  we  call  the  close  of  the  Soman  period,  and  attended
with  circumstances  which  cannot  leave  any  doubt  that  this
was  the  period  of  destruction.  Otherwise,  surely  we  should
find  some  objects  which  would  remind  us  of  the  subsequent
periods.  I  will  only  mention  one  class  of  articles  which  are
generally  found  in  considerable  numbers,  the  coins.  We  in-
variably find  these  presenting  a  more  or  less  complete  series
of  Roman  coins,  ending  at  latest  with  the  Emperors  who
reigned  in  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century.  This  is  not
the  case  with  Roman  towns  which  have  continued  to  exist
after  that  period,  for  then,  on  the  contrary,  we  find  relics
which  speak  of  the  subsequent  inhabitants,  early  Saxon  and
MedieevaL    I  will  only,  for  want  of  space,  give  one  example,

*  Easays  on  Arohseology,  p.  105.


12  BRONZE  AN;D  iron  ARBfS  NEVER  FOUND  TOOETHER.

that  of  Bichborougli  in  Kent.  The  town  of  Kutupise  seemB
to  have  capitulated  with  the  Saxon  inyaders^  and  to  have
continued  until  its  inhabitants,  in  consequence  of  the  retreat
of  the  sea,  gradually  abandoned  it  to  establish  themselves  at
Sandwich.  Now  the  coins  found  at  Bichborough  do  not  end
with  those  of  the  Boman  emperors,  but  we  find^  first,  a  great
quantity  of  those  singular  little  coins  which  are. generally
known  by  the  name  of  minimi,  and  which,  presenting  very
bad  imitations  of  the  Boman  coinage,  are  considered  as  be*
longing  to  the  age  immediately  following  the  Boman  period,
and  preceding  that  of  the  Saxon  coinage."

We  may  assume,  then,  on  the  authority  of  Mr.  Wright
himself,  that  if  all  these  bronze  arms  were  really  of  Boman
origin,  many  of  them  would  have  been  foimd  from  time  to  time
in  conjunction  with  other  Bomau  remains.  Yet  Mr.  Wright
himself  has  only  been  able  to  give  me  one  doubtM  instance
of  this  kind.*

I  may  also  add  that  the  Bomans  used  '^  ferrum  '^  either  to
mean  "iron,"  or  a  sword,  showing  that  their  swords  were
made  of  that  metal ;  and  that  bronze  weapons  are  particu-
larly numerous  in  some  countries  to  which  the  Boman  armies
never  penetrated ;  such,  for  instance,  as  Ireland  and  Denmark.

Nor  does  there  appear  to  be  any  subsequent  period,  to
which  we  can  refer  the  weapons  of  bronze.  Great  numbers
of  Saxon  interments  have  been  examined  both  in  this  country
and  on  the  Continent,  and  we  know  that  the  swords,  lances,
knives,  and  other  weapons  of  that  time,  were  all  of  iron.
Besides  this,  if  the  bronze  implements  and  weapons  had  be*
longed  to  post-Boman  times,  we  should  certainly,  I  think,
have  found  some  of  them  in  the  ruined  towns,  and  with  the
pottery  and  coins  of  that  period.     Moreover,  the  similarity

*  In  Staart'8  Caledonia  Romans,  2nd  near  the  Roman  station  of  Ardoch.
«d.  pi.  T.,  is  a  figure  of  a  leaf-shaped  The  particulars  of  its  disooyery,  how-
sword,  sfiid  to  have  been  found  in  or      ever,  are  not  given.


OBJECTS   CHABACllTRISnC   OF  THE  BBOKZE   AQE.


13


to  each  other  of  the  weapons  found  in  very  distant  parts  of
Europe,  implies  more  extended  intercourse  between  different
countriea,  than  any  that  existed  in  those  centuriee.  On  the
vhote,  then,  the  evidence  appears  to  show  that  the  use  of
bronze  weapons  ia  characteristic  of  a  particular  phase  in  the
hifitoiy  of  European  civilisation,  and  one  which  was  anterior
to  the  discovery,  of,  at  least,  to  the  general  use,  of  iron  for
cutting  porposea.  The  commonest  and,  perhaps,  most  cha-
racteristic objects  belonging  to  the  Bronze  age,  are  the
so-called  "celts"  (figs.  1  to  12)  which  were  probably  used


CoppR-  Cell  ftom  Wilciford.  Winged  Cell  froio  Iirlmd.       Soeliet»d  Cell  from  tnluul.


The  tkiH  diflRnt  t}pei  oT  Celt*  ud  tbe  muiiKr  In  which  Uiej  u*  roppoMd  to  tun  bi


BRONZE  CELTS.


:  cliisels,   hoes,   war-axes,   and  a   variety  of  other  pur-
Fio.  7,  Fio.  s.  poses.       Similar     imple-

inents>  but  made  of  iron
instead  of  bronze,  are
even  now  employed  in
Siberia  and  some  parts
of  Africa.*  More  tban
two  thousand  are  known
to  exist  in  the  different
Insh  collections,  of  which
the  great  Musemn  belong-
ing  to  the   Royal   Irish

onld  fmn  Irclud      i        ,  ,    ti    -li-

Academy  at  Dublin  con-
no  11  Fifl.  u.


DHorated  Celt  ttoio  Irclud.  Diniih  Celta.

tained  in  the  year  1860  no  less  than  six  hundred  and  eighty-

•  Eomferilea,  p.  77-


MODES  OP   HANDLING.  15

eiglity*  no  two  of  whicli  were  cast  in  the  same  mould.
They  Tary  in  size  tram  an  inch  to  a  foot  in  length  and
may  be  diyided  into  three  principal  classes  (figs.  4-6)  accord-
ing to  the  manner  in  which  they  were  handled ;  though  we
must  remember  that  there  were  many  intermediate  forms.
The  first  class  (figs.  1,  4,  7,  9,  10,  and  11)  is  the  simplest  in
form,  and  is  considered  by  some  antiquaries^  as,  for  instance,
by  Sir  W.  R.  Wilde,t  to  be  the  oldest,  partly  because  they  are
"evidently  formed  on  the  type  of  the  old  stone  celts,"  (conf.
figs.  7  and  72)  partly  because  some  of  them  (nearly  thirty
for  instance  in  the  Dublin  Musexmi)  are  of  red,  ahnost  im-
alloyed,  copper,  and  are  '' almost  the  only  antique  implements
of  any  kind  formed  out  of"  this  metal,  and  partly  because
the  copper  ones  at  least  are  always  imomamented.  On  the
other  hand,  the  simplicity  of  form  exhibited  by  the  copper
axes,  which  may  be  observed  in  those  from  other  countries
as  well  as  firom  Irehmd,  is  perhaps  to  be  accounted  for  by
the  great  difficulty  of  casting  copper,  so  that  the  founders,
when  dealing  with  that  metal,  would  naturally  confine  them-
selves to  the  simpler  forms.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
these  simple  celts  were  handled  in  the  manner  indicated

(fig.  4).

Evidently,  however,  the  blade  would  at  every  blow  tend
to  split  the  handle  in  which  it  was  placed.  To  remedy  this
defect,  a  stop  or  ridge  was  raised  across  the  celt,  and  the
metal  and  wood  were  made  to  fit  into  one  another  (figs.  2
and  5).  This  second  form  of  celt  is  known  as  a  Paalstab,  or
Paalstave,  and  has  often  a  small  loop  on  one  side  (the  sup-
posed use  of  which  is  indicated  in  the  figure),  as  well  as  a
wing  on  each  side.

A  still  &rther  improvement  consisted  (figs.  3,  6,  12)  in
reversing  the  position  of  the  metal  and  the  handle,  making

*  In  the  Mnfleam  at  Edinburgh  are  more  than  100,  at  Copenhagen  350.
t  Cat.  p.  861.


BROIfZE  SWOBDS.


the  axe  hollov  at  one  end,  and  so  passing  the  handle  into  it.
The  celts  are  generally  plain,  but  sometimes  omamuited  vith


BBONZE   SWOBDB.


17


ridges,  dots,  or  lines,  as  in  fige.  3,  6,  8, 11,  and  12.  That  they
WBre  made  in  the  countries  where  they  are  found,  is  proved
by  the  presence  of  moulds  (fig.  8).  It  is  djfficidt  to  under-
stand vhy  the  oeltrmakers  never  cast  their  axes  as  we  do


Bword-huidka  Drom  Dmairk.

ouTB,  with  a  transverse  hole,
through  which   the  handle
might  pass.    No  bronze  im-
plement of  this  descriptioa
has,  however,  so  far  as   I
know,   been    yet   found  in
Great  Britain,  though  a  few
have  occurred  in  Denmark,
where    they    are   of   great
beauty    and  -highly    deco-
rated.
The  swords  of  the  Bronze
age  (figs.  14-23),*  are  always  more
or  less  leaf- like  in  shape,  double-
edged,  8harp-point«d,  and  intended
for  stabbing  and   thrusting,  rather
swortiihnoDaniiwk.  jj^^  jj^j.  cutting.     This  18  evident,
not  only  Itodi  the  general  shape,  but  also  from  the  condition
■  In  fig.  13  an  tocientiron  gwordurspieaentediiiiorder  tothaw  tbedifferaaoe


18

of  the  edges.  They  never  have  any  tandguards:  the
handles  are  sometiiiiea  solid  (figs.  17-23) ;  this  is  generally
the  case  with  those  found  in  Denmark :  sometimes  (figs.
14-16)  flat,  thin,  and  evidently  intended  to  he  plated  with
wood  or  bone:   while  sometimes  the  sword  expands  at  its


base,  and  is  fastened  to  a  handle  by  irom  two  to  four
rivets.  Swords  of  this  class  are  generally  shorter  thm
Uie  others,  and  indeed  we  find  every  intermediate  form
between  the  true  sword  and  the  dagger  (figs.  24,  25,  26) :  (^


SPVAS-HKAJM^  AKKOWS,  FtBH-HOOKS,  SICKLES.  19

the  two  classes  together,  the  Dublin  HnBeum  oontaius
nearly  300.  The  handlee  of  the  bronze  svords  axe  very
short,  and  could  not  have  been  held  comfortably  by  hands  as
large  as  ours,  a  chu-acteiiatic  much  relied  on  by  those  who
attribute  the  intrDduction  of  bronze  into  Europe  to  a  people
of  Asiatic  origin.

The  next  classes  of  bronze  objects  are  the  p,^  ^^  .  ^^  ^
heads  of  spear*  (figs.  37,  28),  j'atalitu,  and
arrwf;  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  of
which  are  in  the  Dublin  Museum ;  in  length
they  vary  from  two  feet  and  a  half  to  an
inch,  and  their  shapes  are  also  very  Tarious :
but  it  is  unnecessary  to  describe  them  in
detail,  because  they  are  repeated  in  simi-
lar weapons  of  all  ages,  countries  and  ma-
terials. Bronze  arrows,  however,  are  not
very  conunon  in  Northern  Europe,  proba-
bly because  fiint  was  so  much  cheaper^  and
almost  as  effective.

More   than  a. hundred'  bronze  fith-hookt
have  been  found  at  Ifidau  in  the  Lake  of  .  ^i™^*''^  "'^
Bienne,   but  elsewhere  they  appear  to   be
rare;   the  Museum   at   Dublin  contains  only  one.     Sickles
are  mote  numerous;  at  Copenhagen  there  are  twenty-five,
at   Dublin  eleven ;   in  the   Lake-village  at  Morges  eleven
have  been  found,  at  Nidau  eighteen ;   they  are  generally
about   six  inches   in   length.  Bat  on  one  side,   and  raised
on  the  other ;  they  were  always  intonded  to  be  held  in  the
right  hand.

Bronze  knives  (figs.  39-33)  are  frequently  found  in  the
Danish  tumuli,  and  among  the  remains  of  the  Swiss  lake-
habitations;  twenty,  for  instance,  at  Merges,  twenty-six  at
Eetavayer,  and  about  a-  hundred  at  Nidan :  in  Ireland  they
appear  to  be  very  rare ;  the  Dublin  Museum  does  not  contain


BRORZ£  KNrVBS.


one.     They  were  generally  fitted  into  handles  of  bone,  horn,
or  wood,  and  the  blade  is  almost  always  more  or  leas  curred.


Bronie  Koivet  fn


while  those  of  iron   kniTes,  on   the  contrary,  were  gene-
rally straight.

The  small  bronze  razor-kaivea  (figs.  34-37),  indeed,  have
straight  edges,  but  they  are  quite  of  a  different  character
from  the  iron  knives :  &om  the  ornaments  engraved  on
them,  I  am  disposed  to  regard  them  as  belonging  to  a  late
period  in  the  age  of  Bronze,  if  not  in  some  cases  to  the
beginning  of  that  of  Iron.     Indeed,  the  Flensborg  Museum


RAZOB  KNIVE8.


contaim  a  razor-kniie  said  to  have  been  found  together  with
objects  of  the  latter  metal.


e*  from  Denmark.
The  personal  omamenit  of  the  Bronze  age  consiBt  princi-


22


BRONZE   BKACELFI8.


pally  of  bracelets  (figs.  40,  41),  pins  (fig.  42),  and  rings.
The  bracelets  are  either  simple  spirals,  or  rings  open  at  one
side,  and  decorated  by  those  combinations  of  straight  and
curred  lines,  so  characteristic  of  the  Bronze  age.


Very  many  bronze  pins  have  been  obtaiined  from  the  Swiss
lake-habitations :  for  instance,  57  from  Morges,  239  irom  Es-
t-avayer,  and  600  &om  ^idau.     They  are  also  veiy  frequently


Pw.  U.— Bronie  Hik^idu— SwllHrlind.

found  in  graves,  where  tiey  were  used,  as  pointed  out  hy  Sir
R.  C.  Hoare,  to  secure  the  linen  cloth  which  enveloped  the
bones.  Although  brooches  of  bronze  are  very  common,  they
have  generally  been  found  in  conjunction  with  iron,  and  we  may


BBONZE   PINS.


23


M


almost  say  that  they  were  unknown  during  the  Bronze  age>
their  place  being  filled  by  simple  pins.  Many  of  the  latter
articles  found  in  the  Swiss  lakes  appear,  howevery  to  have
been  hair-pins.  Some  of  them  are  nearly  a  foot  in  length,  and
two  found  near  Berne  even  as  much  as  2ft.  9in.  Many  of  the
pins  have  large  hollow  spherical  heads,  as  in  fig.  42,  a,  b  ;  the
others  yary  so  much  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  any
general  description  of  them.  There  can  be  little  doubt
that  these  pins  really  belong  to  the  fto.  4s.  fio.  m.  fxo.  45.  fio.  46.
Bronze  age ;  but  the  fact,  that  similar  fj)
ones  continued  in  use  long  after  the
introduction  of  iron,  appears  to  be
equally  well  established.  One  of  these
later  bronze  pins  is  represented  in  fig.
124.  Some  other  small  objects  of
bronze,  including  two  needles,  from  the
Lake  of  Neufchatel,  are  represented
in  figs.  43-48.  Bronze  hammers  are
very  rare ;  it  is  probable  that  stones
were  used  for  this  purpose.  Gouges
are  more  common.  Small  saws  have
been  discovered  in  Germany  and  Den-
mark, but  not,  as  yet,  in  Great  Britain.


/


Fio.  47.


Fio.  4S.


SoaU  oVieeti  in  Bnmse.    flwitiecb&d.

Studs  or  buttons,  though  not  very  abundant,  are  found  both
in  Switzerland  and  Scandinavia.*

I  have  also  figured  a  group  (figs.  49-52)  of  Irish  gold


•  Fortber  infonutioa  ai  to  tha  objects  of  bronze  from  Switierland  will  be
foaad  in  the  ehapter  on  the  Swias  Lake-h&bitationk


24


GOLD  ORNAMENTS.


ornaments.  We  have,  however,  as  yet  no  evidence  as  to
their  origin,  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  they  belong
to  a  nmch  later  period.


Fio.  49.


Gold  Torqae— Ireland.    Found  near  CloUBacnoiie.

Fxfl.  51.

Fxo.W.  "■         ^'*^


Gold  Omunento— Irdaad.


CHAJtACTES  OF   OBNAMBMTATION,
PiB.il


The  omamentstion  on  the  objects  of  bronze  is  of  peculiar,
and  at  the  same  time  uniform,  chtiracter ;  it  consiste  of  simple
geometrical  pattens,  and  ia  formed  by  combinations  of  spirals,
ciicleA,  and  zigzag  lines;  representations  of  animals  and  plants
bong  T«y  nxely  attempted.  Even  the  few  exceptions  to
this  rule  are  perhaps  more  apparent  than  real.  Thus,  two
such  only  are  fignied  in  the  Catalogue  of  the  Copenhag^i
Jtlaseum;  one  is  a  rude  figure  of  a  swan  (fig.  29),  the
other  of  a  man  (fig.  31).  The  second  of  these  forms  the
handle  of  a  knife,  which  a{^>ears  to  be  straight  in  the  blade,
a  type  characteristic  of  the  Iron  age,  but  rarely  found  in  that
of  Bronze.  As  regards  one  of  them,  therefore,  there  is  an
independent  reason  for  referring  it  to  the  period  of  transition,
or  at  least  to  the  close  of  the  Bronze  age.  There  is,  indeed,
one  type  of  pattern,  usually  found  on  the  razor-knives,  but
sometimes  also  on  others,  intended  probably  for  a  rude  repre-
sentation of  a  ship  (figs.  34-37).  Even,  however,  if  we  admit
that  this  is  the  case,  and  if  we  accept  these  objects  as  belonging
to  the  Bronze  age,  they  wiU  only  show  how  little  advance  had
yet  been  made  in  the  art  of  representing  natural  objects.

We  should  hardly,  perhaps,  have  expected  to  know  much
of  the  manner  in  which  the  people  of  the  Bronze  age  were
dressed.  Considering  how  perishable  are  the  materials  out
of  which  clothes  are  necessarily  formed,  it:  is  wonderful
that  any  fragments  of'  them  should  have  remained  to  the
present  day.      Hiere  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  skins  of


26  TUMULUS  OF  TRBBNHOI.

animals  were  extensively  used  for  tliis  pnrposei  as  indeed
they  have  been  in  all  ages  of  man's  history ;  many  traces  of
linen  tissue  also  have  been  foimd  in  English  tumuli  of  the
Bronze  age,  and  in  the  Swiss  Lakes.  Fig.  123  repreeents  a
piece  of  fabric  from  Bobenhausen  in  Switzerland ;  it  belongs,
howeyer,  in  all  probability  to  the  Stone  age.  Even  a  single
fragment  such  as  this,  throws,  of  course,  much  light  on  the
manufactures,  if  we  may  call  th^n  so,  of  the  period  to  which  it
belongs ;  but  fortunately  we  need  not  content  ourselves  with
any  such  partial  knowledge  as  this,  as  we  possess  the  whole
dress  of  a  chief  belonging  to  the  Bronze  age.

On  a  farm  occupied  by  a  M.  Dahls,  near  Bibe  in  Jutland,
are  four  tumuli,  which  are  known  as  Great  Kongehoi,
Little  Kongehoi,  Quldhoi,  and  Treenhoi.  This  last  was
examined  in  1861  by  MM.  Worsaae  and  Herbst.  It  is  about
fifty  ells  in  diameter  and  six  in  height,  being  composed  of  a
loose  sandy  earth.  In  it,  near  the  centre,  were  found  three
wooden  coffins,  two  of  full  size,  and  one  evidently  intended
for  a  child.  The  coffin  with  which  we  are  now  particularly
concerned,  was  about  Oft.  Sin.  long  and  2flt.  2in.  broad  on  the
outside;  its  internal  measurements  were  7|ft.  long  and  Ifb.  Sin.
broad.  It  was  covered  by  a  moveable  lid  of  corresponding
size.  The  contents  were  peculiar,  and  very  interesting.
While,  as  might  naturally  be  expected,  we  find,  in  most
ancient  graves,  only  the  bones  and  teeth,  all  the  soft  parts
having  long  ago  decayed  away, — ^in  some  cases,  and  this  was
one  of  them,  almost  exactly  the  reverse  has  happened.
Owing  to  the  presence  of  water,  and  perhaps  to  the  fact
that  it  was  strongly  impregnated  with  iron,  the  soft  parts  of
the  body  had  been  turned  into  a  dark,  greasy,  substance;
and  the  bones,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  fragments,  were
changed  into  a  kind  of  blue  powder.

Singularly  enough,  the  brain  seems  to  have  been  the  part
which  had.  undergone  least  change.     On  opening  the  coffin,


DRESS    IN   THE    BRONZE   AOE.  27

it  was  found  lying  at  one  end,  where  no  doubt  the  heed  had
originally  been  placed,  oovered  by  a  thick  hemispherical
Toollen  cap,  about  six  inches  in  height  (fig.  53).  The  outer
side  of  this  cap  was  tiiiokly  oorered  by  short  loose  threads,


Woolln  Cloak.

every  one  of  them  ending  in  a  Bmall  knot,  which  gave  the  cap
a  very  singular  appearance.  The  body  of  the  corpse  had
been  wrapped  in  a  coarse  woollen  cloak  (fig.  56),  which  was


28  DKESS   OF   A    CHIEF

almost  Bonicircular,  and  hollowed  out  round  the  neck.  It
was  about  3ft.  Sin.  long,  and  broad  iu  proportion.  On  its
innerside  were  left  Itanging  a  great  number  of  ahert  wooUea
threads,  which  give  it  somewhat  the  appearance  of  plush.

On  the  right  side  of  the  corpse,  was  a  box,  made  with  a  lid
of  the  same  diameter.  It  was  7Jin.  in  diameter,  6^in.  high,
and  was  fastened  together  by  pieces  of  osier  or  bark..  In
this  box  was  a  similar  smaller  one,  without  a  lid^  and  in  this,
again,  were  three  articles,  namely,  a  cap  7in.  high»  of  simply
woven  woollen  stufT  (fig.  54);  a  small  comb  Sin.  long,  2|itt.
high  (fig.  55) ;  and  a  amall  simple  razor-knife.

After  the  cloak  and  the  bark-bos  had  been  taken  away,


two  woollen  shawls  came  to  view,  one  of  th^n  covering  the
feet,  the  other  lying  higher  up.  They  were  of  a  square
shape,  rather  less  than  5ft.  long,  3ft.  9in.  broad,  and  with  a
long  fringe  (fig.  58).  At  the  place  wJiere  the  body  had  hun,
was  a  shirt  (fig.  57)  also  of  woollen  material,  cut  out  a  little


IN  TRB    BBONZE   AOE.  39

for  the  neck,  and  with  a  long  projeoting  tongue  at  one  of  the
npper  angles.  It  was  fastened  at  the  waist  by  a  long  woollen
bond,  which  vent  twice  round  the  body,  and  hung  down  in
&ont.  On  the  left  side  of  the  corpse  was  a  bronze  sword
(fig.  19),  in  a  wooden  aheath.  It  is  3ft.  Sin.  in  length,  and
has  a  solid  simple  handle.

At  the  feet  were  two  pieces  of  woollen  ""■  **■

stuff,  about  i4^in.  long  and  3Jin.  wide  •

(fig.  59),  the  use  of  which  does  not  seem
quite  clear,  though  they  may  be  sup-
posed to  have  been  the  remains  of  leg-
gings. At  the  end  of  the  coffin  were
found  traces  of  leather,  doubtless  the
remains  of  boots.  In  the  cap,  where  the
head  had  been,  was  some  black  hair,  and
the  form  of  the  brain  was  still  recog-
nisable. Finally,  this  ancient  warrior
had  been  wrapped  round  in  an  ox's  hide,  Lrgginga.

and  BO  committed  to  the  grave.

The  other  two  coffins  were  not  examined  by  competent
persons,  and  the  valuable  information  which  they  might  have
afforded  was  thus  lost  to  us.  The  more  indestructible  things
were,  however,  preserved ;  they  consisted  of  a  sword,  a  brooch,
a  knife,  a  double-pointed  awl,  a  pair  of  tweezers,  a  large
double  button  or  stud,  all  of  bronze  ;  a  small  double  button
of  tin,  and  a  javelin  head  of  flint.

The  baby's  coffin  produced  only  an  amber  bead,  and  a  small
bronze  bracelet,  consisting  of  a  simple  ring  of  metal.

There  can,  therefore,  be  no  doubt  that  this  very  interesting
tumulus  belonged  to  the  Bronze  age,  and  I  am  inclined  to
place  it  somewhat  late  in  that  period,  partly  on  account  of
the  knife  and  razor-knife,  both  of  which  belong  to  forms
which  I  have  already  given  my  reasons  for  referring  to  the
close  of  the  Bronze  age,  and  to  the  beginning  of  tiiat  of  Iron.


MODE  OF  BURIAL.

Bronze  brooches  are  also  very  rarely  found  in  the  BriBUse
age,  and  are  common  in  that  of  Iron.  The  sword,  again
belongs  to  a  form  which  is  regarded  by  Professor  Nilsson  as
being  of  late  introduction.

Finally,  the  mode  of  sepulture,  though  other  similar  cases
are  on  record,  is,  to  say  the  least,  yery  unusual  y  in  the  age  of
Iron,  indeed,  the  corpse  is  generally  extended,  but  in  that  of
Bronze  the  dead  were,  with  few  exceptions,  burned,  or  buried
in  a  contracted  attitude.  In  Denmark,  cremation  appears  to
have  been  almost  universal;  in  England  I  have  taken  out
the  statistics  of  100  cases  of  tombs  containing  objects  of
bronze,  37  recorded  by  Mr.  Bateman  and  63  by  Sir  B..  C.
Hoare ;  and  the  following  table  shows  the  manner  in  which
the  corpse  had  been  treated.

Contracted.         Burnt.         Extended.    Uncertain.

Bateman  15  10  5  7

Hoare  4  49  2  8

19  59  7  15

We  may  consider,  therefore,  that  during  this  period  the
corpse  was  sometimes,  though  rarely,  extended  on  its  back,
that  more  frequently  it  was  buried  in  a  sitting  or  crouching
position,  and  in  a  small  chamber  formed  by  large  stones,  but
that  the  most  usual  practice  was  to  bum  the  dead,  and  collect
the  ashes  and  fragments  of  bones  in,  or  under,  an  urn.

The  ancient  funeral  cuBtoms,  however,  will  be  more  ftdlv
considered  in  a  subsequent  chapter.


31


CHAPTER      II.


THE   BBONZE   AGE.


rSIlE  are  four  principal  theories  as  to  the  Bronze  age*
According  to  some  archaeologists,  the  discoyery,  or
introduction,  of  bronze  was  unattended  by  any  other  great
or  sudden  change  in  the  condition  of  the  people ;  but  was
the  result,  and  is  the  evidence  of  a  gradual  and  peaceable
development.  Some  attribute  the  bronze  arms  and  imple*
mentSy  found  in  Northern  Europe,  to  the  Soman  armies,  some
to  the  Phoenician  merchants ;  while  others,  again,  consider
that  the  men  of  the  Stone  age  were  replaced  by  a  new  and
more  civilized  people  of  Indo-European  race,  coming  from
the  East ;  who,  bringing  with  them  a  knowledge  of  bronze,
overran  Europe,  and  dispossessed — ^in  some  places  entirely
destroying — ^the  original,  or  rather  the  earUer  inhabitants.

It  is  not,  indeed,  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  introduction
of  bronze  should  have  been  effected  everywhere  in  the  same
manner ;  so  far,  for  instance,  as  Switzerland  and  Ireland  are
concerned,  Dr.  Keller*  and  Sir  W.  R.  Wfldef  may  be  quite
right  in  considering  that  the  so-called  "  primitive  "  popula-
tion did  not  belong  to  a  different  race  from  that  subse-
quently characterised  by  the  use  of  bronze.

Stilly  though  it  is  evident  that  the  knowledge  of  bronze
must  necessarily  have  been  preceded  by  the  separate  use  of
copper  and  of  tin;  yet  no  single  implement  of  the  latter  metal

#  Hittheil.  der  Antiqtiar.  Gesellscb.  in  Zurich,  Bd.  xit.  H.  6.

t  Wilde,  1.  c.  p.  360.


32  SIMILARITY  OF

has  been  hitherto  found  in  Europe,  while  those  of  copper  are
extremely  rare.  Hungary  and  Ireland,  indeed,  have  been  sup-
posed to  form  partial  exceptions  to  this  rule.  The  geographical
position  of  the  former  country  is  probably  a  sufficient  explana-
tion; and  as  far  as  Ireland  is  concerned,  it  may  perhaps  be
worth  while  to  examine  how  far  that  country  really  forms  an
exception.  In  the  great  Museum  at  Dublin  there  are  725  celts
and  celt-like  chisels,  282  swords  and  daggers,  and  276  lances,
javelins,  and  arrow-heads;  yet  out  of  these  1283  weapons
only  30  celts  and  one  sword-blade  are  said  to  be  of  pure
copper.*  I  say  "  are  said  to  be,"  because  they  have  not  been
analysed,  but  are  supposed  to  be  copper  only  from  the  "  phy-
sical properties  and  ostensible  colour  of  the  metal :"  indeed
one  of  these  very  celts,  which  teas  analysed  by  Mr.  Mallet,
was  found  to  contain  a  small  percentage  of  tin.  It  is  pos-
sible that  for  some  of  the  purposes  to  which  celts  were
applied,  copper  may  have  been  nearly  as  usefiil  as  bronze,
and  at  any  rate  it  might  sometimes  have  happened  that  from
a  deficiency  of  tin,  some  implements  would  be  made  of
copper  only.

Taking  these  facts  into  consideration,  Ireland  certainly
does  not  appear  to  present  any  strong  evidence  of  an  age  of
copper,  while  no  one  has  ever  pretended  to  find  either  there,
or  any  where  else  in  Europe,  a  trace  of  any  separate  use
of  tin.*

Sir  W.  R.  Wilde  himself  admits  it  to  be  "  remarkable  that
so  few  antique  copper  implements  have  been  found,  although
a  knowledge  of  that  metal  must  have  been  the  preliminary
stage  in  the  manufacture  of  bronze."  He  thinks,  however,
that  "  the  circumstance  may  be  accounted  for,  either  by  sup-
posing that  but  a  short  time  elapsed  between  the  knowledge

*  One  eTen  of  these  is  with  good  f  It  was  sometimes  used  for  purpoees

reason  considered  hy  Br.  Wilde  to  he  of  ornamentation,  hut  that  does  not  of
an  American  specimen.  course  affect  the  present  argument.


BRONZE   illFLEMENTS   IN  DIFFERENT  COUNTRIES.  33

of  smelting  and  casting  copper  ore,  and  the  introduction  of
tin,  and  subsequent  manufacture  and  use  of  bromse ;  or  from
the  probability  of  nearly  all  such  articles  having  been  re-
cast and  conyerted  into  bronze,  subsequent  to  the  introduc-
tion of  tin,  which  renders  them  harder,  sharper,  and  more
valuable."*

There  is,  howeyer,  another  circumstance  which  strongly
militates  against  this  theory  of  a  gradual  and  independent
development  of  metallurgical  knowledge  in  different  coun-
tries, and  that  is  the  fact  which  has  been  broadly  stated  by
Mr.  Wright,  and  which  I  may,  perhaps,  repeat  here,  that
wheneyer  we  find  the  bronze  swords  or  celts,  "whether  in
Ireland  in  the  far  west,  in  Scotland,  in  distant  Scandinavia,
in  Germany,  or  still  further  east  in  the  Sclayonic  coimtries,
they  are  the  same — ^not  similar  in  character,  but  identical.''
The  great  resemblance  of  stone  implements  found  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  world  may  be  satisfactorily  accoimted
for  by  the  similarity  of  the  material,  and  the  simplicity  of
the  forms.     But  this  argument  cannot  be  applied  to  the
bronze  arms  and  implements.     Not  only  are  seyeral  varieties
of  celts  found  throughout  Europe,  but  some  of  the  swords,
knives,  daggers,  etc.,  are  so  similar,  that  they  seem  as  if  they
must  have  been  cast  by  the  same  maker.     Compare,  for
instance,  figs.  1,  3,  and  9,  which  represent  Irish  celts,  with
10,  12,  and  11,  which  are  copied  from  Danish  specimens ;  the
three  swords,  figs.  14,  15,  and  16,  which  come  respectively
from  Ireland,  Sweden,  and  Switzerland,  and  the  two,  figs.
17  and  18,  of  which  the  first  is  Swiss,  the  second  Scandi-
navian.    It  would  have  been  easy  to  multiply  examples  of
this  similarity,  and  it  is  not  going  too  far  to  say  that  these
resemblances  cannot  be  the  result  of  accident.     On  the  other
hand^  it  must  be  admitted  that  each  coimtry  has  certain

♦  Wilde,  /.  9.  p.  367.


34  BRONZE   IMPLEBfENTS   NOT  OF

minor  peculiarities.  Neither  the  forms  nor  the  ornaments
are  exactly  similar.  In  Denmark  and  Mecklenburgh,  spiral
ornaments  are  most  common;  farther  south,  these  are
replaced  by  ring  ornaments  and  lines.  The  Danish  swords
generally  have  solid,  and  richly  decorated  handles,  as  in
figs.  17-23,  while  those  found  in  Great  Britain  (fig.  14)
terminate  in  a  plate  which  was  riyeted  to  pieces  of  wood
or  bone.  Again,  the  British  lance-heads  frequently  have
loops  at  the  side  of  the  shaft-hole,  as  in  fig.  27,  which  is
never  the  case  with  Danish  specimens.

The  discovery  of  moulds  in  Ireknd,  Scotknd,  Engknd,
Switzerland,  Denmark,  and  elsewhere,  shows  that  the  art  of
casting  in  l»'onze  was  known  and  practised  in  many  countries.
Under  these  circumstances,  it  appears  most  probable  that  the
knowledge  of  metal  is  one  of  those  great  discoveries  which
Europe  owes  to  the  East,  and  that  the  use  of  copper  was  not
introduced  into  our  Continent,  until  it  had  been  observed  that
by  the  addition  of  a  small  quantity  of  tin  it  was  rendered
harder  and  more  valuable.

I  have  already,  in  the  first  chapter,  given  the  reasons
which  render  it  evident  to  me  that  the  bronze  weapons  are
not  of  Boman  origin.     These  may  be  summed  up  as  follows  :

Firstly.  They  have  never  been  found  in  company  with
Roman  pottery,  or  other  remains  of  the  Roman  period.

Secondly.  The  omamientation  is  not  Roman  in  its  character.

Thirdly.  The  bronze  swords  do  not  resemble  in  form  those
used  by  Roman  soldiers.

Fourthly.  The  Latin  word  "ferrum"  was  used  as  synony-
mous with  a  sword,  showing  that  the  Romans  always  used
iron.

Fifthly*  Bronze  implements  are  very  abundant  in  some
countries,  as  for  instance  in  Denmark  and  Ireland,  which
were  never  invaded  by  Roman  armies.

Moreover,  the    bronze  used    by  the  Romans  contained,


BOHAN   ORIGIN.  35

generally,  a  large  proportion  of  lead,  which  i»  never  the
case  in  that  of  the  Bronze  age.

My  fiiend  Mr.  Wright*  mentions^  three  cases  in  which
bronze  swords  are  supposed  to  have  been  found  together
with  Roman  remains.  The  first  instance  has  been,  already
alluded  to  (p.  12).  As  regards  the  other  two,  he  has,  unfor-
tunately, mislaid  the  references,  and  I  haye  therefore  been
unable  to  yerify  the  statements.  Eren  gianting  that  there
is  no  mistake  about  these  cases,  and  that  the  facts  are  as  he
supposes,  they  would  proye  nothing.  Bronze  swords  are  ex-
cellent and  beautifiil  weapons,  and  would  certainly  haye  been
preserved  as  curiosities,  sometimes  even  employed,  long  after
they  had  been  replaced  in  general  use  by  iron.  Mr.  Wright
lays  much  stress  on  the  fact,  that  the  bronze  weapons  have
generally  been  found  near  Roman' stations,  and  Roman  roads.
As  regards  England,  this  is  no  doubt  true,  but  we  must
remember  that  the  whole  of  this  country  is  iixtersected  by
Roman  roads,  many  of  which,  moreover,  were  old  lines  of
communication,  long  before  Caesar  first  landed  on  our  coasts.
He  appears,  however,  to  forget  that  bronze  weapons  are  very
common  in  Ireland  and  Denmark,  where  there  are  no  Roman
roads  at  all.

But  Mr.  Wright  sees  nothing  in  Great  Britain  which
can  be  referred  to  ante-Roman  times.  The  arms  and  im-
plements of  bronze  he  refers,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  Romans
themselves,  those  of  stone  to  the  Britons,  their  contempo-
raries. Thus,  haying  noticed  that  fiint  implements  are  more
common  near  Bridlington  than  near  Leeds,

"  If  these  stone  implements,"*  he  says,  ''belong  to  a  period
anterior  to  the  Romans,  and  before  the  metals  were  extracted
from  the  ground,  why  are  they  not  found  as  frequently  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Leeds  as  in  that  of  Bridlington  P"

*  Lecture  on  the  Early  History  of  Leeds,  p.  19.  f  Ihid,  p.  12.


36  REFERRED   BY  SOME  ARCB^SOLOGISTS  TO

The  reason  seems  to  me  to  be  pbyious.  BridHngtoa  is  in
a  chalk  country,  and  flint  is  therefore  abundant,  while  near
Leeds  none  occurs  in  %Uu.  But  if  we  are  to  refer  not  only
the  bronze  implements,  but  also  those  of  stone,  to  the  Boman
period^  what  implements,  we  may  ask,  does  Mr.  Wright  sup-
pose were  used  by  the  ancient  Britons  before  the  arrival  of
Geesar  P  It  would  be  more  reasonable  to  deny  the  existence
of  ancient  Britons  at  once,  than  thus  to  depriye  them,  as
it  were,  of  all  means  of  obtaining  subsistence ;  nor  can  we
forget  that  these  so-called  barbarians  manufactured  chariots,
coined  money,  and  offered  a  not  unsuccessful  opposition,  even
to  the  forces  of  Bome,  and  the  g^us  of  Csesar.

Their  weapons,  howeyer,  were  made  of  iron,  not  of  bronze ;
and,  on  the  whole,  it  may,  I  think,  be  concluded  that  the  use
of  this  alloy  was  neither  discoTered  in  Northern  Europe,  nor
intrpduoed  by  the  Romans;  we  may  pass  on,  therefore,  to
consider  the  yiewB  of  those  who  attribute  the  Bronze  age
civilisation  to  the  influence  of  Phcsnician  commerce*  This
theory  has  recently  been  maintained,  with  great  ability,  by
Professor  Nilsson;*  Sir  George  Comewall  Lewis  f  on  the
other  hand,  while  admitting  that  Cornwall  was  the  great
source  of  tin  in  ancient  times,  has  endeavoured  to  prove  that
this  metal  found  its  way  "  to  the  nations  in  the  east  of  the
Mediterranean  by  the  overland  route  across  Gaul,  and  that
the  Phcenician  ships  brought  it  from  the  mouth  of  the
Bhone,  without  sailing  as  feir  as  Britain.''

He  regards,  therefore,  the  accounts  of  ancient  voyages  as
being  in  many  cases  either  mythical,  or  at  least  exaggerated,
but  he  does  not  make  sujBScient  allowance  for  the  &ct  that
our  knowljedge  of  them  is  often  derived  from  unfriendly
critics  or  poetical  allusions ;  nor  need  we  go  farther  than  Sir

*  Skandinayiska  Nordens  Ur-inya-      nomy  of  the  Ancients.    By  the  Bight
nare.  Af.  S.  Nilason,  Stockholm,  1862.      Hon.SirGeorge  Comewall Lewia,  1862.
t  An  Historical  Survey  of  the  Astio-


THE   PHOSIflCIAm.  37

Coinewall  Lewis'  own  work  to  show  how  authors  may  suffer
by  this  mode  of  treatment.*

Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  Himilco,  who  was  sent
during  the  prosperous  times  of  Carthage  to  examine  the
north-western  coasts  of  Europe.  His  writings  have  imfor*
tnnately  perished,  and  our  knowledge  of  them,  derived  from
the  "Ora  maritima,''  a  geographical  poem  by  AvienuS,  is
thus  summed  up  by  Sir  ComewaU  Lewis :  ''  The  report  of
Himilco,  that  the  voyage  from  Gades  to  the  Tin  Islands  (ue,  to
Cornwall)  occupied  at  least  four  months;  and  that  navigation
in  these  remote  waters  was  impeded  by  the  motionless  air,  by
the  abundance  of  seaweed,  and  by  the  monsters  of  the  deep —
fabies  which  the  ancient  mariners  recounted  of  unexplored
seas — ^would  not  be  very  attractive  for  the  traders  of  the
Carthaginian  colonies."  This  argument  does  not  seem  to
be  quite  saHsiactory,  because,  if  Himilco  really  did  make  this
voyage,  then  such  voyages  were  possible ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  if  he  did  not  do  so,  and  if  his  statements  were  suoh
mere  fables,  we  may  safely  assume  that  the  shrewd  merchants
of  Carthage  would  detect  the  imposition,  and  wotdd  extract
the  truth,  if  not  fi^m  Himilco  himself,  at  any  rate  frtnn
some  of  those  by  whom  he  was  accompanied.

But  let  that  pass;  we  will  examine  the  four  '^ fables''
specially  referred  to  by  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis.  It  is  unnecessary
to  say  anything  about  the  ''motionless  air;''  it  would  be
doing  an  injustice  to  Sir  Comewall  Lewis  to  suppose  that
he  regarded  this  as  a  serious  objection.  It  may  be  an
invention,  but  it  is  not  an  improbability^  Neither  is  the
time  occupied  by  an  exploring  expedition  any  test  of
that  which  would,  be  required  for  a  commercial  voyage.
Nor  will  I  lay  any  stress  on  the  statement  that  Himilco's


*  In  fhe  long  chapter  idiich  he  de-      Hieroglyphics,  the  name  of  Dr.  Tonng
votes  to  the  Egyptian  Chronology  and      ie  not  onoe  mentioned.


38  PH(ENICIAN   VOYAGES.      filMILOO.

vesselB  were  "  impeded  "  by  the  monsters  of  the  deep.  What
Ayienus  really  said  was,  as  Sir  Comewall  Lewis  admits  in
another  passage,  that  while  becalmed  and  lying  in  a  help-
less state,  the  ships  were  "surrounded  by  marine  monsters."*
It  might  £airly  be  argued  that  whales  were  in  all  probability
more  numerous  on  our  coasts  in  ancient  times  than  they  are
now ;  the  great  mammalia  of  the  sea,  as  well  as  those  of  the
land,  have  given  way  before  the  overwhelming  power  of  man.
But  it  is  unnecessary  to  urge  this  hypothesis ;  the  great
monsters  of  the  deep  have  in  all  ages  appealed  strongly  to
the  imagination  of  mankind,  and  no  poet  would  fail  to  allude
to  them  in  describing  the  dangers  which  beset  those  "  who
go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships,  and  occupy  their  business  in
great  waters.'^

The  third  point  alluded  to  by  Sir  Comewall  Lewis,  so  far
from  threwi&g'any  doubt  on  the  veracity  of  Himilco,  appears
rather  to  be  an  argument  in  his  favor*  His  ships,  he  says,
or  at  least  Avienus  says  for  him,  were  "  surrounded  by  sea-
weed-" Where  was  he  when  this  took  place  P  All  that
we  can  say  in  answer  to  this  question  is,  that  he  sailed
through  the  Pillars  of  Hercules  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean,
and  we  know,  that  a  few  days'  sail  in  this  direction  would
have  brought  him  to  the  "  Mare  di  Sargasso,"  a  sea  which
has  actually  taken  its  name  from  the  quantity  of  sea-
weed growing  in  it.  Sir  G.  Lewis  says,  "the  notion  of
remote  seas  being  impassable  by  ships,  either  from  their
shoals,  ^r  from  the  obstacles  to  navigation  produced  by  the
semi-fluid  and  muddy  properties  of  the  water,  frequently
recurs  among  the  ancients;"  and  it  is  true,  no  doubt,  that
statements  of  this  kind  are  made  by  m^ny  ancient  writers,
as  for  instance  by  Herodotus,  Plato,  Scylax,  and  even  Aris-
totle; but  not  one  of  these  writers  alludes  to  "seaweed"  as
an  impediment  to  navigation,  and  it  can  hardly  be  acci-

*  See  Appendix.


PTTHEAS.  39

dental,  that  the  only  voyager  by  whom  this  is  referred  to,  was
one  who  sailed  on  a  course  which,  if  persevered  in  for  a  few
days,  would  have  brought  him  to  that  which  is  even  now
known  as  the  Sea  of  Seaweed.*

Pytheas  is  another  ancient  writer,  whose  character  has
suffered  veiy  much  in  the  hands  of  Sir  C.  Lewis,  who,  rely-
ing on  the  authority  of  Polybius  and  Strabo,  does  not  hesi*
tate  to  stigmatise  him  as  a  mendacious  impostor.  Polybius
doubts  the  journeys  of  Pytheas,  because  Pytheas  was  a
poor  man;  but  the  great  travellers  and  explorers  of  the
present  day  do  not  generally  belong  to  our  wealthy  fami«
lies.  Strabo  seems  to  have  been  prejudiced  against  Pytheas
because  he  professed  to  have  visited  countries,  which  ought,
according  to  Strabo's  theory,  to  have  been  uninhabitable.
Moreover,  we  should  remember  that  the  first  travellers  in  the
North  must  have  seen,  and  on  their  return  would  describe,
many  things  which  would  appear  impossible  or  incomprehen*
sible  to  dwellers  on  the  sunny  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.
Sir  C.  Lewis  refers  specially  to  four  incredible  -assertions  made
by  Pytheas.  First,  he  is  said  to  have  related  that  ^  if  any  per-
son placed  iron  in  a  rude  state  at  the  mouth  of  the  volcano  in
the  island  of  Lipari,  together  with  seme  money,  he  found  on
the  morrow  a  sword  or  any  other  article  which  he  wanted,
in  its  place."  This,  however,  merely  shows  that  the  myth  of
Yaland,  Wielant,  Weland^or  in  our  popular  dialect,  Wayland
Smith,  was  current  in  the  Lipari  islands  at  the  time  of  Pytheas. f
This  myth,  moreover,  is  but  a  very  slightly  modified  account
of  what  actually  has  taken  place  when  an  ignorant  people,
living  by  the  aide  of  a  more  civilized  race,  and  attributing
their  superiority  to  magical  arts,  has  been  anxious  to  benefit

*  Kay  not  the  belief  in  the  **Atlaii-  of  the  other  causes  which  are  luually

tls"  be  as  probably  owing  to  the  "  galf-  assigned  for  it  ?
weed,"  wUeh  woald  so  naturally -sug-  f  On  this  interesting  subject,  see

gest  the  idea  of  sunken  land,  as  to  any  Wright.  AicheoL  vol.  xxxii.  p,  315.


40  THULE   SUPPOSED   BY  NILSSON

by  their  necromancy^  and  yet  afraid  to  come  in  contact  with
the  magicians  themselves.  Thus  ''the  Yeddahs  of  Ceylon,
when  they  wanted  arrows,  used  to  bring  some  flesh  in  the
night,  and  hang  it  up  in  a  smith's  shop^  also  a  leaf  cut  in
the  form  they  will  have  their  arrows  made  and  hang  by  it ;
which  if  the  smith  do  make  according  to  their  pattern,  they
will  requite  Eind  bring  him  more  flesh."*  If  our  knowledge
of  this  peculiar  mode  of  barter  had  been  derived  from  the
Yeddahs,  it  would  imdoubtedly  have  taken  the  form  of  the
old  European  myth.  The  metallurgists  of  old,  to  preserve
their  monopoly,  would  evidently  have  a  great  interest  in
keeping  up  this  superstition.

Sir  Comewall  Lewis,  in  the  second  place,  accuses  Fytheas
of  having  described  the  sea  roimd  the  Lipari  islands  as  being
in  a  boiling  state.  But  we  do  not  know  what  his  exact  words
were,  and  cannot  fiBtirly  judge  him,  for  it  makes  a  great
diflerence  whether  he  was  repeating  a  statement  made  to
him,  or  making  one  on  his  own  authority.  Moreover,  we
must  remember  that  there  have  been  submarine  eruptions
in  the  Mediterranean,  and  that  the  Lipari  islands  lie  be-
tween Mount  Etna  and  Vesuvius,  in  the  very  centre  of  an
active  volcanic  area.  These  two  mountains,  which  for  the
last  two  thousand  years  have  been  more  or  less  frequently
in  eruption,  seem  to  have  enjoyed  a  long  period  of  rest,
during  which  the  Lipari  islands  served  as  a  vent.  It  Aoems
to  me  therefore  highly  probable  that  this  statement  made

*  Knox's  HiBtorical  ReUtion  of  tbo  Tendroii  aoiis  to  mam  da  Tnm  4eB

Island  Ceylon.  London,  1681.   Quoted  Sottais.    lis  pr6tendent  que  jadis  oes

!n  the  Ethnological  Society's  Trans.,  grottes  servaient   d*liabitation  It  une

ToL  ii.  p.  285,  N.S.    See  also  Sir  J.  E.  eq»^  humaine  d'nne  trte  petite  taille,

Tennent^s  Ceylon,  voL  i.,  p.  593.     The  Sottais,  nains,  pygm^es^  qui  j  TindeiU

Belgian  form  of  the  myth  as  related  by  de  leur  Industrie,  et  restauraient  tout  oe

Schmerling  (Ossements  fossiles,  vol.  i.,  qu'on  deposait  prea  des  ouTertures,  k

p.  48)  still  mare  closely  resembles  the  oondition  fmVmf  ^im$Uit  dm  Hvrm.

account  given  by  Knox.    Speaking  of  En  tree  pen  de  temps  ees  effete  elaieBt

the  caTSs  near  liege,  he  says :  '*Ces  reptHs*  et  renia  ilk  k  m^m  plaoa."
ouTertores  sont  connuee  des  habitans  de


TO  BE  NOEWAY.  41

by  PytheaB  waa  a  perfectly  truthful  record  of  an  actual
oocurrence.

A  third  difficulty  is  the  assertion,  that  round  the  island  of
Thule,  Pytheas  saw  a  substance  which  was  neither  earth,
air,  nor  water,  but  a  substance  resembling  modus®  or  jelly
fishes  {irvevfiovi  dcikauraufi  ioucot;),  which  could  neither  be
passed  on  foot  nor  in  ships.  This  passage,  which  has  com-
pletely puzzled  southern  commentators,  is  regarded  by  Pro-
fessor Nilsson  as  a  striking  eyidence  of  Pytheas'  veracity.
When  the  sea  in  the  north  freezes,  this  does  not  happen
as  in  a  pond  or  lake,  but  small  separate  plates  of  ice  are
formed,  and  as  soon  as  this  process  commences,  the  fisher-
men hurry  to  the  shore,  lest  they  should  be  caught  in  the
ice,  which  for  some  time  is  too  thick  to  permit  the  passage
of  a  boat,  yet  too  weak  to  support  the  weight  of  a  man.  A
veiy  similar  description  is  given  by  Captain  Lyon.  "We
came,''  he  says  "amongst  young  ice,  in  that  state  called
sludge,  which  resembles  in  appearance  and  consistency  a  far
better  thing — lemon  ice.  From  this  we  came  to  small  round
plates,  of  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  which  have  the  appear-
ance of  the  scales  of  gigantic  fishes.''*  Richardson  also
particularly  mentions  the  "circular  plates  of  ice,  six  or
eight  inches  in  diameter."  f  These  discs  of  ice  tossed  about
by  the  waves  suggested  to  Professor  Nilsson  himself,  when
he  first  saw  them,  the  idea  of  a  crowd  of  medusae,  and  if  we
imag^e  a  southerner  who  had  never  before  witnessed  such
a  phenomenon,  and  who  on  his  return  home  wished  to
describe  it  to  his  fellow-countrymen,  it  would  have  been
difficult  to  find  an  apter  or  more  ingenious  simile.  It  is,  at
any  rate,  not  more  far-fetched  or  less  appropriate  than  that
used  by  Herodotus,  when,  in  order  to  describe  a  heavy  snow-
storm, he  compared  it  to  a  fall  of  feathers.

"  Fourthly,"  says  Sir  C.  Lewis,  "  Pytheas  affirmed  that  in

*  Lyon's  Joaxna],  p.  84.  f  Aidu  EzpeditioB,  toI.  ii  p.  97.


42  PHCBNICIAK  OOLOiriSS

returning  from  his  great  northern  voyage,  in  wlticli  lie  first
obtained  accounts  of  the  remote  ifdand  of  Thule,  he  had
sailed  along  the  entire  coast  of  the  Ocean  between  Gadeira
and  the  Tanais;  that  is  from  Cadiz  round  Spain,  Gaul,
Germany,  and  Scythia,  to  the  river  Don,  which  was  con-
sidered  by  the  ancients  as  the  boundary  of  Europe  and  Asia.
This  statement  furnishes  an  additional  proof  of  the  mendacity
of  Pytheas,  because  it  is  founded  on  the  belief^  received  in
his  time,  that  Europe  did  not  project  far  to  the  North,  and
that  the  Ocean  swept  along  its  shores  to  the  north  of  Scythia
and  India/'  Pytheas,  however,  did  not,  in  reality,  lay  him*
self  open  to  aay  such  accusation ;  the  passage  on  which  Sir
C.  Lewis  relies  only  affirms  that  after  his  return  from  the
north  {(hravekSfov  ivOeuhe)  he  travelled  along  the  whole  coast
of  Europe  from  Cadiz  to  the  Don.  This,  which  evidently
refers  to  a  second  journey,  is  a  very  different  statement,  and
one  which  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt.

According  to  Geminus,  Pytheas  went  so  far  north  that
the  nights  were  only  two  or  three  hours  long,  and  he  adds
that  the  Barbarians  took  him  to  see  the  place  where  the  sun
slept.  These  two  statements  seem  to  point  to  Donnas  as
the  northernmost  point  of  his  voyage.  Here  the  shortest
night  is  two  hours  long,  but  behind  the  town  is  a  mountain,
the  top  of  which  is  the  southernmost  point  from  which  the
midnight  sim  can  be  seen.  The  inhabitants  took  Professor
Nilsson  here  in  the  year  1816,  to  show  him  the  place  where
the  sun  rested,  just  as  they  seem  to  have  conducted  Pytheas
to  the  same  spot,  for  the  same  purpose,  more  than  2000  years
before.  On  this  subject  I  will  only  add  that  Pytheas  was  no
mere  traveller,  but  a  distinguished  astronomer,  who,  with
the  help  of  the  gnomon  only,  seems  to  have  estimated  the
latitude  of  Marseille^  at  43°  17'  8",  a  calculation  which  only
differs  by  a  few  seconds  from  the  result  given  by  modem
astronomers — ^namely,  43°  17'  52".


AND  COBCMERCE.  43

I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  this  part  of  my  subject,  for
while  we  are  all  anxious  to  pay  due  honour  to  our  modem
traTeUers,  to  Livingstone  and  Galton,  to  Speke  and  Grant,
we  ought  not  to  forget  those  who  led  the  way.  The  memory
of  great  men  is  a  precious  legacy,  which  we  cannot  afford
lightly  to  surrender,  and  not  the  least  valuable  part  of
Profesflor  l^ilsson's  work  on  the  Bronze  age  is  the  chapter,
in  which,  he  has  rescued  the  memory  of  Pytheas  from  the
cloud  by  which  it  has  been  so  long  and  so  unjustly  obscured.

But  even  if  Sir  Comewall  Lewis  could  have  established
his  case,  and  destroyed  our  faith  in  these  particular  expe*
ditions,  still  there  remain  oyerwhelming  proofs  of  an  im-
portant and  extended  commerce  in  even  more  ancient  times
than  those  of  Pytheas  or  Himilco.  The  evidence  of  this
has  been  well  put  together  by  Dr.  Smith,*  of  Camborne,
to  whose  work  .1  would  refer  those  who  may  wish  for  more
detailed  information ;  for  the  present  I  must  content  myself
with  referring  to  a  few  well-known  facts,  which,  however,  will
be  sufficient  for  my  present  purpose.

We  know,  then,  that  Marseilles  was  founded  by  the  Phocean
Greeks  B.C.  600 ;  Carthage  is  supposed  to  have  been  built  by
the  Phoenicians  about  800  B.C. ;  and  Utica,  according  to
Strabo  and  Pliny,  about  300  years  earlier  still;  while,  ac-
cording to  Velleius  Paterculus  and  Pomponius  Mela,  the  city
of  Gbdes  (Cadiz)  was  founded  by  the  Tyrians  not  long  after
the  fall  of  Troy.  Before  such  facts  as  these,  all  d  priori
improbability  of  Pytheas'  voyage  to  Norway  falls  to  the
ground.  The  distance  between  Cadiz  and  Phoenicia  is  more
than  2000  miles,  and  is  greater  than  that  between  Cadiz  and
Norway.  Even,  therefore,  if  Pytheas  effected  all  that  has
been  claimed  for  him,  he  will  not  have  made  a  longer  voyage
than  hundreds  of  his  countrymen  had  done,  a  thousand  years
before.

*  The  Caanterides,  by  Geoige  Smith,  LL.D.


44  BRONZE  COMPOSED  OF  COPPER  AT(D  TIN.

The  above-given,  dates  must  not,  of  course,  be  considered
as  exact ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  their  general  ac-
curacy. Not  only  do  the  writings  of  Hesiod  and  Homer,
which  certainly  are  not  of  a  later  date  than  800  b.c.»
and  probably  somewhat  earlier,  show,  that  the  nations  on.
the  eastern  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  were  at  that  time
highly  civilised,  and  had  a  considerable  commerce,  but  we
have  very  valuable  evidence  of  the  same  fact  in  the  Biblical
narrative.  Indeed,  brass  is  mentioned  in  the  fourth  chapter
of  Genesis,  which  would  be,  according  to  the  chronology
of  the  established  version,  3875  b.c.  ;  but  there  is  so  much
doubt  about  these  dates,  that  I  do  not  feel  disposed  to  rely
on  this  isolated  passage.  The  high  civilisation  of  Egypt  in
the  time  of  Joseph  is,  however,  apparent  to  every  reader  of  the
book  of  Exodus.  Again,  when  Solomon  prepared  to  build
the  temple  in  Jerusalem,  he  sent  unto  the  king  .of  Tyre  for
cedar-trees  out  of  Lebanon,  ''for  thou  knowest,"  he  said,
<<  that  there  is  not  among  us  any  that  can  skill  to  hew  timber
like  unto  the  Sidonians  "  (1  Kings  v.  6) ;  and  again  we  read,
(/.  c.  vii.  13, 14)  that  ''Eing  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  Hiram
out  of  Tyre.  He  was  a  widow's  son  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,
and  his  fetther  was  a  man  of  Tyre,  a  worker  in  brass :  and  he
was  filled  with  wisdom,  and  understanding,  and  cunning  to
work  all  works  in  brass."  It  is  evident  that  the  word  which
here,  and  in  so  many  other  passages,  is  translated  ''brass,''
should  rather  be  "  bronze."  This  latter,  which  was  the  com-
mon metal  of  antiquity,  is  never  mentioned  in  our  version,
while  on  the  other  hand,  the  alloy  which  we  now  term  braas,
and  which  is  composed  of  copper  and  zinc,  was  not  known
in  ancient  times.

Now  this  bronze,  which  from  the  wholly  independent
statements  of  Homer  and  of  the  Book  of  Kings,  we  find
to  have  been  so  abundant  in  the  East  three  thousand  years
ago,  was  composed  of  copper  and  tin,  in  the  proportions  of


TIN  OBTAINED   FBOM   OOKNWALL.  46

about  nine  parts  of  the  former  to  one  of  the  latter ;  and  the
question  therefore  arises,  whence  were  these  metals  obtained?
Copper  is  found  in  so  many  countries,  that  we  cannot,  as
jet,  form  any  definite  opinion  as  to  the  source,  or  sources,  from
which  it  was  derived  by  the  Phoenicians.  Kevertheless,  we
haye  every  reason  to  hope,  and  expect,  that  we  shall  even*
tually  be  able  to  do  so,  because  the  slight  impurities  by  which
it  is  accompanied,  are  different  in  different  places,  and  Dr.
Fellenberg  has  published  more  than  a  hundred  analyses
of  ancient  bronzes,  which  have  already  thrown  some  light
on  this  part  of  the  subject.  As  regards  tin,  the  case  is
very  different;  although  ores  of  this  metal  are  found  in
other  countries,  as  for  instance  in  Saxony,  and  near
NerchindL,  in  Siberia,  still  almost  all  the  tin  now  used  is
derived  either  firom  Cornwall,  or  from  the  island  of  Banca,
which  lies  between  Sumatra  and  Borneo.  It  has  been
supposed  that  tin  was  at  one  time  abundant  in  Spain,
but  as  Dr.  Smith  observes,*  '^the  most  remarkable  fea-
ture in  tin  mining  seems  to  be  the  enduring  character  of
the  mines*  Wherever  tin  has  been  produced  in  any  con-
siderable quantities,  within  the  range  of  authentic  history,
there  it  is  still  abundantly  found.  In  Banca,  we  are  told^
the  supply  is  inexhaustible ;  and  Cornwall  can  now  supply  as
large  a  quantity  annually  as  it  ever  could.''  The  result
of  enquiries  made  of  the  Government  Engineers,  at  the
College  of  Mines  in  Madrid,  is  as  follows :  "  I  cannot  learn
that  Spain  ever  produced  any  quantity  of  this  metal.  The
Gh>vemment  do  not  work  any  mines  of  tin.  The  quantity
being  produced  at  present  is  very  small,  chiefly  by  streamers ;
or  rather  labourers,  while  out  of  their  regular  employment,
search  some  of  the  rivers  near  the  granite  hills  in  Galicia
and  in  Zamora.  I  cannot  learn  that  there  is  any  tin  mining
in  the  country.''

•/.ftp.  46.


46  AMBER  FROM  GERMAN   OCEAN.

Unless,  then,  the  ancients  had  some  source  of  tin  with
which  we  are  unacquainted,  it  seems  to  be  well  established,
and  is  indeed  admitted  even  by  Sir  Comewall  Lewis,  that  the
Phoenician  tin  was  mainly,  if  not  altogether,  derived  from
Cornwall,  and,  consequently,  that  even  at  this  early  period
a  considerable  commerce  had  been  organised,  and  very  dis-
tant countries  brought  into  connexion  with  one  another.  Sir
C.  Lewis,  however,  considers  that  the  tin  was  ^'carried  across
Gaul  to  Massilia,  and  imported  thence  into  Greece  and  Italy."
Doubtless,  much  of  it  did  in  late  times  come  by  this  route,
but  the  Phoenicians  were  in  the  plenitude  of  their  power
1200  years  B.C.,  while  Massilia  was  not  built  until  600  B.C.
Moreover,  Strabo  expressly  says  that  in  early  times  the
Phoenicians  carried  on  the  tin  trade  from  Cadiz,  which  we
must  remember  was  nearer  to  Cornwall  than  to  Tyre  or
Sidon.

We  are,  therefore,  surely  quite  justified  in  concluding  that
between  b.c.  1500  and  B.C.  1200,  the  Phoenicians  sailed  into
the  Atlantic,  and  discovered  the  mineral  fields  of  Spain  and
Britain;  and,  when  we  consider  how  well  our  South  Coast
must  have  been  known  to  them,  it  is,  I  think,  more  than
probable  that  they  pushed  their  explorations  still  farther,  in
search  of  other  shores  as  wealthy  as  ours.  Indeed,  we  must
remember  that  amber,  so  much  valued  in  ancient  times,
could  not  have  been  obtained  from  any  nearer  source  than
the  coast  of  the  German  Ocean.

M.  Morlot  thinks  that  he  has  found  traces  of  the  Phoeni-
cians even  in  America,  while  Professor  Nilsson  has  attempted^
as  already  mentioned,  to  show  that  they  had  settlements  far
up  on  the  northern  shores  of  Norway.  M.  Morlot  relies  on
some  antiquities,  and  particularly  on  certain  glass  beads,
found  in  American  tumuli;  these,  however,  in  the  opinion
of  Mr.  Franks,  may  be  mediseval,  and  of  Venetian  origin.
Professor  Nilsson's  arguments  may  be  reduced  to   seven.


BAAL-WOBSHIP   IN   NORTHERN   EUROPE.  47

namely,  the  small  size  of  the  sword-handles,  bracelets,  etc. ;
the  character  of  the  ornaments  on  the  bronze  implements,
and  the  engravings  in  Bronze  age  tmnuli;  the  worship  of
Baal ;  certain  peculiar  methods  of  reaping  and  fishing ;  and
the  use  of  war  chariots.

The  implements  and  ornaments  of  bronze  certainly  appear
to  haye  belonged  to  a  race  with  smaller  hands  than  those  of
the  present  European  nation ;  the  ornaments  on  them  are
also  peculiar,  and  have,  in  Professor  Nilsson's  opinion,  a
symbolic  meaning.  Although  the  great  stones,  in  tumuli
of  the  Bronze  age,  are  very  seldom  ornamented,  or  even
hewn  into  shape,  still  there  are  some  few  exceptions;  one
of  these  is  the  remarkable  monument,  near  Kivik  in  Ghris-
tianstad.  From  the  general  character  of  the  engravings
Professor  NUsson  has  no  hesitation  in  referring  this  tumulus
to  the  Bronze  age,  and  on  two  of  the  stones  are  represen-
tations of  human  figures,  which  may  fairly  be  said  to  have
a  Phoenician,  or  Egyptian  appearance.

On  another  of  the  stones,  an  obelisk  is  represented,  which
Professor  Nilssoh  regards  as  symbolical  of  the  Sun-God;  and.
it  is  certainly  remarkable  that  in  an  ancient  ruin  in  Malta,
characterised  by  other  decorations  of  the  Bronze  age  types,
a  somewhat  Himilar  obelisk  was  discovered:  we  know  also,
that  in  many  countries  Baal,  the  God  of  the  Phoenicians,  was
worshipped  under  the  form  of  a  conical  stone.

Nor  is  this,  by  any  means,  the  only  case  in  which  Professor '
Nilsson  finds  traces  of  Baal  worship  in  Scandinavia.  Indeed,
the  festival  of  Baal,  or  Balder,  was,  he  tells  us,  celebrated  on
Midsummer's  night  in  Scania,  and  far  up  into  Norway,  almost
to  the  Loffoden  Islands,  until  within  the  last  fifty  years.  A
wood  fire  was  made  upon  a  hill  or  mountain,  and  the  people
of  the  neighbourhood  gathered  together  in  order,  like  Baal's
prophets  of  old,  to  dance  round  it,  shouting  and  singing.
This    Midsummer's-night-fire   has  even  retained    in  some


48  QXTESPTION  STILL  DOUBTFUL.

parts  the  ancient  name  of  '^  Baldersbal/^  or  Baldersfire.
Leopold  Yon  Bucli  long  ago  suggested,  that  this  custom
could  not  have  originated  in  a  country  where  at  Midsummer
the  sun  is  never  lost  sight  of,  and  where,  consequently,  the
smoke  only,  not  the  fire,  is  visible.  A  similar  custom  also
prevailed  imtil  lately  in  some  parts  of  our  islands.  Baal
has  given  his  name  to  many  Scandinavian  localities,  as,  for
instance,  the  Baltic,  the  Great  and  Little  Belt,  Belteberga,
Baleshaugen,  Balestranden,  etc.

The  ornamentation  characteristic  of  the  Bronze  age,  is,  in^
the  opinion  of  Professor  Nilsson,  decidedly  Semitic,  rather
than  Indo-European.  He  lays  considerable  stress  on  two
curious  vase-carriages,  one  found  in  Sweden  and  the  other
in  Mecklenburg,  which  certainly  appear  to  have  been  very
like  the  '^  vases"  made  for  Solomon's  temple,  and  described
in  the  first  Book  of  Kings.  Finally,  he  believes  that  the
use  of  war  chariots,  the  practice  of  reaping  close  to  the
ear,  and  a  certain  method  of  fishing,  are  all  evidences  of
Phoenician  intercourse.

Professor  Nilsson  is  so  great  an  authority,  as  an  archaeo-
logist his  labors  have  contributed  so  much  to  place  the
science  on  a  sound  basis,  that  his  opinions  are  deserving  of
the  most  carefid  consideration.  Nor  can  they  fairly  be
judged  by  the  very  short  abstract  which  has  been  given
above,  as  many  of  his  arguments  must  be  followed  in  detail
before  they  can  be  properly  appreciated.  That  the  Phoe-
nicians have  left  their  traces  in  Norway  is,  however,  in  my
opinion,  all  that  can  fairly  be  deduced  from  the  facts  on
which  he  relies,  even  if  we  attribute  to  them  all  the  signi-
ficance claimed  for  them  by  him.  Farther  evidence  is  re-
quired, before  it  would  be  safe  to  connect  them  with  the
Bronze  age.  As  regards  the  smallness  of  the  hands,  we
must  remember  that  Hindoos  share  this  peculiarity  with
Egyptians ;  this  character  ig  therefore  as  reconcileable  with


I .


BlUmZS  AOB  CIVILISATIOK.  49

an  Indo-European,  as  with  a  PhcBnician  origin  of  the  Bronze
age  civilisation.

Moreover,  there  are  two  strong  objections  to  the  theory  so
ably  advocated  by  Professor  Nilsson.  The  first  is  the  cha-
racter of  the  ornamentation  on  the  bronze  weapons  and  im-
plements.  This  ahnost  always  consists  of  geometrical  figures,
and  we  rarely,  if  ever,  find  upon  them  representations  of
animals  or  plants ;  while  on  the  ornamented  shields,  etc.,  de-
scribed by  Homer,  as  well  as  in  the  decoration  of  Solomon's
temple,  animals  and  plants  were  abundantly  represented.
Secondly,  the  Phoenicians,  so  far  as  we  know  them,  were
well  acquainted  with  the  use  of  iron ;  in  Homer  we  find  the
warriors  already  armed  with  iron  weapons,  and  the  tools
used  in  preparing  the  materials  for  Solomon's  temple,  were
of  this  metaL  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  scarcely  any
traces  of  ancient  commerce  have  been  found  in  Cornwall,
and  it  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  our  museums  possess
80  few  speciniens  of  Phoenician  art.  When  these  wants  shall
have  been  supplied,  as  we  may  hope  that  ere  long  they  will
be,  there  is  no  doubt  that  much  light  will  be  thrown  on  the
subject.

The  form  of  the  head  also  would  be  very  instructive ;  but,
owing  to  the  unfortunate  habit  of  burning  the  dead  which
prevailed  at  that  period,  we  have,  as  yet^  very  few  skulls
which  can  safely  be  referred  to  the  Bronze  age,  and,  on  the
whole,  we  must  admit  that,  for  the  present,  the  evidence  is
not  sufficient  to  justify  us  in  expressing  any  very  definite
opinion  as  to  the  source  of  the  Bronze  age  civilisation.

It  is  evident  that  a  people  who  had  acquired  so  &ir  a
proficiency  in  metallurgy  and  manufactures,  who  showed  so
much  taste  in  adorning  the  living,  and  so  much  reverence
in  their  disposition  of  the  dead,  must  have  had  some  ideas
of  architecture  and  religion,  although  we  have  not,  hitherto,
found  any  evidence  either  of  a  coinage  or  an  alphabet.     As

4


50  BRONZE   AGE   ARCHITECTURE.

yet,  however,  their  architecture  is  almost  unknown  to  ns.
Douhtlesa,  among  the  numerous  camps,  fortifi<^tion8,  stone
circles,  etc.,  which  still  remain,  there  are  some  which  belong
to  this  period,  but  the  difficulty  is  to  fix  upon  them.  The
only  remains  of  dwellings,  which  we  can  with  any  confidence


sulcoa  Fort— Knrr-
refer  to  the  Bronze  age,  are  some  of  the  Lake-villages,  which
will  be  described  in  a  future  chapter.  A  large  proportion
of  the  ancient  fortifications,  as,  for  instance,  Staigue  Fort
(fig.  60),  belong,  almost  without  a  doubt,  to  a  much  later
period.

My  own  impression  is,  that  both  Abury  and  Stonehenge, —
the  two  greatest  monuments  of  their  kind,  not  only  in  Eng-
land, but  even  in  Europe,  belong  to  this  period.  The  hu-
forical  accoimt,  if  I  may  use  such  an  expression,  of  Stone-
henge is,  that  it  was  erected  by  Aureliua  Ambrosius,  in
memory  of  the  British  chieftains,  treacherously  murdered
by  Hengist  and  the  Saxons,  about  the  year  460.  Giraldus
Cambrenais,  writing  at  the  close  of  the  twelfth  century,
says,  "That  there  was  in  Ireland,  in  ancient  times,  a
pile  of  stones  worthy  of  admiration,  called  the  Giants'
Dance,  because  Giants,  firom  the  remotest  parts  of  Africa,
brought  them  into  Ireland ;  and  in  the  plains  of  Kildare,  not
far  from  the  castle  of  Naas,  as  well  by  force  of  art,  as
strength,  miraculously  set  them  up;  and  similar  stones,
erected  in  a  like  manner,  are  to  be  seen  there  at  this  day.


mONEHENGE.  51

It  is  wonderAil  how  so  many  and  such  large  stones  could
have  been  collected  in  one  place,  and  by  what  artifice  they
could  have  been  erected ;  and  other  stones,  not  less  in  size,
placed  upon  such  large  and  lofty  stooes,  which  appear,  as  it
were,  to  be  so  suspended  in  the  air,  as  if  by  the  design  of  the
workmen,  rather  than  by  the  suj^rt  of  the  upright  stones.
These  stones  (according  to  the  British  history)  Aurelius
Ambrosius,  king  of  the  Britons,  procured  Merlin,  by  super-
natural means,  to  bring  from  Ireland  into  Britain.  And
that  he  might  have  some  famous  monument  of  so  great  a
treason  to  fiiture  ages,  in  the  same  order  and  art  as  they
stood  formerly,  set  them  up  where  the  flower  of  the  British
nation  fell  by  the  cut-throat  practice  of  the  Saxons,  and
where,  under  the  pretence  of  peace,  the  ill-secured  youth  of
the  kingdom,  by  murderous  designs,  were  slain."*

This  account  is  clearly  mythical.  Moreoyer,  the  very  name
of  Stonehenge,  seems  to  me  a  very  strong  argument  against
those  who  attribute  to  it  so  recent  an  origin.  It  is  generally
considered  to  mean  the  Hanging-stones,  as  indeed  was  long
ago  suggested  by  Wace,  an  Anglo-Norman  poet,  who  says^

Stanhengues  ont  nom  en  Engloia
Pieres  pandues  en  Francois,  f

but  it  is  surely  more  natural  to  derive  the  last  syllable  from
the  Anglo-Saxon  word  ''ing,"  a  field;  as  we  have  Keston,
originally  Kyst-staning,  the  field  of  stone  coffins.  What
more  natural,  than  that  a  new  race,  finding  this  magnificent
ruin,  standing  in  solitary  grandeur  on  Salisbury  Plain,  and
able  to  learn  nothing  of  its  origin,  should  call  it  simply
the  place  of  stones  f  what  more  unnatural,  than  that  they
should  do  so,  if  they  knew  the  name  of  him,  in  whose  honor
it  was  erected  P  The  plan,  also,  of  Stonehenge  seems  to  be  a
sufficient  reason  for  not  referring  it  to  post-Boman  times.    It

*  Giraldiu.    Topogpr.  of  Ireland,
t  Wright's  Wanderings  of  an  Antiquary,  p.  301.


52  STOIfBHENGS.

has,  indeed,  been  urged  that  if  Stonehenge  liad  existed  in  the
time  of  Csesar,  we  should  find  it  mentioned  by  ancient  writers^
Hecataeufl,  however,  does  allude  to  a  magnificent  circular
ten^>le,  in  the  iriand  of  the  Hyperboreans,  oyer  against  Gel-
tica^  and  many  archaeologists  have  confidently  assumed  that
this  refers  to  Stonehenge.  But  why  should  we  expect  to
find  it  described,  if  it  was,  as  we  suppose,  even  at  that  time
a  ruin,  more  perfect  no  doubt  than  at  this  day,  but  still  a
ruin  P  The  Caledonian  Wall  was  a  most  important  fortifi-
caticm,  constructed  by  the  Romans  themselves,  and  yet,  as
Dr.  Wilson  tells  us,*  only  one  of  the  Boman  historians  makes
the  least  allusion  to  its  erection.

It  is  evident,  that  Stonehenge  was  at  one  time  a  spot  of
great  sanctity.  A  glance  at  the  ordnance  map  will  show,
that  tumuli  cluster  in  great  numbers  round,  and  within  sight
of  it ;  within  a  radius  of  three  miles,  there  are  about  three
hundred  burial  mounds,  while  the  rest  of  the  country  isj  /  --
I  comparatively  free  from  them.  If,  then,  we  could  determine  i  ^  ^
the  date  of  these  tumuli,  we  should  be  justified,  I  think,  J
in  referring  the  Great  Temple  itself  to  the  same  period.
Now,  of  these  barrows,  Sir  Richard  Colt  Hoare  examined
a  great  number,  151  of  which  had  not  been  previously
opened.  Of  these,  the  great  majority  contained  inter-
ments by  cremation,  in  the  manner  usual  during  the  Bronze
age.  Only  two  contained  any  iron  weapons,  and  these  were
both  secondary  interments ;  that  is  to  say,  the  owners  of  the
iron  weapons  were  not  the  original  occupiers  of  the  tumuli.
Of  the  other  burial  mounds,  no  less  than  39  contained  objects
of  bronze,  and  one  of  them,  in  which  were  foimd  a  spear-
head, and  pin  of  bronze,  was  still  more  connected  with  the
temple  by  the  presence  of  fragments,  not  only  of  Sarcen
stones,  but  also  of  the  blue  stones  which  form  the  inner  circle
at  Stonehenge ;  and  which,  according  to   Sir  B.  C.  Hoare,  i

*  Pte"biatorio  Ann.  of  Scot  vol.  ii.  p.  89.


ABURT.  53

do  nut  naturally  occur  in  Wiltahire.     Under  theee  circum-
fltancesy  we  may  surely  refer  Stonehenge  to  the  Bronze  age.

Abury  is  much  less  known  than  Stonehenge,  and  yet,
though  a  ruder,  it  must  have  been  originally  even  a  grander
temple.  According  to  Aubrey,  Abury  '^did  as  much  ex-
ceed Stonehenge  as  a  cathedral  does  a  parish  church.''
When  perfect,  it  consisted  of  a  circular  ditch  and  em-
bankment, containing  an  area  of  28 1  acres ;  inside  the  ditch
was  a  circle  of  great  stones,  and  within  this,  again,  two  smaller
circles,  formed  by  a  double  row  of  similar  stones,  standing  side
by  side.  From  the  outer  embankment,  started  two  long
winding  avenues  of  stones,  one  of  which  went  in  the  direc-
tion of  Beckhampton,  and  the  other  in  that  of  Kennet,  where
it  ended  in  another  double  circle.  Stukely  supposed  that  the
idea  of  the  whole  was  that  of  a  snake  transmitted  through  a
circle ;  the  Kennet  circle  representing  the  head,  the  Beck-
hampton avenue  the  tail.  Midway  between  the  two  avenues,
stood  Silbnry  Hill,  the  largest  artificial  moimd  in  Great
Britain,  measuring  no  less  than  170  feet  in  height.
From  its  position,  it  appears  to  form  part  of  the  general
pkn,  and  though  it  has  been  twice  examined,  no  primary
interment  has  been  found  in  it.  On  the  whole,  this  appears
to  have  been  the  finest  megalithic  ruin  in  Europe ;  but,  un-
fortunately for  us,  the  pretty  little  village  of  Abury,  like
some  beautiful  parasite,  has  grown  up  at  the  expense,  and  in
the  midst,  of  the  ancient  temple,  and  out  of  650  great  stones,
not  above  20  are  still  standing.

In  a  very  interesting  article,*  Mr.  Fergusson  has  attempted  to
prove,  that  both  Stonehenge  and  Abury  belong  to  post-Roman
tames.  Some  of  his  arguments  I  have  already  replied  to,  in  dis-
cussing the  age  of  Stonehenge.  There  is  one,  however,  which
relates  specially  to  Silbury  Hill.  '^The  Roman  road,"  he
says,  **hom  Bath  to  Marlborough,  either  passes  under  the  hill,

•  Qoarterly  Renow,  July,  1860,  p.  209.


54  SILBXTRY  HILL

or  makes  a  sudden  bend  to  get  round  it  in  a  manner  that  no

Roman  road,  in  Britain  at  least,  was  ever  known  to  do

No  one  standing  on  Oldborough  Down,  and  casting  his  eye
along  its  straight  imbending  line,  can  avoid  seeing  that  it
runs  straight  at  the  centre  of  Silbury  Hill.  It  is  true,  it  may
have  diverged  just  before  hitting  it,  but  nothing  can  be  more
unlikely^  It  would  have  been  just  as  easy  for  the  Roman
engineer  to  have  carried  its  arrow-like  course  a  hundred
yards  to  the  right.  This,  indeed,  would  have  been  a  prefer-
able line,  looked  at  from  a  Roman  point  of  view, — straight
for  MadlboFough,  to  which  it  was  tending,  and  fitting  better
to  a  fragment  of  the  road,  found  beyond  the  village  of
Kennet.  But  all  this  was  disregarded,  if  the  hill  existed  at
that  time,  and  the  road  runs  straight  at  its  heart,  as  if  on
purpose  to  make  a  sharp  turn  to  avoid  it, — a  thing  as  ab*
horrent  to  a  Roman  road-maker,  as  a  vacuum  is  said  to  be  to
nature.  From  a  careM  examination  of  all  the  circumstances
of  the  case,  the  conclusion  seems  inevitable,  that  Silbury  Hill
stands  on  the  Roman  road,  and  consequently  must  have  been
erected  subsequently  to  the  time  of  the  Romans  leaving  the
country,"

Startled  by  this  argument,  and  yet  satisfied  that  there  must
be  some  error,  I  turned  to  the  ordnance  map,  and  found,  to
my  surprise,  that  the  Roman  road  was  distinctly  laid  down
as  passing,  not  under,  but  M  the  side  of,  Silbury  Hill.  Not
content  with  this,  I  persuaded  Professor  TyndaU  to  visit  the
locality  with  me,  and  we  convinced  ourselves  that  upon  this
point  the  map  was  quite  correct.  The  impression  on  our
minds  was,  that  the  Roman  engineer,  in  constructing  the
road  from  Morgans  Hill,  had  taken  Silbury  Hill  as  a  point  to
steer  for,  swerving  only  just  before  reaching  it.  Moreover,
the  map  will  show  that  not  only  this  Roman  road,  but  some
others  in  the  same  part  of  England,  are  less  straight  than  is
usually  the  case.


MORE  ANCIENT  THAN  THE  KOMAX  ROAD.


65


Mr.  Fergusson  admits,  in  the  passage  just  quoted,  tliat
the  pieces  of  the  road,  on  the  two  sides  of  Silbury  Hill,  are
not  in  the  same  straight  line,  so  that  by  his  own  showing
there  must  have  been  a  bend  somewhere.  On  the  whole,
therefore,  I  quite  agree  with  old  Stukeley,  that  the  Boman
road  curved  abruptly  southwards,  to  avoid  Silbury  Hill,  and
that  "this  shows  Silbury  Hill  was  ancienter  than  the
Boman  road."*

How  much  more  ancient,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  Stukeley
thinks  it  was  founded  in  1859  b.c.,  the  year  of  the  death  of
Sarah,  Abraham's  wife.  It  is  wiser  to  confess  our  ignorance,
than  to  waste  valuable  time  in  useless  guesses.  Still,  as  the
stones  of  Stonehenge  are  roughly  hewn,  and  as  this  is  not
the  case  with  any  of  those  at  Abury,  it  seems  reasonable
to  conclude,  with  Sir  R.  C.  Hoare,  and  other  able  archseolo-
gists,  that  Abury  was  the  older  of  the  two ;  and  those  who
are  disposed  to  agree  with  me,  in  referring  Stonehenge  to  the
later  part  of  the  Bronze  age,  will  perhaps  also  do  so  in  attri-
buting Abury  to  the  commencement,  or  at  least  the  earlier
portion,  of  the  same  period,  for,  though  far  from  impossible,
it  is  hardly  probable,  that  so  great  a  work  should  belong  to
the  Stone  agcf


*  Mr.  Blandford,  who  saperintended
the  opening  of  the  Hill  in  1849,  came
alio  to  the  same  oonclusion.

t  It  ]£  impossible  to  mention  Abury,
witbont  regretting  that  so  magnificent
a  national  monument  should  bare  been
destroyed,  for  a  paltry  profit  of  a  few
pounds.  Ab  population  increases,  and
land  grows  more  raluable,  these  ancient
monuments  become  more  and  more
liable  to  mutilation  or  destruction.
We  cannot  afford  them  the  protec-
tion of  our  museums,  nor,  perhaps,
would  it  be  desirable  to  do  so,  but  it
is  well  worthy  of  consideration  whether
GoYemment    would    not    act   wisely


in  selecting  some  competent  archsBolo-
gist,  who  might  be  appointed  Con-
serrator  of  the  National  Antiquities ;
whose  duty  it  would  be  to  preserve,  as
far  as  possible,  from  wanton  injury,
the  graves  of  our  ancestors,  and  other
interesting  memorials  of  the  past;  to
make  careful  drawings  of  all  those
which  have  not  yet  been  figured,  and
to  report,  from  time  to  time,  as  to  their
condition.  At  a  very  trifling  expense
the  Danish  Government  have  bought
for  the  nation  a  large  number  of  tumuli,
and  have  thus  preserved  many  national
monuments  which  would  otherwise  have
been  destroyed.


56  STONE  CIRCLES.

There  is  not,  as  yet,  any  satisfactory  evidence  either  as  to
the  age  or  origin  of  the  great  stone-circles.  They  are  con-
sidered by  most  antiquaries  to  have  been  originally  temples :
some,  however,  are  rather  disposed  to  regard  them  as  courts  of
law,  or  battle-rings.  Dr.  Wilson*  tellfl  us  that  Mr.  George
Petrie  has  called  his  attention  to  several  cases,  in  which  the
Orkney  circles  have  been  thus  used,  in  comparatively  modem
times.  In  1349,  William  de  Saint  Michael  was  summoned
to  attend  a  court  held  ''  apud  stantes  lapides  de  Bane  en  le
Gamiach,"  to  answer  for  his  forcible  detention  of  certain
ecclesiastical  property ;  and  in  1380,  Alexander,  Lord  of
Regality  of  Badenoch,  and  son  of  Robert  II.,  held  a  court
'^apud  le  standand  stanys  de  la  Rathe  de  Kyngucy  Estir,''
to  enquire  into  the  titles,  by  which  the  Bishop  of  Moray
held  certain  of  his  lands.  Even  so  late  as  the  year  1438,  we
find  a  notice,  that  *'  John  off  Erwyne  and  Will.  Bemardson
swor  on  the  Hirdmane  Stein  before  cure  Lorde  ye  Erie  off
Orknay  and  the  gentiless  off  the  cuntre."  Opinions,  how-
ever, will  differ,  as  to  how  far  this  comparatively  recent
use  of  the  stone  circles  justifies  us  in  forming  an  opinion,
Mith  regard  to  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  originally
intended.  Megalithic  erections,  resembling  those  which  are
generally,  but  hastily,  ascribed  to  the  Druids,  are  found
in  very  different  countries.  Mr.  Maurice  f  was,  I  believe,
the  first  to  point  out,  that  in  some  parts  of  India,  there
are  various  monuments  of  stone,  which  ^'recal  strongly
those  mysterious,  solitary,  or  clustered  mommients  of  un-
known orig^,  so  long  the  puzzle  and  delight  of  antiquaries^
which  abound  in  our  native  country,  and  are  seen  here  and
there  in  all  parts  of  Europe  and  Western  Asia.*'

Mr.  Fergusson  goes  farther,  and  argues  with  great  in-
genuity that  the  '*  Buddhist  architecture  in  India,  as  prac-

*  Pre-historic  AnnalB  of  Scotland,  second  edition,  toI.  i.  p.  164.

t  India  Antiqna.


8T0NE  CIRCLES,  ETC.    IK    INDIA.  57

tised  from  the  third  century  B.C.  to  seventh  a.d.,  is  essentially
tumnlar,  circular,  and  external,  thus  possessing  the  three
great  characteristics  of  all  the  so-called  Druidical  remains.'^*
These  resemblances,  indeed,  are  too  great  to  be  accidental,  and
the  di£Perence8  represent,  not  so  much  a  difference  in  style,  as
in  civilisation.  Thus,  the  tumuli  of  India,  though  sometimes
of  earth,  are  *•*  generally  of  rubble  masonry  internally,  and  of
hewn  stone  or  brick  on  the  external  surface,  and  originally
were  apparently  always  suiroimded  by  a  circular  enclosure  of
upright  stones,  though  in  later  times  this  came  to  be  attached
to  the  building  as  an  ornamental  band,  instead  of  an  inde-
pendent feature.  In  the  most  celebrated  example  in  India,
that  at  Sanchee,  the  circle  consists  of  roughly  squared  up-
right stone  posts,  joined  at  the  top  by  an  architrave  of  the
same  thickness  as  the  posts,  exactly  as  at  Stonehenge ;  the
only  difference  being  the  insertion  of  three  stone  rails  be-
tween each  of  the  uprights,  which  is  a  masonic  refinement
hardly  to  be  expected  among  the  Celts."  In  India,  then,
the  circles  of  stones  seem  generally  to  have  surrounded
tumuli;  but  this  is  not  always  the  case,  and  there  are
some,  "which  apparently  enclose  nothing."  Again,  they
are  generally  covered  with  sculpture ;  but  to  this  also  there
are  exceptions,  as,  for  instance,  at  Amravati,  where  there  are
numberless  little  circles  of  rude  unhewn  stone,  identical  with
those  in  this  country,  but  smaller."

The  great  stones  at  Stonehenge  are,  as  we  know,  roughly
hewn,  and  there  is  a  very  remarkable  cromlech,  near  Con-
folens  in  Charonte,  in  which  the  upper  stone  is  supported,
not  on  rude  stone  blocks,  but  on  four  slender  columns."t
At  this  stage,  the  Druidical  arohitecturo  in  Western  Europe
was  replaced  by  a  totally  differont  style,  while  in  India,  on
the  contrary,  it  was  permitted  to  follow  its  natural  course  of
development ;  so  that  it  requires  an  observant  eye  to  detect,

^  I,  e,  p.  212.  t  Statestique  Monamentale  de  la  Gharente.


58  STONE  CIRCLES   IN   PALESTINE

in  the  rude  cromleclis,  stone  circles,  and  tumuli,  the  proto-
types of  the  highly  decorated  architecture  of  the  Buddhists.

It  is  a  very  remarkable  fact  that  even  to  the  present  day,
some  of  the  hill  tribes  in  India  continue  to  erect  cromlechs,
and  other  combinations  of  gigantic  stones,  sometimes  in  rows,
sometimes  in  circles,  in  either  case  very  closely  resembling
those  found  in  Western  Europe.  Among  the  Khasias,*  "the
ftmeral  ceremonies  are  the  only  ones  of  any  importance,  and
are  often  conducted  with  barbaric  pomp  and  expense ;  and
rude  stones  of  gigantic  proportions  are  erected  as  monuments,
singly  or  in  rows,  circles,  or  supporting  one  another  like
those  of  Stonehenge,  which  they  rival  in  dimensions  and
appearance."

ThQse  who  believe  that  the  use  of  metal  was  introduced
into  Europe  by  a  race  of  Indo-European  origin,  wiU  find,  in
these  interesting  facts  a  confirmation  of  their  opinion ;  but,
on  the  other  hand.  Professor  Nilsson  might  appeal  to  pas-
sages in  the  Old  Testament,  which  show  the  existence  of
similar  customs,  if  not  among  the  Phoenicians,  at  least
among  their  neighbours.  Thus,  we  are  told  in  Genesis
xxxi.  that  **  Jacob  took  a  stone  and  set  it  up  for  a  pillar ;"
and  in  verse  51,  "Laban  said  to  Jacob,  behold  this  heap,
and  behold  this  pillar,  which  I  have  cast  between  me  and
thee.  This  heap  is  a  witness,  and  this  pillar  is  a  witness,
that  I  wiU  not  pass  over  this  heap  to  thee,  and  that  thou
shalt  not  pass  over  this  heap  and  this  pillar  to  me,  to  do  me
harm,"  etc.  At  Mount  Sinai,  Moses  erected  twelve  pillars.f
And  so,  again,  when  the  children  of  Israel  had  crossed  over
Jordan,  Joshua  took  twelve  stones  and  pitched  them  in
Gilgal.  "  And  he  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  saying.
When  your  children  shall  ask  their  fathers  in  time  to  come,
saying,  What  mean  these  stones  f    Then  ye  shall  let  your

*  Dr.  Hooker's  Himalayan  Journal,  vol.  ii.,  p.  276.    See  also  p.  320.

t  Ex.  xxiv.  4.


AND  ALGERIA.  59

children  know,  saying,  Israel  came  over  this  Jordan  on  dry
land/'*  In  Moab,  De  Saulcy  observed  rude  stone  avenues,
and  other  monuments,  which  he  compares  to  Celtic  dolmens ;
and  Stanley  saw,  a  few  miles  to  the  north  of  Tyre,  a  circle  of
rough  upright  stones.

Bemains,  more  or  less  similar,  occur,  however,  in  very  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  world ;  thus,  in  Algeria  MM.  H.  Christy
and  L.  Feraudf  have  recently  examined  a  large  number  of
cromlechs,  stone-circles,  and  other  ancient  remains,  very
closely  resembling  those,  which,  in  Northern  Europe,  we  have
been  in  the  habit  of  ascribing  to  the  Druids.  They  occur  in
great  numbers ;  indeed,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Constantine,
MM.  Christy  and  Feraud  saw  more  than  a  thousand,  in  three
days.  They  opened  fourteen  of  the  cromlechs,  all  of  which
turned  out,  as  might  have  been  expected,  to  be  places  of
burial.  The  corpse  had  been  deposited  in  a  contracted
position,  accompanied  sometimes  by  rings  of  copper  or  iron,
worked  flints,  and  fragments  of  pottery ;  in  one  case  even
by  a  coin  of  Faustina,  who  lived  in  the  second  century  after
Christ.

Again,  Arctic  travellers  mention  stone-circles,  and  stone-
rows,  among  the  Esquimaux,  though  it  would  appear  that
these  stone-circles  are  quite  small,  and  merely  form  the  lower
part  of  their  habitations.

Thus,  then,  it  is  evident  that  similar  monuments  have  been
erected  in  very  different  countries,  and  at  very  different
periods ;  generally,  however,  in  honor  of  some  distinguished
man,  or  to  commemorate  some  great  event.

•  Joshua  W.  21,  22.

t  Recoeil  des  notices  et  M^moires  de  la  Soci^t6  Arch^olo^que  de  la  ProTince
de  Goostaatine,  1863,  p.  214.


60


CHAPTER  in.

THE -USE   OF   OTONE   IN   ANCIENT  TIMES.

rE  preceding  chapters  have  been  deyoted  to  the  age
of  Bronze.  We  must  now  reyert  to  still  earlier  times
and  ruder  races  of  men;  to  a  period  which,  for  obvious
reasons,  is  called  by  archsoologists  the  Stone  age.

The  Stone  age,  however,  if  by  this  we  signify  merely  the
ante-metallic  period,  falls  naturally,  as  has  been  already
stated,  into  two  great  divisions.

First.  The  period  of  the  drift,  which  I  have  proposed  to
Qall  the  Archseolithic  period.

Secondly.  The  Neolithic,  or  later  Stone  age,  which  we  must
now  consider,  in  which  the  stone  implements  are  more  skil-
fully made,  more  varied  in  form,  and  often  polished.

The  immense  number  of  stone  implements  which  occur,  in
all  parts  of  the  world,  is  sufficient  evidence  of  the  im-
portant part  they  played  in  ancient  times.  M.  Herbst  has
favored  me  with  the  following  interesting  statement  of  the
number  of  stone  and  bone  implements  in  the  Copenhagen
Museum:

Flint  axes  and  wedges 1070

Broad  Chisels    285

Hollow  ditto 270

Narrow  chisels 36t3

Hollow  ditto 33

Poniards    250

Lance-heads 656


THE  6BXAT  ABUNDANCE  OF  STONE  IMPLEMENTS.  61

Anow-lieads 171

Halfinoon  shaped  implements 205

Pierced  axes  and  axe-hammers 746

Flint  flakes   300

Sundries    489

4840
Bough    stone    implements    from    the

Kjokkenmoddings 3678

Bone  implements 171

Ditto  from  Kjokkenmoddings 109

8798
And  if  duplicates  and  broken  specimens  were  counted,  he
thinks  that  the  number  would  be  between  11,000  and
12,000.  He  has  also  had  the  kindness  to  estimate  for  me
the  numbers  in  private  and  provincial  museums,  and,  on
the  whole,  he  believes  we  shall  be  within  the  mark,  if
we  consider  that  the  Danish  museimis  contain  30,000  stone
implements,  to  which  moreover  must  be  added  the  rich
stores  at  Flensborg  and  Kiel,  as  well  as  the  very  numer-
ous  specimens  with  which  the  liberality  of  the  Danish
archaeologists  has  enriched  other  countries;  so  that  there
is  scarcely  any  important  collection  in  Europe,  which  does
not  possess  some  illustrations  of  the  Danish  stone  implements.
The  museum  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy  includes  nearly
700  flint  flakes,  512  celts,  more  than  400  arrow-heads,  and
50  spear-heads,  besides  75  '^scrapers/'  and  numerous  other
objects  of  stone,  such  as  slingstones,  hammers,  whetstones,
querns,  grain-crushers,  etc.  Again,  the  museum  at  Stockholm
is  estimated  to  contain  between  15,000  and  16,000  specimens.
The  very  existence,  however,  of  a  Stone  age  is,  or  has
lately  been,  denied  by  some  eminent  archsDologists.  Thus
Mr.*Wright,  the  learned  Secretary  of  the  Ethnological  So-
ciety, while  admitting  that  "  there  may  have  been  a.  period


62  STONE   USED  AFTER  DISCOVERY  OF  METAL.

when  society  was  in  so  barbarous  a  state  that  sticks  or
stones  were  the  only  implements  with  which  men  knew  how
to  furnish  themselves,"  doubts  "if  the  antiquary  has  yet
found  any  evidence  of  such  a  period."  And  though  the
above  figures  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  stone  was  at  one
time  used  for  many  implements,  which  we  now  make  of  metal,
this  is  not  in  itself  a  conclusive  answer  to  Mr.  Wright,  nor
in  fact  would  it  be  denied  by  that  gentleman.  Moreover,
there  is  no  doubt,  that  in  early  ages  stone  and  metal  were
used  at  the  same  time,  the  first  by  the  poor,  the  second  by
the  rich.

If  wfe  consider  the  difficulties  of  mining  in  early  days,
the  rude  implements  with  which  men  had  then  to  work,
their  ignorance  of  the  many  ingenious  methods,  by  which,
the  operations  of  modem  miners  are  so  much  feu^ilitated,
and,  finally,  the  difficulties  of  carriage  either  by  land  or
water,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  bronze  implements  must  have
been  very  expensive.

In  addition,  moreover,  to  the  a  priori  probability,  there  is
plenty  of  direct  evidence,  that  bronze  and  stone  were  in  use
at  the  same  time.  Thus,  Mr.  Bateman  records  thirty-seven
instances  of  tumuli  which  contained  objects  of  bronze,  and
in  no  less  than  twenty-nine  of  these,  stone  implements  also
were  found.  At  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  America,  the
Mexicans,  though  well  acquainted  with  the  use  of  bronze,
still  used  flakes  of  obsidian  for  knives  and  razors,  and  even
after  the  introduction  of  iron,  stone  was  still  used  for  various
purposes.

Still,  however,  there  appears,  to  be  enough  evidence  to  jus-
tify us  in  believing,  not  only  that  there  was  a  period  "  when
society  was  in  so  barbarous  a  state  that  sticks  or  stones,"  (to
which  we  must  add  horns  and  bones)  "  were  the  only  imple-
ments with  which  men  knew  how  to  Aimish  themselves,"  but
also  that  the  antiquary  has  found  sufficient  "evidence  of  such


L  ~


■••«.«


MATERIAL  PREFERRED  FOR  ETrONB   IMPLEMENTS.  63

a  period."  Part,  at  least,  of  tliis  evidence  will  be  found  in  the
following  pages ;  and  though  it  is  true  that  much  of  it  has
been  obtained  since  our  accomplished  countryman  published
the  work  from  which  I  have  just  quoted,  yet  he  has  recently
repeated  his  previous  statements  in  a  lecture  deKvered  at
Leed&

Our  knowledge  of  this  ancient  period  is  derived  princi-
pally from  four  sources,  to  the  consideration  of  which  I
propose  to  devote  the  four  following  chapters;  namely,
the  tumuli,  or  ancient  burial-mounds,  the  Lake  habitations
of  Switzerland,  the  Kjokkenmoddings,  or  shell -mounds,
of  Denmark,  and  the  Bone-Caves.  There  are,  indeed,
other  remains  of  great  interest,  such,  for  example,  as  the
ancient  fortifications,  the  "castles"  and  "camps"  which
crown  so  many  of  our  hill-tops,  and  the  great  lines  of
embankment,  such  as  the  Wansdyke,  which  cross  so  many
of  our  downs,  where  they  have  been  spared  by  the  plough ;
there  are  the  so-called  druidical  circles,  and  the  vestiges
of  ancient  habitations;  the  "Hut-circles,"  "Cloghaims,"
"Weems,"  "Picts*  houses,"  etc.  The  majority  of  these
belong,  however,  in  all  probability,  to  a  later  period ;  and
at  any  rate,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  we  can-
not say  which,  or  how  many  of  them,  are  referable  to  the
Stone  age.

As  far  as  the  material  is  concerned^  every  kind  of  stone,
which  was  hard  and  tough  enough  for  the  purpose,  was
used  in  the  manufacture  of  implements.  The  magnificent
collection  of  celts  at  Dublin  has  been  specially  studied,  from
a  mineralogical  point  of  view,  by  the  Rev.  S.  Haughton,  and
the  results  are  thus  recorded  by  Wilde.*

"  Of  the  better  qualities  of  rock  suited  for  celt-making,
the  type  of  the  felspathic  extreme  of  the  series  of  trap  rocks
IB  the  pure  felstone,  or  petrosilex, of  a  pale  blueish

*  Catalog;ae  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  p.  72,


64  FBACrURE  OF   FLINT.

or  grayish  green,  except  where  the  surface  has  been  acted
upon,  and  the  average  composition  of  which  is  25  parts
quartz  and  75  felspar.  Its  physical  characters  are  absence
of  toughness,  and  the  existence  of  a  splintery  conchoidal

fracture  almost  as  sharp  as  that  of  flint At  the

homblendic  extreme  of  the  trap  rocks  we  find  the  basalt,  of
which  also  celts  were  made ;  tough  and  heavy,  the  siliceous
varieties  having  a  splintery  fracture,  but  never  affording  so

cutting  an  edge  as  the  former Intermediate  in

character  between  these  two  rocks,  we  find  all  the  varieties  of
felstone,  slate  and  porphyry  streaked  with  hornblende,  from
which  the  great  majority  of  the  foregoing  implements  have
been  made.''

On  the  whole,  however,  flint  appears  to  have  been  the
stone  most  often  used  in  Europe,  and  it  has  had  a  much
more  important  influence  on  our  civilisation  than  is  generally
supposed.  Savages  value  it  on  account  of  its  hardness
and  mode  of  fracture,  which  is  such  that,  with  practice,  a
good  sound  block  can  be  chipped  into  almost  any  form
that  may  be  required.  If  we  take  a  rounded  hammer,  and
strike  with  it  on  a  flat  surface  of  flint,  a  conoidal  fracture
is  produced ;  the  size  of  which  depends,  in  a  great  measure,
on  the  form  of  the  hammer.  The  surface  of  fracture  is
propagated  downwards  through  the  flint,  in  a  diverging
direction,  and  thus  embraces  a  cone,  whose  apex  is  at  the
point  struck  by  the  hammer,  and  which  can  afterwards  be
chipped  out  of  the  mass.  Flint  cones,  formed  in  this  way,
may  sometimes  be  found  in  heaps  of  stones  broken  up  to
mend  the  roads,  and  have  doubtless  often  been  mistaken  for
casts  of  fossil  shells.

If  a  blow  is  given,  not  on  a  flat  sur&ce,  but  at  the  angle
of  a  more  or  less  square  flint,  the  fracture  is  at  first  semi-
conoidal  or  nearly  so,  but  after  expanding  for  a  short  dis-
tance, it  becomes  flat,  and  may  be  propagated  through  a


FKACTDBB  OF  FLIBT.


65


lengA  of  &■  much  as  ten  inches,  thus  forming  s  Idade-like
Biko  {6gB.  82-69),  with  s  triangular  cross  aeetioa  (flg.  70).
The  oonaeqa«ice  is,  that  a  perfect  flint  flake  will  always  have
a  small  bulb,  or  projection  (flg.  63  a)  at  the  butt  end,  on  the
flat  side ;  this  has  been  called  the  bulb,  or  cone  of  percuasioQ.
After  the  four  original  angles  of  a  square  block  have  been  thus
Saked  off,  the  eight  new  angles  may  be  treated  in  a  simi-
lar manner,  and  so  on.  Fig.  61,  and  pi.  1,  flg.  6,  repreeent
blocks,  or  cores,  from  fw.ii
which  flakes  hare  been
stmck  off.  A  flake  it-
self ia  represented  in  pi.
l,fig-  7,  andavery  large
one  from  Fannenip  in
Jutland  is  figured,  one-


half  of  the  natural  size,  in  figs.  62-64.     The  bulb  is  shown


VLINT  FLAKES.


in  £^  63  a  and  64,  and  ihe  flake  lias  been  worked  into  a
point  at  tbe  end.     Fig.  66  is  an  anow-ahaped  flake  &om


A]TD»-«h*|>*d  F

Ireland,  in  whicli  tlie  butt  end  lias  been   cliipped  avay,
^iparraitlf  to  adapt  it  to  a  tiandle  or  shaft.


Figs.  66-69  are  small  Danish  flakes;  forms  exactly  aimi-
lar  might  be  found  ia  any  country  where  the  ancient  in-
habitante  could  obtain  flint  or  obsidian.     In  fig.  66,  we  see


TLnrr  flakes.  67

that  another  flake  had  been  preyiously  taken  from  the  same
blodc  Figs.  67,  68,  represent  flakes,  of  which  the  points
have  been  broken  ofl^  but  we  see  along  their  whole  length
the  depression  caused  by  the  removal  of  a  preyious
flake.  The  section  of
such  a  flake  is,  there-
fore, not  triangular,  as
in  fig.  70a,  but  four-
sided,  as  in  fig.  70b.
Sometimes,  though  not
often,  a  wide  flake  is
taken  ozf  in  such  a  way

as  to  overlap  two  previous  flakes,  as  in  the  case  of  the  one
represented  in  fig.  69.  In  this  instance,  the  section  is  penta-
gonal ;  the  flat  imder  surface  remaining  always  the  same,
but  the  upper  side  showing  four  facets.

Easy  as  it  may  seem  to  make  such  flakes  as  these,  a  little
practice  will  convince  any  one  who  attempts  to  do  so,  that  a
certain  knack  is  required,  and  that  it  is  also  necessary  to  be
(Careful  in  the  selection  of  the  flint.  It  is  therefore  evident
that  these  flint  flakes,  simple  as  they  may  appear,  are  always
the  work  of  man.  To  make  one,  the  flint  must  be  held
firmly,  and  then  a  considerable  force  must  be  applied,  either
by  pressure  or  by  blows,  repeated  three  or  four  times,  but  at
least  three,  and  given  in  certain  slightly  different  directions,
with  a  certain  definite  force ;  conditions  which  could  scarcely
occur  in  nature ;  so  that,  simple  as  it  may  seem  to  the  un-
trained eye,  a  flint  flake  is  to  the  antiquary  as  sure  a  trace  of
man,  as  the  footprint  in  the  sand  was  to  Kobinson  Crusoe.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say,  that  the  flakes  have  a  sharp
cutting  edge  on  each  side,  and  might  therefore  be  at  once
used  as  knives :  they  are  indeed  so  named  by  some  archsB-
ologists;  bat  it  seems  to  me  more  convenient  to  call  them
simply  flakes,  and  to  confine  the  name  of  knife  to  imple-


OQ  noUX  BATCBXn.

tnents  more  especially  intended   and   adapted  for  onttm^
purposes.

Many  of  tlie  flakee  vere  certainly  never  intended  to  aerve
as  knives,  but  vere  chipped  up  into  sawa,  awhs,  or  anow-
Iieads.  Many  savages  use  flint,  or  chert,  in  Has  manner,
even  at  the  present  day,  and  the  Mexicans  in  the  time  of
Cortez  used  precisely  similar  fragments  of  obsidian.

Next  to  flint  flakes,  axes,  vedges,  or  celts,  are,  periiapa,  of
most  importance.    The  largest  and  finest  specimens  are  found
in  Denmark ;  one  in  my  possession,  of  beautiful  white  flint,  ia
Fn.li.  13in.  long,  l^in.  thick,  and  3Jin,  in

breadth.  The  Seeland  axes  have  very
often,  indeed  generally,  perpendicular
tides;  in  Jutland  a  large  proportiaD
have  sloping  sides;  this  is  also  gene-
rally tha  case  in  other  parts  of  NorUi-
Westem  Europe.  In  Switzerland,  how-
aver,  the  axes,  which  are  much  smaller
Qian  those  frcnn  Denmark,  have  per-
--  pendicular   sides  (fig.

120).  The  conmion
Danish  axe  or  wedge
is  figured  in  pL  1,  fig,
1.  Figs.  71  and  72.
represent  forms  which,
though  rare  in  Seeland,
I  are  common  in  other

parts  of  Europe.  Those
I  found  in  Denmark  arc
I  I  sometimespoUshedibut

almost,  if  not  quite,  aa
sum.  4™-irei«d.  often^  left  rough.     On

the  contrary,  in  other  parts  of  North- Western  Europe,  the
axes  are  usually  ground  to  a  more  or  less  smooth  sujiace.


Vrara  KATCHKI8.  G9

Thai  the^  were  fixed  ia  wooden  handles  ib  evident,  In  many

flpecimenB,  from  peculiar  polished  spaces,  vhic^  have  been

pmdaced  hy  the  friction  of  the  wood.     In  ahnost  all  cases,

the  wooden  handle  has  long  perished,  but  there  are  one  or

two  instances  on  record,  in  which  it  has  been         ^^  ,^

preserred.    Pig.  73  represents  a  stone  hatchet,

finmd,  some  years  ago,  in  the  County  of  Mona-

ghan ;  the  handle  was  of  pine,  and  was  13|in.

long.     Horn    handles    have   been   frequently

found  in  the  Swiss  Lakes.     To  ub,  accustomed

as  we  are  to  the  use  of  metals,  it  seems  difficult

to  believe  that  such  things  were  ever  made  use

of;  we  know,  however,  that  many  savages  of

the  present  day  have  no  better  tools.     Tet,

with  axes  such  as  these,  and  generally  with

the  assistance  of  fire,  they  will  cut  down  large

trees,  and  hollow  them  out  into  canoes.     The

piles  used  in  the  Swiss  Stone  age  Lake-habi-  «™  <«»  i"  !»■*».

tationa  were  evidently,  from  the  form  of  the  cuts  on  them,

prepared  with  the  help  of  stone  axes ;   and  in  the  I^anidt

peat  bogs,  several  trees  have  been  found,  with  the  marks

of  stone  axes,  and  of  fire,  uptm  them,  and  in  one  or  two  cases

stone  celts  bare  even  been  found  lying  at  the  side.

That  they  were  also  weapons  of  war  is  probable,  not  only  on
d  priori  grounds,  but  also  because  they  have  frequently  been
found  in  the  gravea  of  chiefs,  associated  wiih  bronze  daggers.
About  the  year  1809,  a  large  caim  in  Eii^cudbrightahire,
popularly  supposed  to  be  the  tomb  of  a  King  Aldus  M'Oaldus,
wn  removed  by  a  &Tmer.  "When  the  caim  had  been  re-
moved, the  workmen  came  to  a  stone  coffin  of  very  rude
woAmanahip,  and  on  raboring  the  lid,  they  found  the
Aeiehaa  at  a  man  ttf  muxonmon  size.  The  bones  were  in
audi  a  state  of  deoon^KMitionf  that  the  ribs  and  vertebne
cnnnUfid  into  dust  on  attonpting  to  lift  iheoL     The  r


70

ing  bones  being  more  compaot,  were  taken  out,  wben  it  wms
disooTered  tbat  one  of  tbe  arms  had  been  almost  separated
from  the  shoulder  by  the  stroke  of  a  atone  axe,  and  that  a
fragment  of  the  axe  still  remained  in  the  bone.  The  axe
had  been  of  greenstone,  a  material  vhich  does  not  occur  in
this  part  of  Scotland.  There  were  also  found  with  this
skeleton  a  ball  of  flint,  about  three  inches  in  diameter,  which
vOb  perfectly  round  and  highly  polished,  and  the  head  of  an


arroWj  -also  of  flint,   but  not  a  particle  of  any  metallic


Another  class  of  stone  hatchets  are  those  which  are  pieroed
for  the  handle,  as  in  pi.  1,  fig.  2.    From  the  nature  of  flint,

•  TTew  8tati*t  Aoe.  KirkcadbnghtiMn,  rol.  It.,  p.  331.    Qnot«d  b;  WHam,
Prahit.  Ann,  of  SootUnd,  2d  sd.  toI.  i.,  p.  1B7.


71

tbete  were  scarcely  ever  made  of  that  material  There  are,
however,  in  Copenhagen  two  such  hatehets,  in  which  ad>
vantage  has  heen  ingenioiuly  taken  of  a  natural  hole  in  the
flint.  It  IB  very  doubtful,  whether  this  class  of  implements
truly  belongs  to  the  Stone  age.  The  pierced  axes  are
generally  found  in  graves  of  the  Bronze  period,  and  it  is
most  probable  that  this  mode  ctf  attaching  the  handle  was
used  very  rarely,  if  at  all,  until  the  discovery  of  metal  had
rendered  the  process  far  more  easy  than  could  have  been  the
case  previously.

The  so-called  "  scrapers,"  (figs.  74,  75,  105,  106),  are
oblong  stones,  rounded  at  one  end,  which  is  brought  to  a
bevelled  edge  by  a  series  of  small  blows.  One  side  is  flat,
the  other,  or  outer,  one  is  more  or  less  convex;  sometimes
they  have  a  short  handle,  whidi  gives  them  very  much  the
appearance  of  a  spoon.  They  have  been  found  ju  England,
France,  Denmark,  Irelandl,  Switzerland  and  odier  countries.

Fm.  Ti.  Pio.n.  Pla.n.


They  vary  from  one  to  four  inches  in  length,  and  frxim  half
an  inch  to  two  inches  in  breadth.  A  modem  Esquimaux
tcrapat  is  Tepreeeuted  in  figs.  76-78.  These  modem  speci-
mana  aie  in  form  idaUieal  with  the  old  ones.


72  THK  BHALL   AXES

To  the  BmaQ,  triangolar  "  azee,"  (figs.  79-61)  irfttcli  are
very  oharocterifitio  of  the  EjokkenmoddingB,  ns  well  as  of  the
Coaatfinda,  I  have  applied  the  nanie  bj  which  thej  are  aaaally
kDown,  hut  without  wishing  to  prejudge  the  queetion  as  to
their  purpose.  They  are  flat  on  <Hie  aide,  and  more  or  leas
convex  on  the  other ;  rudely  triangnlar  or  qoadraDgolar  in


shape,  with  the  cutting  edge  at  the  .broader  end ;  and  from
2Jin.  to  5^in.  in  leugtli,  with  a  breads  of  I|in.  to  2}in.
They  are  never  ground,  and  the  cutting  edge,  though  not
sharp,  ia  very  strong,  aa  it  is  farmed  by  a  plane,  meetiDg
the  flat  side  at  a  very  obtuae  angle.  Frofeasor  Steratttrup
donbta  whether  these  curious  and  peculiar  implemeutx  were
ever  intended  for  axes,  and  regards  them  as  having  been,
in  all  probability,  mere  weights  for  fishing  lines,  in  support
of  which  view  he  figures  some  not,  peAaps,  very  dissimilar
stone  objects,  used  for  that  purpose  by  the  Esquimaux.
The  so-called  edge,  in  his  opinion,  neitfier  has,  nor  eould


or  THE  SHKIX-UOiniDS.  73

have,  lieen  used  fi:^  cnttiDg,  bat  is  m«%ly  the  resnlt  of  that
fomt,  which  vaa  found  by  the  fishermeii  to  be  most  con-
valient.  He  also  calls  attentJoii  to  the  perished  facets  on
their  surfaces,  which  he  regards  as  affiirding  strong  support
to  his  (^nnion.
It  most  be  at  once  admitted,  tiiat  there  are  many  of  these


"axes"  which  can  never  have  been  used  for  cutting,  but
these  may  be  regarded  as  failures,  and  are  certainly  not  to
be  taken  as  normal  specimens.  It  is  true  that  the  two
Hur&cee,  constituting  the  edge,  form  a  very  obtuse  angle  with
one  another,  but  we  must  remember  that  if  this  detracts  from
the  sharpness,  it  adds  greatly  to  the  strength.  Moreover,  the
angle  is  almost  exactly  the  same  as  that  which  we  find  in
the  adzes  of  the  New  Zealanders,  and  other  South  Sea
Islanders.  Figs.  82-84,  represent  a  recent  adze,  brought
by  the  Bev.  R.  Taylor  from  New  Zealand,  and  now  in  the
British  MoBemn,  whidi  very  doeely  resembles  the  1y|HCBl


74

axes  of  Uie  Ejokkenmoddings.  The  edge,  indeed,  is  pcdished,
but  is  after  all  not  smoother  than  the  natural  fracture  of  the
flint.  The  projection  on  the  underside  of  the  Danish  speci-
men (fig.  81a.)  is  accidental,  and  due  to  some  peculiarity  in
the  flint.  This  surface  is  usually  as  flat  in  the  Danish  speci-
rneoB,  as  in  the  "New  Zealand.

The  chiteh  (pi.  1,  fig.  5 )   resemble   the  Danish  axes,  in
p^  ^  having  perpendicular  sides,  but  they  are

nanxiwer,  and  are  almost  always  ground
to  a  smooth  surface.  Many  of  them
are  slightly  hoUoired  on  one  side,  aa
in  fig.  85.

There  is  a  curious  flat,  semi-circular,

flint  instrument  (pi.  1,  fig.  3),  common

in  Denmark,  but  very  rarely,  if  ever,

found  in  Gh-eat   Britain.     The  convex

edge    was   evidently    fastened    into   a

handle  of  wood,   the  marks  of  which

are  still  in  many  cases  plainly  visible.

The  other  edge,  which  is  either  straight

or  concave,  is  generally  provided  with

a  nimiber  of  teeth,  giving  it  more  or  leea

resemblance  to  a  saw.     In  some  cases,

it  is  so  much  worn  away  by  use,  that

HoiioT  cbiiri.  the  imj^ment  takes  the  form  of  a  new

moon  or  a  boomerang.    The  edge  is  in

many  cases  quite  polished,  evidently  by  continuous  fiictiim

against  a  soft  substance.     I  say  a  soft  substance,  because

the  polished  part  overlaps  on  both   sides,   and   passes   in

between  the  teeth  of  the  saw,  which  would  not  have  been

odierwise   the    case.      It   is  probable  tikat   the  eemi-lunar

instruments  were  fixed  in  wooden  handles,  and  then  used

in  cleaning  skins.      Similarly  shaped  instramenfa  are  even

now  used  as  knives  by  the  Esquimaux  women,  under  ^e


SPKUt-HKUW.       DAOOBRS.  75

name  of  Ocdooa.      It  nught  be  conTenient  to   appl^   Has
term  to  the  ancieDt  Damah  specimens.

The  so-called  "avis"  are  rude  pieces  of  flint,  or  flakes
worked  ap  at  one  place  l^  a  numbeT  of  small  chips  to  a
point  (fig.  125).  Though  not  very  sharp,  they  are  pretty
strong.

The  ^>ear-head»  (fig.  86)  are  very  vari-  fio.m.

able  in  size  and  form ;  some  of  tilem  are
scarcely  distinguiahable  from
large  arror-headfi ;  others  are  ''•■  ••■
much  larger.  Some  are  so
mde  that  it  is  questionable
whether  they  were  finished,
while  others  are  marrellouB
specimens  of  anci^it  art.  One
in  my  possession  is  12in.  in
length,  l^in.  in  breadth,  and
of  wonderfully  beautiful  work-
manship. It  is  one  of  six,
found  together  inside  a  large
tnmolus  in  the  island  of
Uoen.

The  daggert  (pi.  1,  fig.  4,
and  fig.  87)  are  also  marvels
of  skill  in  flint  •  chipping.
Their  form  so  closely  resem-
bles that  of  metallic  daggers,
that  some  antiquaries  am  in-
clined to  regard  them  as
copies  of  bronze  daggers,  and
therefore  as  not  belonging  to

the  Stone  age.     The  localities    ^^^^  ^^^^

in  which  they  hare  be^i  found
do    not,   however,  ofier    any  support   to    this    hypothesis.


76  sUMOfflroirM.

Another  form  of  flint  ireapon  (fig.  88),  irhidi  is  comnum

in  Denmark,  has  a  handle  like  that  of  the  last  form,  hot

instead  of  a  blade,  it  ends  in   a  point,  and  suggests  ^e

idea,  that  if  the  tip  of  a  dagger  had  been  accidentallf  Invken

ofl^i  the  rest  of  the  weapon  might  hare  been  worked  up  into

F».  te.  one  of  these  poniards,  and  thus  utilized.    In

both  these  classes,  the  crimping  along  the

edges  of  the  handle  is  very  curious.

The  slingtUmtB  are  of  two  kinds.  The
first  are  merely  rough  pieces  of  flint,  (pi.
1,  fig.  12),  reduced  by  a  few  blows  of  a
hanmier  to  a  convenient  size  and  fonn.
But  for  the  situations  in  which  they  are
found,  these  might  almost  be  regarded  as
natural  fragments.  Professor  Steenstrup  is
now  disposed  to  think  that  many  of  them
were  used  as  sinkstones  for  nets,  but  that
some  have  really  served  as  slingstones  seems
to  be  indicated  by  their  presence  in  the  Peat-
mosses, which  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  in
any  other  way.  The  other  kind  of  slin^
stones  are  round  flattish  flint  disks,  some
of  which  are  beautifully  made.

The  oval  toolsUmet  (fig.  89),  or  "Tilhng^
gersteems"  of  ihe  oortheni  antiquaries,  are
oval  or  egg-shaped  stones,
more  or  less  indented  on  one  ,
or  both  surfaces.    Their  u
is  not  at  present  thoroughly
understood.    Swne  antiqna-      oni  T<»iito».
ries  suppose  that  th^-  were  held  between

Diggv  (Inkn  M

a»  viM).  the  finger  and  thumb,  and  used  as  hammers
or  ohippers.  I^  however,  a  large  series  is  obtained,  it  will
be  firand  that  the  depreiKon  varies  greatly  in  de^ith,  and


ABBOW-aSAM.


77


I  tlie  stone  is  completalj'  perfoiated,  whldi
&TOt8  tlie  Tiewi  of  those  wlu>  regard  tlieae  uaplemeots  as
ringatones  for  nets,  or  small  hammer  heads.

Other  stones,  in  which  the  longer  axis  is  encircled  hj  a
groove,  t^pear  to  hare  beea  evidaDtly  intended  as  sinkstcmes
far  nets.

The  arrow'heada  are  divided  by  Sir  W.  E.  Wilde  into  five
Ysrieties.     Firstly,  the  tritaisiular  (fig.  90),  which  frequently
had  a  notch  on  each  side  to  receive  the  string         ^^  »-
which  attached  it  to  the  shaft ;  secondly,  that
which  is  hollowed  oat  or  itidtnteii  at  the  base,


as  in  fig.  91 ;  thirdly,  the  ttemmed  arrow,  which  has  a  tang
or  projection  for  HinUng  into  the  shaft ;  fourthly,  whm  the
wings  are  prolonged  on  each  side,  this  passes  into  the  harhed
arrow  (fig.  92) ;  finally,  we  have  the  hqf-Bhaped  form,  a
beentifal  example  of  which  is  represented  in  fig.  93.  The
true  arrow-heads  are  generally  about  an  inch  in  length,  but
they  pass  graduaUy  into  the  javelin,  and  from  that  into  the
spear-head.  There  are  various  other  kinds  of  flint  imple-
ments, such  as  hammers,  saws,  harpoons,  etc.,  but— omitting
for  the  present  the  driA  types — these  are  the  principal
forms.
Some  of  the  old  Spanish  writers  on  Mexico  give  us  a


is  MAKTiFACTURB  OP  FLINT  IMPLEMENTS.

deecription  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Aztecs  obtained
their  obsidian  flakes.  Torquemada,*  who  is  confirmed  by
Hernandez,  tells  us — I  quote  from  Mr.  Tylor's  Anahuao —
''They  had,  and  still  have,  workmen  who  make  knives  of
a  certain  black  stone  or  flint  (obsidian),  which  it  is  a  most
wonderfiil  and  admirable  thing  to  see  them  make  out  of
the  stone;  and  the  ingenuity  which  invented  this  art  is
much  to  be  praised.  They  are  made  and  got  out  of  the
stone  (if  one  can  explain  it)  in  this  manner.  One  of  these
Indian  workmen  sits  down  upon  the  groimd,  and  takes  a
piece  of  this  black  stone,  which  is  like  jet,  and  as  hard  as
flint ;  and  is  a  stone  which  might  be  called  precious,  more
beautiful  and  brilliant  than  alabaster  or  jasper,  so  much  so
that  of  it  are  made  tablets  and  mirrors.  The  piece  they  take
is  about  ^ght  inches  long  or  rather  more,  and  as  thick  as
one's  leg  or  rather  less,  and  cylindrical ;  they  have  a  stick  as
large  as  the  shaft  of  a  lance,  and  three  cubits  or  rather  more
in  length,  and  at  the  end  of  it  they  fasten  firmly  another
piece  of  wood,  eight  inches  long,  to  give  more  weight  to  this
part ;  then,  pressing  their  naked  feet  together,  they  hold  the
stone  as  with  a  pair  of  pincers,  or  the  vice  of  a  carpenter's
bench.  They  take  the  stick  (which  is  cut  off  smooth  at  the
end)  with  both  hands,  and  set  it  well  home  against  the  edge
of  the  front  of  the  stone  {y  ponenlo  avesar  con  el  canto  de  la
/rente  de  la  piedra),  which  also  is  cut  smooth  in  that  part ;
and  then  they  press  it  against  their  breast,  and  with  the
force  of  the  pressure  there  flies  off  a  knife,  with  its  point  and.
edge  on  each  side,  as  neatly  as  if  one  were  to  make  them  of
a  turnip  with  a  sharp  knife,  or  of  iron  in  the  fire.  Then
they  sharpen  it  on  a  stone,  using  a  hone  to  give  it  a  very  fine
edge;  and  in  a  very  short  time  these  workmen  will  make
more  than  twenty  knives  in  the  aforesaid  manner.     They


•  Torqaemad*.    Mouffquia  Indiamu    Serille,  1616,


BONB  DGPLBMEirrB.  79

come  oat  of  the  same  shape  as  our  barbers^  lancets^  except
that  they  haye  a  rib  up  the  middle  and  have  a  slight  graceful
curve  towards  the  point."

Thus  it  appears  that  the  obsidian  flakes  were  made,  not  by
blows,  but  by  strong  pressure ;  and  the  same  is  the  case  with
the  chert  implements  of  the  Esquimaux,  according  to  the
description  giyen  by  Sir  E.  Belcher.*  "Selecting,"  he  says,
''  a  log  of  wood,  in  which  a  spoon-shaped  cavity  was  cut,  they
placed  the  splinter  to  be  worked  over  it,  and  by  pressing
gently  along  the  margin  vertically,  first  on  one  side,  then  the
other,  as  one  would  set  a  saw,  they  spUntered  off  alternate
fragments,  until  the  object,  thus  properly  outlined,  presented
the  spear  or  arrow-head  form,  with  two  cutting  serrated
aides."  A  very  similar  account  is  also  given  by  Lieutenant
Beckwith  of  the  method  used  by  the  North  American  Indians.!

Besides  being  employed  for  handling  the  stone  axes,  the
bones  and  horns  of  animals  were  much  used  as  the  ma-
terial of  various  simple  implements,  and  those  of  the  stag

Fio.94.


Bone  Awl— Beottand.

appear  to  have  been  preferred  as  being  the  hardest.  The
commonest  bone  implement  is  the  pin  or  awl  (fig.  94) :  not
much  less  numerous  are  certain  oblong  chisel-like  imple-
ments (fig.  122),  the  use  of  which  it  is  not  easy  to  determine.
Ribs  split  open,  and  pointed  at  one  end,  are  sometimes
found,  and  have  been  supposed  by  some  archaBologists  to  have
served  as  netting  rules ;  while  by  others  they  are  considered
to  have  been  used  in  the  manufacture  of  pottery.     Bone

*  Tians.  of  the  Ethnologioil  Soc    New  Ser.    Vol.  i.,  p.  138.
t  Report  of  Explorations  and  Surreys  of  the  Pacific  fiailroad,  18^5.    YoL  ii.,
p.i8.


W  DAlflSH  ODASTFINM.

liarpoons,  anow-IieBd«,  and  spear-heads,  also  occur;    and
'*"-*^     pierced  teet^  seam  to  liare  bees  not  unfrequently
worn  as  amnlets.

Stone  implenkoita  of  the  forms  above  described
are  frequently  &nnd  on  the  surfaoe  of  the  ground,
or  are  dug  up  in  agricultural  or  other  operationa.
But  tJiose  found  singly  in  this  manner  have  com-
paratively  little  scientific  value  j  it  is  ouly  when
found  in  couaiderable  numbers,  and  eBpecIalty  when
associated  with  other  remains,  that  they  serve  to
throw  much  light  on  the  manners  and  customs  of
ancient  times.  As  already  mentioned,  the  tumuli,
the  Lake- habitations,  and  the  eheU-mounds,  are
specially  valuable  in  this  respect,  but  I  must  also
say  a  few  words  about  the  "Goastfinds"  of  the
Danish  antiquaries.  "Cioastfinds"  are  discoveries
of  rude  flint  implementa,  which  are  found  lying
in  large  numbers  on  certain  spots  along  the  old
line  of  coast.  These  discoveries  have  receiYed
from  the  Danish  antiquaries  the  name  of  "Eyst-
Junden,"  or,  as  we  may  translate  it,  "Coastfinds."
Owing,  probably,  to  the  elevatioa  of  the  land
which  has  taken  place  in  Jutland  since  the  Stone
age,  some  of  them  are  now  on  dry  ground,  and  as
the  shore  is  very  flat,  the  elevatioD,  slight  as  it  is,
has  in  some  cases  been  sufficient  to  separate  them
by  a  considerable  distance  from  the  present  water-
line.  Some,  on  the  other  hand,  are  at  lower  levels ;
one,  for  instance,  close  to  the  Railway  statitm  at
Eorsoer,  is  exposed  only  at  low  tide,  and  others
are  always  covered.  The  "Coastfinds,"  however,
belong  probably  to  different  classes.  Thus,  one  at
'  Anholt  was  evidently  a  workshop  of  flint  imple-
ments, as  is  shown  by  the  character  of  the  chips,  and  by  the


FIJ»TFDm6.  81

diaooTery  of  more  than  sixty  flint  cores.  Those,  on  the  con-
traiyy  which  even  at  the  present  day  are  nnder  water,  must
have  been  so  in  old  times,  and  as  there  are  no  traces  of  Lake-
habitations  in  Denmark,  it  seems  the  most  natural  suppo-
sitioii  that  they  were  the  places  where  the  fishermen  used  to
drag  their  nets.  It  is  still  usual  to  choose  particular  spots
for  this  purpose,  and  it  is  evident  that  many  of  the  rude
objects  used  in  fishing,  especially  of  the  stones  employed
as  net-weights,  would  there  be  lost.  The  objects  discovered
are  just  what  might  have  been  expected  under  these  cir-
cumstanoes.  They  consist  of  .irregular  flint  chippings,  ftet-
weights  or  slingstones,  flakes,  scrapers,  awls,  and  axes.

These  six  different  classes  of  objects  have  been  found  in
most,  if  not  all  of  the  coastfinds,  though  in  different  pro-
portions. To  give  an  idea  of  the  numbers  in  which  they
occur,  I  may  mention  that  Professor  Steenstrup  and  I
gathered  in  about  an  hour  at  Froelund,  near  Korsor,  141
flakes,  84  weights,  5  axes,  1  scraper,  and  about  150  flint
chips;  while  at  a  similar  spot,  near  Aarhuus  in  Jutland,
I  myself  picked  up,  in  two  hours  and  a  half,  76  weights,  40
flakes,  39  scrapers,  17  awls,  and  a  considerable  number
of  flint  chips.

In  the  sheltered  and  shallow  fjords  of  Denmark,  the  sea
is  generally  calm,  and,  in  many  instances,  a  layer  of  sand
has  accumulated  over  and  thus  protected  the  flint  fragments.
This  was  the  case  with  both  the  above-mentioned  coastfinds,
one  of  which  was  exposed  in  draining  the  land,  the  other  in
a  railway  cutting.  Sometimes  a  change  of  currents  will  re-
move the  light  sand,  and  leave  the  heavier  stones,  which
again  in  other  cases  have  lain  apparently  imdisturbed  and
exposed  from  the  first ;  and  in  such  instances,  the  spots  are
so  thickly  strewn  with  white  flints  that  they  may  often  be
diBtinguished  by  their  color,  even  at  a  considerable  distance.

Of  course,  in  a  sea  like  that  which  surrounds  our  coast,

6


82  fluitfikdb.

such  remains  would  soon  be  reduced  to  mere  gravel ;  besidea
which,  we  must  remember  that  on  our  Southern  or  Eafi^tem
shores,  even  in  historical  times,  the  ^  sea  has  encroieu^hed
greatly.  "Flintfinds,"  however,  resembling  in  many  re-
spects these  Danish  **  coastfinds,''  are  not  altogether  unknown,
in  this  country.  A  great  number  of  flint  flakes,  with  a  few
arrows  and  cores,  were  found  some  years  ago  by  Mx.  Shelley
in  a  field  near  Eeigate,  but,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  other
forms  have  yet  been  observed  at  this  place.

In  the  Aberdeen  Journal  (October,  1863),  Mir.  T.  F.
Jamieson  mentions  a  spot  on  the  banks  of  the  Ythan  below
Ellon,  where  in  a  few  minutes  he  filled  his  ^'pockets  with
flint  flakes,  abortive  arrow-heads,  flint  blocks  from  which  the
flakes  have  been  struck  off,  and  other  such  nondescript
articles  of  ancient  cutlery.^'  !niere  are  other  places,  as,  for
instance,  Bridling^n,  Pont  le  Toy,  Spiennes,  near  Mons,
Pressigny  le  Grand,  etc.,  where  immense  numbers  of  rude
hatchets,  cores,  flakes,  spear-heads,  etc.,  have  been  found.
Now  that  our  attention  has  been  called  to  these  flintfinds,
no  doubt  many  similar  discoveries  will  be  made  elsewhere.


CHAPTER     IV.


ALL  over  Europe;  we  tniglit  indeed  say,  all  over  the
world,  wherever  they  have  not  been  deatroyed  ^3'y  the
plough  or  the  hafnmer ;  we  find  relics  of  pre-hiatorio  times —
canqw,  fortificationB,  dykee,  temples,  tumuli,  etc. ;  many  of
which  astonish  ua  by  their  magnitude,  while  all  of  them
excite  our  interest  by  the  antiquity  of  which  they  remind
nfi,  and  the  mystery  with  which  they  are  surrounded.     Some


few,  indeed,  there  are,  such,  ibr  instance,  as  the  Boman  Wall
in  England,  the  Dannevirke,  and  Queen  Thyra's  tumulus,  in
Denmark,  of  which  the  date  and  origin  are  known  to  us,  but


84  PBE-HIBIOBIC

by  for  the  greater  aumW,  sncK  as  the  Waiudyke,  the


/


"  temple"  of  Camac  in  Srittany,  &e  tomuli  anj^>08ed  to  be
those  of  Thor,  Odin,  and  Freya  at  TIpsaJa,'  and  tha  great


bcpuLohnl  Btona  drolL

tumuli  near  Drogheda,  are  entirely  pre-hiHtorio.     Some  of
*  See  Frontifideoe.


them,  donbtleaa,  belong  'to  the  metallic  period,  some  to  that
of  Stone,  but  it  Teiy  rarely  happens  that  we  can  attribute
any  of  them  with  reasonable  probability  to  one  period  rather
than  to  another.     This  is  particularly  the  case  with  ancient

FM-M.


earthworks  and  megalithic  temples  or  circles ;  the  barrows,
or  Lows,  on  the  other  hand,  frequently  contain  objects
from  which  some  idea  of  relative  antiquity  may  be  ob-
tained.     These   ancient   burial-mounds,   of  which  several


tyjncal  examples  are  represented  in  figs.  96  to  100,  are
extremely  numerous.  In  our  own  island  they  may  be
Been  on  almost  every  down ;    in  the  Orkneys  alone  it  a


86  TUMULI  MENTIONED

estimated  ihat  more  than  two  thousand  still  remain ;  and  in
Dienmark  they  are  even  more  abundant ;  they  are  found
all  over  Europe,  from  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic  to  the
Oural  mountains ;  in  Asia  they  are  scattered  over  the  great
steppes,  from  the  borders  of  Bussia  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,
and  from  the  plains  of  Siberia  to  those  of  Hindostan ;  in
America  we  are  told  that  they  are  to  be  nimibered  by  thou-
sands and  tens  of  thousandB ;  nor  are  they  wanting  in  Africa,
where  the  Pyramids  themselves  exhibit  the  most  magnificent
development  of  the  same  idea ;  so  that  the  whole  world  is
studded  with  these  burial  places  of  the  dead.  The  Crom-
lechs, Dolmens,  and  Cistvaens  (fig.  99),  are  now  generally
regarded  as  sepulchral,  and  the  great  number  in  which  these
ancient  burial  places  occur  is  very  suggestive  of  their  an-
tiquity, since  the  labor  involved  in  the  construction  of
a  tumulus  would  not  be  undertaken  except  in  honor  of  chiefs
and  great  men.  Many  of  them  are  small,  but  some  are
very  large;  Silbury  Hill,  the  highest  in  Great  Britain,
has  a  height  of  one  hundred  and  seventy  feet ;  but  though
evidently  artificial,  there  is  great  doubt  whether  it  is
sepulchral.

Mr.  Bateman,  in  the  Preface  to  his  second  work,*  has
collected  together  the  most  ancient  allusions  to  burial  cere-
monies, and  we  see  that  "Mound-burial"  was  prevalent  in
the  earliest  times  of  which  we  have  any  historical  record.
Achan  and  his  whole  family  were  stoned  with  stones  and
burned  with  fire,  after  which  we  are  told  that  Israel  *^  raised
over  hiTin  a  great  heap  of  stones  unto  this  day.  So  the  Lord
turned  from  the  fierceness  of  his  anger.'^  Again,  the  king
of  Ai  was  buried  under  a  great  heap  of  stones.

According  to  Diodorus,  Semiramis,  the  widow  of  Ninus,
buried  her  husband  within  the  precincts  of  the  palace,  and
raised  over  him  a  great  mound  of  earth.     Some  of  the
•  Ten  Tears'  Diggings  in  Celtic  and  Saxon  GraTehilU.


IN   ANCIENT  HISTORY.  87

tumoli  in  Ghreeoe  were  old  even  in  the  time  of  Homer,  and
were  eonsidered  by  liim  to  be  the  burial  places  of  the  heroes.
Pansanias  mentions  that  stones  were  collected  together,  and
heaped  up  over  the  tomb  of  Laius,  the  father  of  (Edipus.
In  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war,  Tydeus  and  Lycus  are  men-
tioned as  having  been  buried  under  two  earthen  barrows.
"Hector's  barrow  was  of  stones  and  earth.  Achilles  erected
a  tumulus  upwards  of  an  hundred  feet  in  diameter,  oyer  the
remains  of  his  Mend  Patroclus.  The  mound  supposed  by
Xenophon  to  contain  the  remains  of  Alyattes,  &ther  of
Croesus,  king  of  Lydia,  was  of  stone  and  earth,  and  more
than  a  quarter  of  a  league  in  circumference.  In  later  times,
Alexander  the  Great  caused  a  tumulus  to  be  heaped  over  his
friend  Hephaosdon^  at  the  cost  of  1200  talents,,  no  mean  sum,
even  for  a  conqueror  like  Alexander,  it  being  £232,500  ster-
ling."* Yirgil  teUs  us  that  Deroennus,  king  of  Latium,
was  buried  under  an  earthen  mound ;  and,  according  to  the
earliest  historians,,  whose  statements  are  confirmed  by  the
researches  of  archseologists,  mound-burial  was  practised  in
ancient  times  by  the  Scythians,  Greeks,  Etruscans,  Ger-
mans, and  many  other  nations^  The  size  of  the  tumulus
may  be  taken  as  a  rude  indication  of  the  estimation  in
whi<&  the  deceased  was  held;  the  Scotch  Highlanders f
have  still  a  complimentary  proverb,  '^Curri  mi  clach  er  do
cuim^'^  Le.  I  will  add  a  stone  to  your  cairn.

What  Schoolcraft  says  of  the  North  American  Indians  is
applicable  to  many  savage  tribes.  *'  Nothing  that  the  dead
possessed  was  deemed  too  valuable  to  be  interred  with  the
body.  The  most  costly  dress,  arms,  ornaments,  and  imple-
ments, are.  deposited  in  the  grave ;"  which  is  ''  always  placed
in  the  choicest  scenic  situations — on  some  crowning  hill  or
gentle  eminence  in  a  secluded  valley."     And  the  North

*  Ten  TeanT  Diggings  in  the  Cellio  and  Saxon  GraTehillB,  p.  ▼.

t  Wilson,  ?re-historie  Annals  of  Scotland,  toL  L,  p.  86,  seoond  edition.


88  RBSEMBLANCE   BETWEEX  THE   CHAMBERED  TUMULI

•

American  Tni^iftTift  are  said,  even  until  within  the  last  few
years,  to  have  cherished  a  friendly  feeling  for  the  French,
because,  in  the  time  of  their  supremacy,  they  had  at  least
this  one  great  merit,  that  they  never  disturbed  the  resting-
places  of  the  dead.

Some  of  the  oldest  tumuli  of  Scandinavia  are  large  mounds,
containing  a  passage,  formed  by  great  blocks  of  stone,  ahnost
always  opening  towards  tiie  south  or  east, — never  to  the
north, — and  leading  into. a  great  central  chamber,  round
which  the  dead  sit.  At  Gbldhavn,  for  instance,  in  the  year
1830,  a  grave  (if  so  it  can  be  called)  qf  this  kind  was  opened,
and  numerous  skeletons  were  found,  sitting  4»n  a  low  seat
round  the  walls,  each  with  his  weapons  and  ornaments  by
his  side.  Now,  the  dwellings  used  by  Arctic  nations — the
^^  winter-chouses '^  ef  the  Esquimaux  and  Greentanders,  the
"Yurts'*  of  the  Siberians — correspond  closely  with  these
"Ghmggraben'"  or  '^  Passage  graves. '*  The  Siberian  Yurt,
for  instance,  as  described  by  Erman,  consists  of  a  central
chamber,  sunk  a  little  in  the  ground,  and,  in  the  absence
of  great  stones,  formed  of  timber,  while  earth  is  heaped  up
on  the  roof  and  against  the  sides,  reducing  it  to  the  form  of
a  msund.  The  opening  is  on  the  south,  and  a  small  hole
for  a  window  is  sometimes  left  <on  the  east  side.  Instead  of
glass,  a  plate  of  ice  is  used ;  it  is  at  first  %  foot  thick,  and
four  or  &ve  generally  last  through  the  winter.  The  fireplace
is  opposite  the  entrance;  and  round  the  sides  of  the  room,
against  the  walls,  ''the  floor  is  raised  for  a  width  of  about
six  feet,  and  on  this  elevated  part,  the  inmates  slept  at  night»
and  sat  at  work  by  day.'^

Captain  Cook  gives  a  very  similar  description  of  the
winter  habitations  used  by  the  Tschutski,  in  the  extreme
north-east  of  Asia.  They  are,  he  says,*  ''exactly  Uke  a
vault,  the  floor  of  which  is  sunk  a  little  below  the  surface  of

*  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  yd.  ii.,  p.  450.    See  also  vol.  iii.,  p.  374.


AND  THS  DWELLINGS  OF   BOMB  AKCTIG  NATIONS.  89

the  earth.  One  of  them,  wliich  I  examined,  was  of  an  oyal
fimn,  about  twenty  feet  long,  and  twelve  or  more  high.
The  framing  was  composed  of  wood,  and  the  ribs  of  whales,
disposed  in  a  judicious  manner,  and  bound  together  with
smaller  materials  of  the  same  sort.  Over  this  framing  is
laid  a  covering  of  strong  coarse  grass;  and  that,  again,  is
oorered  with  earth :  so  that,  on  the  outside,  the  house  looks
like  a  little  hillock^  supported  b j  a  wall  of  stone,  three  or
four  feet  high«  which  is  built  round  the  two  sides,  and  one
end."

These  dwellings  appear,  then,  to  agree  yery  closely  with
the  **  Ghmggraben ;''  indeed,  it  is  possible  that  in  some  cases
ruined  dwellings  of  this  kind  have  been  mistaken  for  sepul-
chral tumuli  ;*  for  some  mounds  have  been  examined  which
contained  broken  implements,  pottery,  ashes,  etc.,  but  no
human  bones ;  in  short,  numerous  indications  of  life,  but  no
trace  of  death.  We  know,  also,  that  several  savage  tribes
have  a  superstitious  reluctance  to  use  anything  which  has
belonged  to  a  dead  person ;  in  some  cases  this  applies  to  his
house,  which  is  either  deserted  or  used  as  a  grave.  The
Indians  of  the  Amazons  bury  their  dead  under  their  houses,
which,  however,  are  not  therefore  abandoned  by  the  living.

Under  these  circumstances,  there  seems  much  proba-
bility in  the  view  advocated  by  Professor  Nilsson,  the
venerable  archseologist  of  Sweden,  that  these  ^'Ganggra-
ben"  Are  a  copy,  a  development,  or  an  adaptation,  of  the
dwelling-house;  that  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Scandi-
navia, unable  to  imagine  a  friture  altogether  different  frt)m
the  present,  or  a  world  quite  imlike  our  own,  showed  their
respect  and  affection  for  the  dead,  by  burying  with  them
those  things  which  in  life  they  had  valued  most ;  with  ladies
their  ornaments,  with  warriors  their  weapons.  They  buried
the  house  with  its  owner,  and  the  grave  was  UteraUy  the

•  The  so-called  '<  Pond-barrowB  "  perbape  belong  to  thiB  olaai.


do  CHAMBERED

dwelling  of  the  dead.  Wheii  a  great  man  died,  lie  was
placed  on  his  favorite  seat>  food  and  drink  were  arranged
before  him,  his  weapons  were  placed  by  his  side,  his  house
was  closed,  and  the  door  covered  up ;  sometimes,  however,  to
be  opened  again  when  his  wife  or  children  joined  him  in  the
land  of  spirits.

Many  skulls  have  been  obtained  in  Scandinavia^  from
tumuli  of  this  character ;  they  are  round,  with  heavy,  over-
hanging brows,  and  go  far  to  justify  the  opinion  entertained
by  some  archaeologists,  that  the  pre-Celtic  inhabitants  of
Scandinavia,  and,  perhaps,  of  Europe  generally,  were  of  Tu-
ranian origin,  akin  to  the  modem  Laplanders.  The  *'  cham-
bered "  tumuli  of  Great  Britain  resemble,  in  many  respects,
the  Scandinavian  '' Ganggraben,''  and,  like  them,  are  con-
sidered by  some  archsBologists  as  the  earliest  in  time;  but
instead  of  the  round,  heavy-browed  skidls  found  in  the  mega-
lithic  Scandinavian  tumuli,  the  occupants  of  the  ''chambered''
mounds  in  England  (so  tar,  at  least,  as  we  can  judge  from  the
somewhat  scanty  evidence  which  we  possess),  are  charac-
terised by  very  long  and  narrow  skulls,  which  have  received
from  Br.  Wilson  the  name  of  '' £umbecephalic,"  or  boat-
shaped  skulk.  Moreover  (apart  from  the  it  priori  improba-
bility of  these  great  megalithio  tumuli  being  in  all  cases
earlier  than  the  smaller  and  simpler  mounds),  we  must  re-
m^nber  that  in  the  great  burial  mound  of  l^ew  Grange,  in
Ireland,  the  stones  are  decorated  with  figures  very  charac-
teristic of  the  Bronze  age,  and  evidently  engraved  before  the
stones  were  placed  in  their  present  position,  as  they  are,  in
some  cases,  overlapped  by  the  neighbouring  slabs.  Those
who  wish  to  see  the  present  state  of  the  question  as  to
these  chambered  tumuli,  and  the  Kumbecephalic  skulls,  will
find  it  well  stated  by  Dr.  Wilson  in  the  Pre-historic  Annals
of  Scotland;*  but  I  agree  with  the  able  authors  of  the

*  Second  ecL,  toI.  i.  p.  249


TUMULI.  91

Crania  Britannica,  in  thinking  that  the  evidence  which  he
adduces  is  far  from  conclusiye.*

It  is  just  possible  that  the  comparatiye  rarity  of  chambered
tumuli  in  Western  Europe  may  be  connected  with  the
greater  mildness  of  the  climate,  which  did  not  necessitate
the  use  of  underground  "winter-houses;"  or  it  may  be  an
indication  of  a  difference  in  race.  Farther  investigations
willy  doubtless,  decide  this  point.  In  the  meantime,  we
must  remember  that  the  so-called  "Picts^  Houses"  are
abundant  in  the  northern  parts  of  Gbeat  Britain.  These
curious  dwellings  are  "scarcely  distinguishable  from  the
larger  tumuli;  but,  on  digging  into  the  green  mound,
it  is  found  to  cover  a  series  of  large  chambers,  built
generally  with  stones  of  considerable  size,  and  converging
towards  the  centre,  where  an  opening  appears  to  have  been
left  for  light  and  ventilation.  These  differ  little  from  many
of  the  subterranean  weems,  excepting  that  they  are  erected
on  the  natural  surface  of  the  soil,  and  have  been  buried  by
means  of  an  artificial  mound  heaped  over  them."t

According  to  Mr.  Bateman,  who  has  recorded  the  sys-
tematic opening  of  more  than  four  hundred  tumuli,  (a  very
large  proportion  of  which  were  investigated  in  his  presence),
and  whose  opinion  is,  therefore,  of  great  value,  "  the  funda-
mental design  of  them  {i.e,,  the  British  tumuli),  with  the
excq)tion  of  the  very  few  chambered  or  galleried  mounds
in  Berkshire,  Wiltshire,  and  Ireland,  etc.,  as  New  Gbange,
Wayland  Smith's  Gave,  XJleybury  and  others,  and  those  of
the  incalculably  later  Saxon  period,  is  pretty  much  the  same
in  most  places;  the  leading  feature  of  these  sepulchral
mounds  is,  that  they  enclose  either  an  artless  stone  vault,  or
chamber,  or  a  stone  chest,  otherwise  called  a  Kistvaen,  built
with  more  or  less  care ;  and,  in  other  cases,  a  grave  cut  out
more  or  less  below  the  natural  surface,  and  lined,  if  need  bC)
*  Crania  Britannica,  Lc  Part  2,  6,         f  Wilaon,  Lc.  yoI.  i.,  p.  116.


92  OBJECTS  BTJRIKD  WITH  THE  DEAD

with  stone  slabs,  in  which  the  body  was  placed  in  a  perfect
state,  or  reduced  to  ashes  by  fire.''*

The  care  with  which  the  dead  were  interred,  and  the
objects  buried  with  th^n,  have  been  regarded  as  proying  the
existence  of  a  belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  in  a
material  existence  after  death.

"That  the  ancient  Briton,"  says  Dr.  Wilson, f" lived  in
the  belief  of  a  future  state,  and  of  some  doctrine  of  proba-
tion and  of  final  retribution,  is  apparent  from  the  constant
deposition  beside  the  dead,  not  only  of  weapons,  implements
and  personal  (»iiaments,  but  also  of  vessels  which  may  be  pre-
sumed to  have  contained  food  and  drink.  That  his  ideas  of
a  friture  state  were  rude  and  degraded,  is  abundantly  mani-
fest from  the  same  evidence."  ^ '    .' .     .-  '  *

But  it  is  very  far  from  being  "  constantly  "  the  case,  that
the  dead  were  so  well  suppUed  with  what  we  call  the  neces-
saries of  life ;  indeed,  it  is  quite  the  exception,  and  not  the
rule.  Thus,  out  of  more  than  250  interments  described  by  Sir
R.  Colt  Hoare  in  the  first  volume  of  his  great  work  on  Ancient
Wiltshire,  only  18  had  any  implements  of  stone,  only  31  of
bone,  67  of  bronze,  and  11  of  iron ;  and  while  pottery  was
present  in  107,  more  than  60  of  these  contained  only  sepul-
chral urns,  intended  to  receive  the  ashes  of  the  dead,  and
certainly  never  meant  to  hold  food.  So  far,  however,  as
stone  implements  are  concerned,  I  must  confess  that  Sir  R,
C.  Hoare  appears  to  have  overlooked  the  ruder  instruments
and  weapons.  I  will,  therefore,  rely  principally  on  the
evidence  of  Mr.  Bateman,  one  of  the  most  experienced  and
carefrd  of  barrow-openers.

Although  a  large  number  of  the  interments  described  by
him  had  been  already  examined,  there  were  297  which  had
not  been  previously  disturbed,  and  though  he  carefrdly  men-
tions even  the  rudest  bit  of  chipped  flint,  there  are  no  less

*  Bateman,  Ten  Yean*  Diggings,  p.  zi.  f  /.0.  toI.  i.,  p.  498.


NOT  ALWAYS   IIVTBNDED   FOR  ACTUAL  USE.  93

than  100  cases  without  any  implement  at  all,  either  of  stone
or  metaly  and  the  drinking-yessels  and  food-yases  were  only
about  40  in  nmnber.  Moreoyer,  lest  it  should  be  supposed
that  these  ill-proyided  interments  were  those  of  poor  persons
or  enemies,  we  will  leaye  all  these  out  of  consideration.  This
we  can  eoEoly  do.  We  may  be  sure  that  these  tumuli,  which
must  haye  required  much  labor,  were  only  raised  iu  honor  of
the  rich  and  great ;  though  they  may  haye  served^  and,  no
doubt,  often  did  serye,  afterwards,  as  burial  places  for  the
poor.  But  it  is  ahnost  always  easy  to  distinguish  the  primary
interment ;  for  though  there  are  some  few  cases  in  which  the
original  occupaut  has  been  ignominiously  ejected  from  his
graye  to  make  room  for  a  successor,  these  instances  are  rare,
and  can  generally  be  detected,  while  the  secondary  interments
are  usually  situated  either  aboye  the  first,  or  on  the  sides  of
the  tumulus.  The  same  feeling  which  made  our  ancestors
prefer  to  bury  their  dead  iu  a  pre-existing  tumulus,  generally
preyented  them  from  desecrating  the  earlier  interments.

In  the  following  tables,  then,  I  haye  recorded  the  primary
interments  only ;  the  first  column  contains  the  name  of
the  tumulus,  the  succeeding  nine  indicate  the  disposition
of  the  corpse,  and  the  articles  found  therewith,  while  the
last  is  reseryed  for  any  special  remarks.  Out  of  139  iuter-
ments,  only  105  had  any  implements  or  weapons,  and  only
35  were  accompanied  by  any  pottery  that  can  haye  held
either  food  or  drink.  Moreoyer,  if  we  examine  the  nature
of  the  implements  which  were  deposited  with  the  dead,  we
shall  find  that  they  are  far  from  representing  complete  sets
of  tools  or  ornaments.  The  rarity  of  bronze  in  tombs  is
perhaps  not  surprising;  but  to  men  so  practised  as  our
predecessors,  it  must  haye  been  an  easy  matter  to  make  a
rude  arrow-head,  or  a  flint  flake.  Yet  some  of  the  corpses
are  accompanied  by  but  one  single  arrow-head,  others  by  a
small  flint  flake ;  some,  again,  by  a  single  scraper.


TABULATED


EH
•A

pa


13


1^


il

I  Is


Ii  1

||2


^1


Sill
lis;


1   %\


''i'%     ?  I  I  II     I    'III'  llJg  '-


III


:MJ


'  'Sta'


jl


1,1

i^fPIJ^lM   -.p  ,41:


I  I  h


«     II:


Miil_L


II  '^'


-UUi


1 1  ^'  ^^


i  d  III  II


I^TTERMENTS.


95


o


II


I


la  a;


Pi

If

la


IS

8


Hi


ill

P.9       S  0)  «


I        I

9      -^

SI  l|

I  fill
I  f Si


I


II

JS  o

•a

^    -a
Si

•3
a


SIJI


I


3


^         n     00    -C


ri^^


SI


Di

S

D

to


be


^^S


s


■  2

1^


I


«3


I


35

pao


^m  I  ^11     II II II  =  =  III  d  =  =  =  II  ^1 '  'i


a  ' '  •

W*       •       •       m
»«       •       •       •


•«   •    «^  •  •


•  •     «     •

•  •     •     •

•  •     •     •


•     •     •  g


«   «   ■
*   «   *
»   «   •

1    :    :  :
1    .    .  .

•  •     •

•  •     •

•  •     •

*  «   •

*  *    a

:    :    :  :

a   •    •   •

•  •   •
■     •   •

•  •   •

•    •    •
«    •    «

•  •      •

•  *      •

1   .   .   .
1   .   .   .

HI

•  •

•  •

•  •     •

•  •     •

•  •     •

•  •     •     •

•  •     •     •


m


J25


GQ


•      •  •      •


..t

:  :te


■■      •  •     •

•  •         3      >  *     •

•  •  w        •  •        •


■       •


.1 .


g

te  :  *  :


■      ■      •      •


•    •*n       K  C    *    "    •

•  "S  5s  •  ■  •


•  •       ■   •       •   •
■    •       •   •       •   •

•  •       •   •       •   «


»  ■  •  •
■  •  »  ■
•   •   •   ■


•  •       •   ■

•  •       •   •
»   •       •   •


1


•  •  •
■  •  •

•  •  •


■      •


■•■  i-


:  o  a

o  •


•  •      «      •
«     •     •     •

•  •     •     «


•      ■      •


I;
I


•J


:'  :d


^^If  ll


ao<


II


I,


«  «  8   :
TTT

Oi  P<  Mi     •


QOODao


i   ^

§      .S

p^

.sir


I*  *     '  *     *

'=■  II  r


^1


13  S


n   i8€


^M       W^       •0<0


■|


HI  I


!G


:  :  :    aS

•     •      •        ••J  ^^


£     M

|.:««


•       «


!'■


*  3    •


:Q  :


•  •       •■       ••       ••       av           •        »        9        m                  a««a«a«           •••       a

•  •       ••       a»       ••       ••           aaaa       •••«•••           a»a       •

•  •       ••       •*       ••       ••           aaaa       •■••••a           aaa       a

•  *       ••       •           Sa       •••       aaaa       aaaa«aa               •           »
«•       ••       •           ••       waa       aaa*       a*a«**a               *           %

•  a       ••      •          ••       •••       aaaa       aaaaaaa              •          «

•  ■           •           •                          a       aaaa           aaaaaa           •••

•  a          •          a                        aaaa*          aa*aaa          aa*

•  •          •          a                        aaaa*          aaaaaa          aa«

a          ••••««a|                 •                               •|a«
•          aaa****!                 •                               ala*

96


TABULATED


OD

Id


i


I


'Si

5j»


I


a-


«-s


*   I  •

III


S


I      I


t


o

n


o


S.


s

I

•a

e


5   .


s


8

c


€
$


I


ll .  ^
Jli  I

a    A*     H


'1810


O

00

g


k


o


i


■■6S  S-3333


■33    •  •  -333    =33  3  3  • '  •  •    -5    =  =


•       •       ■


:te

I


■t: — ; — r


..S

:  :  bo


■      •      «


:bo


I

60


•  •        •  a#

•  »      •  n

•  •      ■  ^^


*      *     flk


Q


•  •      •

•  •      •

•  ■


•I'


•I


9>


•  •       •    Mi  _^_^       •       •       •       ■       •         «^       •••••  ••■  •

•  •       •    M  T?       •••••  a«***a  ••■  •

•  «       *^P*TSS       «       ■       •       •  ^^       •••••  ■•■  •


S'^i


s
•a


^?


*  a    *       a

■fi  •  S


'■  i


:  z-g     S


•   ■   •


p. . .


I


"1

«  bo


1


■iai    ■

lill


•  "83  •

=  g

-1^


i


'KirxHzoNa

KOIXIHOd


•  •        •

•  •        •

•  •        •


I

:  I'd


I


•ll


'1  =

•S'd
ll


:  <  ^  cQ-^  £■


•■o

ill


•    Ma  •


•       •       •       «    A

•   •    •    "3


•1    fJS^        •


ti  I  ="  -"^


'-is


^8


O.C   Si


•  •••••

■     •••••

•  ••■••


Si
8


*aaaKu.xx


'XKHAfl


•  •      •      •      •
»      ■      •      •      •

•  •      •      •      *


•  ■      •      •

•  •      ■      ■

•  •      ■      •


•  •      •

•  •      •

•  •      ■


•  •      ■

•  •      •

•  •      •


— I


aHJOTHXKOa


■       •       •


m        •        •        •    ^\        •


•      •      ■


|5


^  ::  :$l]  :::::::  :      :S  :  :  :

SIS  :?-^


'  lllsii  IP  I  llll


H    n


;8St    SS8S«8SSoSS9?9    999tSI^9    9SsS    S    SS:SS;s    S


ss


Ill

i


i   1

111


;;; ;;;;  ihM  i

EEEEEEE     1     E      E    ||      E  E  E  E  E 1  E  r|  i      i

nuii!!!!!!!!!!!!^!!

1,;;;;;  ;;i;;;;;

•M;E::      !      '.      ■      :  >    ji-nMi  =  :      !

;■;■■;:    =    i    ■    ■  =  g  r ;  =  ■ ;  e  n  •    i

;;;:  ::::.  ii

!■  ^  ■  It!   1

.liliilf]:

;-  ^^'  1     ■•' hllll  ^  \  '  '\  IHh--l  ■■

:  !  :      ;  E  :      f           :  E  |  M  E      E      |

■■:■■■    ■    ■    ■    ■  ■    :■■■■;■■;;    i

:EE      III      E           ||,E|E      E      ,

E|EEEE      1      E      1      |E      EEEe|||||e      ,

E||      EEE      E           ,E.|E|      |      i

E  E  EEEE      E      E      E      EE      E  |  EE  E  EEEEE      |

'a 'Wis    Aii  '  '

iJ-iiil  111  if-

;;;;;;  : ;  ; ;:  :;;|;p

3SS    88£    c:  SR^ESEK    S    C    I


98  MODELS  OF   IMPLEMENTS  SOMETIMES  BURIED.

Thus,  then,  there  seems  to  have  been  no  intention  of  de-
positing with  each  corpse  a  complete  set  of  implements.
The  barrow  on  Gronkstone  Kill,  for  instance,  contained  the
skeleton  of  a  man,  with  whom  had  been  buried  the  burnt  bones
of  some  one,  probably  a  slave,  or  perhaps  a  wife,  who  had  been
sacrificed  at  his  grave,  and  yet  the  only  implement  found
with  him  was  a  "circular  instrument,"  probably  a  flint
scraper,  or  a  slingstone.  Again,  the  mound  known  as  "  Cow
Low"  contained  only  a  bone  pin.  The  afiectionate  relatives
who  heaped  up  this  tumulus  would  certainly  not  have  sent
their  dead  sister  into  the  new  world  with  nothing  but  a  bone
pin,  if  they  had  thought  that  the  things  they  buried  with
her  could  be  of  any  use.  Even  the  great  tumulus  at  Arbor
Low  contained  only  a  bone  pin,  a  piece  ai  iron  pyrites,  a
kidney  shaped  instrument  of  flint,  and  two  vases.  It  would
be  easy  to  multiply  illustrations,  and  it  is,  I  think,  suffi-
ciently evident  that  the  articles  found  in  the  graves  cannot
seriously  be  considered  as  affording  any  evidence  of  a  definite
belief  in  a  ^tnre  state  of  existence,  or  as  having  been  in-
tended for  the  use  of  the  dead  in  the  new  world  to  which
they  were  going.  Moreover,  there  is  a  well-marked  spe-
ciality in  each  case,  which  seems  to  show  that  these  rude
implements,  far  from  being  the  result  of  a  national  belief,
are  simply  the  touching  evidences  of  individual  affection.

Li  some  few  cases,  again,  small  models  of  weapons  have
been  founds  in  lieu  of  the  weapons  themselves.  Li  modem
Esquimaux  graves  small  models  of  kajaks,  spears,  etc.,  are
sometimes  buried,  and  a  similar  fact  has  been  observed  in
Egyptian  tombs.  Mr.  Franks  informs  me  that  much  of
the  jewellery  found  in  Etruscan  tombs  is  so  thin  that  it
can  scarcely  have  been  intended  for  wear  during  life.

We  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  ancient  tumuli
do  not  all  belong  to  one  period,  nor  to  one  race  of  men.
Excepting,  perhaps,  the   Aurignac    Cave  (which  will    be


BARRO-WB  OF  DIFFERENT  FERIODS.  99

described  in  a  subsequent  chapter)^  there  is,  indeed  no  known
interment  which  can  be  referred,  with  any  reasonable  pro-
bability, to  the  PalBeolithic  age.  Still  it  was  the  examination
of  the  tumuli  which  first  induced  Sir  B.  Colt  Hoare,  and
other  archsBologists,  to  adopt  for  Northern  Europe  the
diyision  into  three  great  periods,  already  indicated  by
ancient  writers.  In  Denmark,  especially,  there  was  sup-
posed to  be  so  sharp  and  well-marked  a  distinction  between
the  txunidi  of  the  Stone  age  and  those  of  the  Bronze
period,  that  the  use  of  bronze  might  be  considered  as
having  been  introduced  by  a  new  race  of  men,  who  rapidly
exterminated  the  previous  inhabitants,  had  entirely  dif-
ferent burial  customs^  and  were  altogether  in  a  much
higher  state  of  civilisation.  It  was  stated  that  the  tumidi
of  the  Stone  age  were  generally  surrounded  by  a  circle
of  great  stones,  and  contained  chambers  formed  of  enor-
mous blocks  of  stone,  and  that  the  dead  were  buried
in  a  contracted  or  sitting  posture,  with  the  knees-  brought
up  under  the  chin,  and  the  arms  folded  across  the  breast.
On  the  contrary,  the  burial  places  of  the  Bronze  age
were  described: as  having  ''no  circles  of  massive  stones,
no  stone  chanibers;  in  general,  no  large  stones  on  the
bottom,  with  the  exception  of  stone  cists  placed  together,
which,  however,  are  easily  to  be  distinguished  from  the
stone  chambers ;  they  consist,  as  a  general  rule,  of  mere
earth,  with  heaps  of  small  stones,  and  always  present  them-
selves to  the  eye  as  mounds  of  earth,  which,  in  a  few  rare
instances,  are  surrounded  by  a  small  circle  of  stones,  and
contain  relics  of  bodies  which  have  been  burned,  and  placed
in  vessels  of  clay  with  objects  of  metal."  *

Thus,  therefore,  the  barrows  of  the  age  of  Bronze  appeared
to  be  distinguished  horn  those  of  the  earlier  period,  not  only
by  the  important  fact,  that,  ''  instead  of  the  simple  and  uni-

*  WoiMae'i  FrimeTal  Antiquities,  p.  93.


100         DirFicxji.Tr  of  dstsbionikg  the  period

form  implementa,  and  ornaments  of  stone,  bone^  and  amber,
we  meet^  suddenly,  with  a  number  and  yariety  of  splendid
weaponsy  implements,  and  jewels  of  bronze,  and  sometimes,
indeed,  with  jewels  of  gold;''*  but  also  because  the  con-
struction of  the  tumuli  themselves  was  different  in  the  two
periods ;  and  the  corpse,  whidi,  in  the  Stone  age,  was  always
buried  in  a  contracted  posture,  was  in  the  Bronze  age  always
burnt.  Subsequent  investigations,  however,  have  furnished
the  Danish  antiquaries  rather  with  exceptions  to,  than  con-
firmations of,  this  generalisation ;  and,  on  the  whole,  it
must  be  admitted  that  we  are  not  acquainted  with  any  ex-
ternal differences  by  which  the  tumuli  of  the  Stone,  Bronze,
and  Iron  ages  can  with  certainty  be  distinguished  from  one
another.  The  contents  of  the  graves  are,  however,  more  in-
structive. Eventually,  no  doubt,  the  human  remains  them-
selvefl^  and  eq)ecially  the  skulls,  will  prove  our  best  guides;  but
at  present  we  do  not  possess  a  sufficient  number  of  trustworthy
descriptions  or  measurements,  to  justify  us  in  drawing  any
generalisation  from  them,  exceptuig,  perhaps,  this,  that  the
skulls  found  with  bronze  in  some  cases  closely  resemble  those
discovered  in  graves  containing  only  stone  implements ;  from
which  we  may  infer  that,  even  if  tthe  use  of  bronze  was  intro-
duced by  a  new  and  more  civilised  race,  the  ancient  inhabitants
wete  probably  not  altogether  exterminated.  The  pottery  does
not  %t  present  help  us  much ;  that  found  in  company  with
bronze  is  coarse,  ill-burnt,  hand-made,  and,  in  form,  ornamen-
tation, and  material,  closely  agrees  with  that  which  occurs  in
graves  containing  stone  implements  only.  We  too  often  see
that  tumuli  are  referred  to  the  Stone  age  because  they  contain
one  or  two  implements  made  of  that  material.  This,  how-
ever, is  a  very  unsafe  deduction.  We  know  that  stone  was
extensively  used  thiaoughout  the  Bronze  age;  and,  indeed,
out  of  '3/7  tumuli  m  which  Mr.  Bateman  found  objects  of

*  WonaM^ftPrimeral  AntiquitieB,  p.  24.


TO  WHICH  A  XmitTLtTS  BELONGS.


101


bronze,  no  less  than  29  contained  also  skme  implem^its>
many  of  M^iich  were  extremely  rude.  Evidently,  therefore,
the  mere  presence  of  one  or  two  objidctB-  of  stone  is  in  itself
no  sufficient  reason  for  referring  any  given  interment  to  the
Stone  age.  The  following  tabular  stateni^t  of  297  inter-
ments recorded  by  Mr.  Bateman  wfll^  however^  I  think,  be
fbnnd  interesting : —


COKPSB.

•tmxL.

DCPLfflOINTS.

COMTRAGTSS.

BVXMT.

RXTSlfDSS.

MMRIOM
VKCXBTAIK.

None  .    .
Stone  ..    •
Bronze     •
Inm

27
53
16
2     .

63
48

3

3

2

i

14

7
31

7
7

100

134

87

26

Total    .

97

124

24

52

29^

These  interments  are  all  from  the  counties  of  Derby,  Staf-
ford, and  York*.  In  his  work  on  Ancient  Wiltshire,  Sir  K.
C.  Hoare  records  the  examination  of  267  interments,  which
may  be  tabulated  in.  a  similar  manner  as  follows : —


CORPSE.

TOTAL.

niFLEHENTS.

OOMTBAOTSO.

B17B1IT.

SXTSKDSD.

rosxnoH

VKCSBTAIK.

*         *       (13          *

9
2
4

160

5

49

3
1

2

7

12
1
8
4

184

9
63
11

Total    .

15

214

13

26

267

We  see  that  in  this  latter  table  nearly  all  the  cases  of
bronze  were  in  interments  preceded  by  cremation,  but  in


102


BTATISnCS.


the  northern  interments  the  reverse  ib  the  case;  and,  89
regards  Wiltshire,  if  we  are  to  regard  cremation  as  a  test  of
the  Brcmze  age,  we  must  refer  ahnost  the  whole  of  these
intonnents  to  that  period.  I  confess  that  I. am  somewhat
inclined  to  do  so.  No  less  than  270  tumuli  cluster  round
Stonehenge,  ctnd  it  seems  most  probable  that  the  dead  were
brought  from  a  distance,  to  lie  near  the  ^eat  temple.  Is3t
this  case,  the  great  majority  of  the  tumuli  belong,  therefore,  .
to  one  period,  that,  namely,  at  which  the  temple  was  held
sacred.  Some  few,  indeed,  may  be  referable  to  earlier  or
later  times,  but  as  out  of  152  of  these  interments,  which  were
examined  by  Sir  R.  C.  Hoare,  no  less  than  39  c(»itained
objects  of  bronze,  I  am  disposed  to  regard  the  whole  group
as- belonging  to  the  Bronze  period.  Now  in  these  152  cases
the  corpse  was  contracted  in  4  only,  and  extended  in  3.  In
16  the  disposition  of  the  corpse  was  not  ascertained,  and  in
no  less  than  129  it  had  been  burnt.

If  we  combine  the  observations  of  Sir  B.  C.  Hoare  and
Mr.  Bateman,  we  shall  obtain  the  following  table : —


IMPLEMENTS.

CORPSE.

COMnUCTSD.

BUKKT.

xxTxinnu).

POSITIOH
VMCKKTAnr.

TOTAL.

None  .     .
Stone  .     .
Bronze     .
Iron     .    ..

Total    .

36

55

19

2

223

53

59

3

6

3

7

21

19
32
15
11

284

143

100

37

112

338

37

77

564

Thus,  out  of  37  graves  containing  iron  weapons  or  imple-
ments, the  corpse  was  certainly  extended  in  21  cases,  and
probably  so  in  several  others;  while  out  of  no  less  than
527  cases  in  which  iron  was  not  present,  the  corpse  was
extended  only  in  16,  the  proportion  being  at  least  iVths


TREATMENT  OF  THE  OORPSE.  103

in  the  one  case,  and  only  -^V^  ^  ^^^  other.  On  the  whole
we  may  certainly  conclude  that  this  mode  of  burial  was
introduced  at  about  the  same  period  as  the  use  of  iron.

As  regards  the  habit  of  burning  the  dead,  the  eyidence  is
less  conclusive.  Out  of  a  himdred  cases,  indeed,  of  graves
characterised  by  the  presence  of  bronze,  the  corpse  appears  to
have  been  buried  in  a  contracted  posture  nineteen  times  only,
in  an  extended  position  only  seven  times.  It  is  evident,
therefore,  that  during  the  Bronze  age  the  dead  were
generally  burnt.  Possibly  the  graves  in  which  a  contracted
skeleton  was  found  together  with  objects  of  bronze,  may
have  belonged  to  the  commencement  of  the  period,  and  to
representatives  of  the  earlier  race.  It  is  true  that  there
are  many  cases  in  which  interments  by  cremation,  if  I  may
use  such  an  expression,  contain  no  weapons  or  objects  of
bronze.  We  know,  however,  that  this  metal  must  always
have  been  expensive ;  and  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose
that  many,  if  not  most,  of  these  interments  may  belong
to  the  Bronze  age,  although  no  objects  of  metal  occurred
in  them.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  Neolithic  Stone  age  it
was  usual  to  bury  the  corpse  in  a  sitting,  or  contracted
posture ;  and,  in  short,  it  appears  probable,  although  far  from
being  satisfactorily  established,  that  in  Western  Europe  this
attitude  is  characteristic  of  the  Stone  age,  cremation  of  that
of  Bronze;  while  those  cases  in  which  the  skeleton  was
extended  may  be  referred,  with  little  hesitation,  to  the  age
of  Iron.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the
evidence  is  very  far  from  conclusive ;  and  we  must  remember
that  in  Anglo-Saxon  times  the  dead  were  burned  by  some
tribes,  and  buried  by  others.

Although  the  mere  presence  of  a  few  flint  flakes,  or  other
stone  implements,  is  certainly  no  sufficient  reason  for  referring
any  given  tumulus  to  the  Stone  age;  the  case  is  di£ferent


104  DESCRIPTION  OP  A

where  a  large  number  of  objects  baye  been  found  togetber ;
for  instance,  I  have  'in  my  collection  a  group  of  stone  imple-
ments, consisting  of  fourteen  beautifully  made  axes,  wedges,
cbisels,  spear-beads,  etc.,  and  more  tban  sixty  capital  flakes,
wbicb  were  all  foimd  togetber,  in  one  of  tbe  large  Danish
sepulchral  chambers  on  the  Island  of  Moen,*  and  have  been
described  by  M.  Boye.  The  tumulus  had  a  circumference  of
one  hundred  and  forty  ells,  and  a  height  of  about  eight  ells.
It  is  probable  that  it  had  been  surrounded  by  a  circle  of
stones,  for  M.  Jensen,  the  owner,  remembered  that,  many
years  before,  the  northern  side  had  been  surrounded  by  a  row
of  stones  standing  close  together.  None  of  them^  however,
at  present  remain.  Unfortunately,  M.  Boye  was  not  present
when  they  began  to  remove  the  tumulus ;  still  he  thinks  that
the  account  given  to  him  may  be  relied  on  with  safety.
M.  Jensen  began  to  dig  on  the  east  side  of  the  Low^  and
fhe  first  thing  which  he  came  to  was  a  jar,,  which  he  un-
fortunately broke.  It  contained  burnt  bones  and  a  bronze
pin,  the  head  of  which  was  omamelited  with  concentric
lines.  Towards  the  S.S.E.  was  found  a  cist,  about  an  ell  long,
and  formed  of  flat  stones.  In  it  were  burnt  bones,  a  bent
knife,  and  a  pair  of  pincers  two  inches  in  length ;  both  these
objects  were  of  bronze.  Not  £gu*  from  this  cist  was  another
urn,  containing  burnt  bones,  with  several  objects  of  bronze,
namely,  a  knife,  four  inches  in  length,  part  of  a  small  sym-
bolical sword,  and  two  fragments  of  an  awl.  It  is  evident
that  these  three  interments  belonged  to  the  Bronze  age,
mH  also  that  they  were  secondary,  that  is  to  say,  that  they
belonged  to  a  later  date  than  the  original  sepulchral  chamber,
over  which  the  timiulus  had  oeen  made.

The  sepulchral  chamber  itself  (fig.  101),  lay  north  and
south,  was  of  an  oval  form,  about  eight  and  a  half  ells  in

*  Annaler  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed  og  Historie,  1858,  p.  202.


tiANlbH  TXTMULtJS.


106


lengthy  and  twenty  and  a  half  in  circumference^,  and  abont
two  and  a  half  in  height.  The  walla  consisted  of  twelve  yery
large,  unhewn  stones^  which^  however^  did  not,  in  most  cases,,
touch  one  another,,  but  left  intervals  which  were  filled  up  by
smaller  stones.  The  roof  was  formed  by  five  great  blocks,,
the  spaces  between  them  being  filled  up.  by  smaller  ones.
The  passage^  which  was  on.  the  east  side>  was  five  ells  long
and  one  ell  broad>  and  was  formad  by  eleven  side  stones,,  and
three  roof  stones.  At  the  place  (a)  was  on  each  side  a  smaller
8tone>  which,  in  conjunction,  with  another  on  the  floor  between
thein,.  formed  a  sort  of  threshold,,  probably  indicating  the


Via.  m.


Wj^


S

Plan  of  ttae>  duunlter  litft  Daniolk  Tmnuliu  in  llMa.

place  where  the  door  stood.  Similar  traces  of  a  doorway  have
been  found  in  other  Danish  tumuli,  and  may,  perhaps,  be  taken
as  evidence  that  the  mounds  had  been  used  previously  as
houses:  at  the  time  of  the  interment,  the  construction  of
a  door  would  have  been  simply  purposeless ;  the  passage
leading  to  it  being  filled  up  with  rubbish.  The  chamber  was
filled  up  with  mould  to  within  half  an  ell  of  the  roof.    About


106  DsscaiFnoN  of  a  barbow

the  middle,  not  far  from  tke  bottom,  a  skeleton  was  ex-
tended (at  b),  with  the  head  towards  the  north.  On  the  south
side  (at  c  and  d),  occurred  two  crania,  each  of  which  lay  on  a
quantity  of  bones,  indicating  that  the  corpses  had  been
buried  in  a  sitting  posture.  At  e  was  a  similar  skeleton,
close  to  which  were  three  amber  beads,  a  beautiful  flint-
axe,  which  -did  not  seem  to  haye  been  ever  used,  a  small
unfinished  chisel,  and  some  fragments  of  pottery,  ornamented
with  points  and  lines.  At /was  another  skeleton  in  a  similar
position,  with  a  flint  flake,  an  amber  bead,  and  some  frag-
ments of  pottery.  Figs.  102,  103  represent  one  of  the  skulls
from  this  Stone  chamber.    Several  other  skeletons  were  found

Fia.  102.  Fio.  lOS.


Skull  from  a  Danish  Tnmtiliu  at  Moen.

sitting  round  the  side  walls,  but  they  had  unluckily  been
remoyed  and  thrown  away  before  the  arrival  of  M.  Boye»
With  them  were  at  least  tw^ity  different  jars  or  urns,  all
of  them  inverted,  and  prettily  decorated  with  points  and
lines.

Besides  these  objects,  the  earth  in  the  chamber  contained  five
flint  spear-heads ;  a  fragment  of  a  flint  spear  which  had  been
broken  and  worked  up  again ;  two  small  flint  chisels ;  fifty-
three  flint  flakes,  varying  from  three  to  five  and  a  half  inches
in  length;   nineteen  perfect,  and  thirty-one  broken  amber


AT  WEST  KENNKT.  107

beada,  of  Thich  tlie  greater  number  were  hammer-like,  the
rest  tubular  or  riug-sluiped.  The  pasBage  was  filled  up  by
earth,  mixed  with  fragments  of  pottery,  and  small  stones.
About  the  middle  was  a  skeleton,  with  the  head  towards  the
east,  at  the  side  of  which  were  five  flakes  and  an  amber  bead.
Close  to  the  feet  was  a  jar,  nnomamented,  and  much  ruder
than  those  found  in  the  chamber  itself.  Not  the  smallest
fragment  of  metal  was  found  either  in  the  chamber  or  in  the
passage.
.  Again,  as  a  second  case  of  the  same  sort,  I  may  mention


yltw  ta  tha  Chimtwi  iDoklDc  Ihrouth  Uia  eDtruua.

the  Long  Barrow  (fig.  104),  near  "West  Eennet,  in  Wiltshire


108  STONE   nilPLEKZin^   ASD   POTTERT

described  by  Dr.  Thnra&m.*  The  tamuluB  in  this  case  is
throe  hundred  and  thirty-eix  feet  in  length,  forty  feet  wide
at  the  west  end,  and  seTOity^five  at  the  east,  with  a  height
of  eight  feet.  The  walls  of  the  chamber  are  formed  by  six
great  blocks  of  stoDe,  and  it  opens  into  a  passage,  so  that  the
ground  jdan  Tery  closely  resembles  that  of  the  tmnnlus  jiut
described,  and,  in  fkct,  of  the  "passage  gra.Tea"  generally.


Fttnt  ImplemBite  from  tlu  Tamnliu  it  West  KbdiuL

The  chamber  and  entrance  were  nearly  filled  with  chalk-
rubble,  containing  also  bones  of  animals,  flint  implements
{figs.  105  to  108),  and  fragments  of  pottery.  In  the  chamber
were  four  skeletons,  two  of  which  appear  to  have  been  buried
in  a  sitting  posture.  In  different  parts  of  the  chamber  were
*  ArchtMlop*,  ToL  uiTiii.,  p.  lOS.


ntOV  THE  TDUULUa   AT   WEST   KSmTET.  IW

fonnd  nearly  tijree  hundred  flakes,  three  or  four  flint  ooreo,
a  whetstone,  a  scraper,  part  of  a  bone  pin,  a  bead  of  Eimme-
ridge  shale,  and  several  heaps  of  &agnients  of  pottery  (figs.


109  to  114),  belonging  ^iparoitly  to  no  lees  than  G&y  dif-
feresA  veaselB,  and  all  made  by  hand,  witii  one  doubtfid
exception.     No  trace  of  metal  was  disooTered.    The  two


110  TUiraU   OF   lf(H>EBTT  BAVAOEe.

pieces  (figs-  113)  114)  vere  found  apart  ironf  the  rest,  and
may*  perbapa,  be  of  later  origin.


Other  BJmilar  caaee  might  be  mentioned,"  in  which  tumoli
of  large  size,  covering  a  sepulchral  chamber,  constructed
with  great  labor  of  huge  blocks  of  stone,  have  contained
several  skeletons,  evidently  those  of  persons  of  high  rank^
and  accompanied  by  many  stone  implements  and  fragments
of  pottery,  yet  without  a  trace  of  '"'^tal  It  appears  reason-
able to  conclude  that  these  interments  belong  to  the  ante-
metallic  period;  especially  when,  as  in  the  first-mentioned,
case,  we  find  several  secondary  interments,  plainly  belonging
to  a  later  age,  and  although  presenting  no  such  indications
of  high  rank,  etiU  accompanied  by  objects  of  bronze.

It  may  aeem  at  first  sight  very  improbable  that  works  so
considerable  f^ould  have  been  undertaken  and  carried  out  by
nations  entirely  ignorant  of  metal.  The  burial  mound  of
Oberea,  in  Otaheiti,  was  nevertheless  tVo  hundred  and  sixty-
seven  feet  long,  eighty-seven  wide,  and  forty-four  in  height.
And  in  treating  of  modem  savages,  I  shall  hereafter  have
occasion  to  notice  other  instances  quite  as  extraordinary.

The  practice  of  burying  in  old  tumuli,  which  continued
*  Sea,  for  initaoM,  Luku,  ArdieNlogU  t.  36,  p.  217.


SEFULCHJUL  POTTERY.  Ill

eren  down  to  tlie  times  of  Charlemagae,*  has  led  to  aome
confasion,  becaoBe  objects  of  very  different  date  are  thus
liable  to  be  described  as  coming  from  one  grave  ;  yet,  on  tbe
other  hand,  it  is  very  instmctiTe,  as  there  are  several  cases
on  record,  besides  the  one  above  mentioned,  of  interments
characterised  by  bronze  being  found  above,  and  being,
therefore,  evidently  subsequent  to  others,  accompanied  by
stone  only.

On  the  whole,  however,  though  it  is  evident  that  the  objects
most  frequently  buried  with  the  dead  would  be  those  most
generally  used  by  the  Hving,  and  though  the  prevalence  of
stone  implements  proves  the  important  part  played  by  stone
in  ancient  times,  and  goes  far  to  justify  the  belief  in  a
Stone  age;  still,  the  evidence  to  be  brought  forward  on
this  point  in  the  following  chapters  will  probably  to  many
minds  seem  more  satis&ctory  ;  Fio.  iia.

and  at  any  rate  we  must  ad-
mit that  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge  there  are
comparatively  few  interments
which  we  could  with  confi-
dence refer  to  the  Neolithic
Stone  age,  however  firmly  we
may  beHeve  that  a  great  many
of  them  must  belong  to  it.

Mr.  Bateman  has  proposed
to  range  the  pottery  found  in
ancient  British  tumuli  nnder
four  different  heads — ^namely,
1.  Fms;  2.  Incense  Cups ;  3.  s^iuichni  p™.

Food  Yasea ;  4.  Drinking  Cups.     The  urns  generally  accom-

■  One  of  Ml  re^nlatioiu  ran  as  fol-      clesiie  daferantor,  et  non  ad  tomtilo*
loira: — "Jabeiniu  at  oorporaChriatuui-      pa^uionun."
oinm   Baxanonuu   ad   cftmeterU    ec-


112  SBPULCSBAL  POTTBRT.

paay  interments  by  cremation,  and  liave  either  containect,
or  been  inv^ed  over,  burnt  boman  bonea.  Tbey  are
generaUy  of  large  size,  "from  ten  to  sixteen  inches  hi^,
with  a  deep  border,  more  or  less  decorated  by  impreBsiooe  of
twisted  thongs,  and  incised  patterns  in  which  the  chevron
or  herring-bone  constantly  recurs  in  various  combinations,
ocoasiooally  relieved  by  circular  pimctures,  or  assuming  a
reticulated  appearance."  They  are  all  made  by  hand — no
trace  of  the  potter's-wheel  being  ever  found  on  them.  The
material  of  which  they  are  formed  is  clay  mixed  with  pebbles,
and  some  of  them  have  been  described  as  "sun-dried."  This
is  not  the  case  with  any  of  those  found  by  Mr.  Bateman,  who,
indeed,  considers  the  statement  to  be  altogether  a  mistake,
arising  from  the  imperfect  manner  in  which  they  were  burnt.
In  color  they  are  generally  brown  or  burnt  umber  outside,
and  black  inside.

Secondly,  The  "incense  cups,"  so  called  by  Sir  B.  Colt
Hoare.  They  differ  very  much  in  shape,  and  are  sddom
more  than  three  inches  high.  When  decorated,  the  patterns
are  the  same  as  those  on  the  urns,  but  they  are  often  left
plain.  It  is  probable  that  they  were  used  for  lamps,  as  was,
I  believe,  first  suggested  by  Mr.  Birch.

"  The  third  division  includes  vessels  of  every  style  of  oma-


V«hIi  fmn  ■  Tunulu  it  Arbor  Low.

ment,  &om  the  rudest  to  the  most  elaborate,  but  nearly  alike


BBPVLCHBAL  FOTIEBT.  113

in  size,  and  more  difficult  to  aasign  to  a  deteimiuate  pMiod

than  any  other,  from  the  fact  of  a  ooan^and  a  well-fiiushed

one  having  sereral  times  been  Vi*-  ">-

found  in  company."    The  above

woodcuts  represent  two  vessels

fonod  in  a  barrow  on  the  circle

at  Arbor  Low,  in  Derbyshire.

Fourthly,  "The  drinking-cups'
(fig.  118)  are  g^ierally  from  six
and  a  half  to  nine  inches  high,
of  a  tall  shape,  contracted  in  the
middle,  globular  below,  and  ex-  |
pending  at  the  mouth  :  they  are
carefully  formed  by  hand,  of  fine
clay,  tempered'  with  sharp  sand,
and  well  baked;  the  walls  are  ]
thin,    averting    about    three-
eighths  of  an  inch,  light  brown  """^^  '^'■
outside  and  grey  within."     Th^  are  generaUy  much  orna-
mented and  usually  accompany  well-made  fliut  implements ;
but  in  some  cases  bronze  awls  have  been  found  with  them.
Mr.  Bateman  considere  that  the  greater  number  belong  to  the
ante-metallic  period.

Ifnmerous  as  are  the  varieties  of  pottery  found  in  ante-
Roman  tumuli,  they  appear  (so  &r,  at  any  rate,  as  those
discovered  by  Mr.  BatemOb  are  concerned)  to  have  been  all
made  by  hand,  without  any  assistance  ^m  the  potter's  wheel ;
they  are  formed  of  clay  tempered  with  sand  and  often  with
pebbles :  they  very  rarely  have  handles,  and  epouts  seem  to
have  been  unknown ;  the  ornaments  consist  of  straight  lines,
dots,  or  marks,  as  if  a  cord  had  been  impressed  on  the
soft  (Jay;  no  circular  or  curved  lines  are  ever  present,
nor  is  there  the  slightest  attempt  to  copy  any  animal  or
plant.


114  BONES  OF   ANIMALS  FOUND  IN  TUMULI.

The  reDQAins  of  mammals  found  with  ancient  human  reUea
hare  acquired  greatly  increased  interest,  since  the  admirable
researches  of  the  Damsh  and  Swiss  zoologieo-arelueologists,
and  especially  of  Steenstrup  and  Riitimeyer,  by  whose  skilful
cross-examination  much  yaluable  and  unexpected  eyidenoe
has  been  elicited,  from  materials  of  most  unpromising  ap*
pearance.  Much,  however,  as  we  may  regret,  we  cannot
wonder  at  the  fact,  that  not  only  the  earlier  aretueologists,
but  even  Mr.  Bateman  himself,  paid  so  little  attention  to  the
non-human  bones  met  with  in  their  researches.  It  would  be
yery  interesting  to  ascertain  what  animals  were  in  a  state  of
domestication  in  Northern  Europe  during  the  Stone  age:
some  archsBologists,  as,  for  instance.  Professor  Steenstrup,
belieye  the  dog  to  haye  been  at  that  period  the  oioly  animal
domesticated;  others,  on  the  contrary,  consider  the  cow,
sheep,  pig,  and  goat,  if  not  the  horse,  to  haye  been  at  that
early  period  domesticated  in  the  North.  This  appears  to
haye  been  the  case  in  Switzerland,  as  &r,  at  jmy  rate,  as
regards  the  cow.  In  the  contents  of  British  barrows,
''bones"  of  quadrupeds  haye  been  frequently  obsenred;
but  it  is  difficult  to  form  any  opinion  as  to  whether  they
belonged  to  wild  or  tame  indiyiduals.

As  &T,  howeyer,  as  the  horse  is  concerned,  we  maj  pro-
bably assume  that  all  the  remains  belong  to  a  domesticated
race,  for  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  any  wild  horses
existed  in  Qreat  Britain  at  a  period  so  recent*  I  haye
thought^  therefore,  that  it  might  be  of  interest  to  point  out
the  class  of  grayes  in  which  bones  or  teeth  of  horses  were
found.  In  Mr.  Bateman's  yaluable  works  there  are,  alto-
gether, twenty-eight  cases ;  but  of  these,  nine  were  in  tumuli
which  had  been  previously  opened,  and  in  one  case  no  body
was  found.  Of  the  remaining  eighteen,  five  were  tumuli
containing  iron,  and  seven  were  accompanied  with  bronze.
In  one  more  case,  that  of  the  ''  IASb"  it  is  doubtful  whether


SSPULCHRAL  PBA«tS.      SACRIFtCES.  115

the  barrow  Iiad  not  been  disturbeoL  Of  the  renuuning  six
tmnnliy  two  contained  beautiM  drinking  yesseky  of  a  very
well  marked  type,  oertainly  in  use  during  the  Bronze  age,
if  not  peculiar  to  it ;  and  in  both  these  instances,  as  well  as
in  a  thirds  the  interment  was  accompanied  with  burnt  human
bones,  suggestive  of  dreadful  rites.  Even,  howeveTi  if  these
cases  caouiot  be  referred  to  the  Bronze  age,  we  still  see  that
out  of  the  two  hundred  and  ninety-seven  interments  only
sixty-three  contained  metal,  or  about  twenty-one  per  cent.,
while  out  of  the  eighteen  cases  of  horses'  remains  tweLve,
or  about  sixty-six  per  cent.,  certainly  belonged  to  the  me-
tallic period.  This  seems  to  be  a  primd  facie  evidence  that
the  hone  was  very  rare,  if  not  altogether  unknown,  in  Eng-
land during  the  Stone  age.  Both  the  horse  and  buU  appear
to  have  been  sacrificed  at  graves  during  later  times,  and
probably  formed  part  of  the  funeral  feast.  The  teeth  of
oxen  are  so  common  in  tumtdi,  that  they  are  even  said  by
Mr.  Bateman  to  be  ''unifbimly  found  with  the  more  ancient
interments.''

The  very  fi*equent  presence  of  the  bones  of  animals  in
tumuli  appears  to  show  that  sepulchral  feasts  were  genendly
held  in  honor  of  the  dead,  and  the  numerous  cases  in  which
interments  were  accompanied  by  burnt  human  bones  tend
to  prove  the  prevalence  of  still  more  dreadfol  customs,  and
that  not  only  horses  *  and  dogs,  but  slaves  also,  were  fre-
quently sacrificed  at  their  masters'  graves ;  it  is  not  impro-
bable that  wives  often  were  burnt  with  their  husbands,  as
in  India  and  among  many  savage  tribes.  For  instance,
among  the  Feegees  it  is  usual  on  the-death  of  a  chief  to  sacri-
fice a  certain  number  of  slaves,  whose  bodies  ''are  called
'grass'  for  bedding"  the  grave.f    "It  is  probable,"  says

*  Sren  lo 'lately  aa  in  1781,  Frederick  Oasimir  was  laid  in  his  grare  with  his
danghtered  horse.    HorsB  ferales,  p.  66.
t  Maanerft  and  Customs  of  the  Feegees,  by  T.  WUUams,  1860,  toL  i.  p.  189.


116  FBE-HI8T0IUC

Mr.  Bateman,  ''  that  the  critical  examination  of  all  depoeits
of  burnt  bones  would  lead  to  much  curious  information  re-
specting the  statistics  of  suttee  and  infanticide,  both  which
abominations  we  are  unwillingly  compelled,  by  accumulated
eyidence,  to  believe  were  practised  in  pagan  Britain."  From
the  numerous  cases  in  which  the  bones  of  an  infant  and  a
woman  have  been  found  together  in  one  grave,  it  seems
probable  that  if  any  woman  died  in  childbirth,  or  while
nursing,  the  baby  was  buried  alive  with  her,  as  is  still  the
practice  among  some  of  the  Esquimaux  tribes.

I  would  particularly  urge  on  those  who  may  in  future  open
cuay  barrows —

1.  To  record  the  sex  of  the  person  buried ;  this  is  more  satis-
factorily to  be  determined  from  the  form  of  the  pelvis,  than
from  the  skull.  In  this  manner,  we  may  hope  to  determine
the  relative  position,  and  the  separate  occupations  (if  any)  of
the  two  sexes.

2.  To  observe  carefully  the  state  of  the  teeth,  from  which
we  may  derive  information  as  to  the  nature  of  the  food.

3.  To  preserve  carefully  any  bones  of  quadrupeds  that
may  be  present,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  species,  and,  in  the
case  of  the  ox  and  hog,  to  determine,  if  possible,  whether
they  belonged  to  wild  or  domesticated  individuals.

As  regards  the  pre-historic  races  of  men  we  have  as  yet
derived  but  little  definite  information  from  the  examination
of  the  tumtdi.  The  evidence,  however,  appears  to  show  that
the  Celts  were  not  the  earliest  colonisers  of  Northern  Europe.
Putting  on  one  side  the  mysterious  '^  kumbecephalic ''  skulls
which  have  been  already  alluded  to  (p.  90),  the  men  of  the
Stone  age  in  Northern  Europe  appear  to  have  been  brachy-
cephalic  in  a  very  marked  degree,  and  to  have  had  heavy,
overhanging  brows.  Many  ethnologists  are  inclined  to  be-
lieve that  the  Turanian  race,  now  represented  in  Europe  by
the  Fins,  Lapps,  and  probably  by  the  Basques,  once  occupied


RACES  OF  MEN.  117

tKe  greater  part  of  our  eontinenty  whicli  was,  however,  even
before  the  begiiming  of  historyy  wrested  from  them  by  the
Celts  and  the  Teutons.

Worsaae  declares  without  hesitation  ^'  that  the  inhabitants
of  Denmark  during  the  Stone  period  cannot  have  been  the
Fins,  whose  descendants  are  the  present  inhabitants  of
Lapland;''*  grounding  his  opinion  principally  on  the  tad
that  the  megalithic  tumuli  of  the  Stone  age  are  neyer  found
either  in  the  north  of  Sweden  or  in  Norway.  Moreover,  we
must  remember  that  the  reindeer  is  intimately  associated
with  the  Fins,  whereas  no  remains  of  this  animal  have  yet
been  found  in  our  tumuli  or  in  the  Danish  shell-mounds.

It  seems  to  me,  however,  that  we  must  wait  for  more  evi-
dence before  we  can  hope  to  solve  this  question  in  a  satis-
factory manner;  but  even  if  the  Turanian  races  did  once
spread  over  Europe,  we  ought  not  to  conclude  that  they  were
the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  our  continent.  It  is,  on  the
contrary,  very  possible  that  they  were  preceded  by  others,
and  we  may  be  sure  that  in  the  long  period  which  elapsed
between  the  commencement  of  the  Drift  period  and  that  of
the  Polished  Stone  age,  there  were  many  wars  and  rumours
of  wars,  and  very  possibly  several  changes  in  the  popu-
lation. What  these  were,  however,  we  have  at  present
absolutely  no  evidence  to  show^  and  we  can  therefore  only
confess  our  ignorance,  and  wait,  in  confident  expectation,  for
"more  light.'*

To  return  for  a  moment  to  the  tumuli,  we  may  fairly  hope
that  when  properly  questioned  they  will  not  only  answer
many  of  these  interesting  questions,  but  that  they  will  also
tell  us  many  things  which  it  would  never  occur  to  us  to
ask.  It  is  evident,  at  least,  that  when  a  sufficient  number
shall  have  been  examined  we  shall  know  many  important
facts  respecting  life  in  those  early  ages ;   we  shall  know

•  PrimeTBl  Antiquities  of  Denmark,  p.  181.


118  PRE-HISTOBIC  XAGBft  OF  MEN.

wbether  doriag  the  Stone  age  they  had  domestic  animals^
such  as  ihe^ox  and  sheep,  in  the  North,  as  would  appear
to  have  been  the  ease  in  Switzerland;  we  shall  know  in
part  what  kind  of  clothes  Aey  wore,  and  by  the  remains
foond  with  female  skeletons  we  shall  even  be  able  to  ascer-
tain, in  some  measure,  the  position  occupied  by  woman
re&reifoe  to  man*


•:-^


H9


CHAPTER  V-

THE  A^CIEST  LAKE'HABlTATIOIfS  OF   SWITZEllLAND.

IN  oonBequeaoe  of  the  extraordiaarj  dijuess  and  coldness
of  the  weather  durmg  the  winter  montha  of  1853,
the  rivers  of  SwitKerlaad  did  not  reoeive  thek  uaual
0appliefl»  and  the  water  in  tl^e  lokeo  fell  much  below  its
ordinary  level,  so  that,  in  some  places,  a  broad  strand  was
left  uncovered  along  tbe  margin.  While  iti  others  shallow
banks  were  converted  into  islands.  The  water  level  of  this
season  was,  indeed,  the  lowest  up<Ni  record.  The  lowest  level
marked  on  the  so-called  stone  of  Stafii  was  that  of  1674.;
but  in  1864  the  water  sank  a  foot.

M.  Aeppli  of  Heilen,  on  the  Lake  of  Zurich,  appears  to
have  been  the  first  to  observe  in  the  bed  of  the  lake  certain
specimens  of  human  workmanship,  which  he  justl  j  supposed
might  &roW  aootte  Hght  on  the  history  and  condition  of  the
early  inliabitaiDits*  of  Iftte  Swis»  valleys.  In  a  small  bay
between  Ober  Heilen  ssid  BoUikon^  the  inhabitants  had
taken  advantage  of  Uie  lowness  of  the  water  to  increase
their  gardens,  by  building  a  wall  along  the  new  water-line,
and  slightly  raising  the  level  of  the  piece  thus  reclaimed,  by
mud  dredged  from  the  lake.  In  the  course  of  this  dredging
tliey  found  great  numbers  of  piles,  of  deer-horns,  and  also
some  implements.  Fortunately  the  attention  of  Dr.  Keller
was  called  to  these  remains,  and  the  reaeardies  at  Meilen,
conducted  and  desmbed  by  him,  have  been  followed  by
similar  investigations  in  other  lakes,  and  have  proved  that


120        LAKE   HABITATIONS  MENTIONED  BT  HERODOTUS.

the  early  inhabitants  of  Switzerland  eonstracted  some,  at
least,  of  their  dwellings  above  the  surface  of  the  water,  and
that  they  must  have  lived  in  a  manner  very  similar  to  that
of  the  Psdonians,  as  described  by  Herodotus.*

'^  Their  dwellings/'  he  says,  ''are  contrived  after  this  man-
ner :  planks  fitted  on  lofty  piles  are  placed  in  the  middle  of
the  lake,  with  a  narrow  entrance  from  the  main  land  by  a
single  bridge.  These  piles,  that  support  the  planks,  all  the
citizens  anciently  placed  there  at  the  public  charge;  but
afterwards  they  established  a  law  to  the  following  effect:
whenever  a  man  marries,  for  each  wife  he  sinks  three^iles,
bringing  wood  from  a  mountain  called  Orbelus :  ^but  every
man  has-several  wives.  They  live  in  the  following  manner :
every  man-  has  a  hut  on  the  planks,  in  which  he  dwells,  with
a  trap<[oor  closely  fitted  in  the  planks,  and*  leading  down  to
the  lake.  They  tie  the  young  children  with  a  cord  rotind
the  foot,  fearing  lest  they  should  Ml  into  the  lake  beneath.
To  their iiorses  and  beasts  of  burd«i  they  give  fish  Sot  fodder;
of  which  there  is  such  an  abundance,  that  when  a  man  has
opened  his  trap-door,  he  lets  down  an  empty  basket  by  a
cord  into  the  lake,  and,  after  waiting  a  short  time,  draws
it  up. full  of  fish."

In  Ireland  a  number  of  more  or  less  artificial  islands  oaUed
''Grannoges"  t  (fig.- 119)  are  known  historically  to  have  been
used  us  strongholds  by  the  petty  chiefs.  They  are  composed
of  earth  land  stones,  strengthened  by  piles,  and  hove  sup-
plied the^IrisharchflBologists  wi^  numerous  ^weapons,  imple-
ments, and  bones.  From  the  GrannogoAt  Dunshauglin,  indeed,
more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty,  cartloads -of  bones  were  ob-
tained and  used  as  manure !  TheseLake-dwellings  of  Ireland,
however,  lare  lefevaUc'  to  a  much  later^period  than  those  of
Switzerland,  and  are  frequently  mentioned  in  early  history.
Thus,  according  to  Shirley,  ^*  One  Thomas  Phettiplace,  in  his

*  Torpnchore,  t.  14.  f  See  'WHde'e  Catalog:ae,  vol.  i.  p.  220.


CRANNOOES  OF*ntELAND.  121

answer  to  an  inquiry  from  the  GoYemmenty  as  to  wliat  castles
or  forts  O'Neil  hath,  and  of  what  strength  they  be,  states
(May  15,  1567) :  '  For  castles,  I  think  it  be  not  unknown
unto  your  honors,  he  trusteth  no  point  thereunto  for  his
safety,  as  appeareih  by  the  raising  of  the  strongest  castles  of  all
his  countreys,  and  that  fortification  which  he  only  dependeth

Fi^  119.


SeetiMi  of  a  Cnimogeki  ArdakflUn  Loqgli,  Botoomnon.

upon  is  in  BorHn  ffreshwater  loghes  in  his  country,  which
from  the  sea  there  come  neither  ship  nor  boat  to  approach
them :  it  is  thought  that  there  in  the  said  fortified  islands
lyeth  all  his  plate,  which  is  much,  and  money,  prisoners,  and
gages :  which  islands,  hath  in  wars-  to  fore  been  attempted,
and  now  of  late  again  by  the  Lord  Deputy  there,  Sir  Harry
Sydney,  which  for  want  of  means  for  safe  conducts  upon  the
water  it  hath  not  prevailed/  "

Again,  the  map  of  the  escheated  territories,  made  for  the
Gh)Yemment,  a.d.  1591,  by  Francis  Jobson,  or  the  '^  Piatt
of  the  County  of  Monaghan,''  preseryed  in  ^he  State  Paper
Office,  contains  rough  sketches  of  the  dwellings  of  the  petty
chiefs  of  Monaghan,  which  ^are  in  all  cases  surrounded  by
water/'  In  the  '^Annals  of  the  Four  Masters,"  and  other
records  of  early  Irish  history,  we  meet  with  numerous  in-
stances in  which  the  Crannoges  are  mentioned,  in  some  of
which  their  position  has  not  preserved  them  from  robbery
and  destruction ;  and  we  need  not,  therefore,  be  surprised  to
find  that  many  of  the  Swiss  Pfahlbauten  appear  to  have  been
destroyed  by  fire.


122         LAKS-DWELLINGS  I»*VAIIICnr8  PABTS  OF  EXJBOPE.

At  tibe  Newcastle  meeting  of  the  British  Association,  in  1863,
Lord  Lovaine  described  a  Lake-dwelling  observed  by  him  in
the  South  of  SootliEuid ;  and  in  the  ''Natural  History  Be  view"
for  July,  1863,  I  had  already  mentioned  one  in  the  North,
which,  however,  had  not  at  that  time  been  thoroughly  ex-
amined. Sir  Charles  Bunbury  has  recorded  (Quarterly  Journal
of  the  GFeological  Society,  voL  xii.  1856)  eoaae  similar  remains
found  near  Thetford,  which  have  been  described  at  greater
length  by  Mr.  Alfred  Newton,  in  an  interesting  paper  ''On
the  Zoology  of  Ancient  Europe,''  read  before  the  Cambridge
Philosophical  Society,  in  March,  1862.  In  hi#  fifth  memoir
on  the  Pfahlbauten,*  Dr.  Keller  has  described  a  Lake-dwelling
at  Peschiera,  on  the  L.  di  Garda;  and  we  are  indebted  to
MM.  B.  Oastaldi,t  P.  Strobel,  and  L.  Pigorini  for  a  de-
scription of  ruins  of  a  similar  nature,  which  have  been
found  in  Northern  Italy.  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  in  his
celebrated  work,  "Antiquit^s  Celtiques  et  Ant^diluviennee,''
mentions  certain  remains  found  in  the  peat  near  Abbeville,
which  appear  to  have  been  the  ruins  of  Lake-dweUings ;
an  observation  which  is  of  special  interest,  as  an  additional
argument  for  referring  the  Swiss  Lake-dweUings  to  the
period  of  the  peat  in  the  Somme  valley,  and  therefore  to  »i
epoch  long  subsequent  to  that  of  the  drift*hatohets.  This
infi^renoe  is  entirely  in  accordance  with  the  conclusions  de-
rived from  the  study  of  the  stone  implements  themselves.

But  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  back  to  pre-historic  times;
nor  need  we  appeal  to  doubtful  history  or  ancient  remains  for
evidence  of  the  curious  habit  of  water-dwelling.  Many  savage
or  semi-savage  tribes  live  in  the  same  manner,  even  at  the
present  day.    I  have  been  informed  by  a  friend  who  lives  at

•  Mittpheilnngen  der  Antiquaruehen  pani,  Prima  ricarca  di  Abitaxioni  la-

OeBeUadbaft  in  Znrick.    ISSS.  ewtii  nei  Laghi  di  Lombardia.    Atti

t  NoDvi  Cenni  angli  oggetti  di  Alta  della  Soc.  Italiana  di  Sdense  Natiirali,

Antiehitii  trovati  nelle  Torbiere  e  Delle  1S63.  toL  t.  p.  164.
Maniiere  dell'  Italia.    See  alio  Stop-


PILB-BWBLLIKGS  8TILL  USED  IK  YABIOUB  00UKTBIE8.      123

Salonica  ihat  the  fialienDen  of  Lake  Prasias  still  inhabit
wooden  cottages  built  orer  the  water^  as  in  the  time  of  Hei^odo-
tufl.  The  city  of  Tcherkask  also  is  built  over  the  Don.  But  it
is  in  the  East  Indies  that  this  habit  prevails  most  jextensi vely .
The  city  of  Borneo  is  altogether  binlt  upon  piles,  and  similar
constmctions  have  been  described  by  various  travellers  in
'New  Ghiinea,  Oelebes>  Solo,  CSeram,  Mindanao,  the  Caroline
Islands,  and  elsewhere.  Dampier  long  ago  mentioned  similar
dwellings  constructed  over  the  water^  and  Dumont  d'Urville,*
quoted  by  M.  Troyon,  tells  us  that  ''  Jadis  toute  la  viUe  de
Tondano  ^tait  construite  sur  le  lac,  et  Ton  ne  communiquait
d'une  maison  &  une  autre  qu'en  bateau.  Forts  de  cette  disposi-
tion, en  1810,  les  habitants  eurent  des  d^mdl^s  avec  les  Hollan-
dais,  et  roulurent  secouer  leur  joug:  ils  s'arm^rent  et  furent
battuB.  Ce  ne  fut  pas  sans  peine  qu'on  en  vint  &  bout :  il
fallut  y  porter  de  TartilleriQ  et  construire  des  bateaux  can-
noniers.  Depuis  ce  temps,  et  pour  feviter  cet  inconvenient,
on  a  d^endu  aux  indig^es  de  construire  leurs  habitations
sur  le  lac.'^  The  Bishop  of  Labuan  thus  describes  the  dwel-
lings of  the  I^aks :  *'  They  are  built  along  the  river  side,  on
an  elevated  platform  twenty  or  thirty  feet  high,  in  a  long
row;  or  rather  it  is  a  whole  village  in  one  row  of  some
hundreds  of  fidet  long.  The  platforms  are  first  framed  with
beams,  and  then  crossed  with  laths  about  two  inches  wide
and  two  inches  i^iart,  and  in  this  way  are  well  ventilated ;
and  nothing  remains  on  the  floors,  but  all  the  refuse  falls
Ijirough  and  goes  below.'^f

The  Swiss  *^  Pfa/dbauten/*  or  Lake-habitations,  have  been
described  by  Br.  Kellw,  in  five  memoirs  presented  to  the  Anti-
quarian Society  of  Zurich,  in  1854, 1858, 1860,  and  1863,  and
by  M.  Troyon,  in  a  special  work,  '^  Sur  les  Habitations  Lacus-
trm,"  1860,  in  which  the  author  giTOs  a  general  account  of

•  Yoyage  de  ^Astrolabe,  toI.  t.  p.  635.
t  Traos.  of  the  Etlmol.  Soc.,  New  Ser.,'Tol.  ii.  p.  2S.


124      PILE-DWELLINGS  FOUND  IN  MOST  OF  THE  SWISS  LAKES.

what  has  been  done  in  Switzerland,  and  compares  the  ancient
habitations  of  his  native  land,  with  the  Lake-dwellings  of  other
countries  and  times.  The  discoveries  in  Lake  Moosseedorf
have  been  described  hy  MM.  Jahn  and  TJhlmann  (Die  Pfahl-
baualterthumer  von  Moosseedorf.  Bern,  1857) ;  the  Lake-
habitation  at  the  Pont  de  Thiele  has  also  been  described  in
a  separate  memoir  by  M.  Y.  Qilli^ron  (Actes  de  la  Soci^te
jurassienne  d'Emulation.  1860) ;  and  we  owe  to  Dr.  Riiti-
meyer  two  works  on  the  animal  remains  from  the  PfSahl-
bauten,  the  first,  '' XJntersuchmig  der  Thierreste  ans  den
P&hlbauten  der  Schweiz,"  published  by  the  Antiquarian
Society  of  Zurich,  in  1860 ;  and  still  more  recently,  a  larger
work — "  Die  Fauna  der  Pfahlbauten  in  der  Schweiz."  Col-
lections of  objects  from  these  localities  have  also  been  made
by  many  Swiss  archsBologists.  The  Flora  has  been  studied
by  M.  Heer,  whose  results  are  contained  in  the  memoirs
published  by  Dr.  Keller.

Nor  must  we  omit  to  mention  M.  Morlot's  excellent  paper  in
the  "Bulletin  de  k  Soci^tfe  Vaudoise  (March,  I860),"  and  his
no  less  admirable  "Le^on  d'Ouverture  dW  cours  sur  la  haute
Antiquity  fait  &  I'Acad^mie  de  Lausanne  (Dec.  I860)."  From
the  conclusion  of  this  lecture,  indeed,  I  must  express  my  dis-
sent :  not  that  I  would  undervalue  what  M.  Morlot  calls  the
"  practical  utility  of  geology,"  nor  that  I  am  less  sanguine  as
to  the  future  advantages  of  archsBology.  Science,  how-
ever, is  like  virtue,  its  own  reward,  and  the  improvement
of  the  mind  must  be  regarded  as  the  highest  object  of
study.  But  M.  Morlot  is,  to  use  his  own  metaphor,  laboring
earnestly  in  the  vineyard,  and  is  improving  the  soil,  though,
as  in  the  old  fable,  it  may  be  in  the  fedse  hope  of  finding  a
concealed  treasure.  The  Swiss  archaeologists  have  indeed
made  the  most  of  a  golden  opportunity.  Not  only  in  the  Lake
of  Zurich,  but  also  in  Lakes  Constance,  Geneva,  Neufchatel,
Bienne,  Morat,  Sempach,  in  fact  in  most  of  the  large  Swiss


firrBucTUBs  of  the  huts.  126

lakes,  as  well  as  in  several  of  the  smaller  ones  (Inkwyl,
PfeflSkon,  Moosseedorf,  Luissel,  etc),  similar  Lake-habitations,
have  been  discovered.  In  the  larger  lakes,  indeed,  not  one,
bat  many  of  these  settlements  existed;  thus,  there  are
already  on  record,  in  Lake  Bienne,  twenty ;  in  the  Lake  of
Geneva,  twenty-four;  in  Lake  Constance,  thirty-two;  in  Lake
Neufchatel,  as  many  as  forty-six ;  on  the  whole  more  than
two  hundred ;  and  many  others,  doubtless,  remain  to  be  dis-
covered. Of  those  ah*eady  known,  some  few  belong  to  the
Iron  age,  and  even  to  Soman  times ;  but  the  greater  num-
ber appear  to  be  divided  in  almost  equal  proportions  between
the  age  of  Stone  and  that  of  Bronze.

The  dwellings  of  the  Oauls  are  described  as  having  been
circular  huts,  built  of  wood  and  lined  with  mud.  The  huts
of  the  Pileworks  were  probably  of  a  similar  nature.  This
supposition  is  not  a  mere  hypothesis,  but  is  confirmed  by  the
preservation  of  pieces  of  the  clay  used  for  the  lining.  Their
preservation  is  evidently  due  to  the  building  having  been
destroyed  by  fire,  which  has  hardened  the  clay,  and  enabled
it  to  resist  the  dissolving  action  of  the  water.  These  frag-
ments bear,  on  one  side,  the  marks  of  interlaced  branches,
while  on  the  other,  which  apparently  formed  the  inner  wall
of  the  cabin,  they  are  quite  smooth.  Some  of  those  which
have  been  found  at  Wangen  are  so  large  and  so  regular,
that  M.  Troyon  feels  justified  in  concluding  that  the  cabins
were  circular,  and  from  ten  to  fifteen  feet  in  diameter.
Though  the  architecture  of  this  period  was  very  simple,
still  the  weight  to  be  sustarned  on  the  wooden  platforms
must  have  been  considerable ;  and  their  construction,  which
must  have  required  no  small  labor,*  indicates  a  large
population.  It  would,  indeed,  be  most  interesting  if  we
could  construct  a  retrospective  census  for  these  early  periods,

•  *'  Increasing  density  of  population      production."     Bastiat,  Hannonies  of
is  equivalent  to  increasing  facility  of     Political  (Economy,  p.  12.


126  ATTEMPT  TO  MAKE  A  CENSUS.

and  M.  Troyon  has  made  an  attempt  to  do  so.  The  settle*
ment  at  Morges,  wliich  is  one  of  the  hurgest  in  the  Lake
of  G^neya,  is  1200  feet  long  and  160  broad,  giving  a
surface  of  180,000  sqiiare  feet.  Allowing  the  huts  to  have
been  fifteen  feet  in  diameter,  and  supposing  that  they  oc-
cupied  half  the  sarfieu^y  leaving  the  rest  for  gangways,  he
estimates  the  number  of  cabins  at  311 ;  and  supposing  again
that,  on  an  average,  each  was  inhabited  by  four  persons,  he
obtains  for  the  whole  a  population  of  1244.  Starting  from
the  same  data,  he  assumes  for  the  Lake  of  Neufchatel  a
population  of  about  5000.  Sixty-eight  villages,  belonging
to  the  Bronze  age,  are  supposed  to  have  contained  42,500
persons ;  while  for  the  preceding  epoch,  by  the  same  process
of  reasoning,  he  estimates  the  population  at  31,876.

So  far  as  these  calculations  rest  on  the  fragments  of  the  clay
walls,  they  must  be  regarded  as  altogether  unsatisfactory,  since
Dr.  Keller  informs  us  that  the  largest  pieces  yet  discovered
are  only  a  foot  in  their  greatest  diameter.  There  is  also  good
reason  to  believe  that  the  huts  were  not  circular,  but  rectangu-
lar. Nor  am  I  inclined  to  attribute  much  value  to  the  esti-
mates of  population  based  on  the  extent  of  the  platforms.  M.
Troyon  himself  admits  that  his  '^chiffi'es  sont  peut-fttre  un  peu
^lev^s,  en  ^gard  aux  habitations  sur  terre  ferme,  dont  il  ne
pent  itre  question  dans  ce  calcul,  et  vu  qu'on  est  encore  bien
loin  de  connaltre  tons  les  points  des  lacs  qui  ont  ^t^  occup^,''
and,  indeed,  in  the  three  years  which  have  elapsed  since  his
book  was  written,  the  number  of  Lake-villages  diBCOvered  has
been  doubled.  Moreover,  M.  Troyon  assumes  that  the  Lake-
villages  of  the  Bronze  age  were  contemporaneous,  and  that
the  same  was  the  case  with  those  belonging  to  the  Stone
age.  This  also  I  should  be  disposed  to  question ;  both  these
periods,  but  especially  the  Stone  age,  in  all  probability  ex-
tended over  a  long  series  of  years,  and  though  in  these
matters  it  is  of  course  necessary  to  speak  with  much  caution.


OOJWTRUOfiON  OF  THS   VLATtrOKUB,  137

still  if  we  are  to  make  any  aflsnmption  in  the  case,  it  would
seem  safer  to  suppose  that  in  eadi  peiiod  some  of  the  vil-
lages had  perished,  or  been  forsaken,  befcnre  others  ^ere  built.

We  might  fisel  surprise  that  a  people  so  uncivilised  should
hare  constructed  their  houses  with  immense  labor  on  the
water,  when  it  would  have  been  so  much  more  easy  to  have
built  them  on  dry  land.  But  we  have  already  seen  how,
even  in  historical  times,  such  dwellings  have  served  as  simple
and  yet  valuable  fortifications.  The  first  settlers  in  Switzer-
land had  to  contend  with  the  boar,  the  wolf,  the  bear,  and
the  urns ;  and  subsequently,  when  the  population  increased,
aad  disputes  arose,  the  Lake-habitations,  no  doubt,  acted  as
fortifications,  and  protected  man  &om  man,  as  they  had
before  preserved  him  from  wild  beasts;  still,  though  it  is
evident  that  the  security  thus  given  would  amply  compensate
tor  much  extra  labor,  it  remains  difficult  to  understand  in
what  manner  the  piles  were  driven  into  the  ground.

In  many  cases,  indeed,  settlements  of  the  Stone  age  are
characterised  by  what' are  called  '^Steinbergs,''  that  is  to  say,
artificial  heaps  of  stones,  etc.,  evidently  brought  by  the
natives  to  serve  as  a  support  to  the  piles.  In  iact,  they  found
it  easier  to  raise  the  bottom  rotmd  the  piles,  than  to  drive
the  piles  into  the  bottom.  On  the  other  hand,  some  of  these
constructions,  as,  for  instance,  those  at  Inkwyl  and  Wauwyl,
described  respectively  by  M.  Morlot  and  Col.  Suter,  more
dosely  resemble  the  Irish  Onumoge.  We  see,  therefore,
that,  as  Dr.  Keller  says,  the  Lake-dwellers  followed  two
different  systems  in  the  construction  of  their  dwellings,
which  he  distinguishes  as  "  Pfahlbauten,"  or  Pilebuildings,
and  '^  Paokwerkbauten,"  or  Crannoges:  in  the  first  of  which
the  platforms  were  simply  supported  on  piles ;  in  the  second
of  which  the  support  consisted  not  of  piles  only,  but  of  a  solid
mass  of  mud,  stones,  etc.,  with  layers  of  horizontal  and  per-
pendicular stakes,  the  latter  serving  lees  as  a  support  than


128  OONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  PLATFORMS.

to  bind  the  mass  firmly  together.  It  is  evident  that  the
'^Packwerkbau'^  is  a  much  simpler  and  ruder  affiur  than  the
''  Pfahlbaft/'  in  which  no  small  skill  must  have  been  required
to  connect  the  perpendicular  and  horizontal  piles  firmly  to-
gether. Still  the  ^^Packwerkbauten''  were  not  suitable  for
the  larger  lakes,  us  during  storms  they  would  have  been  in-
jured by  the  waves,  which  must  have  passed  harmlessly  through
the  open-work  of  the  "Pfahlbauten."  We  find,  therefore,  that
while  the  former  method  of  construction  prevailed  only  in
small  lakes  or  morasses,  the  latter  was  adopted  in  the  larger
lakes,  and  even  sometimes,  as  at  Ebersberg,  on  dry  land;  a
custom  which,  however  singular,  exists  even  at  tha  present
day,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  island  of  "Borneo.

After  having  chosen  a  fieivorable  situation,  the  first  step
in  the  construction  of  the  Lake-habitations  was  to  obtain  the
necessary  timber.  To  cut  down  a  tree  with  a  stone  hatchet
must  have  been  no  slight  imdertaking.  It  is,  indeed,  most
probable  that  use  was  made  of  fire,  in  the  same  manner  as
is  done  by  existing  savages  in  felling  trees  and  making
canoes.  Burning  the  wood  and  then  scraping  away  the
charred  portion  renders  the  task  far  more  easy,  and  the  men
of  the  Stone  period  appear  to  have  avoided  the  use  of  large
trees,  except  in  making  their  canoes.  Their  piles  were  im-
bedded in  the  mud  for  from  one  to  five  feet,  and  must  also
have  projected  from  four  to  six  feet  above  the  water  level,
which  cannot  have  been  very  difierent  from  what  it  is  at
present.  They  must,  therefore,  have  had  a  length  of  from
fifteen  to  thirty  feet,  and  they  were  from  three  to  nine  inches
in  diameter.  The  pointed  extremity  which  entered  into  the
mud  still  bears  the  marks  of  the  fire  and  the  rude  cuts  made
by  the  stone  hatchets.  The  piles  belonging  to  the  Bronze
period  being  prepared  with  metal  axes,  were  much  more
regularly  pointed,  and  the  differences  between  the  two  have
been  ingeniously  compared  to  those  shown  by  lead  pencils


BSaCBIFTION  OF  THE  HKMAINS  AT  WAXHITTL.  129

well  and  badly  cut.  To  drag  the  piles  to  the  lake,  and  fix
them  firmly,  muMt  hare  required  much  labor,  essp&oiaHj
wheti  their  number  is  considered.  At  Wangen  .alone  M.
Lohle  has  calculated  that  40,000  piles  have  been  used ;  but
we  must  remember  that  these  were  probably  not  all  planted
at  one  time,  nor  by  one  generation.  Wangen,  indeed,  was  cer-
tainly  not  built  in  a  day,  but  was,  no  doubt,  gradually  en-
larged as  the  population  increased.  Herodotus  informs  us  that
the  Pasonians  made  the  first  platform  at  the  public  expense,
but  that  subsequently  at  erery  marriage  (and  polygamy  was
permitted),  the  bridegroom  was  expected  to  add  a  certain
number  of  piles  to  the  common  support.  In  some  localities,
.as  at  Bobenhausen,  on  Lake  Pfiiffikon,  the  piles  were
strengthened  by  cross-beams.  The  pile- works  of  subsequent
jperiods  differ  little  from  those  of  the  Stone  age,  so  far  at
least  as  can  be  judged  by  the  parts  remaining,  but  the  piles
are  less  decayed,  and  project  above  the  mud  farther  th^n  :s
the  case  with  those  of  the  preceding  epoch.

Through  the  kindness  of  Col.  Suter  I  had  an  opportunity
of  examining  the  construction  of  the  Lake-dwelling  at  Wau-
wyl,  near  Zofingen,  in  the  Canton  of  Lucerne.  This  ap-
parently belonged  to  the  Stone  age,  no  trace  of  metal
having  yet  been  discovered  in  it  It  is  situated  in  a  peat
moss,  which  was  evidently  at  one  time  the  bed  of  a  shallow
lake«  By  the  gradual  growth  of  peat,  however,  the  level  has
been  raised  several  feet,  and  the  plain  has  recently  been
drained.  We  were  assisted  by  six  labourers,  who  dug  out
the  peat,  which  we  then  careMly  examined.  I  mention  this,
because  the  difference  in  the  objects  collected  from  different
Pfahlbauten,  may  probably  be,  in  part  at  least,  accounted  for
by  the  different  ways  in  which  the  search  has  been  made.  The
peat  at  Wauwyl  varies  in  thickness  from  three  to  ten  feet,
and  rests  on  a  white  bed  consisting  of  broken,  fresh-water
sheUs.     This  stratum,  though  only  a  few  inches  thick,  is

9


130  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE   REMAINS  AT  WAUWYL.

found  hi  the  old  beds  of  many  small  lakes,  and  is  frequently
mentioned  by  the  Swiss  archasologists  under  the  name  of
"weissgnind."  It  must  not,  however,  be  confounded  with
the  "  blancfond  "  of  the  larger  lakes.  The  piles  go  through
the  peat  and  the  "  weissgrund  "  into  the  soUd  ground  below.
It  is  not  easy  to  obtain  them  whole,  because  the  lower  por-
tions are  much  altered  by  time,  and  so  thoroughly  saturated  by
water,  that  they  are  quite  soft.  Col.  Suter,  however,  extracted
two  of  them;  one  was  14ft.  Gin.  in  length,  of  which  4fk.  was  in
the  peat,  and  the  remaining  10ft.  6in.  in  the  sand  beneath ;  the
other  was  only  8ft.  6in.  long,  4ft.  of  which  was  in  the  peat,
the  other  4ft.  Gin.  in  the  solid  ground.  The  piles  vary  from
three  to  five  inches  in  diameter,  and  are  always  round,  never
having  been  squared.  The  lower  part  is  very  badly  cut,  so
that  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  they  can  have  been
forced  to  so  great  a  depth  into  the  ground.

In  most  of  the  Pfahlbauten  the  piles  are  scattered,
more  or  less  irregularly,  over  the  whole  extent  of  the
settlement ;  at  Wauwyl  this  is  not  the  case,,  but  they  en-
close, as  it  were,  four  quadrangular  areas,  the  interiors  of
which  are  occupied  by  several  platforms  one  over  the  other,
the  interstices  being  filled  up  by  branches,  leaves,  and  peat.
The  objects  of  antiquity  are  not  scattered  throughout  the
peat,  but  Ue  either  on  the  layer  of  broken  shells,  which
formed  the  then  bottom  of  the  lake,,  or  in  the  lower  part  of
the  peat.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  almost  the  whole,  if  not
the  whole,  of  the  peat  has  grown  since  the  time  at  which  this
interesting  ruin  was  inhabited.  The  upper  part  had,  how-
ever, been  removed  before  our  arrival,  so  that  the  "  cultur-
chicht,"  the  layer  containing  the  objects  of  antiquity,  was  ex-
posed ready  for  examination  in  the  manner  already  described.

Some  of  the  piles  still  stand  two  or  three  feet  above  the
level  of  the  peat,  but  the  greater  number  are  broken  off
lower  down.     We  stood  on  one  of  the  upper  platforms,


WSAPOnS  AHD  mPLEHEHTS  OF  THE  L&KE-DWBLLEK8.       131

wUcli  seema  to  haTe  been  the  floor  on  vliich  the  huts  wen
erected,  and  the  beams  of  which  are  atill  perfectly  preserved.
It  was  at  first  a  question  in  what  manner  the  platforms  at
this  place  were  eappM-ted ;  whether  they  rested  like  a  raft
on  the  surface  of  the  water,  rising  and  sinking  with  it ;  or
whether  they  were  fixed,  and  rested  on  a  sort  of  artifioial
island,  ibtmed  by  the  clay,  branches,  etc.,  which  now  occupy
the  interspaces  between  the  different  platforms.  Subsequent
obeerrations,  however,  confirmed  as  they  have  been  by  dis-
coveries elsewhere,  as  for  instance,  at  Inkwyl  and  Niederwyl,
have  decided  the  question  in  favor  of  the  latter  hypothesis.

During  my  visit  to  Wauwyl  we  obtained  four  small  stone
axes,  (Hie  arrow-head,  forty  flint  flakes,  fifteen  rude  stone
hammers,  eight  whetstones,  thirty-  nt.  ito.

three  slingstones,  eight  instruments
of  bwie,  and  two  of  wood,  besides
numerous  bones,  and  a  great  quantity
of  broken  pottery.  Col.  Suter  re-
garded this  as  a  fair  average  day's
work.  Altogether,  about  350  instru-
ments of  stone  and  bone  have  been
discovered  at  Wauwyl ;  at  Moossee-
dorf  more  than  1,300,  at  Wangen
more  than  2,000,  while  M.  Troyon
estimates  that  those  at  Concise  must
have  amounted  to  25,000.

The  axe  was  pre-eminently  ike
implement  of  antiquity.  It  was
used  in  war  and  in  the  chase,  as
well  as  for  domestic  purposes,  and  swi™  sume  am.

great  numbers  have  been  found,  especially  at  Wangen  (Lake
of  Constance)  and  Concise  (Lake  of  Neufchatel).  With  a  few
exceptions,  they  were  small,  especially  wh^i  compared  with
the  magnificent  specimens  &om  Denmark ;   in  length  they


132  AXES.      KNIVES.

yaried  from  six  inches  to  one,  while  the  cutting  edge  had
generally  a  width  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  lines.  Flint  was
sometimes  used,  and  nephrite,  or  jade,  in  a  few  cases,  but
serpentine  was  the  principal  materiaL  Most  of  the  larger
settlements  were  eyidently  manu&cturing  pkces,  and  many
spoilt  pieces  and  half-finished  specimens  hare  been  found.
The  process  of  manufiu^ture  is  thus  described  by  M.  Troyon  :
After  having  chosen  a  stone,  the  first  Btq>  was  to  reduce  it
by  blows  with  a  hammer  to  a  suitable  size.  Then  grooves
were  made  artificially,  which  must  have  been  a  very  tedious
and  difficult  operation,  when  flint  knives,  sand,  and  water
were  the  only  available  instruments.  Having  carried  the
grooves  to  the  required  depths,  the  projecting  portions  were
removed  by  a  skilful  blow  with  a  hammer,  and  the  implement
was  then  sharpened  and  polished  on  blocks  c^  sandstone.

Sometimes  the  hatchet  thus  obtained  was  simply  fixed  in  a
handle  of  horn  or  wood.  Oenerally,  however,  the  whole
instrument  consisted  of  three  parts.  A  piece  of  horn,  two  or
three  inches  in  length,  received  the  stone  at  one  end,  and  was
squared  at  the  other,  so  as  to  fit  into  a  longer  handle  either
of  wood  or  horn.  These  intermediate  pieces  present  several
variations ;  some  are  simply  squared,  while  others  have  a  pro-
jecting  wing  which  rested  against  the  handle ;  some  few  are
forked  as  if  to  receive  a  wedge,  and  one  has  a  small  transverse
hole,  apparently  for  the  insertion  of  a  peg.  It  is  remarkable
that  while  in  some  places  these  horn  axe-handles  are  nimierous,
this  being  especially  the  case  at  Concise,  whence  several  hun-
dred have  been  obtained,  in  other  Lake- villages  they  are  very
scarce:  at  Wangen,  for  instance,  though  more  than  1,100  stone
axes  have  been  found,  M.  Lohle  has  as  yet  met  with  only  a
few  handles,  all  of  which  were  of  wood.  The  axes  appear  to
have  been  fastened  into  the  handles  by  means  of  bitumen.

The  stone  knives  may  be  considered  as  of  two  sorts.  Some
differ  from  the  axes  principally  in  having  their  width  greater


AKKOW-HEAIK,  aPINDLB  WHORLS,  FLINT  FLjIEES,  ETC.       133

than  thfiir  length.  la  other  cases  fiiat  flahes  were  set  in
voodea  handles  and  fosteoed,  like  the  axes,  by  means  of
bitmnen.  Saws  also  were  made  in  a  similar  manner,  but
with  their  edges  somewhat  rudely  dentated ;  we  do  not
find  in  Switzerland  any  of  the  semilunar  stone  implements,
which  are  frec^ueot  in  Demnark.  The  arrow-heads  were
made  of  fiint,  or  in  some  cases  of  rock  crystal,  and  were
of  the  usual  forma.     Spindle  whorls  Pu>.  iil

of  rude  earthenware  (dg.  121)  were
abandant  in  some  of  the  Lake-villages-
even  of  the  Stone  age.  This  indi-  ,
cates  a  certain  skill  in  wearing,  f^  I
which,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  there
is  even  more  conclusiTe  evidence.
There  are  also  found  rounded  stones,
pierced  with  one  or  sometimes  two

'  _  ,         Sptsdle  Vhorl  from  KobmluiiHil

holes.    The  use  of  these  is  uncertain,  (^k™  w*)-

bat  they  may  perhaps  have  been  used  to  sink  fishing  lines.

The  flint  flakes  offer  no  peculiarities ;  the  Swiss  specimens
are,  however,  of  small  size.  The  presence  of  corn-crushers,
which  are  round  balls  of  hard  stone,  two  to  tliree  inches  in
diameter,  proves  that  agriculture  was  known  and  practised
even  in  the  Stone  age.

The  list  of  objects  hitherto  found  at  "Wauwyl  is  as  follows :
Stone  axes,  principally  of  serpen-
tine         28

Small  flint  arrow-heads 22

Flint  flakes 136

Corn-crushers 13  N

I}ude  stones  used    as  hammers,  j  -^^^  ^

^^^^-^  (»y) 20  LoUected.

Whetstones 18  \

Siingstones 43  /

In  all  about 380  articles  of  stone.


131  MATERIAL   USED  FOR  STONE   IMPLEMENTS.

The  flint,  of  wMch  the  flakes  and  arrow-heads  were
formed,  must  have  come  from  a  distance,  and  the  best  pieces
in  all  probability  were  obtained  from  France.  Visits  may
hare  been  made  to  the  French  quarries,  just  as  Gatlin  tells  us
that  the  American  tribes,  from  far  and  near,  yisited  the  red
pipestone  quarry  of  Coteau  des  Prairies.  A  few  fragments
of  Mediterranean  coral  have  been  found  at  Concise,  and  of
Baltic  amber  at  Meilen.  Some  archaeologists  have  argued
from  these  facts,  that  there  must  have  been  a  certain  amount
of  commerce  even  in  the  Stone  age.  As,  however,  both  these
settlements  appear  to  have  belonged  to  the  transitional  period
between  the  age  of  Stone  and  that  of  Bronze,  it  would  be
safer  to  refer  both  the  amber  and  the  coral  to  ihe  later  period.

But  flue  most  important  fact  of  this  nature  is  the  presence
of  nephrite.  This  rock  is  not  known  to  occur  in  the  Alps,
or,  indeed,  in  Europe;  some  archsDologists  have  suggested
that  it  may  possibly  have  been  obtained  from  the  conglome-
rate known  as  the  "Nagelflue,''  others  think  that  it  must
hare  been  introduced  from  the  East.  Even  if  this  is  the
case,  it  would  not  be  any  proof  of  commerce,  properly  so
called;  but  I  should  rather  be  disposed  to  think  that  the
nephrite  had  passed  from  hand  to  hand,  and  from  tribe
to  tribe,  by  a  sort  of  barter.  Other  facts  of  a  similar
nature  are  on  record.  Thus,  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis
tell  us,  that  in  the  tumuli  of  the  Mississippi  valley,
we  And  ''side  by  side,  in  the  same  mounds,  native  copper
from  Lake  Superior,  mica  from  the  Alleghanies,  shells  from
the  Ghilf.  and  obsidian  (perhaps  porphyry)  from  Mexico."
Good  representations  of  the  sea-cow,  or  manatee,  are  found
a  thousand  miles  from  the  shores  inhabited  by  that  animal,
and  shells  of  the  large  tropical  Pyrula  perversa  are  found  in
the  tumidi  round  the  great  lakes,  two  thousand  miles  from
home.
Like  other  savages,   the  Lake -dwellers  made  the  most


BONE   IMPLEMENTS.  135

of  any  animal    they    could   catch.      They  ate   the   flesh,
P^^22  used   the  skin    for  clothing,   picked   every

fragment  of  marrow  out  of  the  bones,  and
then,  in  many  cases,  fieishioned  the  bones
themselves  into  weapons.  The  larger  and
more  compact  ones  served  as  hammers,  and,
as  well  as  horns  of  the  deer,  were  used  as
handles  for  hatchets.  In  some  cases,  pieces
of  bone  were  worked  to  an  edge,  but  they
are  neither  hard  nor  sharp  enough  to  cut
well.  Bone  awls  are  numerous,  and  may
have  been  used  in  preparing  skins  for
clothes.  Fig.  122  represents  a  chisel,  or
scraper,  of  bone,  from  Wangen.  .In  most  of
the  settlraients,  ribs  split  open  and  pointed
at  one  end  have  been  found,  but  for  what
purpose  they  were  intended  it  is  difficult  to  say.  Perhaps
they  were  used  in  netting,  or  in  the  manufacture  of  pottery.
A  few  objects  made  of  wood  have  also  been  found  at  Wau-
wyl  and  elsewhere ;  but  these,  even  if  originally  numerous,
would  be  difficult  to  distinguish  from  the  surrounding  peat,
especially  as  it  contains  so  many  branches  of  trees  and  other
fragments  of  wood ;  and  it  would  also  be  very  difficult  to
extract  them  entire.  Perhaps,  therefore,  implements  of  wood
may  have  been  much  more  varied  and  common  than  the
collections  would  appear  to  indicata

The  pottery  of  the  Stone  age  presents  nearly  the  same
chapacters  in  all  the  settlements.  Very  rude  and  coarse,  it
is  generally  found  in  broken  pieces,  and  few  entire  vessels
have  been  obtained.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  potter's-
wheel  was  known,  and  the  baking  is  very  imperfect,  having
apparently  taken  place  in  an  open  fire.  The  material  is  also
very  rude,  and  generally  contains  numerous  grains  of  quartz.
The  form  is  fi^uently  cylindrical,  but  several  o^  the  jars


136  FOTTERT.

are  rounded  at  the  base,  and  without  feet.  In  some  of  the
Bronze  age  villages,  rings  of  pottery  are'  found,  which  were
evidently  intended  to  serve  as  supports  for  these  earthenware
tumblers,  but  none  of  them  have  yet  been  met  with  in  any  of
the  Stone  age  villages..  PossiUy  the  earthenware  during  the
Stone  age  rested  en  the  soft  earth,,  and  tables  were  only
introduced  in  the  Bronze  age,  when  by  means  of  metallic
implements  it  became  so  much  easier  to-  cut  wood,  and
particularly  to  make  boards.  Many  of  the  vessds  had
snudl  jMrcjections,  which  were  pierced  in  such  a  manner
that  strings  might  be  passed  through  them^  and  which
may,  therefore,  haye  served  for  BuspenBion.  Some  of
the  vessels,  also,  are  pierced  by  small  holes  at  different
levels;  it  has  been  suggested  that  these  may  have  been
used  in  the  preparation  of  curds,  the  small  holes  being  in-
tended to  permit  the  escape  of  the  milk.  The  ornaments
on  the  pottery  belonging  to  this  age  are  of  a  very  rude  and
simple  character.  Sometimes  a  row  of  knobs  runs  round  the
vase,  just  below  the  lip ;  this  style  of  ornamentation  is  com-
mon on  the  pottery  found  by  M.  GKlli^ron  at  the  Pont  de
Thidle.  Another  curious  character  is  the  frequent  presence
of  a  row  of  depressions  which  do  not  completely  penetrate
the  thickness  of  the  vessel ;  but  the  commonest  decorations
are  simple  lines  or  furrows  made  sometimes  by  a  sharp  instru-
ment, sometimes  by  the  finger-nail,  and  occasionally  produced
by  pressing  a  cord  on  the  soft  clay.  No  representation  of
any  animal  or  vegetable  has  yet  been  met  with;  indeed,
curved  lines  can  hardly  be  said  to  exist,  being  very  rare,
and  when  present  very  irregular  and  childish.  It  is  true
that  Dr.  Keller  gives  a  figure  (also  copied  by  Troyon,  Le.,
pi.  vii.  f.  35)  of  a  vase  found  at  Wangen  (Stone  age),  on
which  is  a  much  more  elaborate  ornament,  apparently  in-
tended to  represent  leaves.  This  surprised  me  very  much,  but
having  obtained^  through  the  kindness  of  M.  M orlot,  a  cast  of


MAmlFACTURBS  OF   THE    STONE   FEBIOD.  137

tlie  fragment  from  which  this  dzswing  was  copied,  I  am  in  a
positiou  to  state  that  the  reprefientatioa  is  very  complimentary.
Although  ihaie  con  he  little  douht  that  the  akin^  of  ani-
mals supplied  the  ancient  Lake-^wellera  with  their  pniic^)al
articles  of  clothing,  still  in  several  of  ths  settlements,  and
eq>ecially  at  Wangen  and  Robeuhausen,  both  of  which  be-
long to  the  Stone  age,  pieces  of  rude  fabric  have  been  found
ia  some  abundance.  They  consist  either  of  flax  fibres  or
straw  (fig.  123).  The  presence  of  B|»ndle  whorls  has  been
already  meotioned.


The  antiquitiee  found  at  Wauwyl,  Robenhausen,  at  the
Font  de  Thi^le,  at  Moosseedorf,  and  elsewhere  in  small
lakes  and  peat-bogs,  are  more  or  less  covered  by  a
thick  layer  of  peat,  which  perhaps  at  some  future  date
will  give  us  a  clue  to  their  age.  On  the  contrary,  in  the
large  lakes  no  peat  grows.  At  the  entrance  of  the  rivers,
indeed,  much  mud  and  gravel  is  of  course  accumulated ;  the
Lake  of  Geneva,  for  instance,  once  no, doubt  extended  for  a
considerable  distance  up  the  Yalley  of  the  Khone.  But  the
gravel  and  mud  brought  down  by  that  river  are,  as  every
one  knows,  soon  deposited,  and  the  water  of  the  lake  is  else-
where beauti^lly  clear  and  pure.


138  COMPARISON   OF  THE   PILES

The  lake  itself  is  very  deep,  in  parts  as  much  as  nine
hundred  and  eighty  feet ;  and  the- banks  are  generally  steep,
but  round  the  margin  there  is,  in  most  places,  a  fringe  of
shallow  water,  due  probably  to  the  erosive  action  of  the
waves,  and  known  to  the  fishermen  as  the  ^^  blancfond/'
because  the  lake  is  there  of  a  pale  greyish  hue,  when  con-
trasted with  the  bright  blue  of  the  central  deeper  water.
It  is  on  this  ''  blancfond,''  and  at  a  depth  of  sometimes  as
much  as  fifteen  feet,  that  the  Pfahlbauten  were  generally
constructed.  On  calm  days^  when  the  surface  of  the  water  is
imruffled,  the  piles  are  plainly  visible.  Few  of  them  now
project  more  than  two  feet  from  the  bottom ;  eaten  away  by
the  incessant  action  of  the  water,  some  of  them  '^n'apparais-
sent  plus  que  comme  aiguiUes,"  which  finally  alBO  disappear,
and  leave  only  a  black  disk  at  the  surface  of  the  mud.  This,
however,  is  the  case  principally  in  the  Lake- villages  of  the
Stone  age.  "Ce  qui  les  distingue  surtout,"  says  Prof.  Desor,
''c'est  la  quality  des  pieux,  qui  sont  beaucoup  plus  gros  que
ceux  des  stations  du  bronze  :  ce  sont  des  troncs  entiers,  mesu-
rant  jusqu'i  28  et  30  centimetres.  Au  lieu  de  faire  saiUie
dans  Teau,  ils  sont  k  fleur  du  fond.''  On  the  other  hand,  in
speaking  of  the  Bronze  age  piles,  he  says  :  "  Les  pieux  sont
plus  gr^les ;  ce  sont  fr^quemment  des  troncs  fondus  en  quatre,
n'exc^dant  guere  4,  au  plus  5  pouces  de  diam^tre ;  au  lieu
d'etre  k  fleur  du  fond,  ils  s'^l^vent  de  1  &  2  pieds  au-dessus
de  la  vase,  ce  qui  permet  de  les  reconnattre  facilement,  mal-
gr^  leur  plus  grand  profondeur."  M.  Troyon  also  tells  us
that  ''On  pent  dire  que  les  pilotis  de  la  fin  du  deuxidme  &ge,
anciens  de  plus  de  deux  mille  ans  et  saillants  d'un  &  trois
pieds  au-dessus  de  la  vase,  pr^sentent  k  pen  pr^s  partout  le
m6me  aspect,  tandis  que  ceux  de  I'&ge  de  la  pierre  ont  ^t^
g^n^ralement  us^s  jusqu'i  la  surface  du  limon  dont  ils  sont
parfois  reconverts."*

*  Lea  Constmctioiis  ladutres  da  lac  de  NeofohateL


BELON6INO  TO  THE  STONE   AND   BRONZE   AGE.  139

The  more  complete  destruction  of  the  piles  belonging  to
the  earlier  period  depends  not  only  on  their  greater  age,  but
on  their  occurrence  in  shallower  water.  The  action  of  the
waves  being  greatest  near  the  surface,  and  diminishing  gra-
dually downwards,  not  only  are  those  piles  which  occupy  the
deeper  parts,  least  liable  to  destruction,  but  in  each  the
erosion  takes  place  gradually  from  above,  so  that  the
upper  end  of  the  piles  is  often  more  regularly  pointed
even  than  the  lower.  Lying  among  them  are  fragments
of  bone,  horn,  pottery,  and  sometimes  objects  of  bronze.
Most  of  these  are  imbedded  in  the  mud  or  hidden  under
the  stones,  but  others  lie  on  the  bottom  yet  uninjured;
80  that  when  for  the  first  time  I  saw  them  through  the
transparent  water,  a  momentary  feeling  of  doubt  as  to  their
age  rose  in  my  mind.  So  fresh  and  so  unaltered,  they  look
as  if  they  were  only  things  of  yesterday,  and  it  seems  hard  to
believe  that  they  can  have  remained  there  for  centuries.  The
explanation  of  the  difficulty  is,  however,  to  be  foimd  in  the
&ct  that  the  action  of  the  most  violent  storms  is  perceptible
only  to  a  small  depth.  Except,  therefore,  near  the  mouths
of  rivers,  or  where  there  is  much  vegetation,  the  deposition
of  mud  at  depths  greater  than  four  feet  is  an  extremely  slow
process,  and  objects  which  fall  to  the  bottom  in  such  situa-
tions will  neither  be  covered  over  nor  carried  away.  "  J'ai
picW,"  says  M.  Troyon,  "sur  I'emplacement  en  face  du  Mou-
lin de  Bevaix,  les  fragments  d'lm  grand  vase  qui  gisaient  &
peu  de  distance  les  uns  des  autres,  et  que  j'ai  pu  r^unir  de
manidre  k  les  remontre  compl^tement.  A  la  Tongue,  pr^s
d'Hermance,  j'ai  trouv^  les  deux  fragments  d'un  anneau  sup-
port, distants  de  quelques  pieds,  qui^  en  les  rapprochant  ne
laissent  aucun  interstice.'^  The  upper  parts  of  the  objects
also,  which  are  bathed  by  the  water,  are  generally  covered  by
a  layer  of  carbonate  of  lime,  while  the  lower  part  which  has
sunk  into  the  mud  is  quite  unaltered.     M.  Troyon  once


140  TH»  FAUNA   Oy  XHB

obtained  at  Cortaillod  a  pair  of  bracelets  in  one  haul  of  the
dredge — ^the  first,  which  had  been  visible  from  the  boat,  was
greenish  and  covered  with  incrustation;  the  second,  which
had  been  in  the  mud  immediately  below,  was  as  fresh  as  if  it
had  only  just  been  cast.

As  piles  of  the  Bronze  age  are  sametimes  feund  at  a
depth  of  as  much  as  fifteen  feet,  and  it  is  manifest  that
buildings  cannot  have  been^  constructed  over  water  much
deeper  than  this,  it  is  evident  that  the  Swiss  lakes  cannot
since  that  period  have  stood  at  a  much  higher  level  than  at
present.  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  the  position  of
Roman  remains  at  Thonon,  on  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  and  we
thus  obtain  satisfactory  evidence  that  the  height  of  the  Swiss
lakes  must  have  remained  ahnost  unaltered  for  a  very  long
period.

For  our  knowledge  of  the  animal  remains  from  the  Pile-
works  we  are  ahnost  entirely  indebted  to  Prof.  Riitimeyer,
who  has  published  two  memoirs  on  the  subject  (Mittheilungen
der  Antiq.  Gesellschaft  in  Zurich,  Bd.  xiii.  Abth.  2,  1860 ;
and,  more  recently,  a  separate  work,  Die  Fauna  der  Pfahlbau-
ten  in  der  Schweiz,  1861).  The  bones  are  in  the  same  frag-
mentary condition  as  those  from  the  Kjokkenmoddings,  and
have  been  opened  in  the  same  manner  for  the  sake  of  the
marrow.  There  is  also  the  same  absence  of  certain  bones
and  parts  of  bones,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  reconstruct  a
perfect  skeleton,  even  of  the  commonest  animal.

The  total  number  of  species  amounts  to  about  seventy,  of
which  ten  are  fishes,  three  reptiles,  twenty  birds,  and  the
remainder  quadrupeds.  Of  the  latter,  six  species  may  be
considered  as  having  beep,  domesticated,  namely,  the  dog,
pig,  horse,  goat,  sheep,  ^and  at  least  two  varieties  of  oxen.
The  bones  very  seldom  occur  in  a  natural  condition,  but  those
of  domestic  and  wild  animals  are  mixed  together,  and  the
state  in  which  they  are  found,  the  marks  of  knives  upon  them.


SWISS  LAKB-DWELLINOS.  141

and  their  having  been  ahnoet  always  broken  open  for  the  sake
<of  the  marrow,  are  all  evidences  of  human  interference.

Two  species,  the  one  wild,  the  other  domestic,  are  especially
numerous — the  stag  and  the  ox.  Indeed,  the  remains  of  these
two  equal  those  of  all  the  others  together.  It  is,  however,
an  interesting  fact,  that  in  the  older  settlements,  as  at
Moosseedor^  Wauwyl,  and  Bobenhausen,  the  stag  exceeds
the  ox  in  the  number  of  specimens  indicated,  while  the
reverse  is  the  case  in  the  more  modem  settlements  of  the
western  lakes,  as,  for  instance,  those  at  Wangen  and  Meilen.

Next  to  these  in  order  of  abundance  is  the  hog«  Less  nu-
merous again,  and  generally  represented  by  single  specimens
where  the  preceding  occur  in  numbers,  are  the  roe,  the  goat,
and  the  sheep,  which  latter  is  most  abundant  in  the  later  set-
tlements. With  these  rank  the  fox  and  the  martens.  Foxes
are  occasionally  eaten  by  the  Esquimaux,*  and  Captain  Lyon
seems  to  have  taken  rather  a  fancy  to  them.t  They  also
appear,  whether  from  choice  or  necessity,  to  have  been  eaten
during  the  Stone  period.  This  conclusion  is  derived  from
the  fact  that  the  bones  often  present  the  marks  of  knives,
and  have  been  opened  for  the  sake  of  the  marrow.  While,
however,  the  fox  is  very  frequent  in  the  Pileworks  of  the
Stone  epoch,  it  has  not  yet  been  found  in  any  settlement
belonging  to  the  Bronze  period.  Oddly  enough,  the  dog  is
rarer  than  the  fox,  at  least  as  far  as  the  observations  yet  go,  in
the  Lake-dwellings  of  the  Stone  period,  though  more  common
than  the  horsey  and  of  other  species  but  few  specimens  have
been  met  with,  though  in  some  localities  the  beaver,  the
badger,  and  the  hedgehog  appear  in  some  numbers.  The
bear  and  the  wolf,  as  well  as  the  urus,  the  bison,  and  the  elk,
seem  to  have  occasionally  been  captured  ;  it  is  probable  that
the  latter  species  were  taken  in  concealed  pits.

*  CrantZf  History  of  Greenland,  toL  i.  p.  73.
t  Lyons'  Joumal,  p.  77.


142  STAG.      BOAB.      BULL.      GOAT.      SHEEP.      DOG.

From  the  small  lake  at  Moosseedorf,  M.  Biitimeyer  has
identified  the  following  list : — Of  the  dog,  three  specimens ;
fox,  four  specimens ;  beaver,  five  specimens ;  roe,  six  speci-
mens ;  goat  and  sheep,  t^i  specimens ;  cow,  sixteen  speci-
mens ;  hog,  twenty  specimens ;  stag,  twenty  specimens.  It
is  certainly  very  striking  to  find  two  wild  species  repre-
sented by  the  greatest  number  of  specimens,,  and  particularly
so,  since  this  is  no  exceptional  case ;  but  the  whole  sum  of
the  wild,  exceeds  that  of  the  domesticated  individuals^  a
result^  moreover,,  which  holds  good  in  other  settlements
of  this  epoch.  Not  only  does  this  indicate  a  great  antiquity,
but  it  also  proves  that  the  population,  must  have  been  some-
times subjected  to  great  privations,  partly  from  the  unavoid-
able uncertainty  of  supplies  so  obtained,  partly  because  it  is
improbable  that  foxes  would  have  been  eaten  except  under
the  pressure  of  hunger.

The  bones  of  the  stag  and  the  wild  boar  often  indicate
anima.ls  of  an  unusual  magnitude,  while,  on  the  other  hand,,
the  ibx  appears  to  have  been  somewhat  snialler  than  at  present.
The  dogs  varied  less  than  they  do  now;  in  fact  they  aU  belong
to  one  variety,  which  was  of  middle  size,  and  appears-  to  have
resembled  our  present  beagles.  (M.  Riitimeyer  describes  it
as  "resembling  the  Jagdhund"  and  the  "  Wachtelhund.")
The  sheep  of  the  Stone  period  differed  from  the  ordinary
form,  in  its  small  size,  fine  legs,  and  short,  goat-like  horns :
particulars,  in  which  it  is  nearly  resembled  by  some  northern,
and  mountain,  varieties  at  the  present  day,  as,  for  instance,
by  the  small  sheep  of  the  Shetlands,  Orkneys,  Welsh  hills,
and  parts  of  the  Alps.  At  WauwyU  however,  M.  Riitimeyer
found  traces  of  an  individual  with  large  horns.  Our  know-
ledge of  the  wild  species  of  ^eep  is  so  deficient,  that  M.
Riitimeyer  does  not  venture  to  express  any  opinion  concern-
ing the  origin  of  the  domestic  varieties,  except  that  he  is
inclined  to  trace  them  up  to  several  wild  races.


TABLES  OF  THE  ANIMAL   REMAINS.


143


In  his  first  memoir^  Prof.  Riitimeyer  gi¥es  an  interesting
table,  which,  with  some  additions  which  I  owe  to  the  courtesy
of  Prof.  Biitiineyer,  is  here  subjoined,  premising  that  1  denotes
a  single  individual ;  2,  several  individuals ;  3>,  the  species
which  are  common;  4,  those  which  are  very  common;  5,
those  which  are  present  in  great  number.


1
2
3

4
5
6


Umu  Arctofl

Meles  TiUgaris

MuBtela  roina

M      Martes

Patorius

EnnineA

7  Lulra  TQlgaris

S  Canis  Lupus

9      •,    fanoliaris  (pains-

tris)
„        major...

„    Yulpea

FelisCatw

13  Erinaoeiu  europffius    ...

14  Castor  Fiber

15  Seiams  europseuB

16  Mus  sylvaticos

17  Lepus  timiduB

18  Sus  Scrofa  ferns

19  ,,  Pfedustris  feruB

20  ,.   Scrofa  domesticus  ..


10
11
12


>i


»»


>f


21  „   Palnstris  domesticus

22  Equus  Caballus

23  Ceryus  Aices

24  „      ElaphuB  ♦.

25  „       Capreolus

26  „      Dama

28  „     Hircus

29  Oris  Aries

30  Antilope  rupicapra

81  Bos  pnmigenius
32


..••.*«..•<


33
34
3.5
36


n


••••••■»■••••••


Bison

Taurus  primigenins

brachyceros

trocbooeros

Taurus  frontosus . . .


2
2
2
2
2
«• .
1

•  •  •

2


3

2

1

8

2

•••

1

3

5

•  ■  •

1
1
1
5.


2
2


2
6


I


2
8
8
2
2

..  a
1

2


3
2
1
2
2


2
6
1
1
2
1
5
2


2

1

•  ■  •

2

1
?
5


I


2
8
2

2

1

•  •  •

2
1
2


3
1
8
2
2
1

« ■  •

4

3

...

2

1

2

5

3


2
2
1
8
2
6
2


I
I


•  •  •

•  ••

•  ••


1
2


?
6


6
2


I


1

•  •  •

1


1
3


2
6

•  •  •

1
1
2
5
2

i


2
5


I


2
3
I
2


1
8


•••
•*•
2
3


6
2
2


•  ••

•  •  •


2

2

2

2

1

1

2

4

2

3

1

1

5

6

3

..<

3-4
3-4

• .  •
■«•
.■*

2

6


Morges
MorgBs

Eftar.


EsteT.


The  almost  entire  absence  of  the  hare  is  doubtless  owing


144  BIRDS.

to  the  curious  prejudice  w)iich  was  and  is  entertained  by
tnany  races  against  the  flesh  of  this  animal.  It  was  never
eateti  by  the  ancient  Britons,  and  is  avoided  by  the  Lapps  at
t^he  present  day.  Among  the  Hottentots  it  was  eaten  by  the
women,  but  was  forbidden  to  men.*  It  was  regarded  as  un-
clean by  the  Jews,  being  erroneously  supposed  to  chew  the
cud.  According  to  Crantz,  the  Greenlanders,  if  in  want,  will
eat  foxes  rather  than  hares.t  Finally,  its  remains  do  not
occur  in  the  Danish  shell-mounds.

The  birds  which  have  been  discovered  are  : —

Aquila  fulva.     The  golden  eagle.     At  Eob^ihaus^i.

Aquik  haUaetus.  A  single  bone  found  at  Moosseedorf
is  rather  doubtfully  referred  to  this  speoies  by
M.  Rutimeyer.

Falco  milvus.        Bobenhausen.

Falco  palumbarius.         Wauwyl,  Moosseedorf.

Falco  nisus.         Moosseedorf.

Strix  aluco.        Concise.

Stumus  vulgaris.        Hobenhansen.

Corvus  corona.  „

Cinclus  aquaticus.  „

Columbus  palumbus  ,,  Moosseedorf.

Tetrao  bonasia.  ^,

Ciconia  alba.  Not  unfrequent  at  Moosseedorf  and  Robenli.

Ardea  cinerea.        Bobenhausen.  •

Fulica  atra.  „

Larus.     Sp.  in  „

Cygnus  olor  „

Anser  segetum.  „

Anas  boschas.        Bobenhausen,  Moosseedorf,  Wauwyl.

Anas  querquedula.

Podiceps  minor.


99  »

99


*  Kolben's  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  vol.  i.  p.  205.
t  History  of  Greenland,  p.  73.


ABSSNCE  OF  THE  BAT,   MOUSE^   CAT,  ETC.  145

The  reptiles  and  fishes  are  represented  by  about  ten  of  our
commonest  species.

The  common  mouse  and  our  two  house-rats^  as  well  as  the
domestic  cat  and  the  barn-door  fowl,  are  absent  from  the
Lake-habitations  of  Switzerland,  as  also  from  the  Kjokken-
moddings  of  Denmark ;  Prof.  Xtiitimey er  attributes  to  a  later
period  a  single  bone  of  the  latter  bird  which  was  foimd  at
Merges,  a  settlement  belonging  to  the  Bronze  period.

The  earliest  remains  of  the  ass  mentioned  by  Prof.  Biiti-
meyer  are  those  found  at  Chavannes  and  I^^oville,  which,
however,  were  not  connected  with  Pfahlbauten,  and  belonged
to  post-Roman  times.

It  is  singular,  that  though  remains  of  the  horse  have
been  found  in  all  the  Pileworks,  they  are  so  rare  that  their
presence  may  almost  be  considered  accidental :  thus,  Wangen
has  only  produced  a  single  tooth ;  Moosseedorf,  a  metatarsal
bone,  which  has  been  polished  on  one  side ;  Bobenhausen,  a
single  Os  naviculare  tarsi ;  and  Wauwyl,  only  a  few  bones,
which  may  all  have  belonged  to  a  single  individual.  On  the
other  hand,  when  we  come  to  the  Bronze  period,  we  find  at
Nidau  numerous  bones  of  this  species;  so  that,  as  far  as
these  slight  indications  go,  the  horse,  even  if  present  in  the
Stone  age,  seems  to  have  been  rarer  than  at  subsequent
periods.  All  the  remains  of  this  animal  belonged  ap-
parently to  the  domestic  variety.

Though  he  refers  some  bones  to  the  wild  boar,  and
others  to  the  domestic  hog,  yet  Prof.  Biitimeyer  considers
that  the  greatest  number  of  the  remains  of  this  genus
belong  to  a  different  race,  which  he  calls  Sus  scrofa
palustris.  This  variety  was,  in  his  opinion,  less  powerful
and  dangerous  than  the  wild  boar,  the  tusks  being  much
smaller  in  proportion;  in  fact,  he  describes  it  as  having,
with  the  mola;r  teeth  of  an  ordinary  full-grown  wild  boar
premolars,  canines,  and  incisives  resembling  those  of  a  yoimg

10


146  OOMPARISON  OF  THE  BONES   BELONGING  TO

domestic  hog.  He  considers  that  all  the  bones  of  this  yariety
from  Moosseedorf  belonged  to  wild  indiyidualsy  while  of
those  from  Nidau,  Robenhansen,  Wauwyl^  and  Concise^  some
bear,  in  his  opinion,  evidences  of  domestication.  It  has  been
supposed  by  some  naturalists  that  this  yariety  was  founded
only  on  female  specimens,  but  in  his  last  work  Prof.  Buti-
meyer  combats  this  opinion  at  some  length,  and  gives  copious
descriptions  and  measurements  of  the  different  parts.  He  also
points  out  numerous  sexual  differences  in  the  S.  palustris,  of
the  same  nature,  but  not  so  well  marked^  as  those  of  the  wild
boar.  Belying  also  on  its  well-defined  geographical  and
historical  range,  he  denies  that  it  can  be  considered  as  a
cross  between  the  wild  boar  and  domestic  hog,  or  that  the
differences  which  separate  it  from  the  former  can  be  looked
upon  as  mere  individual  peculiarities.  He  considers,  in-
deed, that  as  a  wild  animal  it  became  extinct  at  a  very
early  period,  though  the  tame  swine  of  India,  which
agree  closely  with  this  race,  may  perhaps  have  descended
from  it.

Our  domestic  hog  first  makes  its  appearance  in  the  later
Pileworks,  as,  for  instance,  at  Concise.  Prof.  Butimeyerdoes
not,  however,  believe  that  it  was  tamed  by  the  inhabitants
of  Switzerland,  but  is  rather  disposed  to  look  upon  it  as
having  been  introduced  during  the  Bronze  age,  and  the  more
BO,  as  he  also  finds  at  Concise  traces  of  an  ox  {B.  troGhooeros)
which  does  not  occur  in  the  earUer  Pileworks.

In  endeavouring  to  ascertain  whether  any  given  bones
belonged  to  a  wild  or  domesticated  animal,  we  must  be
guided  by  the  following  considerations:  the  number  of  in-
dividuals represented;  the  relative  proportions  of  young
and  old;  the  absence  or  presence  of  very  old  individuals,
at  least  in  the  case  of  species  that  served  for  food ;  the  traces
of  long,  though  indirect,  selection,  in  diminishing  the  size  of
any  natural  weapons  which  might  be  injurious  to  man ;  the


WILD  AND  JIOMBfinCATED   RACES.  147

direct  action  of  mail  during  the  life  of  the  animal;   amd
finally  the  texture  and  condition  of  the  bones.

Applying  these  considerations  to  the  Sus  palnstris  from
Moosseedorfy  it  is  evident,  says  Prof.  Bfitimeyer,  firstly,  that
the  argument  derivable  from  the  number  of  young  specimens
loses  much  of  its  force  on  account  of  the  great  fertility  of  the
sow,  and  the  ease  with  which  the  young  can  be  found  and
destroyed;  secondly,  in  the  number  of  individuals  repre-
sented, it  is  equalled  by  the  stag,  which  certainly  was  never
domesticated;  thirdly,  some  bones  of  very  old  individuals
have  been  found,  and  some  of  very  young,  even  of  imbom
pigs ;  the  ffmallness  of  the  tusks  is,  according  to  Prof.  Buti-
meyer,  a  characteristic  of  the  race  and  not  an  evidence  of
domestication ;  the  bones  are  of  a  firm  and  dose  texture,  and
the  only  cases  of  decay  have  arisen  from  an  extreme  degrada-
tion of  the  teeth,  which  would  certainly  be  unlikely  to  occur
in  a  domestic  animal.  Finally,  none  of  the  teeth  show
traces  of  any  filing  or  othear  preparation,  except  such  as  may
have  taken  place  after  the  death  of  the  animal ;  from  all  which
reasons  Prof.  Biitimeyer  infers  that  the  inhabitants  of  Moos-
seedorf  had  not  yet  succeeded  in  taming  either  the  Sus  scrofa
palnstris  or  the  Sus  scrofii  ferus.

Prof.  Biitimeyer  has  paid  great  attention  to  the  texture  and
condition  of  the  bones  themselves,  and  believes  that  he  can
in  many  cases  from  these  alone  distinguish  the  species,  and
even  determine  whether  the  bone  belonged  to  a  wild  or  a
domesticated  animal.

In  wild  animals  the  bones  are  of  a  firmer  and  closer  tex-
ture; there  is  an  indescribable,  but  to  the  accustomed  eye
very  characteristic,  sculpturing  of  the  external  surface,  pro-
duced by  the  sharper  and  more  numerous  impressions  of
vessels,  and  the  greater  roughness  of  the  surfaces  for  the
attachment  of  muscles.  There  is  also  an  exaggeration  of  all
projections  and  ridges,  and  a  diminution  of  all  indifferent


148  EACES  OF  OXEK.

surfaces.  In  the  consideration  of  the  remains  of  oxen,  these
distinctions  have  proved  of  the  greatest  importance.  By  their
assistance,  and  this  is  in  many  respects  one  of  the  most
interesting  parts  of  the  work,  Prof.  Butimeyer  has  convinced
himself  that  besides  the  two  wild  species  of  bos^  namely,
the  nrus  {B,  primigenius)  and  the  aurochs  (J7.  bison  or  Biion
Europmua),  three  domestic  races  of  oxen  occur  in  Pileworks.

The  first  of  these  is  allied  to,  and  in  his  opinion  descended
from,  the  urus,  and  he  therefore  calls  it  the  Primigeniufl  race.
This  variety  occurs  in  all  the  Pileworks  of  the  Stone  period.
The  second  or  Trochoceros  race,  he  correlates  with  a  fossil
species  described  under  this  name  by  F«  von  Meyer,  from  the
diluvium  of  Arezzo  and  Siena.  This  variety  has  hitherto
only  been  found  at  Concise.

The  third,  or  Longifrons  race,  is  by  £eu*  the  most  common
of  the  three.  It  occurs  in  all  the  Pileworics,  and  at  Moos-
seedorf  and  Wangen — ^that  is  to  say,  in  the  settlements  which
are  supposed  to  be  the  oldest — almost  to  the  exclusion  of  the
Primigenius  race.  Prof.  Biitimeyer  considers  that  it  is  the
domesticated  form  of  B.  longifrons  of  Owen,  but  as  the  word
'^  longifrons"  seems  to  him  to  be  inappropriate  and.  incorrect,
he  uses  the  name  ''brachyceros,"  which  was  originally  pro-
posed in  manuscript  by  Owen  for  this  species,  but  which  has
also  been  used  by  Gbay  for  an  African  species,  and  ought
not  therefore  to  be  adopted.

A  subsequent  portion  of  the  work  is  devoted  to  the  ex-
amination of  the  existing  races  of  European  oxen.  The  old
Trochoceros  race  Prof.  Eiitimeyer  considers  to  be  extinct,  but
he  fifees  in  the  great  oxen  of  Friesland,  Jutland,  and  Holstein,
the  descendants  of  the  Bos  primigenius.  This  race  does  not
now  occur  in  Switzerland,  but  he  considers  that  there  are  at
present  in  that  country  two  distinct  varieties  of  domestic
oxen.  The  one  of  various  shades  between  light  grey  and
dark  brown,  but  without  spots,  and  prevailing  in  Schwyz,


ABSENCE  OF  EXTINCT  SPECIES.  149

ITriy  Yalaifly  etc.,  in  fact,  in  the  whole  country  south  of  a
line  drawn  from  the  Lake  of  Constance  to  Yahds,  agrees  in
its  general  osteological  characters  with  the  Bos  longifrons  of
Owen.  The  other  or  spotted  variety,  which  is  generally  of
larger  size,  and  prevails  in  Northern  Switzerland,  is  con-
sidered by  Prof.  Eutimeyer  to  be  descended  from  the  B*
finontosuSy  a  species  found  fossil  in  Sweden^  and  described
by  Nilsson.

I  will  not  express  any  c^inion  of  my  own  as  to  these  con-
clusions. The  subject  is  one  no  less  difficidt  than  important^
and  my  space  does  not  permit  me  to  lay  before  my  readers
the  details  given  by  Prof.  Biitimeyer,  to  whose  work  there-
fore those  must  refer  who  wish  for  more  information  on
the  subject.  All  naturalists  must  feel  much  indebted  to
Prof.  Biitimeyer  for  the  labor  he  has  £^ent  and  the  light  he
has  thrown  upon  the  subject,  whether  we  eventually  adopt
his  conclusions  or  not.

Making  allowance  for  the  marine  animals,  such  as  seals
and  fish,  oysters,  cockles,  whelks,,  etc.,  which  we  could
not  expect  to  find  so  far  away  from  the  sea,  tho  fauna
indicated  by  the  remains  found  in  the  Swiss  lakes  agrees
remarkably  with  that  which  characterises  the  Danish  Kjok-
kenmoddings,  and  belongs  evidently  to  a  far  later  age  than
that  of  the  celebrated  stone  hatchets,  wliich  were  first  made
known  to  us  by  the  genius  and  perseverance  ef  M.  Boucher
de  Perthes.

Instead  of  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros  we  find  in  the
later  or  second  stone  period — ^in  that,  namely,  of  the  Kjok-
kenmoddings  and  ^'Pfahlbauten^' — the  urus  and  bison,  the
elk,  and  the  red  deer  already  installed  as  monarchs  of  the
forest.  The  latter,  indeed,  with  the  boar,  appears  to  have
been  very  frequent,  and  to  have  formed  a  most  important
article  of  food  to  the  Lake-dwellers.  The  urus,  or  great
fossil  ox,   is  now  altogether    extinct,  at  least  ^  a  wild


150  THE  AXJROCHS  AND  £LK.

Species.*  It  is  mentioned  bj  Geesar,  who  describes  it  as
being  little  smaller  than  an  elephant.  (Hi  sunt  magnitudine
paido  infira  elephaaitos^  specie  et  colore  et  figuri  tauri.)
According  to  Herberstein,  it  stiU  existed  in  Germany  during
the  sixteenth  centurj^  aooa  after  which,  howeyer,  it  must
have  become  extinct.

The  aurochs,  or  European  bison,  seems  to  haye  disappeared
from  Western  Europe,  at  aboiXt  the  same  period  as  the  nnis.
There  is  no  historical  record  of  its  existence  in  England  or
Scandinavia.  In  Switzerland  we  cannot  trace  it  later  than
the  tenth  century ;  but  it  is  mentioned  in  the  "  Niebelungen
Lied,'^  of  the  twelfth  century,  as  occurring  in  the  Forest  of
Worms,  and  in  Prussia  the  last  was  killed  in  the  year  1775.
At  one  period,  indeed,  it  appears  to  have  inhabited  almost
the  whole  of  Europe,  much  of  Asia,  and  part  even  of  America,
but  at  present  it  is  confined  in  Europe  to  the  imperial  forests
in  Lithuania,  where  it  is  preserved  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia ;
while,  according  to  Nordmann  and  Yon  Baer,  it  still  exists
in  some  parts  of  Western  Asia.

We  have  no  notice  of  the  existence  of  the  elk  in  Switzer-
land during  the  historical  period,  but  it  is  mentioned  by
Csesar  as  existing  in  the  great  Hercynian  forest ;  and  even
in  the  twelfth  Century  it  was  to  be  met  with  in  Sclavonia
and  Hungary,  according  to  Albertus  Magnus  and  Gesner.
In  Saxony,  the  death  of  the  last  is  recorded  as  having  oc-
curred in  1746.  At  present  it  inhabits  Prussia  and  Lithuania,
Finland  and  Russia,  Scandinavia  and  Siberia,  to  tiie  shores
of  the  Amoor.

The  ibex  disappeared  from  most  of  the  Swiss  Alps,  perhaps
not  much  later  than  the  elk.  It  has  lingered  longest  in  the
West.    In  Glarus  the  last  one  perished  in  1550^  though  near

*  Prof.  Butimeyer,  howerer,  con-      though  dirarflflh,  dwcendants  of  the
siden  that  the  oelebrated  wild  cattle  of      B.  primigpniiu*
TaokerTiile  Park  are  immistakeable)


THS  IBKX  AND  BBAB.  151

GhiaTemia  it  existed  toitil  the  commeaoement  of  the  seven-
teenth oentuiy,  and  in  the  l^r^ol  until  the  second  half  of  the
eighteenth^  while  it  still  mMTifaM'Tia  itself  in  the  mountains
saxTonnding  Mont  Is^ran.

The  eztennination  of  the  bear,  like  that  of  the  ibex»  seems
to  have  begmi  in  the  Easty  and  not  yet  to  be  complete,  since
this  animal  still  occurs  in  the  Jora^  in  Yalais,  and  in  the
south-eastern  parts  of  Switzerland.  The  fox,  the  otter,  and
the  different  species  of  weasels,  are  still  the  common  car-
nivora  of  Switaeriand,  and  the  wild  cat,  the  badger,  and  the
wolf  still  occur  in  the  Jura  and  the  Alps,  the  latter  in  cold
winters  venturing  even  into  the  plains.  The  beaver,  on  the
contrary,  has  at  last  disappeared.  It  had  long  been  very
rare  in  Switaerland,  but  a  few  survived  until  the  beginning
of  the  present  oentuiy,  in  Lucerne  and  Yalais.  Bed  deer
were  abundant  in  the  Jura  and  Black  Torest  in  the  twelfth
and  thirteenth  centuries,  though  they  do  not  appear  to  have
been  so  large  as  those  which  lived  in  earlier  times.  The  last
was  shot  in  the  canton  of  Basle,  at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth
century,  while  in  western  Switzerland  and  Yalais  they  lin*
gered  somewhat  longer.  The  roedeer  still  occurs  in  some
places.

The  Fauna  tiiius  indicated  is  certainly  very  much  what
might  have  been  expected.  We  find  among  the  remains
of  Hie  Lake-dwdlings  most  of  the  species  which  characterise
the  post-tertiary  ^och  in  Ehuope.  Some  of  the  larger  ones
have  since  feUen  away  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  and
others  are  becoming  rarer  and  rarer  every  year,  while  some
maintain  themselves  even  now,  thanks  only  to  the  inclemency
and  inaccessibility  of  the  mountainous  regions  which  they
inhabit.  The  gradual  process  of  extermination,  which  has
continued  ever  since,  had  evep  then  begun.

Taken  as  a  whole,  therefore,  the  animals  of  the  Swiss  Pile-
works  belong  evidently  to  the  fauna  which  commenced  in


152  GENJSKAL  CHARACTER

post-tertiary  times  with  the  mammoth,  the  rhinoceros  ticho-
rhinusy  the  cave  bear,  and  the  fossil  hysena.

While,  however,  we  must  regard  the  fauna  of  the  Stone
age  as  belonging  to  the  same  great  zoological  epoch  with  that
of  the  riyer  drift  grayels  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  present
time  on  the  other,  we  cannot  forget  that  the  immense  period
which  has  elapsed  since  the  end  of  the  tertiary  period  has
produced  great  changes  in  the  faima  of  Europe.  In  this
post-tertiary  era  the  Pileworks  occupy,  so  to  say,  the  middle
position.  Distinguished  from  the  present  f&una  of  Switzer-
land by  the  possession  of  the  urus,  the  biscm,  the  elk,  tiie
stag,  and  the  wild  boar,  as  weU  as  by  the  more  general  dis-
tribution of  the  beayer,  the  bear,  the  ibex,  etc.,.  their  fauna
differs  firom  the  drift  grayels  in  the  absence  of  the  mammoth,
the  rhinoceros,  the  caye  bear,  and  the  caye  hysena.

Prof.  Butimeyer  thinks  that  from  these  considerations
alone,  eyen  if  we  had  no  other  eyidence,  we  might  carry  this
division  farther ;  and  if  we  take  the  settlements  at  Moossee-
dorf,  Wauwyl,  Kobenhausen,  and  Nidau,  which  have  been
the  most  carefully  studied  in  this  respect,  the  three  fonner,
which  belong  to  the  Stone  age,  certainly  offer  a  marked  con-
trast to  the  latter,  which  is  the  locality  whence  the  largest
number  of  bronze  objects  has  aa  yet  been  obtained.

It  is  of  course  imnecessar}'-  to  point  out  the  interest  and
importance  of  such  a  distinction,  which  accords  so  well  with
that  indicated  by  the  study  of  the  weapons  and  the  state  of
preservation  of  the  piles.  Thus,  the  urus  has  only  occurred
at  Moosseedorf,  Wauwyl,  Eobenhausen,  and  Concise;  the
aurochs  only  at  Wauwyl  and  Bobenhausen ;  the  bear  only
at  Moosseedorf  and  Meilen.  A  glance  at  the  table  given  at
page  167,  will  show  that  several  other  species  have  as  yet
only  occurred  at  Moosseedorf  and  Eobenhausen ;  a  fact,  how-
ever, which  indicates  rather  the  richness  than  the  antiquity
of  these  localities.    Possibly,  we  may  consider  the  presence


OF  THE  FAUNA.  153

of  these  larger  species  as  an  indication  of  their  greater
abundance  in  the  oldest  period;  but  we  must  not  forget
that  not  only  the  bear  and  the  elk^  but  also  the  aurochs
and  the  urus  appear  at  a  comparatively  late  period.  On
the  other  hand,  the  abundance  of  wild  animals,  and  the
fact  that  at  Moosseedorf  and  Wauwyl  the  fox  was  more
abundant  than  the  dog»  while  elsewhere  the  reverse  is  the
case,  certainly  speak  in  favor  of  the  greater  antiquity  of
these  two  settlements.

The  evidence  derived  from  the  distribution  of  the  domestic
aninmlft  is,  perhaps,  more  satisfactory.  The  sheep  is  present
even  at  Moosseedorf,  though  not  so  numercms  as  at  Nidau.
On  the  other  hand,  the  horse  ia  frequent  at  Nidau,  while  at
Moosseedorf  only  a  single  bone  of  this  animal  was  discovered,
in  a  different  condition  from  that  of  the  other  bones,  and
probably  more  recent*  Finally,'  the  domestic  hog  of  the
present  race  is  absent  from  all  the  Pileworks  of  the  Stone
period,  excepting  the  one  at  Wauwyl,  and  becomes  frequent
only  at  Nidau.

If  succeeding  investigations  confirm  the  conclusions  thus
indicated,  we  may  infer  that  the  domestic  animals,  which
were  comparatively  rare  in  the  Stone  period,  became  more
frequent  after  the  introduction  of  bronze ;  a  change  indi-
cating and  perhaps  producing  an  alteration  of  habits  on
the  part  of  the  inhabitants.

Hare,  indeed,  as  they  may  have  been,,  oxen,  horses,  sheep,
and  goats  coidd  not  be  successfully  kept  through  the  winter
in  the  climate  of  Switzerland,  without  stores  of  provisions
and  some  sort  of  shelter.  A  pastoral  people,  therefore,  must
have  reached  a  higher  grade  than  a  mere  nation  of  himters.
We  know,  moreover,  in  another  way,  that  at  this  period
agriculture  was  not  entirely  imknown.  This  is  proved  in
the  most  unexpected  manner,  by  the  discovery  of  carbonised
cereals  at  various  points.    Wheat  is  most  common,  having


154  THE  FLORA  OF

been  difloovered  at  Meilen^  Mooeaeedorf,  and  Wangen.  At  the
latter  place,  indeed,  many  bushels  of  it  were  found,  the  grains
being  united  in  large  thick  lumps.  In  other  cases  the
grains  are  free,  and  without  chaff,  resembling  our  present
wheat  in  size  and  form,  while  more  rarely  they  are  still  in
the  ear.  Ears  of  the  Hordeum  hexastichon  L.  (the  six-rowed
barley)  are  somewhat  numerous.  This  species  differs  from
the  H.  vulgare  L.  in  the  number  of  rows  and  in  the  smaller
size  of  the  grains.  According  to  De  Candolle,  it  was  the
species  generally  cultiyated  by  the  ancient  G-reekS;  Bomans,
and  Egyptians.  In  the  ears  from  Wangen,  each  row  has
generally  t^i  or  eleven  grains,  which,  however,  are  smaller
and  shorter  than  those  now  grown.

Still  more  unexpected  was  the  discovery  of  bread,  or  rather
cakes,  for  leaven  does  not  appear  to  have  been  used.  They
were  flat  and  round,  from  an  inch  to  fifteen  lines  in  thick-
ness,  and,  to  judge  from  one  specimen,  had  a  diameter  of
four  or  five  inches.  In  other  cases  the  grains  seem  to  have
been  roasted,  coarsely  ground  between  stones,  and  then  either
stored  up  in  large  earthenware  pots,  or  eaten  after  being
slightly  moistened.  Grain  prepared  in  a  similar  manner  was
used  in  the  Canary  Islands  at  the  time  they  were  conquered
by  Spain,  and  even  now  constitutes  the  principal  food  of  the
poorer  classes.  In  what  way  the  groimd  was  prepared  for
the  cidtivation  of  com  we  know  not,  as  no  implements  have
as  yet  been  discovered,  which  can  with  certainty  be  regarded
as  agricultural.

Carbonised  apples  and  pears  have  been  found  at  Wan-
gen, sometimes  whole,  sometimes  cut  into  two,  or  more
rarely  into  four  pieces,  and  evidently  dried  and  put  aside
for  winter  use.  Apples  are  more  numerous  than  pears,
and  have  occurred  not  only  at  Wangen,  but  also  at  Boben-
hausen  in  Lake  Pfeffikon,  and  at  Concise  in  Lake  I^euf-
chatel.     Both  apples  and  pears  are  Eonall,  and  resemble


THB   PFAHLBAXJTBN.  155

those  which  still  grow  wild  in  the  Swiss  forests.  No  traces  of
the  Tine,  the  cherry,  or  the  damson  have  yet  been  met  with,
but  stones  of  the  wild  plum  and  the  Pronus  padus  haye  been
found.  Seeds  of -the  raspberry  and  blackberry,  and  sheUs
of  the  hazel-nut  and  beech-nut  occur  pl^itifully  in  the
mud.

From  all  this,  therefore,  it  is  eyident  that  the  nourishment
of  the  dwellers  in  the  Pileworks  consisted  of  com  and  wild
firuits,  of  fish,  and  the  flesh  of  wild  and  domestic  animals.
Doubtless  also  milk  was  an  important  article  of  their  diet.

The  list  of  plants  found  in  the  Pileworks  stands  a4
follows : —

Pinus  abies.
„     picea.
„     sylyestris.
„     Mughus.
Quercus  Bobur.
Fagus  sylvatica*
Populus  treiliula.
Betula  alba.
Alnus  glutinosa.
Oorylus  Avellana.
Prunus  spinosa.
„      Padus.
„      avium.
Tilia.

Carpinus  Betulus.
Gomus  sang^ttinea.
Taxus  baccata.
Bubus  idseus.

„     fruticosus.
Fragaria  yesca.
Carum  Caryi.
Heracleum  Spondylium.


156  SCABdTY  OF  HUMAN   BONES.

Wheat.

Hordeum  distichiiiiL
„       hezastichiun.

Trapa  natans.  This  species  was  supposed  to  be  extinct
in  Switzerland,,  but  it  has  recently  been  discoTered
in  a  liTing  condition.    It  is,  however,  very  locals

Flax.

Juncus.

Arundo.

Nymphsaa  alba.

Nuphar  luteum..
„  pumilunu
Neither  hemp,  oats,  nor  rye  have  yet  been  found.  Small
pieces  of  twiae  and  bits  of  matting  made  of  flax  may  have
been  part  of  some  article  of  clothing.  For  this  purpose
also  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  skins  of  a,TiimalB
were  used,  and  some  of  the  stone  implements  seem  well
adapted  to  assist  in  their  preparation,  while  the  bone  pins,
and  the  needles  made  from  the  teeth  of  boars,  may  have
served  to  fasten  then^  together.

To  what  race  of  men  these  interesting  remains  are  ascrib-
able,  we  have  as  yet  no  direct  evidence.  Human  bones  are
very  rare  in  the  Pileworks,  and  may  probably  be  referred  to
accidents,  especially  as  we  find  that  those  of  children  are
most  numerous.  M.  Desor,  indeed,  states  that  not  a  single
human  skeleton  has  yet  been  foimd  in  any  of  the  stations
belonging  to  the  St<me  age,  and  Dr.  Keller,  in  his  fifth  re-
port, informs  us-  that  all  the  Lake- villages  taken  together
have  not  yet  produced  more  than  half  a  dozen.  One  mature
skull  from  Mdlen  hae  been  described  by  Professor  His,  who
considers  that  it  does  not  differ  much  from  the  ordinary
Swiss  type.  While  his  work  was  in  the  press.  Prof.  Biitimeyer
received  from  CoL  Schwab  four  more  skulls,  two  of  which
were  obtained  at  Nidau,   one  at  Sutz,   and  one  at  Biel.


LAKE-HABITATIONS  OF  THE   BRONZE  AGE.  157

Another  skull  shown  to  me  by  Professor  Desor,  and  found
ut  Auyemiery  completes  the  number  mentioned  by  Br.  Keller.
All  these  settlements,  however,  appear  to  have  belonged  to
the  Bronze  age,  nor  has  it  yet  been  possible  certainly  to
refer  many  of  the  ancient  tumuli  foimd  in  Switzerland  to  the
earlier  period.

Passing  now  to  the  Lake-habitations  belonging  to  the
Bronze  age,  we  find  that  they  are  less  generally  distributed
than  those  of  the  earlier  period.  They  have  as  yet  been
found  only  on  the  Lakes  of  G-eneya,  Luissel,  Neufchatel,
Morat,  Bienne,  and  Sempach ;  none  in  eastern  Switzerland.
It  has  been  supposed  from  this  that  the  age  of  Stone
lasted  longer  in  the  east  than  in  the  west,  and  that  flint
and  serpentine  were  in  use  on  Lake  Constance  long  after
bronze  had  replaced  them  on  the  western  lakes.  We  can,
however,  hardly  suppose  that  the  inhabitants  of  Inkwyl  and
Moosseedorf  in  Berne,  who  imported  flint  from  IVance,  can
have  been  ignorant  of  the  neighbouring  civilisation  on  the
Lake  of  Bienne.  Perhaps,  however,  settlements  of  the
Bronze  age  may  yet  be  foimd  on  the  Lake  of  Oonstance ;
but  as  the  question  now  stands,  Pileworks  g£  the  Metallic
period  are  peculiar  to  western  and  central  Switzerland.  The
constructions  of  the  latter  period  are  more  solidly  built,  but
do  not  otherwise  appear  to  have  differed  materially  from
those  of  the  Stone  age.  They  are  often,  however,  situated
farther  from  the  land  and  in  deeper  water,  partly  no  doubt
on  account  of  the  greater  facility  of  working  timber,  but
partly  also,  perhaps,  because  more  protection  was  needed  as
the  means  of  attad^  were  improved.  The  principal  imple-
ments of  bronze  are  swords,  daggers,  axes,  spear-heads,
knives,  fish-hooks,  sickles,  pins,  rings  and  bracelets.  The
number  of  these  articles  which  have  been  discovered  is
already  very  great,  the  collection  of  Col.  Schwab  alone  con-
taining no  less  than  4346  objects  of  metaL    They  are  classi-


158


OBJECTS  OF   BRONZE.


fied  in  the  foUowing  table,  which  I  owe  to  the  kindnesB  of
Dr.  Keller,  and  which  gives  an  idea  of  the  relative  propor-
tions in  which  they  occur : —


1

m

1

1
1

•

1

•

1

•

1

11
4

•  ••

9

22
3
5
2
1

...

*•«
2

...

•  a.

..•
■  a.

•  •  V

2
4

•*•

...
4

•

1

Celts  and  fragments

Swords

Hammers

23

...

4

102

611

496

238

55

189

95

*••

27

■•  •

•  a*

20
15

•••
*« .
18
75
20
96

7

•  •  •

19
53
28
42
11
12
3
...
7

...
1
2
5

•  ••

•  ••

12

•  •  •

...
3

6

•  •  •

1
14
239
115
86
16
43
49
46
...

5
28

3

7

3
...

1

...
•••

5

13

•••

...

22

183

195

116

21

71

98

50

4

1
10

4
18
.  • .
*■.

2

11
16

1

•  ••

•  ••

19

237

202

.■*

26

9

17

5

2

«••

10

1

3

a*.

...

7

...

•  •  ■

6

•  •  •

•  ••

8
22
14

3
11

2

•  •  •

5

..•
•• .
■•*

1

...
...

1

•  •  •

•  •  •

•  ••

67

4

5

193

1367

1058

440

145

248

262

101

47

6

49

30

49

3

2

45

75

31

124

Knives  and  fragpnents  ...

Hair-pins

Small  rings

Ear-rings

Bracelets  and  fragments
Fish-hooks

AwIb

Spiral  wires   #..

Lance-heads

Arrow-heads ••••.

Buttons  •

Needles

Various  ornaments

Saws

Dagg^eiB

Sickles

Bouhle-pointed  pins

Small  bracelets

Sundries

Total

2004

208

618

835

539

73

69

4346

These  objects  were  all  cast,  and  the  skill  displayed  in
their  manufEu^ture,  as  well  as  the  beauty  of  their  forms  and
ornamentation^  shows  a  considerable  development  of  art.
The  discovery  of  a  bar  of  tin  at  Estavayer,  and  of  a  mould  for
casting  celts  at  Merges,  has  proved  that  some  at  least  of  these
objects  were  made  in  Switzerland,  just  as  evidence  of  a  similar
nature  shows  that  other  countries  in  Europe,  as,  for  instance,
Denmark,  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  had  also  their
own  foundries.  The  similarity  of  form  and  ornamentation
appears  also  to  indicate  some  communication  between  dif-
ferent parts  of  Europe ;  but  as  Cornwall  and  Saxony  are  the


USE  OF  PILEBUILDINOS  AS  MAGAZINES.  159

only  known  European  sources  of  tin,  the  mere  presence  of
bronze  is  in  itself  a  sufficient  evidence  not  only  of  metallur-
gical skill,  but  also  of  commerce.

Brought  from  so  great  a  distance,  at  a  time  wben  the
means  of  transport  were  very  imperfect,  objects  of  metal
must  have  had  a  great  value.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to
understand  how  so  many  can  have  been  left  uncared-for  and
forgotten,  along  the  shallow  margins  of  the  Swiss  lakes.
''II  est  Evident,"  says  Prof.  Desor,  ''que  ce  ne  sent  pas  des
rebuts  qui  se  seraient  perdus,  sans  qu'on  s'en  inqui^t&t.  Us
ne  sont  pas  tomb^s  &  I'eau  par  hasard,  non  plus  que  cette
quantity  de  vases  qui  sont  accumul^s  sur  certain  points,  ni  les
jattes  &  provisions  qu^on  retire  intactes."  On  the  whole  he
is  inclined  to  think  that  in  some  of  these  cases,  at  least,  we
have  "de  simples  magasins  destines  aux  utensiles  et  aux
provisions,  et  qui  auraient  6t6  d^truits  par  Tincendie^  comme
semble  I'indiquer  la  trace  du  feu  que  montrent  fr^quemment
les  poutres  aussi  bien  que  les  vases  en  terre.  On  ezpliquerait
ainsi  comment  il  se  Mt  que  les  objets  en  bronze  sont  presque
tous  neufs,  que  les  vases  sont  entiers  et  r^unis  sur  un  seid
point.  Gette  hyi)oth£se  semble  corrobor^e  par  Topinion  de
plusieurs  de  nos  chercheurs  d'antiquit^  les  plus  experiments,
qui  pretendent  que  I'on  n^a  chance  de  faire  de  bonnes  trou-
vailles que  lA  ou  les  pieux  sont  brj^s,  tandis  que  Ton  perd
son  temps  &  fouiller  les  stations  ou  les  pieux  ne  sont  pas  char-
bonnes."  CoL  Schwab  also, .  than  whom  no  man  has  had
more  experience  in  such  matters,  is  of  opinion  that  com-
paratively little  is  ever  found  except  in  such  Lake- villages  as
show  traces  of  fire.  "Wo  immer  verbranntes  Holz  zum
Yorschein  konmit,  hat  man  beim  Suchen  nach  Alterthiimem
auf  Ausbeute  zu  rechnen.  Zeigen  sich  keine  Brandspuren,  so
ist  alle  Bemuhung  von  wenig  oder  keinem  Erfolge  begleitet."

It  has  also  been  suggested  that  the  early  inhabitants  of
Switzerland  may  have  worshipped  the  Lakes,  and  that  the


160  SACRED  LAKES.

beautiful  bracelets^  etc.,  may  have  been  offerings  to  the
gods.  In  iact,  it  appears  from  ancient  writers  that  among
the  Gauls,  Germans,  and  other  nations,  many  lakes  were
regarded  as  sacred.  M.  Aymard  (Etude  Archaeol.  sur  le  Lac
du  Bouchet.  Le  Puy.  1862)  has  collected  several  instances  of
this  kind.  According  to  Cicero,*  Justin,!  and  Strabo,:^  there
was  a  lake  near  Toulouse  in  which  the  neighbouring  tribes
used  to  dqx>sit  offerings  of  gold  and  silver.  Tacitus,  Pliny,
and  Yirgil  also  mention  the  existence  of  sacred  lakes.  Again,
so  late  as  the  sixth  century,  Gregory  of  Tours,  who  is  quoted
by  M.  Troyon  and  M.  Aymard,  teUs  us  (De  glor.  confes.
chap,  ii.)  that  on  mount  Helanus  there  was  a  lake  which  was
the  object  of  popular  worship.  Every  year  the  inhabitants
of  the  neighbourhood  brought  to  it  offerings  of  clothes,  skins,
cheeses,  cakes,  etc.  Traces  of  a  similar  superstition  may  still
be  found  lingering  in  the  remote  parts  of  Scotland  and  .L*e-
land;  in  the  former  country  I  have  myself  seen  a  sacred
spring  surrounded  by  the  offerings  of  the  neighbouring  pear
santry,  who  seemed  to  consider  pence  and  hal^ence  as  the
most  appropriate  and  agreeable  sacrifice  to  the  spirit  of  the
waters.  This  hypothesis  would  account  for  the  newness
of  the  objects,  few — indeed,  according  to  Professor  Desor,
scarcely  any— of  which  present  traces  of  having  been  used.
Neither  the  coarse  broken  pottery,  the  castaway  fragments  of
bones,  nor  the  traces  of  habitations,  can,  however,  be  ac-
counted for  in  this  manner.  §

The  pottery  of  the  Bronze  period  is  more  varied  and  more
skilfully  made  than  that  of  the  Stone  age,  but  the  potter's  wheel
does  not  seem  to  have  been  in  use.  Eings  of  earthenware
are  common,  and  appear  to  have  been  used  as  supports  for
the  round-bottomed  vases.  The  ornaments  are,  according  to
M.  Troyon,  of  tlie  same  character  as  those  on  the  objects  of

^  De  Nat.  Deor.  lib.  iii.  xxx.        f  Just,  zxxii.  iii.  %  Geog.  toL  ir.

§  See  also  Wylie  *'  On  Lake-dwellings  of  the  Early  periods."  AichsoL  toI.
xxxTiii.,  p.  181.


INHABITANTS  OF  THE  PFAHLBAUTEN.  161

bronze.  Many  of  the  large  urns  appear  to  haye  been  used
as  storeplaces  for  the  nuts,  etc.,  which  were  collected  during
the  summer  for  the  winter's  use.  In  the  absence,  perhaps,
of  boxes  and  cupboards,  eyen  ornaments  and  instruments
aeem  to  haye  been  kept  in  large  jars.  Some  beautiful  brace-
lets were  found  with  seyeral  sickles  in  a  jar  at  Oortaillod.
Pieces  of  pottery,  distorted  by  fire  during  the  process  of
baking,  haye,  according  to  M.  Troyon,  been  found  in  many
of  the  Lake*yillages,  whence  he  concludes  that  the  pottery
was  manufactured  on  the  spot.

M.  Troyon  is  of  opinion  that  the  inhabitants  of  Switzer-
land during  the  Bronze  age  were  of  a  different  race  from
those  who  had  liyed  there  during  the  earlier  period,  and  he
agrees  with  some  of  the  Scandinayiain  archBDologists  in  re-
garding them* as  the  true  "Celts,"  and  in  attributing  to  them
the  habit  of  burning  their  dead.  ''D^s  que  le  bronze  se
r^pand  en  Europe,  I'incin^ration  deyient  d'un  usage  g^n^ral.
L'apparition  d'un  nouyeau  peuple  r^pond  ^yidemment  A  celle
de  ce  in^taL  L'ume  cineraire,  de  m£me  que  la  tombe  cu-
bique,  se  retrouye  sous  la  surface  du  sol  ou  dans  le  tumidus,
mais  celui-ci,  g^n^ralement  moins  ^ley^  que  dans  I'ltge  pri-
mitif,  ne  recouyre  plus  gudre  de  saUe  fun^raire.  Quand  on
yoit  oombien  il  est  rare  que  le  bronze  accompagne  le  premier
mode  d'inhumation,  on  doit  reconnattre  que  TenyahiBseur  est
rest^  maitre  du  sol ;  du  reste  il  ne  pouyait  en  fitre  autrement
de  la  part  d'un  peuple  poss^dant  des  armes  en  m^tal,  or  ces
armes  sent  celles  des  anciens  Celtes  qui  n'inhumaient  point
leur  morts,  mais  les  liyraient  an  flammes  du  bdcher.  L'in-
cin^ration  ^tant  une  partie  int^grante  de  leurs  pratiques
religieuses,  et  Fume  cineraire  deyenant  d'un  usage  g^n^ral
ayec  le  bronze,  il  en  r^sulte  que  le  Celte  n'est  pas  le  premier
habitant  de  I'Europe  dans  laquelle  il  a  introduit  les  arts
metallurgiques.'^  It  would  be  yery  desirable  to  haye  some
statistics  in  order  that  we  might  appreciate  the  yalue  of  the

11


162  CHABACTEE.  OF  THE  OBXECflS

evidence  to  be  derived  from  these  Swiss  tumuli.  M.  Troyon
relies  on  the  fact  that  many  of  the  Lake- villages  were
destroyed  by  fire,  and  that  when^  as  appears  to  hare  been
the  case  at  several  places,  they  were  rebuilt  during  the
Bronze  age,  this  was  done,  not  exactly  on  the  same  spot,
but  farther  away  from  the  buk.  Dr.  Keller,  on  the  other
hand,  considers  that  the  primitive  population  did  not  differ,
either  in  disposition  (anlage),  mode  of  life,  or  industry,
from  that  which  was  acquainted  with  the  use  of  bronze  ;  and
that  the  whole  phenomena  of  the  Lake- villages,  firom  their
commencement  to  their  conclusion,  indicate  most  clearly  a
gradual  and  peaceable  development.  The  number  of  in-
stances in  which  Lake-villages  had  been  destroyed  by  fire
has  been,  he  considers,  exaggerated.  Of  the  settlements  on
the  Lakes  of  Bienne  and  JS^eufchatel,  amounting  in  all  to
sixty«six,  only  a  quarter  have,  according  to  Col.  Schwab,
shown  any  traces  of  combustion;  a  proportion  which  is,
perhaps,  not  greater  than  might  have  been  expected,  re-
membering that  the  huts  were  built  of  wood,  and  in  all  pro-
bability covered  by  thatch.  Moreover,  if  these  conflagrations
had  resulted  from  the  attacks  of  enemies,  we  ought  surely  to
have  found  numerous  remains  of  the  slain,  whereas  all  the
Lake- villages  together  have  as  yet  only  supplied  us  with  the
remains  of  six  human  skeletons.

It  must,  I  think,  be  confessed  that  the  arguments  used  by
M.  Troyon  do  not  justify  us  in  believing  with  him  that  the
introduction  of  bronze  was  accompanied  by  an  entire  change
of  population.  The  construction  of  Lake-dwellings  is  a
habit  so  unusual,  that  the  continuance  of  similar  habitations
during  the  Bronze  age  seems  to  me  a  strong  argument
against  any  such  hypothesis.

The  evidence  of  increasing  civilisation  is  more  satis&ctory.
During  my  visit  to  Switzerland  I  endeavoured  to  obtain
statistics  as  to  the  objects  found  in  the  different  Pfahlbauten,


FOUND  IN  DIFFERENT   LAKE- VILLAGES.  163

and  80  far  as  six  stations  are  concerned,  the  result  is  shown
in  the  following  table.  If,  for  instance,  we  commence  with
the  remains  discovered  at  the  Pont  de  Thiele,  between  the
Lakes  of  Neofehatel  and  Bienne,  the  list  comprises  17  axes,
20  whetstones,  and  97  arrow-heads,  flint  flakes,  chips,  etc.>
besides  22  axe-handles  and  95  other  implements  of  bone,
making  altogether  252  objects  of  stone  and  bone.  Yet  not
only  are  objects  of  metal  altogether  absent,  bat  the  other
articles  imply  an  archaic  character.  There  is  only  one  doubt-
ful case  of  a  comcrusher,  and  not  a  single  spindle- whorl.
Moosseedorf  and  Wauwyl  have  produced  almost  exactly  the
same  list.  Wangen,  on  the  Lake  of  Constance,  is  an  even
more  remarkable  case.  M.  Lohle  has  found  there  more  than
1100  axes,  100  whetstones,  150  comcrushers,  and  260  arrow-
heads,  flint  flakes,  chips,  etc. ;  altogether  more  than  1600
instrument!}  and  chips  of  stone,  besides  about  350  of  bone,
making,  with  100  earthenware  spinning-weights,  a  grand
total  of  more  than  2000  objects,  and  yet  not  a  trace  of  metal.
The  number  of  comcrushers  and  spindle -whorls  is  in-
teresting, when  we  remember  that  alone  among  these  four
localities,  Wangen  has  supplied  us  with  specimens  of  car-
bonised grain,  and  flax  fabrics.

Now  let  me  ask  the  reader  to  compare  with  these  four  cases
the  list  of  remains  from  the  Bronze  age  settlements  of  Merges,
Nidau,  Estavayer,  Gortaillod  and  Corcelettes.  The  manner
in  which  the  collections  were  made  accoimts  probably  for  the
absence  of  whetstones,  and,  perhaps,  to  a  great  extent  for
that  of  the  flint  flakes,  etc.  On  these  points,  therefore,  I  lay
no  stress ;  but  the  total  absence  of  stone  axes  at  Merges,  and
their  rarity  at  Nidau  and  Estavayer,  is  very  remarkable.  M.
Forel  assured  me  that  though  he  had  carefully  looked  for
them  he  had  never  found  one.  The  large  number  of  com-
crushers and  the  presence  of  spinning-weights  are  alsp
significant.


164


STATISnCS.


M
N

k

o

M

n


•T«joi


■Mfxpans


*si|00ii-ipia


*8)8f|30«JS


*8^iiu-nE[


•a^tro


•BUM


•»Pl»I8


'soovri


'MAfnS


'Mxy


o«


§


i  §


a


3    S


S    8    S    9    fi


b*       Jp       'I*       CO       cJ

00     b<.     rH     i-i     eq


SCO


SS    i^    s


t<«        rH        CO        A        9        t>

»«  s  ^  s  s  a


•H      00      G<i      fH      oq     i>«


:    :::    S$


■^        09


§0)       ^       69       Ok
l-l      ^      —


e<i     iH


:    S    S^


bo       CO        CO        fH


'I»V>X  PTO^O


G9       eo


a.      a.


M


•rnoi


O      (>.      O      QQ         :       ^

»Q       1^       «-<       00  :       iS       a.

eo        rH        kO


CLa  &•  CLa


'9|d  'fiMV


s


QO        :      kS      a.


€L»  CL*  CL«


*B9ipnvq-8XY


•      09     CO      GQ      a.        •


&•  Om  Cka


•siioq^  aipaidg


d      0>

D        C<«        Cl«         Cl«         O^         CX«


'sSoiJivf


S       9      a.      ci«      eu      a.


'moL


o     to

CO        r-i


^


&.«      &.      a.      cL.


'uaqsiusujoo


o     a.     ^

»0         IH


kO      fc»b


a*      a*      a*


■saoowaqjl^


I      i      S    III  a.


a*      a«      a>      a*      a*


'd9a*89i[«U


^  0»  tN.

^     S9     S9     '^     ^*     ^*     ^^     ^*


*S9XY


*HOQq  eoa..    a.      a.a.


9  1   §   I   I  -i  I  I


Hi


i,    ^   3    JS


OOlfPARISON  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  LAKE-VILLAGES.        165

CoL  Schwab's  splendid  coUectioii  firom  the  Steinberg  at
Nidau  tells  the  same  tale.  He  has  only  33  stone  axes,  and
yet  as  many  as  335  comcrushers.  The  other  articles  of  stone
he  has  not  apparently  collected.  He  has  nearly  200  spindle-
whorls,  and  many  earthenware  rings,  some  of  which  have
also  been  found  at  Merges,  but  which  are  entirely  wanting
at  the  Pont  de  Thiele,  at  Wauwyl,  at  Moosseedorf,  and  at
Wang^a.

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  very  different  states  of  civi-
lisation may  co-exist  in  different  parts  of  the  same  country ;
but  in  this  case  we  must  remember  that  the  settlement  at  the
Pont  de  Thiele,  and  the  one  at  Nidau  were  on  the  borders  of
the  same  lake,  and  that  Moosseedorf,  again,  is  only  about
fifteen  miles  from  Nidau.  Nor  can  we  suppose  that  the
differences  were  merely  a  question  of  wealth;  the  bronze
fish-hooks,  axes,  small  rings,  pins,  etc.,  which  are  foimd  in
such  large  numbers,  show  that  bronze  was  used  not  for
articles  of  luxury  only,  but  also  for  the  ordinary  implements
of  daily  life.

Nor  is  it  only  in  the  presence  or  absence  of  bronze  that
the  Pfithlbauten  differ  from  one  another;  there  are  many
other  indications  of  progress.  We  cannot  expect  to  find
much  evidence  of  this  in  the  implements  of  bone  or  stone ;  but,
as  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  better  forms  of  stone  axe,
and  those  which  are  perforated,  are  very  rare,  if  not  alto-
gether absent  in  the  Stone  age,  none  having  been  found  at
the  Pont  de  Thiele,  at  Moosseedorf,  or  at  Wauwyl,  and  only
two  at  Wangen.

Again,  it  is  not  only  by  the  mere  presence  of  bronze,  but
by  the  beauty  and  variety  of  the  articles  made  out  of  it,  that
we  are  so  much  struck.  In  a  collection  of  objects  made  at
any  of  the  Stone  age  settlements,  no  one  can  fail  to  remark
the  uniformity  which  prevails.  The  wants  of  the  artificers
se^n  to  have  been  few  and  simple.     In  the  Bronze  age  all


166  OOVFAKUON  OF  THB

this  is  altered*  We  find  not  cRUy»  «a  before,  axes»  arrowB>
and  kiuYes,  but,  in  addition,  swords,  lances,  sickles,  ear-rings,
bracelets,  pins,  rings,  and  a  yarietj  of  otber  articles.  More-
over, it  is  a  very  remarkable  fSact,  especially  wben  we  con-
sider the  great,  I  might  say  the  immense,  number  of  bronze
celts  which  are  founds  that  scarcely  two  of  them  haye  been
cast  in  the  same  mould.

The  pottery  tells  the  same  tale.  There  is  no  eyidence  that
the  potter's  wheel  was  known  to  men  of  the  Stone  age,  and
the  materials  of  which  the  Stone  age  pottery  is  composed  are
very  rough,*  containing  large  grains  of  quartz,  while  that  of
the  Bronze  age  is  more  carefully  prepared.  The  ornaments
of  the  two  periods  show  also  a  great  contrast.  In  the  Stone
age  they  consist  of  impressions  made  by  the  nail  or  the
finger,  and  sometimes  by  a  cord  twisted  round  the  soft  clay.
The  lines  are  all  straight,  or  if  curved  are  very  irregular  and
badly  drawn.  In  the  Bronze  age  all  the  patterns  present  in
the  Stone  age  are  continued,  but  in  addition  we  find  circles
and  spirals ;  while  imitations  of  RnimalR  and  plants  are  cha-
racteristic of  the  Iron  age.

In  the  following  page  is  a  table  abstracted  from  a  larger
one  given  by  Professor  Rutimeyer : — 1,  represents  a  single
individual;  2,  several  individuals;  3,  denotes  the  species
which  are  common ;  4,  those  which  are  very  common ;  and
5,  those  which  are  present  in  great  numbers.  A  glance  will
show  that  wild  animals  preponderate  in  the  Stone  age  of
P&hlbauten  at  Moosseedorf  and  Wauwyl,  tame  ones  at  the
Bronze  age  settlement  of  JS^idau.

Thus,  then,  we  see  that  the  distinction  between  the  ages
of  Stone  and  Bronze  is  by  no  means  confined  to  the  mere
presence  of  metal.     Some  may  consider  that  the  evidence  is

*  The  extreme  coarseness  of  the  Swiss  poses ;  for  the  vessels  found  in  tamuli
Lake  pottery  is,  perhaps,  owing  to  its  of  the  Stone  age,  the  material  was  often
haying  been  intended  for  titchen  pox-      more  carefiilly  prepared.


DIFFERENT  lJkK£«VILLAG£S.


16;


not  yet  suiBideiit  to  justify  any  oonclusioii.  Still  tlie
nature  and  execution  of  the  ornaments — the  manufacture
of  pottery,  the  presence  of  the  potter's  wheel,  the  greater
▼aiiety  of  requirements^  eyidenced  by  the  greater  variety
of  implements,  the  indications  of  more  adyanced  husbandry,
the  diminution  of  wild  animals  and  the  increase  of  tame


Waowyl.

MoosMcdorf.

NUaa.

Wild  Andiau.
Broim  Bear

•••
2
3
3
2

1
3

2

2

1
•••
1
d
2
2

6

?1
2
6
2
1
2

2
2
2
2
2

•  •  •

3
2
3

1
1
••■
6
4
2

5

•••
M
5
2
2
2

2

3
3
d
3
4
3

Badirer

Marten

Pine  Marten

Polecat

Wolf

Fox

Wild  Oat

Beayer

Elk

UruB

Bison

Stair

Roe  Deer

Wild  Boar

Marsh  Boar*

B0MB8TXO  Akikals.
Domestic  Boar

Horse

Ox

Goat

Sheep ,

Doe

*^o     •••••••••».•••

ones — all  indicate  a  higher  civilisation  for  the  inhabitants  of
Merges  and    Nidau,   than   for  those  of   Moosseedorf  and
,  Wauwyl.

CoL  Schwab  has  found  at  the  Steinberg  more  than  twenty


*  Considered  hy  Prof.  Riitimeyer  to      at  Nidau  and  in  the  later  Pfahlbauten.
haye  been  at  first  wild,  hat  domesticated


168  ABANDONMENT

crescent6|  made  of  earthenware^  and  with  the  convex  aide
flattened,  to  serve  as  a  foot.  They  are  compressed  at  the
sides,  sometimes  plain,  sometimes  ornamented,  from  eight  to
twelve  inches  from  one  horn  to  the  other,  and  from  six  to
eight  inches  in  height*  They  are  considered  by  Dr.  Keller
to  be  religious  emblems,  and  are  taken  as  evidence  of  moon-
worship.  He  refers  to  Pliny,  xvL  95:  ''Est  autem  id
(viscum)  rarum  admodum  inventu  et  repertmn  magnA  le-
ligione  petitur  et  ante  omnia  sext&  lun&,  qu8&  principia
mensinm  annorumque  his  facit,  et  sseculi  post  tricesimuia
annmn,  quia  jam  virium  abunde  habeat  nee  sit  sui  dimidia ;
omnia  aanantem  appellantes  sua  vocabuh"  This  passage  he
translates  as  follows :  ''  The  mistletoe  is,  however,  very  rare,
but  when  it  is  found  it  is  gathered  with  great  religious  cere-
mony, especially  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  moon,  at  which
epoch  begin  their  months,  years,  and  divisions  of  thirty
years,  because  it  has  then  sufficient  force,  and  yet  is  not  in
the  middle  of  its  course ;  calling  it  Heal-all  in  their  lan-
guage." This  name  has  generally  been  referred  to  the
mistletoe.*  But  the  Swiss  arch8EM)logists  consider  that  this  is
a  mistake,  and  that  it  properly  refers  to  the  moon.

The  Pileworks  of  Switzerland  appear  to  have  become  gra-
dually less  numerous.  During  the  Stone  age  they  were
spread  over  the  whole  country.  Confined,  so  far  as  we  at
present  know,  during  the  Bronze  era  to  the  Lakes  of  Western
Switzerland ;  during  that  of  Iron  they  have  as  yet  been
found  only  on  the  Lakes  of  Bienne  and  Neufchatel.  In
these  settlements  not  only  has  a  new  substance  made  its
appearance,  but  the  forms  of  the  implements  are  different.
We  have,  indeed,  copies  -of  the  bronze  axes  made  in  iron,
just  as  we  found  before  that  some  of  the  earlier  bronze  celts
resembled  the  stone  axes  in  form,  but  these  are  exceptional
cases.     The  swords  have  larger  handles,  and  are  more  richly

*  See  The  Celt,  Roman  and  Saxon,  p.  48.


OF  THE   LAKE-VILLAGES.  169

ornamented ;  the  knives  liave  straight  edges ;  the  sickles  are
larger ;  the  pottery  is  more  skilfully  made  and  is  of  the  kind
generally  known  as  Roman :  the  personal  ornaments  are  also
more  varied,  and  glass  for  the  first  time  makes  its  appearance.

A  field  of  battle  at  Tiefenau,  near  Berne,  is  remarkable  for
the  great  number  of  iron  weapons  and  implements  which
have  been  found  on  it.  Pieces  of  chariots,  about  a  hundred
swords,  fragments  of  coat  of  mail,  lance-heads,  rings,  fibulse,
ornaments,  utensils,  pieces  of  pottery  and  of  glass,  accom-
panied by  more  than  thirty  Gaulish  and  Massaliote  coins  of
a  date  anterior  to  our  era,  enable  us  to  refer  this  battle-field
to  the  Boman  period.  About  forty  Boman  coins  have  also
been  found  at  the  small  island  on  the  Lake  of  Bienne.

After  this  period  we  find  no  more  evidences  of  Lake-habi-
tations on  a  large  scale.  Here  and  there,  indeed,  a  few
fishermen  may  have  lingered  on  the  half-destroyed  plat-
forms, but  the  wants  and  habits  of  the  people^  had  changed,
and  the  age  of  the  Swiss  Pileworks  was  at  an  end.

We  have,  however,  traced  them  through  the  ages  of  Stone
and  Bronze  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  Iron  period.  We
have  seen  evidences  of  a  gradual  progress  in  civilisation,  and
improvement  in  the  arts,  an  increase  in  the  number  of  domestic
animals,  and  proofs  at  last  of  the  existence  of  an  extended  com-
merce. We  foimd  the  oountry  inhabited  only  by  rude  savages,
and  we  leave  it  the  seat  of  a  powerful  nation.  Changes  so
important  as  these  are  not  effected  in  a  day ;  the  progress  of
the  human  mind  is  but  slow ;  and  the  gradual  additions  to
human  knowledge  and  power,  like  die  rings  in  trees,  enable
us  to  form  some  idea  how  distant  must  be  the  date  of  their
commencement.  So  varied,  however,  are  the  conditions  of
the  human  mind,  so  much  are  all  nations  affected  by  the
influence  of  others,  that  when  we  attempt  to  express  our
impressions,  so  to  say,  in  terms  of  years,  we  are  baffled  by
the  complexity  of  the  problem.


170  CHBOllOLOGY.

Some  attempts  have,  indeed,  been  made  to  obtain  a  more
definite  chronology^  and  they  will  be  alluded  to  in  a  later
chapter.  Though  we  must  not  oonoeal  from  ourselYes  the
imperfection  of  the  archseological  i^onl,  still  we  need  not
despair  of  eyentually  obtaining  some  approximate  chrono-
logy. Our  knowledge  of  primitiTe  antiquity  has  made  an
enormous  stride  in  the  last  t^i  years,  and  we  may  fairly  look
forward  with  hope  to  the  Aiture.

The  Swiss  archsBologists  are  continuing  their  labors,  and
they  may  rest  assured  that  we  in  England  await  with  interest
the  result  of  their  investigations.  Few  things  can  be  more
interesting  than  the  spectacle  of  an  ancient  and  long-for-
gotten people  thus  rising,  as  it  were^  to  take  that  place  which
properly  belongs  to  it  in  the  history  of  the  human  race*


171


CHAPTEE  VI.

THB  DANISH    KJOKKB^MODDINOS,  OR  SHELL-M0UND6.

DENMARK  occupieB  a  larger  space  in  the  history,  than
on  the  map  of  Europe;  the  nation  is  greater  than
the  country.  Though,  with  the  growth  of  physical  power
in  surrounding  populations,  she  has  lost  somewhat  of  her
influence  in  political  councils,  and  has  recently  been  most
imjustly  deprived  of  a  great  part  of  her  ancient  possessions :
still  the  Danes  of  to-day  are  no  unworthy  representatives
of  their  ancestors.  Many  a  larger  nation  might  envy
them  the  position  they  hold  in  science  and  in  art,  and  few
have  contributed  more  to  the  progress  of  human  knowledge.
Copenhagen  may  well  be  proud  both  of  her  museums  and  of
her  professors.  I  would  especially  point  to  the  celebrated
Museum  of  Northern  Antiquities,  as  being  most  character-
istic and  imique.

For  the  formation  of  such  a  collection  Denmark  offers  un-
rivalled opportunities.  The  whole  coimtry  appears  to  have
been,  at  one  time,  thickly  studded  with  tumuli :  where  the
land  has  not  been  brought  into  cultivation,  many  of  them
are  often  in  sight  at  once,  and  even  in  the  more  fertile  and
thickly  populated  parts,  the  plough  is  often  diverted  from  its
course  by  one  of  these  ancient  burial  places.  Fortunately,
the  stones  of  which  they  are  constructed  are  so  large  and  so
hard,  that  their  destruction  and  removal  is  a  laborious  and
expensive  undertaking.     While,  however,  land  grows  more


172  8HELL-M0IJNDS  AT  FIRST

valuable,  or  perhaps  when  the  stones  themselves  are
coveted  for  building  or  other  purposes,  no  conservative  tra-
dition, no  feeling  of  reverence  for  the  dead,  protects  them
from  desecration :  and  it  is  estimated  that  not  a  day  passes
without  witnessing  the  destruction  of  one  or  more  of  these
tumuli,  and  the  loss  of  some  perhaps  abnost  irrecoverable
link  in  the  history  of  the  human  race.

Almost  every  barrow,  indeed,  contains  in  itself  a  small
.  collection  of  antiquities,  and  the  whole  country  may  even  be
considered  as  a  museum  on  a  great  scale.  The  peat  bogs,
which  occupy  so  large  an  area,  may  abnost  be  said  to  swarm
with  antiquities,  and  Professor  Steenstrup  estimates  that  on
an  average  every  column  of  peat  three  feet  square  contains
some  specimen  of  ancient  workmanship.  AR  these  advan-
tages and  opportunities,  however,  might  have  been  thrown
away,  but  for  the  genius  and  perseverance  of  Professor
Thomsen,  who  may  fairly  be  said  to  have  created  the
museum  over  which  he  so  worthily  presides.

In  addition  to  the  objects  collected  from  the  tumuli
and  the  peat  bogs,  and  to  those  which  have  been  found
from  time  to  time  scattered  at  random  in  the  soil,  the
Museum  of  Northem  Antiquities  contains  an  immense  col-
lection of  specimens  from  some  very  interesting  shell-mounds,
which  are  known  in  Denmark  under  the  name  of  "  Ejokken-
moddings,''  and  were  long  supposed  to  be  raised  beaches,  like
those  which  are  found  at  so  many  points  along  our  own
shores.  True  raised  beaches,  however,  necessarily  contain  a
variety  of  species ;  the  individuals  are  of  .different  ages,  and
the  shells  are,  of  course,  mixed  with  considerable  quan-
tity of  sand  and  gravel.  But  it  was  observed  in  the  first
instance  I  believe  by  Professor  Steenstrup,  that  in  these  sup-
posed raised  beaches,  the  shells  belonged  entirely  to  fiill
grown,  or  to  nearly  full  grown,  individuals :  that  they  con-
sisted of  four  species  which  do  not  live  together,  nor  require


SUPP06BD  TO  BE  RAISED  BEACHES.  173

the  same  conditions,  and  would  not,  therefore,  be  found
together  alone  in  a  natural  deposit:  and  thirdly,  that  the
stratum  contained  scarcely  any  gravel,  but  consisted  almost
entirely  of  shells.

The  discovery  of  rude  flint  implements,  and  of  bones  still
bearing  the  marks  of  knives,  confirmed  the  supposition  that
these  beds  were  not  natural  formations,  and  it  subsequently
became  evident  that  they  were,  in  fact,  the  sites  of  ancient
villages ;  the  primitive  population  having  lived  on  the  shore
and  fed  principally  on  shell-fish,  but  partly  also  on  the  pro-
ceeds of  the  chase.  In  many  places  hearths  were  discovered
consisting  of  flat  stones,  arranged  in  such  a  manner  as  to
form  small  platforms,  and  bearing  all  the  marks  of  fire.  The
shells  and  bones  not  available  for  food  gradually  accumulated
round  the  tents  and  huts,  until  they  formed  deposits  generally
£rom  three  to  five  feet,  but  sometimes  as  much  as  ten  feet  in
thickness,  and  in  some  cases  more  than  three  hundred  yards
in  length,  with  a  breadth  of  from  one  hundred  to  two
hundred  feet.  The  name  Ejokkenmodding,  applied  to  these
mounds,  is  derived  from  Ejokken,  '*  kitchen,^'  and  modding,
(corresponding  to  our  local  word  midding),  *'  a  refuse  heap,''
and  it  was,  of  course,  evident  that  a  careful  examination  of
these  accumulations  would  throw  much  light  on  the  manners
and  civilisation  of  the  then  population.

Under  these  circiunstances  a  committee  was  formed,  con-
sisting of  Professor  Steenstrup,  the  celebrated  author  of  the
treatise  ''On  the  Alternation  of  Generations,"  Professor
Forchhammer,  the  father  of  Danish  Geology,  and  Professor
Worsaae,  the  well-known  archaeologist:  a  happy  combina-
tion, promising  the  best  results  to  biology,  geology,  and
archaeology.  Much  was  naturally  expected  from  the  labours
of  such  a  triumvirate,  and  the  most  sanguine  hopes  have  been
fulfilled.  Already  more  than  fifty  of  the  deposits  have  been
careftdly  examined,  many  thousand  specimens  have  been  col-


174  DESCRIPTION  OP

lected,  ticketedy  and  deposited  in  the  Museum  at  Gopenliageii,
and  the  general  results  haye  been  embodied  in  six  Reports
pres^ited  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Copenhagen.*

It  is  from  these  reports,  and  from  the  excellent  Memoir
by  M.  Morloty  that  the  following  information  has  prin-
cipally been  derived.  Being,  howeyer,  anxious  to  pre-
sent to  my  readers  a  complete  and  accnra4;e  account  of
these  interesting  shell-monndsy  I  have  twice  visited  Den-
maxk ;  first  in  1861,  with  Professor  Busk,  and  again  in  the
summer  of  1863.  On  both  these  occasions,  through  the
kindness  of  Professor  Thomsen  and  Herr  K.  Herbst  every
facility  has  been  afforded  me  of  examining  the  large  collec-
tions made  in  different  Kjokkenmoddings,  in  addition  to
which  I  had  the  great  advantage  of  visiting  several  of  the
shell-mounds  under  the  guidance  of  Professor  Steenstrup
himself — one,  namely,  at  Havelse  in  1861,  and  those  at
Meilgaard  and  Fannerup  in  1863.

Mr.  Budc  and  I  also  visited  by  ourselves  one  at  Bilidt,
on  the  Isef  jord,  close  to  Fredericksund,  but  this  is  one  of  the
places  at  which  it  would  seem  that  the  inhabitants  cooked
their  dinners  actually  on  the  shore  itself,  so  that  the  shells
and  bones  are  much  mixed  up  with  sand  and  gravel ;  and
we  were  not  very  successful  in  the  search  for  flint  imple-
ments. At  Havelse,  on  the  contrary,  the  settlement  was  on
rather  hig^r  ground,  and  though  close  to  the  shore,  quite
beyond  the  reach  of  the  waves ;  the  shells  and  bones  are
therefore  almost  unmixed  with  extraneous  substances.  At
this  place  the  Kjokkenmodding  is  of  small  extent,  and  is
in  the  form  of  an  irregular  ring,  enclosing  a  space  on
which  the  ancient  dwelling  or  dwellings  probably  stood.
In  other  cases,  where  the  deposit  is  of  greater  extent,  as

*  Untersdgelfer  i  geologiak-antiqna-  also  has  published  an  excellent  abstract
risk  Retning  af  O.  Forchbammer,  J.  of  the  Beports  in  the  M^m.  de  la  So-
Steenstnip,  og  J.  Wonaae.  H.  Movlot      (AM  Vandoise,  T.  ti*  1S6^.


THB  SHBLL-MOUND&  175

for  THJi^j^?ifift  in  the  celebrated  sliell-moand  at  Meilgaard,
the  earhce  is  imdiiUting,  the  greater  thiekneas  of  the
shelly  atratam  in  acme  places  apparently  indicating  the
arrangeoAent  of  the  dwellings.  When  the  shell-mound
at  Havelse  was  preyiously  visited  by  Professor  Steen-
stnxp,  the  shells  were  being  removed  to  serve  as  manure,
and  the  mound,  presenting  a  perpendicular  section,  was  in
a  very  fiivourable  condition  for  examination.  The  small
pit  thus  formed  had,  however,  been  filled  in;  so  that  we
were  obliged  to  make  a  firesh  excavation.  In  two  <^
three  hours  we  obtained  about  a  hundred   fragments  of

*

bone,  many  rude  flakes,  slingstones,  and  flint  fragments,
together  with  nine  rude  axes  of  the  ordinary  "shell-
moimd'*  type,  several  of  which,  however,  were  picked  up
on  the  sur£9tce.

Our  visit  to  Meilgaard  in  1863  was  even  more  success-
ful. This,  which  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  interesting
sheQ-mounds  hitherto  discovered,  is  situated  not  far  from  the
sea-eoast,  near  Grenaa  in  north-east  Jutland,  in  a  beautiM
beech  forest  called  "  Aigt,''  or  "  Aglskov,"  on  the  property  of
M.  Olsen,  who  with  a  praiseworthy  devotion  to  science,  has
given  orders  that  the  Kjokkenmodding  should  not  be  de-
stroyed, although  the  materials  of  which  it  consists  are  well
adapted  for  the  improvement  of  the  soil  and  for  other  pur-
poses, to  which,  indeed,  they  had  already  been  in  part  applied
before  the  true  nature  of  the  deposit  was  discovered.  Arriving
at  his  house  without  invitation  or  notice,  we  were  received  by
M.  Olsen  and  his  family  with  kindness  and  hospitality.  M.
Olsen  immediately  sent  two  workmen  to  dear  away  the  rub-
bish which  had  fallen  in  since  the  last  archeeological  visit,  so
that  when  we  reached  the  spot  we  foimd  a  fresh  wall  of  the
sheU-mound  ready  for  examination.  In  the  middle,  this  Kjok-
kenmodding has  a  thickness  of  about  ten  feet,  from  which,
however,  it  slopes  away  in  all  directions ;  round  the  prin-


176  DISTRIBUTION   OF  THE  SHELL-MOUNDS.

cipal  mound  are  several  smaller  ones,  of  the  same  nature.
Oyer  the  shells  a  thin  layer  of  mould  has  formed  itself,  on
which  the  trees  grow.  A  good  section  of  such  a  Kjokken-
modding  can  hardly  fail  to  strike  with  astonishment  any  one
who  sees  it  for  the  first  time,  and  it  is  difficult  to  conyey  in
words  an  exact  idea  of  the  appearance  which  it  presents.  The
whole  thickness  consists  of  shells,  oysters  being  at  Meilgaard
by  far  the  most  numerous,  with  here  and  there  a  few  bones,  and
still  more  rarely  stone  implements  or  fragments  of  pottery.
Excepting  just  at  the  top  and  bottom,  the  mass  is  quite
unmixed  with  sand  and  gravel ;  and,  in  fact,  contains
nothing  but  what  has  been,  in  some  way  or  other,  subservient
to  the  use  of  man.  The  only  exceptions  which  I  could  see
were  a  few,  very  few,  rough  flint  pebbles,  which  were  pro-
bably dredged  up  with  the  oysters.  While  we  were  in  this
neighbourhood,  we  visited  another  Kjokkenmodding  at  Fan-
nerup  on  the  E!olindsund,  which  was  even  in  historical  times
an  arm  of  the  sea,  but  is  now  a  freshwater  lake.  Other
similar  deposits  have  been  discovered  on  the  Randersfjord
and  Mariagerfjord  in  this  part  of  Jutland,  nor  are  the  two
settlements  at  Havelse  and  Bilidt  by  any  means  the  only
ones  on  the  Isefjord;  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Boeskilde,
Kjokkenmoddings  occur  near  Gjerdrup,  at  Kattinge,  and
Kattinge  Yaerk,  near  Trallerup,  at  Gjershoi,  and  opposite  the
island  of  Hyldeholme ;  besides  several  farther  north,  others
have  been  found  on  the  islands  of  Fyen,  of  Moen,  and  of
Samsoe,  and  in  Jutland  along  Liimfjord  and  Horsensfjord,
as  well  as  on  the  Mariagerfjord,  Spandersfjord,  and  Kolind-
sund.  The  southern  parts  of  Denmark  have  not  yet  been
carefully  examined.  Generally  it  is  evident  that  deposits  of
this  nature  were  scattered  here  and  there  over  the  whole
coast,  but  that  they  were  never  formed  inland.  The  whole
country  was  more  intersected  by  fjords  during  the  Stone
period  even  than  it  is  now.    Under  these  circtmistanoes  it  is


SHELL-MOUNDS  IN  SCOTLAND.


177


eyident  that  a  nation  wliich  subsisted  principallj  on  marine
moUusca  would  never  form  any  large  inland  settlements.  In
«ome  instances,  indeed,  Ejokkenmoddings  have  been  found
as  fiu"  as  eight  miles  from  the  present  coast,  but  in  these
cases  there  is  good  reason  for  supposing  that  the  land  has
encroached  on  the  sea.  On  the  other  hand,  in  those  rio.  m.
parts  where  Kjokkenmoddings  do  not  occur,  their
absence  is  no  doubt  occasioned  by  the  waves  having
to  a  certain  extent  eaten  away  the  shore :  an  explana-
tion which  accounts  for  their. being  so  much  more
frequent  on  the  borders  of  the  inland  fjords  than  on
the  coast  itself;  and  which  seems  to  deprive  us  of
all  hope  of  finding  any  similar  remains  on  our  eastern
and  south-eastern  shores.  Shell-mounds  have,  how-
ever, actually  been  found  on  our  coasts.  They  were
observed  by  Dr.  Gordon,  of  Bimie,  on  the  shores
of  the  Moray  Firth.  I  have  had  the  advantage  of
visiting  these  shell-mounds  with  him.  The  largest
of  the  Scotch  Kjokkenmoddings  is  at  a  place  called
Brigzes  on  Loch  Spynie.  We  did  not  find  any  im-
plements or  pottery  in  it,  although  we  searched  for
several  hours,  but  a  labourer  who  had  been  employed
in  carting  it  away  for  manure  had  previously  found
some  fragments  of  rude  pottery  and  the  bronze  pin
(fig.  124).  Loch  Spynie  has  been  partially  drained,
and  is  shut  out  from  the  sea  by  a  great  accumulation
of  shingle,  so  that  the  water  is  now  perfectly  fresh.
From  ancient  records  it  appears  that  the  shingle  bar-
rier was  probably  completed,  and  the  lake  shut  out
from  the  sea  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  cen-
turies. On  the  other  hand,  I  have  submitted  the
bronze  pin  figured  here  to  Mr.  Franks,  who  gives
it  as  his  opinion  that  it  is  probably  not  older  than  moimd.
800  or  900  a.d.     If,  therefore,  it  really  belongs  to  the  shell-

12


Bronze
Pinfrcm
a  Scotch


178  SHELL-M0I7in)S  IN  OTHER  COUNTRIES.

•

mound,  and  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  the  statement  of
the  man  who  found  it,  we  thus  get  an  approximate  date  for
the  accumulation  of  the  mound  itself.  At  St.  YaliSry,  olose
to  the  mouth  of  the  Somme,  Mr.  Evans,  Mr.  Prestwich,  and
I  found  a  large  accumulation  of  shells,  from  which  I  ob-
tained several  flint  flakes  and  some  pieces  of  rude  pottery.
Mr.  Pengelly  and  Mr.  Spence  Bate  have  recently  described
some  shell-mounds  in  Cornwall  and  Devonshire.  Similar
remains  have  been  observed  by  travellers  in  various  parts
of  the  world,  as,  for  instance,  in  Australia  by  Dampier,*
in  Tierra  del  Fuego  by  Mr.  Darwin,t  and  in  tlie  Malay
Peninsula  by  Mr.  Earle.  j:

The  fact  that  the  majority  of  the  Danish  shell-mounds  are
found  at  a  height  of  only  a  few  feet  above  the  sea  appears  to
prove  that  there  has  been  no  considerable  subsidence  of  the
land  since  their  formation,  while  on  the  other  hand  it  clearly
shows  that  there  can  have  been  no  elevation.  In  certcdn
cases,  however,,  where  the  shore  is  steep,,  they  have  been
found  at  a  considerable  height.  It  might  indeed  be  sup-
posed that  where,  as  at  Bilidt,  the  materials  of  the  £jokken-
modding  were  rudely  interstratified  with  sand  and  gravel,
the  land  must  have  sunk ;.  but  if  for  any  length  of  time  such
a  deposit  was  subjected  to  the  action  of  the  waves,  all  traces
of  it  would  be  obliterated,  and  it  is  therefore  probable  that
an  explanation  is  rather  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the
action  of  waves  and  storms  may  have  been  greater  at  that
time  than  they  are  now.  At  present  the  tides  only  affect
the  Kattegat  to  the  extent  of  about  a  foot  and  a  half,  and
the  configuration  of  the  land  protects  it  very  much  from  the
action  of  the  winds.  On  the  other  hand,  the  tides  on  the
west  coast  of  Jutland  rise  about  nine  feet,  and  the  winds
have  been  known  to  produce  differences  of  level  amounting

•  Pinkerton's  Travels,  vol.  ii-  p.  478.  f  Journal,  p.  234.

X  Ethnological  Soc.  Trans.    New  Ser.  vol.  ii.,  p.  119.  •


FLORA  OF  THB  SHELL-MOD  NDS.  179

to  twenty-nine  feet;  and  as  we  know  that  Jutland  was
anciently  an  archipelago,  asid  that  the  Baltic  was  more  open
to  the  German  Ocean  than  it  is  now,  we  can  easily  imder-
stand  that  the  fluctuations  of  level  may  have  been  greater,
and  we  can  thus  explain  how  the  waves  may  have  risen  over
the  Kjokkenmodding  at  Bilidt  (which  is  after  all  not  much
more  than  ten  feet  above  the  water),,  without  resorting  to
the  hypothesis  of  a  subsidence  and  subsequent  elevation  of
the  coast.

In  the  Lake-habitations  of  the  Stone  age  in  Switzerland,
grains  of  wheat  and  barley,,  and  even  pieces  of  bread,  or
rather  biscuit,  have  been  found.  R  does  not,  however,  ap-
pear that  the  men  of  the  Kjokkenmoddings  had  any  know-
ledge of  agriculture,  no  traces  of  grain  of  any  sort  having
been  hitherto  discovered..  The  only  vegetable  remains  found
in  them  have  been  burnt  pieces  of  wood,,  and  some  charred
substance,  referred  by  M.  Fbrchhammer  to  the  Zosiera  marina^
a  sea  plant  which  was,  perhaps>  used  in*  the  production  of
salt.

The  four  ^ecies  which  are  the  most  abundant  in  the  shell-
mounds  are —

The  oyster,  Ostrea  edulis,.  L..

The  cockle,  Cardium  edule,  L.

The  mussel,  MytiluB  edulie,.  L.  and

The  periwinkle,  Idttorina  liitorea,  L.
all  four  of  which  are  still  used  as  food  for  man.     Other
species  occur  more  rarely,,  namely,; —

Ifasm  reticulata^  L.

Buccinum  undatumy  L..

Venus  puUastra,  Mont.

Helix  nemoraliSf  Miill.

Ventis  aurea,  Gm.

Triffonella  planuy  Da.  C.

Littorina  obtusata,  L.


180  .PAUNA   OF  THE   SHELL-MOUNDS.

'Helix  striffellay  Miill.  and
Carocolla  lapicida,  L.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  specimens  of  the  first  seven
species  are  well  developed,  and  decidedly  larger  than  any
now  found  in  the  neighbourhood.  This  is  especially  the  case
with  the  Cardium  edule  and  Littorina  Httarea,  while  the  oyster
has  entirely  disappeared,  and  even  in  the  Kattegat  itself
occurs  only  in  a  few  places ;  a  result  which  may,  perhaps,  be
partly  owing  to  the  quantities  caught  by  fishermen.  Some
oysters  were,  however,  still  living  in  the  Isefjord^at  the  be-
ginning of  this  century,  and  their  destruction  cannot  be  alto-
gether ascribed  to  the  fishermen,  as  great  Jiumbers  of  dead
shells  are  still  present ;  but  in  this  case  it  is  attributed  to  the
abundance  of  starfishes,  which  are  very  destructive  to  oysters.
On  the  whole,  their  disappearance,  especially  when  taken
in  connexion  with  the  dwarf  size  of  the  jother  species,  is
evidently  attributable. in  a  great  measure  to  the  smaller
proportion  of  salt  in  the  water.

Of  Crustacea  only  a  few  fragments  of  crabs  have  hitherto
been  found.  ZThe  remains  of  vertebrata  are  very  numerous
and  extremely  interesting.  In  order  to  form  an  idea  of  the
nimiber  of  bones,  and  of  the  relative  proportions  belonging
to  different  animals,  Professor  Steenstrup  dug  out  from  three
different  parts  of  the  shell-mound  at  Havelse  «quare  pillars
with  sides  three  feet  in  length,  and  carefully  collected  the
bones  therein  contained.  In  the  first  pillar  he  found  175
bones  of  mammals,  and  35  of  birds ;  in  the  second  pillar  he
found  121  of  mammals  and  9  of  birds ;  in  the  third  309  of
mammals  and  10  of  birds.  The  pillars,  however,  were  .not
exactly  comparable,  because  their  cubic  contents  depended  on
the  thickness  of  the  shell-mound  at  the  place  where  they
were  taken,  and  varied  between  seventeen  and  twenty  cubic
feet.  On  the  whole.  Prof.  Steenstrup  estimates  that  there
were  froip  ten  to  twelve  bones  in  each  cubic  foot.     It  will  be


FISH.      BIRDS.      MAMMALS.  181

seen,  therefore,  that  the  number  of  bones  is  very  great.
Indeed,. from,  the  mound  at  Havelse  alone  the  Committee  ob-
tained in  one  summer  3S00  bones  of  mammids,  and  more  than
200  of  birds,  .besides  many  hundred  of  fishes,-,  which  latter,
indeed,,  are  almost  innumerable.     The  most  common,  species

Clupea  harengus,  X.  (the  herring)
OaduB  callarius,  L.  (the  dorse)
Pkuronectes  limanda,  L.  (the  dab)  and
Murcena  anguiila,  L.  (the  eel).

The  remaiQS  of  birds  are  highly  interesting  and  instruc-
tive. The  domestic  fowl  {Gallus  domesticus)  is  entirely
absent.  The  two  domestic  swallows  of  Denmkrk  {Hirundo
rMtica  and  H.  iiriiica),. the  sparrow  and  the  stork  are  also
missing.  On  the  other^  hand,  fine  specimens  of  the  caper-
cailzie {Tetrao  urogullus)  which  feeds  principally  on  the  buds
of  the  pine,  show  that,  as  we  knew  already  from  the  remains
found  in  the  peat,  the  country  was  at  one  time  covered  with
pine  forests.  Aquatic  birds,  however^  are  the  most  frequent,,
especially  several  species  of  ducks  and  geese.  The  wild  swan
{Cygnus  mtisicus)  which  only  visits  Denmark  in  winter,  is
also  firequently  found ;  but,  perhaps,  the  most  interesting  of
the  birds  whose  remains  have  been  identified  is  the  Great
Auk  {;Aica  impennis,  L.),  a  species  which  is  now  almost,
extinct.

Of  mammalia  by  far  the  most  common  are—

The  stag  {Cercus  elaphus,  L.),

The  roedeer  {C^rvui  capreolus,  L.)  and

The  wild  boar  {8us  scro/a,  L.)

Indeed,  Professor  Steenstrup  estimates  that  these  three  species
form  ninety-seven  per  cent,  of  the  whole ;  the  others  are —

The  urus  {Bos  unu,  L.)

The  dog  {Canis  familiarise JU^)


182  MAMMALS.

The  fox  (Cants  vulpeSy  L.)

The  wdlf  {Cmnis  lupus,  L.)

The  marten  (Maries  sp.  wu)

The  otter  (Luira  mlgarisy  Exl.)

The  porpoise  (Delphinus  phoccma^  L.)

The  seal  (Phoca  sp.)

The  water  rat  (Hypudmis  amphibius,  L.  and

Sypudwus  agrestis^  L.)
The  beaver  (Castor  fiber^  L.)
The  lynx  (Felis  lynx,  L.)
The  wild  cat  (Felis  catus,  L.)
The  hedgehog  (Srinaeeuseuropmus,  L.)
The  bear  (Ursus  arctos,  L.)
The  mouse  (Mus  JlavicoUis,  Mel.)

There  are  also  traces  of  a  smaller  species  of  ox.  The  Lithu-
anian aurochs  (Bison  europmusyhdM  been  found,  though  rarely,
in  the  peat  bogs,  but  not  yet  in  the  Xjokkenmoddings.  The
musk  ox  (Bubalus  moschatus)  and  the  domestic  ox  (Bos  taurus),
as  well  as  the  reindeer,  the  elk,  the  hare,  the  sheep,  and  the
domestic  hog,  are  all  absent.*

Professor  Steenstrup  does  not  believe  that  the  domestic
hog  of  ancient  Europe  was  directly  derived  from  the  wild
boar,  but  rather  that  it  was  introduced  from  the  East ;  and
the  skulls  which  he  showed  me  in  support  ^f  this  belief  cer-
tainly exhibited  very  great  differences  between  the  two  races.
It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  an  animal  so  powerful  and*  so
intractable  as  the  urus  appears  to  have  been,*can  have  been
domesticated  by  savages,  and  the  condition  of  the  bones
themselves  confirms  the  idea  that  they  belonged  to  wild  ani-
mals. The  sheep,  the  horse,  and  the  reindeer  being  entirely
absent,  and  the  domestic  cat  not  having  been  known  in

*  It  ig  a  -curiouB  fact  that,  as  Prof.  cate,  as  a  general  rule,  larger  and  more
Steenstrup  informs  me,  the  bones  from  powerful  animals  than  those  of  the
the  Kjokkenmoddings  of  Jutland  indi-      Islaads.


ABSENCE   OF  CERTAIN   BONES.  183

Europe  until  about  the  ninth  century,  the  dog*  appears  to
have  been  the  only  domestic  animal  of  the  period;  and
though  it  may  fairly  be  asked  whether  the  bones  may  not
have  belonged  to  a  race  of  wild  dogs,  the  question  admits  of
a  satisfactory  answer.

Among  Hie  remains  of  birds,  the  long  bones  which  form
about  one-fifth  of  the  skeleton,  are,  in  the  Kjokkenmoddings,
about  twenty  times  as  nimierous  as  the  others,  and  are  almost
always  imperfect,  the  shaft  only  remaining.  In  the  same
manner  it  would  be  impossible  to  reconstruct  a  perfect  skele*
ton  of  the  quadrupeds,  certain  bones  and  parts  of  bones  being
always  absent.  In  the  case  of  the  ox,  for  instance,  the
mkaing  parts  are  the  heads  of  the  long  bones  (though  while
the  shaft  only  of  the  femur  is  found,  in  the  himierus  one  end
is  generally  perfect),  the  back  bone  except  the  two  first
vertebrae,  the  spinous  processes,  and  often  the  ribs,  and  the
bones  of  the  skull  except  the  lower  jaw  and  the  portion
round  the  eyes.  It  occurred  to  Prof.  Steenstrup  that  these
curious  results  might,  perhaps,  be  referred  to  dogs ;  and,
on  trying  the  experiment,  he  ascertained  that  the  bones
which  are  absent  £rom  the  Ejokkenmoddings  are  precisely
those  which  dogs  eat,  and  those  which  are  present  are  the
parts  which  are  hard  and  solid  and  do  not  contain  much
nourishment.  Prof.  Steenstrup  has  since  published  a  diagram
of  a  skeleton,  tinted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  show  at  a  glance
which  of  the  bones  occur  in  the  Kjokkenmoddings,  and
points  out  that  it  coincides  exactly  with  one  given  by  M.
Flourens  to  illustrate  those  portions  of  the  skeleton  which
were  first  formed.  Although  a  glance  at  the  longitudinal
section  of  a  long  bone,  as,  for  instance,  of  a  femur
and  a  comparison  of  the  open  cancellated  tissue  of  the
two  ends  with  the  solid,  close,  texture  of  the  shaft,  at  once

*  From  the  marks  of  kniyes  on  the      was  then,  as  it  is  still  among  Bereral
bones,  it  seems  evident  that  the  dog      sayage  tribes,  an  article  of  food.


184  MxrriLATiON  of  certain  bones.

juBtifies  and  acooiints  for  the  selection  made  by  the  dogs,  it  is
interesting  thus  to  ascertain  that  their  predilections  were  the
same  in  primseval  times  as  at  present.  Moreover,  we  may
in  this  manner  explain. the  prevalence  of  some  bones  in  fossil
strata.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  of  the  skuU,  the  hard
parts  roimd  the  eye  and  the  lower  jaw  are  the  only  parts
left ;  now  the  preponderance  of  latter  Jaws  in  a  fossil  state  is
well  known.

For  instance, in  the  "Proceedings of  the  Geological  Society
for  1857/'  p.  277,  Dr.  Falconer,  after  describing  some  of  the
fossils  found  by  Mr.  Beccles  at  Swanage,  says: — "The  curious
fttct  that  only  lower  jaws  should  have  turned  up  among  the
Stonesfield  mammalian  remains  has  often  been  the  subject
of  speculation  or  remark.  The  same,  to  a-  certain  extent,
has  held  good  with  the  remains  found  in  the  Ptirbeck  beds.
In  these  minute  creatures^  imless  the  bone  be  com-
plete, and,  supposing  it  to  be  a  long- bone,  with  both  its
articular  surfaces  perfect,  it  is  almost  hopeless,  or  at  any  rate
very  discouraging,  to  attempt  to  make  out  the  creature  that
yielded  it;  whereas  the  smallest  fragment  of  a  jaw,  with  a
minute  tooth  in  it,  speaks  volumes  of  evidence  at  the  first
glance.  This  I  believe  to  be  one  great  reason  why  we  hear
so  much  of  jaw  remains,  and  so  little  of  other  bones."  No
doubt  it  is  so,  but  these  observations,  made  by  Prof.  Steen-
strup,  afford  a  farther  explanation  of  the  fact,  and  it  is  to  be
regretted  that  the  parts  of  the  long  bones  which  are  most
important  to  the  palsDontologist  are  also  those  which  are
preferred  by  beasts  of  prey.

Inevery  caae,  the  boB68  which  contained  marrow  are  split
open  in  the  manner  best  adapted  for  its.  extraction :  this  pecu-
liarity, which  is  in  itself  satisfactory  proof  of  the  presence
of  man,  has  not  yet  been  observed  in  bones  from  the  true
tertiary  strata.

The  Kjokkenmoddings  were  not  mere  summer  quarters;


SHELL-MOUND  BUILDERS  NOT  MERE  SUMMER  VISITORS.      185

the  ancient  fishermen  resided  on  these  spots  for  at  least
two-thirds,,  if  not  the  whole  of  the  year..  This  we  learn
from  an  examination  of.  the  bones  of  the  wild  animals,  as  it
is  often  possible  to  determine,  within  very  narrow  limits,  the
time  of  year  at  which  they  were  killed.  For  instance,  the
remains  of  the  wild  swan  {Cygnus  musicus)  are  very  common,
and  this-  Bird  is  only  a  winter,  yi^tor,  leaving  the  Danish
coasts  in  March,  and  returning  in  November.  It  might
naturally  have  been  hoped  that  the  remains  of  young  birds
would  have  supplied  evidence  as  to  the  spring  and  early
summer,  but  unfortunately,  as  has  been  already  explained,,
no  such  bones  are  to  be  found.  It  is,  therefore,  fortunate
that  among  the  mammalia  two  periodical  phenomena  occur ;:
namely,,  the  shedding  and  reproduction  of  stags'  antlers,
which,. witU  slight  variations  according  to  age,  have  a  fixed
season;  and,  secondly,  the  birth  and  growth  of  the  young.
These, .  and  similar  phenomena  render  it  highly  probable
that  the  ''mound-builders"  resided  on  the  Danish. coast  all
the  year  round,  though  I  am  disposed  to  think  that,  like
the  Fuegians,  who  lead,  even  now,  a  very  similar  life,  they
frequently  moved  from  spot  to  spot.  This  appears  to  me
to  be  indicated  not  only  by  the  condition  of  the  deserted
hearths,  but  by  the  color  of  the  flint  flakes,,  etc. ;  for  while
many  of  these  retain*  the  usual  dull,  bluish  black  color  which
is  characteristic  of  newly-broken  flints,  and  which  remains
imaltered  as  long  as  they  are  surrounded  by  carbonate  of
Ume, .others  are  whitened,, as  is  usual  with  those  which  have
been  exposed  for  any  length  of.  time.  Perhaps,  therefore,
these  were  lying  on  the  surface  during  some  period  of  deser-
tion, fLud  covered  over^only  when  the  place  was  again  inhabited.
The  flint  implements  found  in  the  Ejpkkenmoddings  re-
semble those  which  are  characteristic  of  the  "  Coastfinds."
They  may  be  classed  as  flakes  (figs. .62-69) ;  '^'Shell-mound"*
axes,  which,  as  we  have  already  observed,  present  a- peculiar


186  FLINT   IHPLEHEKT8

form  (figs.  79-81,  and  pi.  1,  figs.  8,  9),  awls  (fig.  125),  aling-


stoties  or  net-weight«  (pL  1,  fig.  12),  and  rude  lance-heads


FBOM   THE   BHELL-UOIJNSS.


(figs.  126-128).   With  these  occur  other  fonns,  which,  though
very  rude,  are  eTidently  ertiflcial,  such  as  fig.  129,  which


appears  to  have  been  a  kind  of  axe,  and  others  of  which  the
sharp  edges  were  evidently  used  for  cutting  purposes.

In  the  two  days  which  we  spent  at  MeQgaard,  we  found
the  following  objects  ; —

"Shell-mound"  axes 19

Flint  flakes 139

Bone  pins,  etc 6

Honis  6

Pottery,  only  4  pieces

Stone  hammer 1

SlingBtonea,  about 20

195
Of  the  three  "pillars"  of  material,  just  alluded  to  (p.  180),
the  first  contained  seven  flint  flakes,  two  axes,  one  worked
piece  of  horn,  three  worked  pieces  of  bone,  and  some  pottery ;
in  the  second  were  cdxteen  flint  flakes,  one  axe,  and  seven
slingstones;  in  the  third,  four  flint  flakes,  two  flint  axes,
and  a  pointed  bone.  In  short,  without  appearing  to  be
richer  than  other  Sjokkenmoddings,  Meilgaard  and  Havelse
have  each  produced  already  more  than  a  thousand  of  these
rude  relics,  though  but  a  small  portion  of  the  mound  has
in  either  case  been  hitherto  removed.     We  need  not,  there*


188  MODE   OF  LIFE   INDICATED

fore,  wonder  at  the  number  of  axes  found  in  the  valley  of  the
Somme,  where  80  much  larger  a  mass  of  material  has  been,
examined.

None  of  the  large  polished  axes  have  jret  been  found  in
the  Ejokkenmoddings :  but  a  fragment  of  one,  which  was-
discovered  at  Havelse,  and  which  had  been  worked  up  into  a'
scraper,  shows  that  they  were  not  altogether  unknown.  A
very  few  carefully-formed  weapons  have  been  found,  but  the
implements  generally  are  very  rude,  .and  of  the  same  types
as  those  which  have  been  already,  describedl  as  characteristic
of  the  "Coastfinds."  Small  pieces  of  very  coarse  pottery
have  also  been  discovered,  and  many  of  the  bones  from  the
Kjokkenmoddings  bear  evident  marks  of  a  sharp  instrument;
several,  of  the  pieces  found,  by  us  were  in  this  condition,  and
had  been,  fashioned  into  rude  pins.

The  observations  of  Arctic  travellers  prove  that  even  if
human  bones  had  been  found,  in  the  shell-mounds,  this
would  not  of  itself  be  any  proof  of  cannibaHsm;  but  the
absence  of  such  remains-  satisfactorily  shows  that  the
primitive  population  of  the  North,  were  free  from  this
practice..  On  the  other  hand,  the  tumuli  have  supplied
us  with,  numerous  skeletons  which  probably  belong  to
the  Stone  age.  The  skulls  are  very  round,  and  in  many
respects  resemble  those  of  the  Lapps,  but  have  a  more
projecting  ridge  over  the  ey^e. .  One- curious  peculiarity  is,
that  their  front  teeth  did  not  overlap  as  ours  do,  but  met  one
another,  as  do  those  of  the  Greenlanders  at  the  present  day.
This  evidently  indicates  a  peculiar  manner  of  eating.

Much  as  still  remains  to  be  made  out  respecting  the  men
of  the  Stone  period,  the  facts  already  ascertained,  like  a  few
strokes  by  a  clever  draughtsman,  supply  us  with  the  elements
of  an  outline  sketch.  Carrying  our  imagination  back  into
the  past,  we  see  before  us  on  the  low  shores  of  the  Danish
Archipelago  a  race  of  small  men,  with  heavy  overhanging


BT  THE  SHELL-MOUNDS.  189

browSy  round  heads,  and  faces  probably  much  like  those  of
the  present  Laplanders.  As  they  must  eyidently  have  had
some  protection  from  the  weather,  it  is  most  probable  that
they  lived  in  tents  made  of  skins.  The  total  absence  of  metal
in  the  Kjokkenmoddings  proves  that  they  had  not  yet  any
weapons  except  those  made  of  wood,  stone,  horn,  and  bone.
Their  principal  food  must  have  consisted  of  shell-fish,  but  they
were  able  to  catch  fish,  and  often  varied  their  diet  'by  game
caught  in  hunting.  It  is,  perhaps,  not  uncharitable  to  con-
clude that,  when  their  hunters  were  unusually  successful,  *the
whole  community  gorged  itself  with  food,  as  is  the  case  with
many  savage  races  at  the  present  time.  It  is  evident  that
marrow  was  considered  a  great  delicacy,  for  every  single  bone
which  contained  any  was  split  open  in  the  manner  best
adapted  to  extract  the  precious  morsel.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  mound-builders  were
regular  settlers  and  not  mere  summer  visitors,  and  on  the
whole  they  seem  to  have  lived  in  very  much  the  same
manner  as  the  Tierra  del  Fuegians,  who  dwell  on  the
coast,  feed  principally  on  shell-fish,  and  have  the  dog  as
their  only  domestic  animal.  A  very  good  account  of  them  is
given  in  Darwin's  Journal  (p.  234)  from  which  we  extract
the  following  passages,  which  give  us  a  vivid  and  probably
correct  idea  of  what  might  have  been  seen  on  the  Danish
shores,  long,  long  ago.  ''  The  inhabitants,  living  chiefly  upon
shell-fish,  are  obliged  constantly  to  change  their  place  of  resi-
dence ;  but  they  return  at  intervals  to  the  same  spots,  as  is
evident  from  the  pile  of  old  shells,  which. must  often  amoimt
to  some  tons  in  weight.  These  heaps  can  be  distinguished  at
a  long  distance  by  the  bright  green  colour  of  certain  plants
which  invariably  grow  on  them .  The  Fuegian  wig-
wam resembles,  in  size  and  dimensions,  a  haycock.  It  merely
consists  of  a  few  broken  branches  stuck  in  the  ground,  and
very  imperfectly  thatched  on  one  side  with  a  few  tufts  of


190  THE   rUEGIANS.

grass  and  rushes.    The  whole  cannot  be  so  much  as  the  work

of  an  hour,  and  it  is  only  used  for  a  few  days At  a

subsequent  period,  the  Beagle  anchored  for  a  couple  of  days
under  Wollaston  Island,  which  is  a  short  way  tt)  the  north-
ward.    While  going  on  shore,  we  pulled  alongside  a  canoe
with  six  Fuegians.     These  were  the  most  abject  and  misera-
ble creatures  I  anywhere  beheld.     On  the  east  coast,   the
natives,  as  we  have  seen,  have  guanaco  cloaks,  and  on  the
west,  they  possess  sealskins.     Amongst  the  central  tribes  the
men  generally  possess  an  otter  skin,  or  some  small  scrap
about  as  large  as  a  pocket-handkerchief,  which  is  barely
sufficient  to  cover  their  backs  as  low  down  as  their  loins.     It
is  laced  across  the  breast  by  strings,  and  according  as  the
wind  blows,   it  is   shifted  from  side  to  side.     But  these
Fuegians  in  the  canoe  were  quite  naked,  and  even  one  full
grown  woman  was  i^solutely  so.     It  was  raining  heavily,
and  the  fresh  water,  together  with  the  spray,  trickled  down
her  body.     .     .     .     These  poor  wretches  were  sti^nted  in
their  growth,  their  hideous  faces  bedaubed  with  white  paint,
their  skins  filthy  and  greasy,  their  hair  entangled,  their
voices  discordant,  their  gestures  violent  and  without  dignity.
Viewing  such  men,  one  can  hardly  make  oneself  believe  they
are  fellow-creatures  and  inhabitants  of  the  same  world.     .     .
At  night,  five  or  six  human  beings,,  naked,  and  scarcely  pro-
tected from  the  wind  and  rain*  of  this  tempestuous  climate,
sleep  on  the  wet  ground  coiled  up  like  animals.     Whenever
it  is  low  water,  they  must  rise  to  pick  sheU-fish  from  the
rocks ;  and  the  women,  winter  and  summer,  either  dive  to
collect  sea  eggs,  or  sit  patiently  in  their  canoes  and,  with  a
baited  hair  line,  jerk  out  small  fish.     If  a  seal  is  killed,  or
the  floating  carcase  of  a  putrid  whale  discovered,  it  is  a
feast:    such  miserable  food  is  assisted  by  a  few  tasteless
berries  and  fungi.     Nor  are  they  exempt  from  &mine,  and,
as  a  consequence,  cannibalism  accompanied  by  parricide."


THE  RELATION  OF  THE  SHELL-MOUXDS  TO  THE  TUMULI.      191

In  this  latter  respect,  however,  the  advantage  appears  to  be
all  on  the  side  of  the  ancients,  whom  we  have  no  right  to
accuse  of  cannibalism.

If  the  absence  of  cereal  remains  justifies  us,  as  it  appears
to  do,  in  concluding  that  they  had  no  knowledge  of  agricul-
ture, they  must  certainly  have  sometimes  suffered  from  periods
of  great  scarcity,  indications  of  which  may,  perhaps,  be  seen
in  the  bones  of  the  fox,  wolf,  and  other  camivora,  which
would  hardly  have  been  eaten  from  choice ;  on  the  other  hand,
they  were  blessed  in  the  ignorance  of  spirituous  liquors,  and
saved  thereby  from  what  is  at  present  the  greatest  scourge  of
Northern  Europe.

Prof.  Worsaae  has  proposed  to  divide  the  Stone  age  into
two  divisions,  the  first  of  which  he  again  sub-divides.  His
classification  stands  as  followf


The  Older  Stone  Age.

1.  The  stone  implements  found  in  the  drift,  and  in  caves
with  remains  of  the  mammoth,  rhinoceros,  hyeDua,  and  other
extinct  animals.

2.  The  Kjokkenmoddings  and  Coastfinds.

The  Later  Stone  Age,

Characterised  by  the  beautifully  worked  stone  implements
and  large  tomulL

The  shell-mounds  and  coastfinds,  according  to  Professor
Worsaae,  are  characterised  by  very  rough  flint  implements
(fig.  25-129)  and  are  evidently  the  remains  of  a  much  ruder
and  more  barbarous  people  than  that  which  constructed
the  large  Stone  age  tumuli,  and  the  beautiful  weapons,  etc.,
found  in  them.  He  does  not  altogether  deny  that  a  few  well-
worked  implements,  and  fragments  of  such,  have  been  found
in  the  Kjokkenmoddings,  but  he  considers  that  some  of  these
at  least  may  be  altogether  more  recent  than  the  shell-


192  THE   OPINIONS  OF   8TEENSTRUP  AND   WORSAAE.

mounds  in  whicli  they  are  reported  to  have  been  found,  and,
at  any  rate,  that  their  presence  is  altogether  exceptional.  At
Meilgaard,  for  instance,  the  researches  undertaken  under  the
superintendence  of  the  late  king  in  June,  1861,  produced  more
than  five  hundred  flint  flakes  and  other  rude  implements,  but
not  a  single  specimen  with  a  trace  of  polishing,  or  in  any
way  resembling  the  flint  implements  found  in  the  tumuli.
On  the  other  hand. these  rude  implements  are  said  to  be
wanting  in  the  tumuli,  where  they  are  replaced  by  instru-
ments of  a  different  character  and  more  skilful  workmanship.
Moreover,  while  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the  shell-
mound  makers  had  no  domestic  animal  but  the  dog,  and  no
knowledge  of  agriculture.  Prof.  Worsaae  considers  that
during  the  later  Stone  age,  the  inhabitants  of  Denmark  cer-
tainly possessed  tame  cattle  and  horsey,  and  had  in  all  pro-
bability some  knowledge  of  agriculture.

Prof.  Steenstrup  is  of  an  entirely  different  opinion,  and
considers  that  the  Kjokkenmoddings  and  Stone  age  tumuli
were  contemporaneous.  He  denies  altogether  that  remains  of
tame  oxen  or  horses  have  been  found  in  tumuli  of  the  Stone
age,  except  in  very  few  instances,  and  in  these  he  TniM'Tif.H^'Tift
that  the  fragments  which  have  occurred  are  evidently  not
coeval  with  the  moimds  themselves,  and  that  in  all  probability
they  have  been  introduced  by  foxes.  He. admits  that  the
stone  implements  from  the  shell-mounds  and  coastfinds  are
altogether  differ^t  '£rom,  and  much  ruder  than,  those  from
the  tumuli;  he  considers  the  two  classes  as  representing,
not  two  different  degrees,  but  two  different  phases  of  one
single  condition  of  civilisation.  The  tmnuli  are  the  burial
places  of  chiefs,  the  Kjokkenmoddings  are  the  refuse
heaps  of  fishermen.  The  first  contain  all  that  skill  could
contrive,  affection  offer,  or  wealth  command;  the  second
only  those  things  which  art  could  not  make  available,
which  were  thrown  away  as  useless,  or  accidentally  lost.


THE   FI.INT   DIPLEMENTB  OF  THE  8HBU.-M0UNDS.       193

In  order,  therefore,  to  compare  these  two  classes  of  objects,
we  most  take,  not  the  ordinary  rude  ^lecunens  which  are  so
numerous  in  the  shell-moands,  but  the  few  better  made  im-
plements which,  fortunately  for  science  and  for  ua,  were  lost
among  the  oyster-shells,  or  which  had  been  broken,  and
therefore  thrown  away.  These,  though  few  in  number,  are,
in  Professor  Steenstrup's^  opinion,  quite  as  numerous  as  could
have  been  expected  under  the  circumstances.  Moreover,  the
long  fiint  flakes,  which  are  so  common  in  the  Kjokkenmod-
dings,  are  sufficient  evidence  that  great  skill  in  the  treatment
of  flint  had  already  been  attained.  Indeed,  as  Professor
Steenstrup  well  says,  these  flakes  are  the  result  of  such  a
small  number  of  blows,  they  are  so  sinq)le  in  appearance,
that  the  art  shown  in  their  manufacture  has  generally  been
much  underrated.  Any  one,  however,  who  will  try  to  make
some  for  himself,  while  he  will  probably  be  very  imsuc-
cessful,  will  at  least  learn  a  valuable  lesson  in  the  ap-
preciation of  flint  implements.  Some  of  the  flakes  found  in
the  Kjokkenmoddings  are  equal  to  any  from  the  Tumuli;
several  of  those  which  we  found  at  Meilgaard  were  iHore
than  five,  and  ozke  was  more  than  six  inches  in  length,  while
I  have  in  my  possession  a  giant  flake  from  Fannerup  (figs.
62-64),  given  to  me  by  Professor  Steenstrup,  which  has  a
length  of  eight  inchea  and  three  quarters.  As  regards  the
rude,  more  or  less  triang^ular,  ''  axes  "  which  are  so  charac*
teristic  of  the  Kjokkenmoddings  and  Coaslfinds,  Prof.  Steen-
strup, as  we  have  already  seen,  declines  to  compare  them
with  the  polished  axes  of  the  tumuli,,  because  in  his  (pinion
they  were  not  intended  for  the  same  purposes.  In  addition
to  the  direct  evidence  derived  from  the  discovery  of  some
few  well-made  flint  axes  of  the  tumulus  type.  Professor
Steenstrup  relies  much  on  the  more  indirect  evidence  de-
rivable from  the  other  contents  of  the  shell-mounds.  Thus
the  frequent  remains  of  large  and  full-grown  animals,  for

13


194  THE  scABcrrr  of  well  madb  flint

inatance  of  the  seal,  and  the  wild  ox,  are  in  his  opinion
sufficient  eyidence  that  the  shell-mound  builders  must  haTe
had  weapons  more  useful  and  destructive  than  anj  which
Prof.  Worsaae  will  concede  to  them ;  moreover,  he  considers
that  many  of  the  cuts  which  are  so  common  on  the  bones
found  in  the  shell-heaps  must  have  been  made  by  polished
implements,  and  are  too  smooth  to  be  the  marks  of  flint
flakes,  according  to  the  suggestion  of  Professor  Worsaae.
Finally,  Professor  Steenstrup,  though*  not  attributing  so
much  weight  as  Professor  Worsaae  to  the  absence  of  the
ruder  implements  from  the  tumuli,  even  if  this  had  been
the  case,  disputes  the  fact  on  the  ground  that  these  imple-
ments  would  not  until  recently  have  been  recognised  and
collected,  and  that  they  have,  in  fact,  been  found  whenever
they  were  looked  for.

After  having  carefiilly  considered  the  evidence  on  both
sides,  I  find  myself,  as  might  naturally  be  expected,  unable
altogether  to  agree  with  either.

The  small  rude  axes  seem  to  me  even  less  well  adapted  to  the
purpose  suggested  by  Prof.  Steenstrup,  than  for  those  which
have  generally  been  attributed  to  them.  There  are,  no  doubt,
some  which  could  never  have  been  used  for  cutting,  but  diese
may  have  been  failures,  owing  to  some  want  of  skill  <m  the
part  of  the  manufacturer,  or  some  flaw  in  the  flint  itself.
Others  appear  to  me,  as  to  Prof.  Worsaae,  serviceable,  though
rude ;  and  well  adapted  for  some  purpose  (possibly  for  oyster
dredging  or  chopping  wood),  which  required  a  strong,  rather
than  a  sharp  edge.  They  also  very  closely  resemble  in
form  some  of  ihe  adzes  used  by  the  South  Sea  Islanders,
one  of  which  is  figured  for  comparison  (see  pp.  72,  73).
They  seem  to  me,  however,  as  to  Prof.  Steenstrup,  to  difPer
in  character  from  the  well-made  and  generally  polished
axes,  and  not  to  be  ruder  implements  of  the  same  type.
Although  the  carefully  formed  knives,  axes,  lance-heads,  etc..


IM7T«EMENTR  IN  THE  8HELL-MOUND8.  195

would  not  be  likely  to  aboxind  in  the  Kjokkenmoddings,  any
more  than  works  of  art,  or  objects  of  value  in  modem  dust-
heaps  ;  still  I  confess  I  should  have  expected  that  frag;inent8
of  these  instnunents,  recognisable  to  us,  though  useless  to
their  original  owners,  would  have  been  more  numerous  than,
in  reality,  they  appear  to  be.

In  addition  to  the  five  hundred  rude  implements,  described
by  Prof.  Worsaae,  as  having  been  found  at  Meilgaard  during
the  king's  visit,  I  myself  obtained  a  hundred  and  forty  flint
flakes,  with  about  fifty  other  implements,  in  the  visit  to
this  celebrated  locality  which  I  made  last  year  imder  the
guidance  of  Prof.  Steenstrup.  To  these,  again,  must  be
added  many  which  had  previously  been  collected  by  M.
Olsen,  and  the  members  of  the  Kjokkenmodding  committee ;
and  yet  among  so  large  a  number  of  instruments  of  various
kinds  there  is  only  one  which  in  any  respect  resembles  the
well- worked  implements  of  the  tumuli.  So,  again,  at  Havelse
only  a  single  fragment  of  a  polished  axe  has  been  foimd
among  more  than  a  thousand  objects  of  the  ruder  kind.  It
might,  however,  fairly  be  urged  that  in  such  a  comparison,
neither  the  flakes  nor  "slingstones"  ought  to  be  brought  into
consideration ;  in  this  case,  and  if  we  were  to  count  the  axes
only,  the  numbers  would  be  immensely  diminished.

There  is  also  much  weight  in  Prof.  Steenstrup's  argument
derived  from  the  flint  flakes,  and  he  has  not  at  all  exaggerated
the  skill  shown  in  their  manufacture.  Their  edges,  how-
ever, are  so  sharp  that  it  would,  I  cannot  help  thinking,
be  very  difficult  to  distinguish  a  cut  produced  by  a  flake,
from  one  made  by  a  ground  axe.  On  the  other  hand,  the
alleged  absence  of  rude  implements  in  the  Stone  age  bar-
rows has  been  satisfactorily  explained  by  Professor  Steen-
strup. In  this  country  it  might  be  argued  from  the  re-
searches of  so  intelligent  an  antiquary  as  Sir  R.  Colt  Hoare,
that  rude  implements  were  never,  or  very  rarely,  found  in


196  ANnOTTITY  OF  THB

tumuli,  but  the  more  recent  researches  of  Mr.  Bateman  have
shown  that  this  is  yery  far  from  being  the  case,  and  haye
made  it  evident  that  the  ruder  implements  of  stone  mtist
have  been  overlooked  by  the  earlier  archaaologists.  In  the
tumuli  examined  by  Mr.  Bateman,  he  obtained  many  flint
flakes,  etc.,  quite  as  rude  as  those  which  are  foimd  in  the
shell-mounds.  •  I  am  not  aware,  however,  that  any  of  the
small  triangular  axes,  which  are  so  characteristic  of  the
shell-mounds,  have  yet  been  met  with  in  the  tumuli.  Ifor^
on  the  other  hand,  have  any  forms  resembling  those  which
are  characteristic  of  the  PalsBolithic  age,  yet  been  found  bk
the  shell-mounds.

Finally,  as  regards  the  supposed  remains  of  domestic
animals  (other  than  the  dog)  in  Stone  age  tumuli,  the
evidence  brought  forward  by  Professor  Worsaae  seems  to
me  altogether  inconclusive,  which,  however,  is  of  the  less
consequence,  as  the  point  will  certainly  be  determined
ere  long,  now  that  attention  has  specially  been  directed
to  it.

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  appears  to  show  that  the
Danish  shell-mounds  represent  a  definite  period  in  the  his-
tory of  that  country,  and  are  probably  referrible  to  the  early
part  of  the  Neolithic  Stone  age,  when  the  art  of  polishing
flint  implements  was  known,  but  before  it  had  reached  its
greatest  development.

It  is,  as  yet,  impossible  to  a£Sx  a  date  in  years  to  the
formation  of  the  Kjokkenmoddings,  which  nevertheless  are^
as  evidently,  of  immense  antiquity.  We  know  that  the
country  has  long  been  covered  by  beech  forests,  and  yet  it
appears  that  during  the  Bronze  age  beeches  were  aibsent,
or  only  represented  by  stragglers,  while  the  whole  country
was  covered  with  oaks.  This  change  implies  a  great  lapse
of  time,  even  if  we  suppose  that  but  a  few  generations  of
oaks  succeeded  one  another.    We  know  also  that  the  oaks


8HSLL-MOUNDS.  197

had  been  preceded  by  pinee,  and  that  the  country  was  in-
habited even  then.

Again,  the  immense  number  of  objects  belonging  to  the
Bronze  age  which  have  been  found  in  Denmark  from  timie
to  time,  and  the  great  number  of  burial  places,  appear  to
justify  the  Danish  Archseolegists  in  assigning  to  this  period
a  Tery  great  lapse  of  time.  The  same  arguments  apply  with
even  more  strength  to  the  remains  of  the  Stone  period,  as  a
country,  the  inhabitants  of  which  live  by  hunting  and  fishing,
can  never  be  thickly  populated ;  and,  on  the  whole,  the  con-
duaion  is  forced  upon  us,  that  the  country  must  have  been
inhabited  for  a  very  long  period,  although  none  of  the  Danish
remains  belong  to  a  time  as  ancient  as  some  of  those  which
have  been  found  in  other  ^arts  of  Europe,  and  which  will  be
described  in  subsequent  chapters.


198


CHAPTER  Vn.

NORTH  AMERICAN  ARCHAEOLOGY.

OUR  knowledge  of  North  American  ArchaBology  is  derived
mainly  from  four  excellent  memoirs  published  under
the  auspices  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution: — 1.  Ancient
Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Yalley,  comprising  the  Results
of  extensive  Original  Surveys  and  Explorations ;  by  E.  G.
Squier,  A.M.,  and  E.  H.  Davis,  M.D.  2.  Aboriginal  Monu-
ments of  the  State  of  New  York,  comprising  the  Results
of  Original  Surveys  and  Explorations,  with  an  illustrative
Appendix ;  by  E.  G.  Squier,  A.M.  3.  The  Antiquities  of
Wisconsin,  as  surveyed  and  described  by  J.  A.  Lapham.
4.  The  Archssology  of  the  United  States,  or  Sketches,  His-
torical and  Biographical,  of  the  Progress  of  Information  and
Opinion  respecting  Yestiges  of  Antiquity  in  the  United
States;  by  Samuel  F.  Haven.  There  are,  indeed,  several
other  memoirs  which  we  ought  perhaps  to  have  added  to  our
list,  especially  one  by  Mr.  Caleb  Atwater,  who,  according  to
Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis,  ''deserves  the  credit  of  being  the
pioneer  in  this  department."  His  researches  form  the  first
volume  of  the  ArchsBologia  Americana,  which  was  published
in  1819,  and  contains  plans  and  descriptions  of  many  ancient
works.  Nor  must  we  omit  to  mention  Schoolcraft's  "  History^
Condition  and  Prospects  of  the  Indian  Tribes  of  the  United
States."

The  memoir  by  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis,  occupying  more
than  three  hundred  pages,  is  chiefly  descriptive  of  ancient


BIBUOGRAPHT.  199

fortifications,  enclosures,  temples  and  mounds,  and  of  the
different  implements,  ornaments,  etc.,  wliicli  have  been  ob-
tained from  them.  It  is  embellished  with  forty-eight  plates,
and  no  less  than  two  hundred  and  seven  woodcuts.

In  his  second  work,  Mr.  Squier  confines  himself  to  the
antiquities  of  the  State  of  New  York.  Within  these  limits^
however,  he  describes  many  ancient  monuments  of  various
kinds,  and  he  feels  "warranted  in  estimating  the  number
which  originally  existed  in  the  State  at  from  two  hundred
to  two  himdred  and  fifty."  He  comes  to  the  conclusion^
''little  anticipated,"  he  says,  ''when  I  started  on  my  trip  of
exploration,  that  the  earthworks  of  Western  New  York  were
erected  by  the  Iroquois,  or  their  western  neighbour^,  and  do
not  possess  an  antiquity  going  very  &a  back  of  the  discovery."
(«c.)  ,

The  systematic  exploration  of  the  ancient  remains  in  Wis-
consin, of  which  the  memoir  by  Mr.  Lapham  is  the  result,
was  undertaken  by  him  on  behalf  of  the  American  Anti-
quarian Society,  by  which  the  necessary  funds  were  provided.
The  cost  of  the  publishing,  however,  which  frt>m  the  great
number  of  engravings  (fifty-five  plates,  besides  sixty-one
wood  engravings)  was  considerable,  was  defrayed  by  the
Smithsonian  Institution,  and  the  work  is  included,  in  the
seventh  volume  of  "Contributions."

Mr.  Haven's  work  is  well  described  in  the  title,  and  forms
an  iilteresting  introduction  to  the  study  of  North  American
Archaeology.  He  gives  us  comparatively  few  observations  or
opinions  of  his  own ;  but  after  a  careful  examination  of  what
others  have  written,  he  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the
ancient  earthworks  of  the  United  States  "differ  less  in  kind
than  in  degree  from  other  remains  concerning  which  history
has  not  been  entirely  silent.  They  are  more  numerous,  more
concentrated,  and  in  some  particulars  on  a  larger  scale  of
labour,  than  the  works  which  approach  them  on  their  several


^00  IHFLEMENTS.

borders,  and  with  whose  Tarious  characters  they  are  blended.
Their  nmnbers  may  be  the  result  of  frequent  changes  of
residence  by  a  comparatiyely  limited  population,  in  accordance
with  a  superstitious  trait  of  the  Indian  nature,  leading  to  the
abandonment  of  places  where  any  great  calamity  has  been
suffered ;  but  they  appear  rather  to  indicate  -a  country  thickly
inhabited  for  a  period  long  enough  to  admit  of  the  progressiye
enlargement  and  extension  of  its  movements.''

Although  more  especially  devoted  to  the  present  condition
and  habits  of  the  Indian  tribes,  still,  tis  constituting  their
history,  Schoolcraft  gives  us  much  arclueological  information,
and  we  shall  have  occasion  frequently  to  quote  from  his  work.

The  antiquities  themselves  fall  into  two  great  divisions:
Implements  {including  ornaments)  and  Earthworks.  The
earthworks  have  been  again  divided  by  the  American  Archae-
ologists into  seven  classes: — 1.  Defensive  enclosures;  2.
Sacred  and  miscellaneous  enclosures ;  3.  Sepulchral  mounds ;
4.  Sacrificial  mounds;  5.  Ten^le  mounds;  6.  <' Animal"
mounds ;  and  7.  Miscellaneous  mounds.  These  classes  we
shall  treat  separately,  and  we  can  then  better  consider  the
''mound-builders"  themselves.


IMPLEMENTS.

The  simple  weapons  of  bone  and  stone  which  are  found  in
America  closely  resemble  those  which  occur  in  otlier  coun-
tries. The  flakes,  hatchets,  axes,  arrow-heads,  and  bone
implements  are,  for  instance,  very  similar  to  those  which
occur  in  the  Swiss  Lakes,  if  only  we  make  allowance  for  the
differences  of  material  In  addition  to  the  simple  forms,
which  may  almost  be  said  to  be  ubiquitous,  there  are  some,
however,  which  are  more  complicated.  In  many  cases  they
are  perforated,  as  for  instance  those  figured  by  Messrs.  Squier
and  Davis  {he.  p.  218).    The  perforated  axes  found  in  Europe


THE  UBB  OP  tX>PPEB.  201

are  generally  considered  to  belong  to  the  metallic  age ;  but
as  &r  as  America  is  concerned,  we  have  not  yet  any  eyidence
as  to  tbe  relative  antiquity  of  the  perforated  and  imperforate

At  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  America,  iron  was  abso-
lutely unknown  to  the  natives,  with  tiie  exception,  perhaps,
ef  a  tribe  near  the  mouth  of  the  La  Plata,  who  had  arrows
tipped  with  this  metal,  which  they  are  supposed  to  have  ob-
tained from  masses  of  native  iron.  The  powerAil  nations  of
Central  America  were,  however,  in  the  age  of  Bronze,  while
the  North  Americans  were  in  a  condition  of  which  we  find
in  Europe  but  scanty  traces — ^namely,  in  an  age  of  Copper.
Silver  is  the  only  other  metal  which  has  been  found  in  the
ancient  tumuli,  and  that  but  in  very  small  quantities.  It
occurs  sparingly  in  a  native  form  with  the  copper  of  Lake
Superior,  whence,  in  all  probability,  it  was  derived.  It  does
not  appear  to  have  been  ever  smelted.  From  the  large  quan-
tity of  galena  which  is  found  in  the  mounds,  Messrs.  Squier
and  Davis  are  disposed  to  think  th^t  lead  must  have  been
used  to  a  certain  extent  by  the  North  American  tribes :  the
metal  itself,  however,  has  not,  I  believe,  yet  been  foimd.

Copper,  on  the  other  hand,  occurs  frequently  in  the  tu-
muli, both  wrought  and  unwrought.  The  axes  have  a
striking  resemblance  to  those  isimple  axes  of  Europe,  which
contain  the  minimum  quantity  of  tin;  and  some  of  the
Mexican  -paintings  give  us  interesting  evidence  as  to  the
manner  in  which  they  were  handled  and  used.  These,  how-
ever, were  of  bronze,  and  had,  therefore,  been  fused;  but
the  Indian  axes,  which  are  of  pure  copper,  appear  in  all
cases  to  have  been  worked  in  a  cold  state,  which  is  the  more
remarkable,  because,  as  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  have  well
observed,  "  the  fires  upon  the  altar  were  sufficiently  intense  to
melt  down  the  copper  implements  and  ornaments. deposited
upon  them.    The  hint  thus  afforded  does  not  seem  to  have


202  TRACES  OF  AKaENT

been  seized  upon."*  This  is  the  more  surprising^  because  as
Schoolcraft  t  tells  us  ''  in  almost  all  the  works  lately  opened,
there  are  heaps  of  coals  and  ashes,  showing  that  fire  had
much  to  do  with  their  operations."  Thus,  though  they  were
acquainted  with  metal,  they  did  not  know  how  to  use  it ;  and
as  Professor  Dana  has  well  observed  in  a  letter  with  which
he  favored  me,  they  may  in  one  sense  be  said  to  have  been  in
an  age  of  stone,  since  they  used  the  copper,  not  as  metal,  but
as  stone.  This  intermediate  condition  between  an  age  of
stone  and  one  of  metal  is  most  interesting.

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Superior,  and  in  some  other
still  more  northern  localities,  copper  is  found  native  in  large
quantities,  and  the  Indians  had  therefore  nothing  to  do  but
to  break  off  pieces  and  hammer  them  into  the  required
shape.  Heame's  celebrated  journey  to  the  mouth  of  the
Coppermine  Biver,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Hudson's  Bay
Company,  was  undertaken  in  order  to  examine  the  locality
whence  the  natives  of  that  district  obtaiaed  the  metal.  In
this  case  it  occurred  in  limips  actually  on  the  surface,  and  the
Indians  seem  to  have  picked  up  what  they  could,  without
attempting  anything  that  could  be  called  mining.  Bound
Lake  Superior,  however,  the  case  is  very  different.  A  short
account  of  the  ancient  coppermines  is  given  by  Messrs.
Squier  and  Davis  in  the  work  already  so  often  cited,  by  Mr.
Squier  in  "  The  Aboriginal  Monuments  of  the  State  of  New
York,"  by  Mr.  Lapham,  J  and  by  Mr.  Schoolcraffc,§  while  the
same  subject  is  treated  at  considerable  length  by  Professor
Wilson.  The  works  appear  to  have  been  first  discovered  in
1847  by  the  agent  of  the  Minnesota  Mining  Company.

''  Following  up  the  indications  of  a  continuous  depression
in  the  soil,  he  came  at  length  to  a  cavern  where  he  foimd

*  One  '*  cast "  copper  axe  is  howeyer  recorded  as  haying  been  fonnd  in  the  State
of  New  York,  bnt  tiiere  is  no  eyidence  to  show  by  whom  it  was  made,
t  Indian  Tribes,  p.  97.  J  Le.  p.  74.  {  U  p.  96.


OOPPKB  MQfES.  203

seyeral  poicupines  had  fixed  their  quarters  for  hybernation ;
bat  detecting  evidences  of  artificial  excavation,  he  proceeded
to  dear  out  the  accumulated  soil,  and  not  only  exposed  to
view  a  vein  of  copper,  but  found  in  the  rubbish  numerous
stone  mauls  and  hanmiers  of  the  ancient  workmen.  Sub-
sequent observations  brought  to  light  ancient  excavations  of
great  extent,  frequently  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  feet  deep,
and  scattered  over  an  area  of  several  miles.  The  rubbish
taken  from  these  is  piled  up  in  mounds  alongside ;  while  the
trenches  have  been  gradually  refilled  with  the  soil  and  decay-
ing vegetable-matter  gathered  through  the  long  centuries
since  their  desertion ;  and  over  all,  the  giants  of  the  forest
have  grown,  and  withered,  and  fallen  to  decay.  Mr.  Knapp,
the  agent  of  the  Minnesota  Mining  Company,  counted  three
hundred  and  ninety-five  annular  rings  on  a  hemlock-tree,
which  grew  on  one  of  the  mounds  of  earth  thrown  out  of  an
ancient  mine.  Mr.  Foster  also  notes  the  great  size  and  age
of  a  pine  stump,  which  must  have  grown,  flourished  and  died
since  the  works  were  deserted ;  and  Mr.  C.  Whittealey  not
only  refers  to  living  trees  now  flourishing  in  the  gathered
soil  of  the  abandoned  trenches,  upwards  of  three  hundred
years  old,  but  adds,  'On  the  same  spot  there  are  the  de-
cayed trunks  of  a  preceding  generation  or  generations  of
trees  that  have  arrived  at  maturity,  and  fallen  down  from  old
age.'  According  to  the  same  writer,  in  a  communication
made  to  the  American  Association,  at  the  Montreal  meeting
in  1857,  these  ancient  works  extend  over  a  track  from  100
to  150  miles  in  length,  along  the  southern  shore  of  the
lake."

In  another  excavation  was  found  a  detached  mass  of  native
copper,  weighing  upwards  of  six  tons.  It  rested  on  an
artificial  cradle  of  black  oak,  partly  preserved  by  immersion
in  water.  Various  implements  and  tools  of  the  same  metal
were  found  with  it.    The  commonest  of  these  are  the  stone


1804  TOITERT.

mauls  or  Tiammers,  of  whicli  from  one  place  ten  cart-loads
were  obtained.  With  these  were  "  stone  axes  of  large  size,
made  of  greenstonej  and  shaped  to  receive  wiiiie-handles.
Some  large  round  greenstone  masses^  that  had  apparently
been  used  for  sledges,  were  also  found.  Thej  had  round
holes  bored  in  them  to  a  depth  of  several  inches,  which
seemed  to  have  been  designed  for  wooden  plugs,  to  which
withe-handles  might  be  attached,  so  that  several  men  could
swing  them  with  sufficient  force  to  break  the  rock  and  the
projecting  masses  of  copper.  Some  of  them  were  broken,
and  some  of  the  projecting  ends  of  rock  exhibited  marks  of
having  been  battered  in  the  manner  here  suggested.''  *

Wooden  implements  are  so  perishable  that  we  •could  not
expect  manj  of  them  to  have  been  found.  Two  or  three
wooden  bowls,  a  trough,  and  some  shovels  with  long  handles,
are  all  that  appear  to  be  recorded.

It  has  often  been  stated  that  the  Tndians  possessed  some
method,  at  present  unknown,  by  which  they  were  enabled  to
harden  the  copper.  This,  however,  from  examinations  insti-
tuted by  Professor  Wilson,  seems  to  be  an  error.  Some
copper  implements,  which  he  submitted  to  Professor  Crofts,
were  found  to  be  no  harder  than  the  native  copper  firom
Lake  Superior.  ''  The  structure  of  the  metal  was  also  highly
laminated,  as  if  the  instrument  had  been  brought  to  its
present  shape  by  hammering  out  a  solid  mass  of  copper/'

POTTERY.

f

Before  the  introduction  of  metallic  vessels,  tlie  art  of  the
potter  was  more  important  even  than  it  is  at  present.  Ac-
cordingly, the  sites  of  all  ancient  habitations  are  generally
marked  by  numerous  fragments  of  pottery :  this  is  as  true
of  the  ancient  Indian  settlements,  as  of  the  Celtic  towns  of

•  Prol  Vf.  Vf.  Mather  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Sqoier,  U.  p.  184.


POTTBllT.  205

England,  or  the  Lake-villages  of  Switzerland.  These  frag-
ments, howoTer,  would  generally  he  those  of  rude  household
yesselsy  and  it  is  pnncipaUj  from  the  tumuli  that  we'  obtain
those  better-made  iims  and  cups  frt>m  which  the  state  of  the
art  may  fairly  be  inferred.  Yet  I  know  of  no  British  sepul-
chral urn,  belonging  to  ante-Roman  times,  which  has  upon
it  a  curved  line.  It  is  unnecessary  to  add  that  representa-
tions of  ftTiiTTiAlH  or  plants  are  entirely  wanting.  They  are
also  absent  from  all  articles  belonging  to  the  Bronze  age  in
Switzerland,  and  I  might  almost  say  in  Western  Europe
generally,  while  ornaments  of  curved  and  spiral  lines  are
eminently  characteristic  of  this  period.  The  ornamental
ideas  of  the  Stone  age,  on  the  other  hand,  are  confined,  so  far
as  we  know,  to  compositions  of  straight  lines,  and  the  idea  of
a  curve  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  them.  The  most
elegant  ornaments  on  their  vases  are  impressions  of  the
finger-nail,  or  of  a  cord  wound  round  the  soft  clay.

Dr.  Wilson  has  well  pointed  out,  that,  as  regards  Europe,
^'in  no  single  case  is  any  attempt  made  to  imitate  leaf  or
flower,  bird,  beast,  or  any  simple  natural  object ;  and  when,
in  the  bronze  work  of  the  later  Iron  period,  imitative  forms
at  leingth  appear,  they  are  chiefly  the  snake  and  dragon
shapes  and  patterns,  borrowed  seemingly  by  Celtic  and  Teu-
tonic wanderers,  with  the  wild  fancies  of  their  mythology,
from  the  far  Eastern  cradle-land  of  their  birth.'*  Very
different  was  the  condition  of  American  Art.

"  The  art  of  pottery  attained  to  a  considerable  degree  of
perfection.'*  Some  of  the  vases  found  in  the  tumuli  are  said
to  rival,  ''in  elegance  of  models  delicacy,  and  finish,'*  the
best  Peruvian  specimens.  The  material  used  is  a  fine  clay  :
in  the  more  delicate  specimens,  pure ;  in  the  coarser  ones,
mixed  with  pounded  quartz.  The  art  of  glazing  and  the  use
of  the  potter*B  wKeel  appear  not  to  have  been  known,  though
that  ''simple  approximation  to  a  potter's  wheel  may  have


206  ORNAMENTS.

existed/'  which  consists  of  ''  a  stick  of  wood  grasped  in  the
hand  by  the  middle,  and  turned  round  inside  a  wall  of  clay
formed  by  the  other  hand  or  by  another  workman."  ♦

Among  the  most  characteristic  specimens  of  ancient
American  pottery  are  the  Pipes.  Some  of  these  are  simple
bowls,  smaller  indeed,  but  otherwise  not  unlike  a  common
everyday  pipe,  from  which  they  differ  however  in  having
generally  no  stem,  the  mouth  having  apparently  been  applied
direct  to  the  bowl.  Others  are  highly  omam^ited^  and
many  are  spirited  representations  of  monsters  or  of  animals,
such  as  the  beaver,  otter,  wild  cat,  elk,  bear,  wolf,  panther,
raccoon,  opossum,  squirrel,  manatee,  eagle,  hawk,  heron,  owl,
buzzard,  raven,  swallow,  parroquet,  duck,  grouse,  and  many
others.  The  most  interesting  of  these,  perhaps,  is  the
Manatee  or  Lamantin,  of  which  seven  representations  have
been  found  in  the  mounds  of  Ohio.  These  are  no  mere  rude
sculptures,  about  which  there  might  easily  be  a  mistake,  but
''  the  truncated  head,  thick  semicircular  snout,  peculiar  nos-
trils, tumid,  fiirrowed  upper  lip,  singular  feet  or  fins,  and
remarkable  moustaches,  are  all  distinctly  marked,  and  render
the  recognition  of  the  animal  complete."!  This  curious
animal  is  not  at  present  found  farther  than  the  shores  of
Florida,  a  thousand  miles  away.

ORNAMENTS.

The  ornaments  which  have  been  found  in  the  mounds
consist  of  beads,  shells,  necklaces,  pendants,  plates  of  mica,
bracelets,  gorgets,  etc.  The  number  of  beads  is  some-
times quite  surprising.  Thus  the  celebrated  Grave  Creek
mound  contained  between  three  and  four  thousand  shell-
beads,  besides  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  ornaments  of
mica,  several  bracelets  of  copper,  and  various  articles  carved

•  Squier  and  DaviB,  Lc.  p.  196.  f  Sqnier  and  Dafu,  Le,  p.  252.


BABTHWORKS.  207

in  stone.  The  beads  are  generally  made  of  shell,  but  are
sometimes  cut  out  of  bone  or  teeth ;  in  form  they  are  gene-
rally round  or  oblong ;  sometimes  the  shell  of  the  XJnio  is
cut  and  strung  so  as  to  ''exhibit  the  conyex  surface  and
pearly  nacre  of  the  shell/'  The  necklaces  are  often  made  of
beads  or  shells,  but  sometimes  of  teeth.  The  ornaments  of
mica  are  thin  plates  of  various  forms,  each  of  which  has  a
small  hole.  The  bracelets  are  of  copper,  and  generally  en-
circle the  arms  of  the  skeletons,  besides  being  frequent  on
the  "altars.''  They  are  simple  rings  "hammered  out  with
more  or  less  skill;  and  so  bent  that  the  ends  approach,  or  lap
over,  each  other."  The  so-called  "gorgets"  are  thin  plates
of  copper,  always  with  two  holes,  and  probably  therefore
worn  as  badges  of  authority.

EARTHWOBKS.

The  Earthworks  are  most  abimdant  in  the  central  parts
of  the  United  States.  They  decrease  in  number  as  we  ap-
proach the  Atlantic,  and  are  very  scarce  in  British  America
and  on  the  west  of  the  Bocky  Moimtains.

Defensive  Enclosures.

The  works  belonging  to  this  class  "usually  occupy
strong  natural  positions,"  and  as  a  fair  specimen  of  them  we
may  take  the  Boumeville  Enclosure  in  Boss  Ooimty,  Ohio.
"This  work,"  say  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  {Lc.  p.  11),
"occupies  the  summit  of  a  lofby  detached  hill,  twelve  miles
westward  from  the  city  of  ChQlicothe,  near  the  village  of
Boumeville.  The  hill  is  not  far  from  four  hundred  feet  in
perpendicular  height ;  and  is  remarkable,  even  among  the
steep  hills  of  the  west,  for  the  general  abruptness  of  its  sides,
which  at  some  points  are  absolutely  inaccessible."  ....  The
defences  consist  of  a  wall  of  stone,  which  is  carried  round  the


208  DEFENSIVE  ENCLOSURES.

hill  a  litde  below  the  brow ;  but  at  some  places  it  rises,  so
as  to  cut  off  the  narrow  spurs,  and  extends  across  the  neck
that  connects  the  hill  with  the  range  beyond."  It  must  not,
however,  be  understood  that  anything  like  a  true  wall  now
exists;  the  present  appearance  is  rather  what  might  have
been  ^'expected  from  the  falling  outwards  of  a  wall  of  stones,
placed,  as  this  was,  upon  the  declivity  of  a  hill."  Where  it
is  most  distinct  it  is  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  wide,  by
three  or  four  in  height.  The  area  thus  enclosed  is  about
one  himdred  and  forty  acres,  and  the  wall  is  two  miles  and  a
quarter  in  length.  The  stones  themselves  vary  much  in  size,
and  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  suggest  that  the  wall  may
originally  have  been  about  eight  feet  high,  with  an  equal
base.  At  present,  treea  of  the  largest  size  are  growing  upon
it.  On  a  similar  work,  known  as  ''Fort  Hill,"  Highland
County,  Ohio,  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  found  a  splendid
chestnut  tree,  which  they  suppose  to  be  six  hundred
years  old.  "If,"  they  say,  "to  this  we  add  the  probable
period  intervening  from  the  time  of  the  building  of  tins
work  to  its  abandonment,  and  the  subsequent  period  up  to
its  invasion  by  the  forest,  we  are  led  irresistibly  to  the  con-
clusion that  it  has  an  antiquity  of  at  least  one  thousand  years.
But  when  we  notice,  all  around  us,  the  crumbling  trunks  of
trees,-  half  hidden  in  the  accumulating  soil,  we  are  induced  to
fix  on  an  antiquity  still  more  remote."

The  enclosure  known  as  "Clark's  Work,"  in  Boss  Coiinty,
Ohio,  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  interesting.  It  consists
of  a  parallelogram^  two  thousand  eight  hundred  feet  by
eighteen  hundred,  and  enclosing  about  one  hundred  and
eleven  acres.  To  the  right  of  this^  the  principal  work  is  a
perfect  square,  containing  an  area  of  about  sixteen  acres.
Each  side  is  eight  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  length,  and  in
the  middle  of  each  is  a  gateway  thirty  feet  wide,  covered
by  a  small  mound.    Within  the  area  of  the  great  work  are


SACRED  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  ENCLOSUBES.  209

several  smaller  mounds  and  enclosures ;  and  it  is  estimated
that  not  less  than  three  millions  of  cubic  feet  of  earth  were
used  in  this  great  undertaking.  It  has  also  been  observed
that  water  is  almost  invariably  found  within,  or  close  to
these  enclosures.

Sacred  and  Miscellaneous  Enclosures.

If  the  purpose  for  which  the  works  belonging  to  the  first
class  were  erected  is  very  evident,  the  same  cannot  be  said
for  those  which  we  have  now  to  mention.  That  they  were
not  intended  for  defence  is  inferred  by  Messrs.  Squier  and
Davis  firom  their  small  size,  from  the  ditch  being  inside  the
embankment,  and  from  their  position,  which  is  often  com-
pletely commanded  by  naighbouring  heights.

Dr.  Wilson  also  (vol.  i.  p.  324)  follows  Sir  R.  C.  Hoare  in
considering  the  position  of  the  ditch  as  being  a  distinguishing
mark  between  military  and  religious  works.  But  Catlin  ex-
pressly tells  us  that  in  the  Mandan  village  which  he  describes,
the  ditch  was  on  the  inner  side  of  the  embankment,  and  the
warriors  were  thus  sheltered  while  they  shot  their  arrows
through  the  stockade.  We  see,  therefore,  that,  in  America
at  least,  this  is  no  reliable  guide.

While,  however,  the  defensive  earthworks  occupy  hill
tops,  and  other  situations  most  easy  to  defend,  the  so-called
sacred  enclosures  are  generally  foimd  on  ''the  broad  and
level  river  bottoms,  seldom  occurring  upon  the  table-lands  or
where  the  surface  of  the  groimd  is  imdulating  or  broken."
They  are  usually  square  or  circular  in  form ;  a  circular  being
often  combined  with  one  or  two  squares.  ''  Occasionally  we
find  them  isolated,  but  more  frequently  in  groups.  The
greater  number  of  the  circles  are  of  small  size,  with  a  nearly
uniform  diameter  of  two  himdred  and  fifby  or  three  hundred
feet,  and  invariably  have  the  ditch  interior  to  the  wall."

14


210  EARTHWORKS  IK  THE  flCIIlTO  VAIXBT.

Some  of  the  circles,  however,  are  much  larger,  enclosing  fifty
acres  or  more.  The  squares  or  odier  rectangular  works
never  have  a  ditch^  and  the  earth  of  which  they  are  oom-
posed  appears  to  hare  been  taken  up  evenly  from  the  sur-
£Etce,  or  from  large  pits  in  the  neighbourhood.  They  Taiy
much  in  size  ;  five  or  six  of  them,  however,  are  "  exact
squares,  each  ride  measuring  one  thousand  and  eighty  feet —
a  coincidence  which  could  not  possibly  be  accidental,  and
which  must  possess  some  significance/'  The  circles  also,  in
spite  of  their  great  size,  are  perfectly  round,  so  that  the
American  archaBologists  consider  themsdves  justified  in  con-
cluding that  the  mound*builders  must  have  had  some  stan-
dard of  measurement,  and  some  means  of  determining  angles.

The  most  remarkable  group  is  that  near  Newark,  in  &e
Scioto  Yalley,  which  covers  an  area*of  four  square  miles  /  A
plan  of  these  gigantic  works  is  given  by  Messrs.  Squier  and
Davis,  and  another,  from  a  later  survey,  by  Mr.  Wilson.
They  consist  of  an  octagon^  with  an  area  of  fifty,  a  square
occupying  twenty  acres,  and  two  large  circles  occupying  re-
spectively thirty  and  twenty  acres.  From  the  octagon  an
avenue  formed  by  parallel  walls  extends  southwards  lor  two
miles  and  a  half;  there  are  two  other  avenues  which  are
j:ather  more  than  a  mile  in  length,  one  of  ihem  oonnecting
the  octagon  with  the  square.

Besides  these,  there  are  various  other  embankments  and
small  circles,  the  greater  number  about  eighty  feet  in
diameter,  but  some  few  much  larger.  The  walls  of  Uiese
small  circles,  as  well  as  those  of  the  avenues  and  of  the
irregular  portions  of  the  works  generally,  are  very  slight,
and  for  the  most  part  about  four  feet  in  height.  The  other
embankments  are  much  more  considerable ;  the  walls  of  the
large  circle  are  even  now  twelve  feet  high,  with  a  base  of
fifty  feet,  and  an  interior  ditch  seven  feet  deep  and  thirty-
five  in  width.     At  the  gateway,  however,  they  are  stiU  more


SAKTHWOKEt  AT  GIBCLBTILLB.  211

imposing ;  the  wallB  bemg  sixteen  feet  lugh,  and  the  ditoh
thirteen  feet  deep.  The  whole  area  is  covered  with  '' gigantic
trees  of  a  primitive  forest ;"  and,  say  Messrs.  Sqiiier  and
Davis,  ^'in  entering  the  ancient  avenue  for  the  first  time,
the  visitor  does  not  fJEul  to  experience  a  sensation  of  awe,
sach  as  he  might  feel  in  passing  the  portals  of  an  Egyptian
temple,  or  in  gazing  upon  the  silent  ruins  of  Petra  of  the
desert.''

The  city  of  Oircleville  takes  its  name  from  one  of  these
embankments,  which,  however,  is  no  more  remarkable  than
many  others.  It  consists  of  a  square  and  a  circle,  touching
one  anotiier ;  the  sides  of  the  square  being  about  nine  hun-
dred feet  in  length,  and  the  circle  a  little  more  than  a
thousand  feet  in  diameter.  The  square  had  eight  doorways,
one  at  each  angle,  and  one  in  the  middle  of  each  side,  ev^y
doorway  being  protected  by  a  mound.  The  circle  was  peculiar
in  having  a  double  embankment.  This  work,  alas !  has  been
entirely  destroyed ;  and  many  others  have  also  disappeared,
or  are  being  gradually  obliterated  by  the  plough.  Under
these  circumstances,  we  read  with  pleasure  that  "  The  Direc-
tors of  the  Ohio  Land  Company,  when  they  took  possession
of  the  country  at  the  mouth  of  the  Muskingum  River  in
1788,  adopted  immediate  measures  for  the  preservation  of
these  monuments.  To  their  credit  be  it  said,  one  of  thieir
earliest  official  acts  was  the  passage  of  a  resolution,  which  is
entered  upon  the  Journal  of  their  jMroceedings,  reserving  the
two  truncated  pyramids  and  the  great  mound,  with  a  few
acres  attached  to  each,  as  public  squares.^^  Such  enlightened
conduct  deserves  the  thanks  of  archaeologists,  and  I  sin-
cerely hope  that  the  Company  has  prospered.

Both  as  being  the  only  example  of  an  enclosure  yet  ob-
served in  Wisconsin,  and  also  as  having  in  many  respects  a
great  resemblance  to  a  fortified  town,  the  ruins  of  Aztalan
are  weU  worthy  of  attention.     They  are  situated  on  the  west


212  AZTALAN.

branch  of  Rock  Biver,  and  were  disooyered  in  1836  by  N.  F.
Hyer,  Esq.,  who  surveyed  them  hastily,  and  published  a
brief  description,  with  a  figure,  in  the  '^  Milwaukie  Adver-
tiser/' In  '^  Silliman's  American  Journal,"  No.  XLIY.,  is  a
paper  on  tiie  subject  by  Mr.  Taylor,  from  which  was  derived
the  plan  and  the  short  account  given  by  Messrs.  Squier
and  Davis.*  The  most  complete  description  is  contained  in
Mr.  Lapham's  '^  Antiquities  of  Wisconsin'' f  The  name
"  Aztalan"  was  given  to  this  place  by  Mr.  Hyer,  because  the
Aztecs  had  a  tradition  that  they  originally  came  from  a
country  to  the  north,  which  they  called  Aztalan.  It  is  said
to  be  derived  from  two  Mexican  words,  Atl,  water,  and  An,
near.  **  The  main  feature  of  these  works  is  an  endosore  of
earth  (not  brick,  as  has  been  erroneously  stated),  extending
around  fiiree  sides  of  an  irregular  parallelogram ;"  the  river
'^  forming  the  fourth  side  on  the  east.  The  space  thus  en-
closed contains  seventeen  acres  and  two-thirds.  The  comers
are  not  rectangular,  and  the  embankment  or  ridge  is  not
straight."  ^'The  ridge  fDrming  the  enclosure  is  631  feet
long  at  the  north  end,  1419  feet  long  on  the  west  side,  and
700  feet  on  the  south  side ;  making  a  total  length  of  wall  of
2750  feet.  The  ridge  or  wall  is  about  22  feet  wide,  and
from  one  foot  to  £ve  in  height.  The  wall  of  earth  is  en-
larged on  the  outside,  at  nearly  regular  distances,  by  mounds
of  the  same  material.  They  are  called  buttresses,  or  bas-
tions ;  but  it  is  quite  clear  that  they  were  never  intended  for
either"  the  one  or  the  other.  They  vary  from  sixty-one
to  ninety-five  feet  apart,  the  mean  distance  being  eighty-two
feet.  Near  the  south-west  angle  are  two  outworks,  con-
structed in  the  same  way  as  the  main  embankment.

In  many  places  the  earth  forming  the  walls  appears  to
have  been  burnt.  ''  Irregular  masses  of  hard  reddish  clay,
fiiU  of  cavities,  bear  distinct  impressions  of  straw,  or  rather

•  l,e.  p.  131.  t  P.  41.  I

i


AZTALAK.  213

wHd  liay,  with  which  they  had  been  mixed  before  burning/'
"  This  is  the  only  foiindation  for  calling  these  *  brick  walls.'
The  'bricks'  were  never  made  into  any  regular  fonn,  and  it
is  even  doubtful  whether  the  burning  did  not  take  place  in
the  wall  after  it  was  built."  *  Some  of  the  moimds,  or  but-
tresses, though  forming  part  of  an  enclosure,  were  also  used
for  sepulchral  purposes,  as  was  proved  by  their  containing
sikeletons  in  a  sitting  posture,  with  fragments  of  pottery.
The  highest  point  inside  the  enclosure  is  at  the  south-west
comer,  and  ie  '^  occupied  by  a  square  truncated  mound,
which  ....  presents  the  appearance  of  a  pyramid,  rising
by  successive  steps  like  the  gigantic  structures  of  Mexico."
"At  the  north-west  angle  of  the  enclosure  is  another  rectan-
gular, truncated,  pyramidal  elevation,  of  sixty-five  feet  level
area  at  the  top,  with  remains  of  its  graded  way,  or  sloping
ascent,  at  the  south-west  comer,  leading  also  towards  a  ridge
that  extends  in  the  direction  of  the  river."

Within  the  endosure  are  some  ridges  about  two  feet  high,
and  connected  with  them  are  several  rings,  or  circles,  which
are  supposed  to  be  the  remains  of  mud  houses.  *'  Nearly  the
whole  interior  of  the  inclosure  appears  to  have  been  either
excavated  or  thrown  up  into  mounds  and  ridges ;  the  pits
and  irregular  excavations  being  quite  nimierous  over  much
of  the  space  not  occupied  by  moxmds."  These  excavations
and  ridges  are,  in  all  probability,  the  ruins  of  houses.  Some
years  ago  a  skeleton  was  found  in  one  of  the  mounds,  wrapped
apparently  in  cloth  of  open  texture,  "  like  the  coarsest  linen
fabric ;"  but  the  threads  were  so  entirely  rotten,  as  to  make
it  quite  uncertain  of  what  material  they  were  made.

The  last  Indian  occupants  of  this  interesting  locality  had
no  tradition  as  to  the  history  or  the  purpose  of  these  earth-
works.

•  These  -walls  must  present  some  faint  resemblance  to  the  eelehrated  yitrified
forts  of  Scotland.


^14  MODEBK  BABTHWORKS.

Among  the  Northern  tribes  of  existing  IndianB  there  do
not  appear  to  be  any  earthworks  corresponding  to  these  so-
called  Sacred  Enclosures.  "  No  sooner,  however,  do  we  pass
to  the  sonthwaid,  and  arrive  among  the  Creeks,  Natchez,
and  affiliated  Floridian  tribes,  than  we  discover  ttaces  of
struetores  which,  if  they  do  not  entirely  correspond  with  the
regular  earthworks  of  the  West,  nevertheless  seem  to  be
somewhat  analogous  to  them.*  These  tribes,  indeed,  appear
to  have  been  more  civilised  than  those  of  the  North,  since
they  were  agricultural  in  their  habits,  lived  in  considerable
towns,  and  had  a  systematized  religion,  so  that,  in  fact,  they
ihust  have  occupied  a  position  intermediate,  as  well  econo-
mically as  geographically,  between  the  powerAil  monarchies
of  Oentral  America  and  the  hunting  tribes  of  the  North.
The  ^'structures  to  which  Mr«  Squier  alludes  are  described
by  him,  both  in  his  ^Second  Memoir>''  and  also  in  the
'' Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mis»ssippi  Yalley''  (p.  120).
The  '^'Ghunk  Yards,"  now  or  lately  in  use  among  the  Creeks,
and  which  have  only  recently  been  abandoned  among  the
Cherokees,  are  rectangular  areas,  generally  occupjring  the
.  ceiitre  of  the  town,  closed  at  the  sides,  but  with  an  opening
at  each  end.  They  are  sometimes  from  six  to  nine  hundred
feet  in  length,  being  largest  in  the  oUeat  towns.  The  area  is
levelled  and  slightly  sunk,  being  surrounded  by  a  low  bank
formed  of  the  earth  thus  obtained.  In  the  centre  is  a  low
mound,  on  which  stands  the  Chunk  Pole,  to  the  top  of  which
is  some  object  which  serves  as  a  mark  to  shoot  at.  Near  each
comer  at  one  end,  is  a  small  pole,  about  twelve  feet  high ;
these  are  called  the  ^' slave  posts,'*  because  in  the  ''good  old
times,'*  captives  condemned  to  the  torture  were  fiistened  to
them.  The  name  "  Chunk  Yard  "  seems  to  be  derived  from
an  Indian  game  called  "Chunke,"  which  was  played  in  them.
At  one  end  of,  and  just  outside,  this  area  stands  generally

*  Squier,  Le,  p.  186.


atipuLcaiLUi  MOUNDS.  215

a  circular  eminence,  with  a  flat  top,  upon  which  is  elevated
the  Great  Council  House.  At  the  other  end  is  a  flat-topped,
square  eminence,  about  as  high  as  the  circular  one  just  men-
tioned; '^upon  this  stands  the  public  square."

These,  and  other  accounts  given  by  early  travellers  among
the  Indians,  certainly  throw  much  light  on  the  circular  and
square  enclosures ;  some  of  which,  though  cbussed  by  Messrs.
Squier  and  Davis  under  this  head,  seem  to  me  to  be  the
slight  fortifications  which  surrounded  villages,  and  were  un-
doubtedly crowned  by  stockades.  We  have  already  seen  that
the  position  of  the  ditch  is  in  reality  no  argument  against
this  view ;  nor  does  the  position  of  the  works  seem  conclusive,
if  we  suppose  that  they  were  intended  less  to  stand  a  regulai
siege  than  to  guard  against  a  sudden  attack.

Sepulchral  Mounds.

The  Sqmlchrai  mounda  are  very  numerous  in  the  central
parts  of  the  United  States.  "  To  say  that  they  are  innumer-
able in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  would  be  no  exag-
geration. They  may  literaDy  be  numbered  by  thousands  and
tens  of  thousands.^  They  vary  from  dz:  to  eighty  feet  in
height ;  generally,  stand  outside  the  enclosures  :  are  often
isolated,  but  often  also  in  groups;  they  are  usually  round,
but  sometimes  elliptical  or  pear-shaped.  They  cover  gene-
rally a  single  skeletcm,  which  however  is  often  burnt.  Oc-
casionally there  is  a  stone  cist,  but  urn  burial  also  prevailed
to  a  considerable  ext^it,  especially  in  the  Southern  States.
The  corpse  was  genendly  buried  in  a  contracted  position.
Implements  both  of  stone  and  metal  occur  frequently ;  but
while  personal  ornaments,  such  as  bracelets,  perforated  plates
of  copper,  beads  of  bone,  diell,  or  metal,  and  similar  objects,
are  very  common,  weapons  are  but  rarely  found;  a  fact
which,  in  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Wilson,  *^  indicates  a  totally


216  ANCIEKT  MODES  OF   BURIAL.

different  condition  of  society  and  mode  of  thought "  firom  those
of  the  present  Indian.

Certain  small  timmli  found  in  America  have  been  regarded
as  the  remains  of  mud  huts.  Mr.  Dille*  has  examined  and
described  some  small  tumuli  observed  by  him  in  Missouri.
He  dug  into  several,  but  never  succeeded  in  finding  anything
except  coal,  char,  and  a  few  pieces  of  pottery,  whence  he
concluded  that  they  were  the  remains  of  mud  houses.t
The  Mandans,  Minatarees,  and  some  other  tribes  also  built
their  huts  of  earth,  resting  on  a  framework  of  wood.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  some  tumuli  to  which  it
would  seem  that  this  explanation  is  quite  inapplicable,  and
which  are  fiiU  of  human  remains.  This  was  long  supposed
to  be  the  case  with  the  great  Grave  Greek  Mound,  which
indeed  was  positively  stated  by  Atwater,  j:  to  be  fiill  of  human
remains.  This  has  turned  out  to  be  an  error,  but  the  state-
ment is  not  the  less  true  as  regards  other  mounds.  In  con-
junction with  them  may  be  mentioned  the  ^'  bone  pits,"  many
of  which  are  described  by  Mr.  Squier.§  "  One  of  these  pits,
discovered  some  years  ago  in  the  town  of  Cambria,  Niagara
county,  was  estimated  to  contain  the  bones  of  several  thou-
sand individuals.  Another  which  I  visited  in  the  town  of
Clarence,  Erie  county,  contained  not  less  than  four  himdred
skeletons."  A  tumulus  described  by  Mr.  Jefferson  in  his
!'  Notes  on  Virginia,"  was  estimated  to  contain  the  skeletons
of  a  thousand  individuals,  but  in  this  case  the  number  was
perhaps  exaggerated.

The  description  given  by  various  old  writers  of  the  solemn*
'^Festival  of  the  Dead"  satisfactorily  explains  these  large
collections  of  bones.     It  seems  that  every  eight  or  ten  years


1

•  SmithBonian  ContribntioiiB,  toI.  i.  p.  136.

t  Archaeolog^a  Americanai  Tol.  i.  p.  223.

t  See  also  Lapham,  Le,  p.  80.

i  U,  pp.  26f  66,  57,  68,  71,  73, 106, 107.     Squier  and  Datia,  U,  p.  118,  etor


SACRIPICIAL  MOUNDS.  217

the  TTiflianfl  used  to  meet  at  some  place  previously  chosen,
that  they  dug  up  their  dead,  collected  the  bones  together,
and  laid  them  in  one  common  burial  place,  depositing  with
them  fine  skins  and  other  yaluable  articles.  Seyeral  of  these
ossuaries  are  described  by  Schoolcraft.*

Sacrificial  Mounds.

"  The  name  of  Sacrificial  Mounds/'  says  Dr.  Wilson,  ''  has
been  conferred  on  a  class  of  ancient  monuments,  altogether
peculiar  to  the  New  World,  and  highly  illustratiye  of  the
rites  and  customs  of  the  ancient  races  of  the  mounds.  This
remarkable  class  of  mounds  has  been  very  careAiUy  explored,
and  their  most  noticeable  characteristics  are,  their  almost
inyariable  occurrence  withjn  enclosures ;  their  regular  con-
struction in  uniform  layers  of  gravel,  earth,  and  sand,  disposed
alternately  in  strata  conformable  to  the  shape  of  the  moimd ;
and  their  covering  a  symmetrical  altar  of  burnt  clay  or  stone,
on  which  are  deposited  numerous  relics,  in  all  instances  ex-
hibiting traces,  more  or  less  abundant,  of  their  having  been
exposed  to  the  action  of  fire."  The  so-called  '^ altar"  is  a
basin,  or  table,  of  burnt  clay,  careiuUy  formed  into  a  sym-
metrical form,  but  varying  much  both  in  shape  and  size.
Some  are  round,  some  elliptical,  and  others  squares  or  paral-
lelograms, while  in  size  they  vary  from  two  feet  to  fifty  feet
by  twelve  or  fifteen.  The  usual  dimensions,  however,  are
from  five  to  eight  feet.  They  are  almost  always  found  within
sacred  enclosures ;  of  the  whole  number  examined  by  Messrs.
Squier  and  Davis  there  were  only  four  which  were  exterior
to  the  walls  of  enclosures,  and  these  were  but  a  few  rods
distant  firom  them.

The  ''altar"  is  always  on  a  level  with  the  natural  soil,
and  bears  traces  of  long  continued  heat ;  in  one  instance^

•  u  p.  loa.


218  THE   00NTBMT8  OF  THE

where  it  appears  to  have  been  formed  of  sand^  instead  of
clay,  the  sand  for  a  dq>th  of  two  inches  is  discoloured  as  if
&tty  matter  of  some  sort  had  been  burned  on  it.  In  this
case  a  second  deposit  of  sand  had  been  placed  on  the  first,
and  upon  this  stones  a  little  larger  than  a  hen's  egg  were
arranged,  so  as  to  form  a  payement,  which  strongly  reminds
us  of  the  ancient  hearths  in  the  Danish  Kjokkenmoddings.

In  a  few  instances,  traces  of  timber  were  found  above
the  altar.  Thus  in  one  of  the  twenly-six  tumuli  forming
the  "Mound  City"  on  the  Scioto  River,  were  a  number  of
pieces  of  timber,  four  or  five  feet  long,  and  six  or  eight
inches  thick.  "These  pieces  had  been  of  nearly  uniform
length  ;  and  this  circumstance,  joined  to  the  position  in
which  they  occurred  in  respect  to  each  other  and  to  the
altar,  would  almost  justify  the  inference  that  they  had  sup-
ported some  funeral  or  sacrificial  pile.''*  The  contents  of
these  mounds  vary  veiy  much.  The  one  just  mentioned
contained  a  quantity  of  pottery  and  many  implements  of
stone  and  copper,  all  of  which  had  been  subjected  to  a  strong
heat.  The  pottery  may  have  formed  a  dozen  vessels  of
moderate  size.  The  copper  articles  consisted  of  two  chisels,
and  about  twenty  thin  strips.  About  fifty  or  a  htmdred
stone  arrow-heads,  some  flakes,  and  two  carved  pipes,  com-
pleted the  list  of  articles  found  in  this  interesting  tumulus.
In  another  mound  nearly  two  hundred  pipes  were  buried.
Oenerally  speaking,  the  deposit  is  homogeneous.  "  That  is
to  say,  instead  of  finding  a  large  variety  of  relics,  ornaments,
weapons,  and  other  articles,  such  as  go  to  make  up  the  pos-
sessions of  a  barbarian  dignitary,  we  find  upon  one  altar
pipes  only,  upon  another  a  single  mass  of  galena,  while  the
next  one  has  a  quantity  of  pottery,  or  a  collection  of  spear
heads,  or  else  is  destitute  of  remains,  except  perhaps  a  thin
layer  of  carbonaceous  material.     Such  could  not  possibly  be

*  Squier  and  Daris,  1,9,  p.  151.  •


8ACRIFI0IAL  MOUNDS.  219

the  case  upon  the  above  hypotheeis,  for  the  spear,  the  arrows,
the  pii>e9  and  the  other  implements,  and  personal  ornaments
of  the  dead,  wonld  then  be  found  in  connedtion  with  each
other."*

This  conclusion  does  not  seem  altogether  satisfactory;
and  although  these  altar-containing  mounds  differ  in  so
many  respects  from  the  above-described  tumuli,  I  still  feel
disposed  to  regard  them  as  sepulchral  rather  than  sacrificial.
Not  having,  however,  had  the  advantage  of  examining  them
for  myself,  I  throw  this  out  as  a  suggestion,  rather  than
express  it  as  an  opinion.  It  is  difficidt  to  understand  why
"  altars"  should  be  covered  up  in  this  manner  ;  I  can  call
to  mind  no  analogous  case.  On  the  other  hand,  if  Professor
Nilsson's  suggestion  with  reference  to  ancient  tumuli  be
correct,  the  long  continued  fire  will  offer  no  difficidty.
Among  the  Buraets,  fi>r  instance,  the  hearth  is  made  of
beaten  earth,  on  which  a  good  fire  is  kept  blaziag  at  all
times,  t  Such  a  house,  if  used  finally  as  a  sepulchre,  would
present  an  altar  very  much  like  those  above  described  ;  while
the  wooden  constructions  and  the  burnt  bones  will  all  be  ex-
plicable on  the  hypothesis  that  we  have  before  us  a  sepulchre,
rather  than  a  temple.

Nor  does  the  *'  homogeneousness"  of  the  deposits  found  in
these  mounds  appear  so  decisive  to  me  as  to  Messrs.  Squier
and  Davis.  Take,  for  instance,  the  cases  in  which  pipes  are
found.  The  execution  of  these  is  so  good  that  "  pipe-
carving"  was  no  doubt  a  profession;  the  division  of  labor
must  have  already  begun.  Exactly  the  same  feeling  which
induces  many  savage  races  to  bury  weapons  with  the  dead
himler,  in  order  that  he  may  supply  himself  with  food  in
Hades  as  on  earth ;  that  feeling,  which  among  some  ancient
nations  suggested  the  placing  of  money  in  the  grave,  would
account  not  only  for  the  presence  of  these  pipes,  but  aLM>
•  S^et  and  BaTUB,  f.  160.  t  Ettaa.  Ic,  toL  U.  p.  408.


220  THE   QRAVE  CREEK  MOUND.

for  their  number.  The  hunter  oould  use  but  few  weapons,
and  must  depend  for  success  mainly  on  his  strength  and
skill ;  whereas  the  pipe-seUer,  if  he  could  dispose  of  a  pipe
at  all  in  the  grave,  might  render  his  whole  stock-in-trade
available.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  great  nimiber  of  objects
foimd  in  the  Grave  Creek  Mound^  which  was  imdoubtedly
sepulchral,  and  in  which  one  of  the  skeletons  was  accom-
panied by  seventeen  hundred  bone  beads,  five  hundred  sea^
shells,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  pieces  of  mica,  besides
other  objects.  Many  flakes,  arrow-heads,  etc.,  have  been  at
times  found  in  tumuli,  so  that  the  mere  number  of  objects
seems  no  argument  against  the  sepulchral  nature  of  these
so-called  *^  sacrificial  mounds.''

If,  therefore,  ''  the  accumulated  carbonaceous  matter,  like
that  formed  by  the  ashes  of  leaves  or  grass,"  which  suggests
to  Professor  Wilson  ^'  the  giaceM  offerings  of  the  first-fruits
of  the  earth,  so  consonant  to  the  milder  forms  of  ancient
sacrifice  instituted  in  recognition  of  the  Lord  of  the  Har-
vest," seems  to  me  only  the  framework  of  the  house,  or  the
material  of  the  funeral  pyre;  on  the  other  hand,  I  avoid
the  conclusion  to  which  he  is  driven,  that  on  ''  the  altars  of
the  mound-builders,  human  sacrifices  were  made ;  and  that
within  their  sacred  enclosures  were  practised  rites  not  less
hideous  than  those  which  characterised  the  worship-  which
the  ferocious  Aztecs  are  affirmed  to  have  regarded  as  most
acceptable  to  their  sanguinary  gods."

Temple  Mounds.

The  class  of  moimds,  called  b^  Messars*  Squier  and  Davis
'^ Temple  Mounds,"  ''are  pyramidal  structures,  truncated,
and  generally  having  graded  avenues  to  their  tops.  In  some
instances  they  are  terraced,  or  have  successive  stages.  But
whatever  their  form,  whether  round,  oval,  octangular,  square,


TEMPLE  MOUinW.  221

or  oblaag,  they  have  inyariably  flat  or  level  tops,  of  greater
or  less  area."  These  mounds  much  resemble  the  Teocallis  of
MezicOy  and  had  probably  a  similar  origin.  They  are  rare
in  the  North,  though  examples  occur  even  as  fiEur  as  Lake
Superior,  but  become  more  and  more  numerous  as  we  pass
down  the  Mississippi,  and  especially  on  approaching  the
Gulf,  where  they  constitute  the  most  numerous  and  im-
portant portion  of  the  ancient  remains.  Some  of  the  largest,
however,  are  situated  in  the  North.  One  of  the  most  re-
markable is  at  Oahokia,  in  Illinois.  This  gigantic  mound  is
stated  to  be  9even  hundred  feet  long,  ftve  hundred  feet  wide  at
the  base,  and  ninety  feet  in  height.  Its  soHd  contents  have
been  roughly  estimated  at  twenty  millions  of  cubic  feet.

Probably,  however,  these  moimds  were  not  used  as  tem-
ples only,  but  also  as  sites  for  dwellings^  especially  for  those
of  the  chiefs.  We  are  told  that  among  the  Natchez  Indians
'^  the  temples  and  the  dwellings  of  the  chiefs  were  raised
upon  moimds,  and  for  every  new  chief  a  new  mound  and
dwelling  were  constructed."  Again,  Garcilego  de  la  Yega,
in  his  History  of  Florida,  quoted  by  Mr.  Haven,*  says —
**  The  town  and  house  of  the  Cacique  of  Osachile  are  similar
to  those  of  all  other  caciques  in  Florida,  and,  therefore,  it
seems  best  to  give  one  description  that  will  apply  generally
to  all  the  capitals,  and  all  the  houses  of  the  chiefs  in  Florida.
I  say,  then,  that  the  Tndians  endeavour  to  place  their  towns
upon  elevated  places ;  but  because  such  situations  are  rare  in
Florida,  or  that  they  find  a  difficulty  in  procuring  suitable
materials  for  building,  they  raise  eminences  in  this  manner.
They  choose  a  place  to  which  they  bring  a  quantity  of  earth,
which  they  elevate  into  a  kind  of  platform  two  or  three  pikes
in  height  (fix>m  eighteen  to  twenty-five  feet),  of  which  the
flat  top  is  capable  of  holding  ten  or  twelve,  fifteen  or
twenty  houses,  to  lodge  the  cacique,  his  family,  and  suite,  f

*  he,  p.  57.  t  See  also  Schoolcraft,  l,e,  vol.  iii.  p.  47.


222  AKIMAL  MOtNBfi.

Animal  Mounds.

Not  the  least  remarkable  of  the  American  antiquities  are
the  Animal  Mounds,  which  are  principally,  though  not  ex-
clusively, found  in  Wisconsin.  In  this  district  '^  thousands
of  examples  occur  of  gigantic  basso-relievos  of  men,  beasts,
birds,  and  reptiles,  all  wrought  with  persevering  labor  on  the
surface  of  the  soil,''  while  enclosures  and  works  oi  defence
are  almost  entirely  wanting,  the  ^*  ancient  city  of  Aztalan  "
being,  as  is  supposed,  the  only  example  of  the  former  class.

The  "Animal  Mounds''  were  discovered  by  Mr.  Lapham
in  1836,  and  described  in  the  newspapers  of  the  day,  but  the
first  account  of  them  in  any  scientific  journal  was  that  by
Mr.  B.  0.  Taylor^  in  the  American  Journal  of  Science  and
Art,  for  April,  1838.  In  1843  a  longer  memoir,  by  Mr.  S.
Taylor,  appeared  in  the  same  journal.  Professor  J.  Locke
gave  some  account  of  them  in  a  "Report  on  the  Mineral
Lands  of  the  United  States,"  presented  to  Congress  in  1840.
Mesfflrs.  Squier  and  Davis  devoted  to  ihe  same  subject  a  part
of  their  work  on  the  "  Anci^it  Monuments  of  the  Misfflssif^i
Valley;"  and  finally,  the  sev^ith  volume  of  the  Smithsonian
Contributions  contains  the  work,  by  Mr.  Lapham,  which
gives  the  most  complete  account  of  these  interesting  remains.

Mr.  Lapham  gives  a  map,  showing  the  distribution  of
these  curious  earthworks.  They  appear  to  be  most  nimierous
in  the  southern  counties  of  Wisconsin ;  and  extend  from  the
Mississippi  to  Lake  Michigan,  following  generally  the  courses
of  the  river,  and  being  eepecially  numerous  along  the  great
Indian  trail,  or  war-path,  from  Lake  Michigan,  near  Mil-
waukie,  to  the  Mississippi,  above  the  Prairie  du  Chien.  This,
however,  does  not  prove  any  connection  between  the  present
Indians  and  the  motmds ;  the  same  line  has  been  adopted
as  the  route  of  the  United  States  military  road,  and  may
have  been  in  use  for  an  indefinite  period.


OEITBRAL   APFBARANCE.  223

The  mounds  themaelTee  not  only  represent  animals,  sncb
as  men,  boffaloes,  elks,  bears,  otters,  wdives,  raccoons,  birds,
serpents,  lizards,  turtles,  and  frogs,  but  also  some  inanimate
objects,  if  at  least  the  American  archeeologists  are  right  in
r^arding  some  of  them  as  crosses,  tobaoco-pipee,  etc.

Ifany  o£  the  representations  are  spirited  and  correct,  but
others,  probably  through  the  action  of  time,  are  leas  definite ;
one,  for  instance,  near  the  village  of  Muscoda,  may  be  either
''a  bird,  a  bow  and  arrow,  or  the  human  figure."  Their
h^ght  varies  from  one  to  four  feet,  sometimes,  however,
rising  to  six  feet,  and  as  a  "  regular  elevation  of  six  inches
can  be  readily  traced  upon  the  level  prairies  "  of  the  West,
their  outlines  are  generally  distinctly  defined  where  they
occupy  favoraUe  positions.  It  seems  probable  tiiat  many  of
the  details  have  disappeared  under  the  action  of  rain  and
vegetation.  At  present  a  ^^man"  consists  generally  of  a
head  and  body,  two  long  arms,  and  two  shcnrt  legs,  no  other
detafls  being  visible.  The  ''birds"  differ  from  the  '^men''
principally  in  the  absence  of  legs.  The  so-called  ''  lizards,"
which  are  among  the  most  common  forms,  have  a  head,  two
legs,  and  a  long  tail ;  the  side  view  being  represented,  as  is,
indeed,  the  case  with  most  of  the  quadrupeds.

One  remarkable  group  in  Dale  County,  close  to  the  Gfreat
Indian  trail,  consists  of  a  man  with  extended  arms,  seven
more  or  less  elongated  moimds,  one  tumulus  and  six  quadru-
peds. The  length  of  the  human  figure  is  one  hundred  and
twenty-five  feet,  and  it  is  one  hundred  and  forty  feet  from
the  extremity  of  one  arm  to  that  of  the  other.  The  quadru-
peds vary  from,  ninety  to  a  hundred  and  twenty-six  feet  in
length.

At  Waukesha  are  a  number  of  mounds,  tumuli,  and  ani-
mals, including  several  "  lizards,"  a  very  fine  ''  bird,"  and  a
magnificent  "turtle."  "This,  when  first  observed,  was  a
very  fine  specimen  of  the  art  of  moimd-building,  with  its


224  ANIMAL   MOUNDS  OUT  OF   WISCONSIN.

graceful  curves,  the  feet  projecting  back  and  forward^  and
the  tail,  with  its  gradual  slope,  so  acutely  pointed,  that  it
was  impossible  to  ascertain  precisely  where  it  terminated.
The  body  was  fifty-six  feet  in^  length,  and  the  tail  two  hun-
dred and  fifty ;  the  height  six  feet/'  This  group  of  moxmds
is  now,  alas,  covered  *with  buildings.  '^A  dwelling-house
stands  on  the  body  of  the  turtle,  and  a  Catholic  church  is
built  upon  the  tail."

"But,"  says  Mr.  Lapham,  "the  most  remarkable  collec-
tion of  lizards  and  turtles  yet  discovered  is  on  the  school
section,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  south-east  from  the  village
of  Pewaukee.  This  consists  of  seven  turtles,  two  lizards,
four  oblong  mounds,  and  one  of  the  remarkable  excavations
before  alluded  to.  One  of  the  turtle  moimds,  partially
obliterated  by  the  road,  has  a  length  of  four  hundred  and
fifty  feet,  being  nearly  double  the  usual  dimensions.  Three
of  them  are  remarkable  for  their  curved  tails,  a  feature  here
first  observed."

In  several  places  a  very  curious  variation  occurs.  The
animals,  with  the  lusual  form  and  size,  are  represented  not  in
relief,  but  in  intaglio ;  not  by  a  mound,  but  by  an  excavation.

The  few  "  animal  mounds  "  which  have  been  observed  out
of  Wisconsin  differ  in  many  respects  from  the  ordinary  type.
Near  Gfranville,  in  Ohio,  on  a  high  spur  of  land,  is  an  earth-
work known  in  the  neighbourhood  as  the  "  Alligator."  It
has  a  head  and  body,  four  sprawling  legs,  and  a  curled  tail
The  total  length  is  two  hundred  and  fifty  feet ;  the  breadth
of  the  body  forty  feet,  and  the  length  of  the  legs  thirty-six
feet.  "The  head,  shoulders,  and  rump  are  more  elevated
than  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  an  attempt  having  evidently
been  made  to  preserve  the  proportions  of  the  object  copied."
The  average  height  is  four  feet,  at  the  shoulders  six.  Even
more  remarkable  is  the  great  serpent  in  Adams  County,
Ohio.     It  is  situated  on  a  high  spur  of  land,  which  rises


ANIICAL   MOTTUDS.  225

a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  aboye  Brush  Creek.  "Con-
fonning  to  the  curve  of  the  hill,  and  occupying  its  very
summit,  is  the  serpent,  its  head  resting  near  the  point,  and
•its  body  winding  back  for  seven  hundred  feet,  in  graceful
undulations,  terminating  in  a  triple  coil  at  the  tail.  The
entire  length,  if  extended,  would  be  not  less  than  one
thousand  feet.  The  accompanying  plan,  laid  down  from
accurate  survey,  can  alone  give  an  adequate  conception  of
the  outline  of  the  work,  which  is  clearly  and  boldly  defined,
the  embankment  being  upwards  of  five  feet  in  height  by
thirty  feet  base  at  the  centre  of  the  body,  but  diminishing
somewhat  toward  the  head  and  tail.  The  neck  of  the  ser-
pent is  stretched  out,  and  slightly  curved,  and  its  mouth  is
opened  wide,  as  if  in  the  act  of  swallowing  or  ejecting  an
oval  figure,  which  rests  partially  within  the  distended  jaws.
This  oval  is  formed  by  an  embankment  of  earth,  without
any  perceptible  opening,  four  feet  in  height,  and  is  per-
fectly regular  in  outline,  its  transverse  and  conjugate
diameters  being  one  hundred  and  sixty,  and  eighty  feet
respectively."

When,  why,  or  by  whom  these  remarkable  works  were
erected,  as  yet  we  know  not.  The  present  Indians,  though
they  look  upon  them  with  reverence,  can  throw  no  light
upon  their  origin.  Nor  do  the  contents  of  the  mounds
themselves  assist  us  in  this  inquiry.  Several  of  them  have
been  opened,  and  in  making  the  streets  of  Milwaukie  many
of  the  moimds  have  been  entirely  removed,  but  the  only
result  has  been  to  show  that  they  are  not  sepulchral,  and
that,  excepting  by  accident,  they  contain  no  implements  or
ornaments.

Under  these  circumstances  speculation  would  be  useless;
we  can  but  wait,  and  hope  that  time  and  perseverance  may
solve  the  problem,  and  explain  the  nature  of  these  remark-
able and  mysterious  monuments.

15


226  iNSGBjpnoNS.


INSCRIPTIONS.


There  is  one  class  of  objects  which  I  have  not  yet  ia»i-
tioned,  and  which  yet  ought  not  to  be  left  entirely  unnotioed.

The  most  remarkable  of  these  is  the  celebrated  Dighton
Bock  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Taimton  Siver.  Its  history,
and  the  various  conclusions  which  have  been  derived  firom  it,
are  very  amusingly  given  by  Dr.  "Wilson.*  In  1783,  the
Rev.  Ezra  Stiles^  D.D.,  President  of  Yale  College,,  when
preaching  before  the  Governor  of  the  State  of  Oonnjecticut,
appealed  to  this  rock,  inscribed,  as  he  believed,  with  PluBni-
cian  characters,  for  a  proof  that  the  Indians  were  descended
from  Canaan,  and  were  therefore  accursed.  _  Count  de
Gebelin  regarded  the  inscription  as  Carthaginian.  In  the
eighth  volume  of  the  ''  Archseologia,''  Colonel  Yallency  en-
deavours to  prove  that  it  is  Siberian ;  while  certain  Danish
antiquaries  regarded  it  as  Ilimic,  and  thought,  that  they
could  read  the  name  '*  Thorfinn,"  '^  with  an  exacts  though  by
no  means  so  manifest,  enumeration  of  the  associates  who,
according  to  the  Saga,  accompanied  Karlsefiie's  expedition  to
Yinland,  in  a.d.  1007."  Finally,  Mr.  Schoolcraft  submitted
a  copy  of  it  to  Chingwauk,  an  intelligent  Indian  chief,  who
''interpreted  it  as  the  record  of  an  Indian  triumph  over
some  rival  native  tribe,"  but  without  offering  any  opinion  as
to  its  antiquity.

In  the  ''  Grave  Creek  Mound"  was  found  a  small  oval
disk  of  white  sandstone,  on  which  were  engraved  twenty-two
letters.  Mr.  Schoolcraft,  who  has  especially  studied  this  rdic,
finally  concludes,  after  corresponding  with  many  American
and  European  archaeologists,  according  to  Dr.  Wil8on,t
that  of  these  twenty-two  letters,  four  corresponded  ''with
ancient  Greek,  four  with  the  Eiaruscan,  five  with  the  old
N^orthem  Runes,  six  with  the  ancient  Gaelic,,  seven  with  the

•  Pre-bistoric  Man,  ii.  p.  172.  f  Do.  toL  ii.  p.  181k


WAMFTTM.  227

oM  Bne,  ten  with  the  Phcanician,  fourteen  with  the  Anglo-
Saxon,  and  sixteen  with  tbe  Celtiberic ;  besides  which  |k>8-
sibly  equivalents  may  be  found  in  the  old  Hebrew.  It  thus
appears  that  this  ingenious  little  stone  is  even  more  accom-
modating than  the  Dighton  Bock,  in  adapting  itself  to  all
conceivable  theories  of  ante-columbian  colonisation/'  A
stone  of  snch  doubtful  character  could  prove  little  under  any
circumstances;  but  it  must  also  be  mentioned  that  '^Br.
James  W.  Clemens  communicated  to  Dr.  Morton  all  the
details  of  the  exploration  of  the  Grave  Creek  Mound  ;  .  .
.  .  without  any  refevenoe  to  tile  discovery  of  the  inscribed
stone.  Nor  was  it  till  the  excavated  vault  had  been  fitted
up  by  its  proprietor  for  exhibition,  to  all  who  cared  tcVpay
for  the  privilege  of  admission,  that  the  marvellous  ini^crip-
tion  opportunely  came  to  light  to  add  to  the  attractions  of
the  show."

One  or  two  other  equally  doubtful  cases  are  upon  recdrd,
but  upon  the  whole  we  may  safely  assert  that  there  is  no
reason  to  suppose  that  the  nations  of  America  had  developed  t6f
themselves  anything  corresponding  to  an  alphabet.  Thb  art  of
picture-writing,  which  they  shared  with  the  Aztecs  and  the
Quipa  of  the  Peruvians,  was  supplemented  among  the  I^orth
American  Indians  by  the  '^  wampum."  This  curious  substi-
tute for  writing  consisted  of  variously-coloured  beads,  gene-
rally worked  upon  leather.  One  very  interesting  exaniple
is  ihe  belt  of  wampum  ^Melivered  by  the  Lenni  Lenape
Sachetns  to  the  founder  of  Pennsylvania,  at  the  Ghreat  Treaty,
under  the  elm-tree  at  Shachamox  in  1682."  It  is  still  pre-
served in  the  collection  of  the  Historical  Society  at  Phila^
delphia,  and  consists  of  '^eighteen  strings  of  wampimi  fonned
of  white  and  violet  beads  worked  upon  leather  thongs,"  the
whole  forming  a  belt  twenty-eight  inches  long,  and  two-and-
a-half  broad.  '*  On  this  five  patterns  are  worked  in  violet
beadi»  on  a  white  ground,  and  in  the  centre  Penn  is  i^sjttty


228  THE   MOUND   BTFTLDERS.

sented  taking  the  hand  of  the  Indian  Sachem/'  The  large
nmnber  of  beads  found  in  some  of  the  tumidi  were  perhaps
in  a  similar  manner  intended  to  conmiemorate  the  actions
and  virtues  of  the  dead.

THE    MOUND   BUILDEBS.

Just  as  the  wigwam  of  the  recent  Mandan  consisted  of  an
outer  layer  of  earth  supported  on  a  wooden  framework,  so
also,  in  the  ancient  sepulchral  tumuli,  the  body  was  pro-
tected only  by  beams  and  planks ;  when  therefore  these  latter
decayed,  the  earth  sank  in  and  crushed  the  skeleton  within.
Partly  from  this  cause,  and  partly  from  the  habit  of  burying
in  ancient  tumuli,  which  makes  it  sometimes  difficult  to  dis-
tinguish the  primary  from  secondary  interments,  it  happens
that  from  so  many  thousand  tumuli  we  haye  only  three  well-
preserved  skulls  which  indisputably  belong  to  the  ancient
race.  These  are  decidedly  brachycephalic  ;  but  it  is  evident
that  we  must  not  attempt  to  build  much  upon  so  slight  a
basis.

No  proof  of  a  knowledge  of  letters,  no  trace  of  a  burnt
brick,  have  yet  been  discovered,  and  so  far  as  we  may  judge
from  their  arms,  ornaments,  and  pottery,  the  motmd-builders
closely  resembled  some  at  least  of  the  recent  Indian  tribes;  and
the  earthworks  agree  in  form  with,  if  they  differ  in  magnitude
from,  those  still,  or  imtil  lately,  in  use.  Yet  this  very  magni-
tude is  sufficient  to  show  that,  at  some  early  period,  the  great
river  valleys  of  the  United  States  must  have  been  more
densely  populated  than  they  were  when  first  discovered  by
Europeans.  The  immense  number  of  small  earthworks,  and
the  mounds,  "  which  may  be  counted  by  thousands  and  tens
of  thousands,"  might  indeed  be  supposed  to  indicate  either  a
long  time  or  a  great  population ;  but  in  other  cases  we  have
no  such  alternative.  The  Newark  constructions ;  the  moimd
near  Florence  in  Alabama,  which  is  forty-five  feet  in  height


OIOAimC  EARTHWORKS.  229

by  four  hundred  and  forty  feet  in  circumference  at  the  base,
with  a  level  area  at  the  summit  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet
in  circumference;  the  still  greater  mound  on  the  Etowah
river,  also  in  Alabama,  which  has  a  height  of  more  than
seventy-five  feet,  with  a  circumference  of  twelve  hundred
feet  at  the  base,  and  one  htmdred  and  forty  at  the  summit-;
the  embankments  at  the  mouth  of  the  Scioto  river,  which  are
estimated  to  be  twenty  miles  in  length ;  the  great  mound  at
SeLaerstown,  Mississippi,  which  covers  six  acres  of  ground ;
and  the  truncated  pyramid  at  Cahokia,  to  which  we  have
ah-eady  alluded ;  these  works,  and  many  others  which  might
have  been  quoted,  indicate  a  population  both  large  and
stationary ;  for  which  hunting  cannot  have  supplied  enough
food,  as  it  has  been  estimated  that  in  a  forest  country  each
hunter  requires  an  area  of  not  less  than  50,000  acres  for  his
support;  and  which  must,  therefore,  have  derived  its  sup-
port in  a  great  measure  from  agriculture.  "  There  is  not,"
say  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis,  ''and  there  was  not  in  the
sixteenth  century,  a  single  tribe  of  Indians  (north  of  the
semi-civilised  nations)  between  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific,
which  had  means  of  subsistence  sufiKcient  to  enable  them  to
apply,  for  such  purposes,  the  unproductive  labor  necessary
for  the  work ;  nor  was  there  any  in  such  a  social  state  as  to
compel  the  labor  of  the  people  to  be  thus  applied."  We
know  also  that  many,  if  not  most  of  the  Indian  tribes,  at
that  time  still  cultivated  the  ground  to  a  certain  extent,  and
there  is  some  evidence  that  even  within  historic  times  this
was  more  the  case  than  at  present.  Thus  De  NonviUe
estimates  the  amount  of  Indian  com  destroyed  by  him  in
four  Seneca  villages  at  1,200,000  quarters.

Mr.  Lapham*  has  brought  forward  some  ingenious  reasons
for  thinking  that  the  forests  of  Wisconsin  were  at  no  very
distant  period  much  less  general  than  at  present.     In  the

•  l§,  p.  90.


230  TRACES  our  AK4XEBT  AaJilCULTUBE.

first  place,  the  largest  trees  are  probably  not  more  4hiui
five  bimdred  years  old;  aikl  large  tracts  are  now  ooirosed
with  "  young  trees,  Trhere  there  are  no  traces  of  antecedent
growth/'  Every  year  nuuay  trees  are  blown  down,  and  fre-
quent storms  pass  through  the  forest,  throwing  down  nearly
everything  before  them.  Mr.  Lapham  gives  a  map  of  these
windfalls  in  one  district ;  they  axe  very  conspicuous,  firstly,
because  the  trees,  having  a  certain  quantity  of  easHk  en-
tangled among  their  roots,  continue  to  vegetate  for  several
years ;  and,  secondly,  because  even  when  the  trees  tb^ooselvee
have  died  and  rotted  away,  the  earth  so  torn  up  forms  little
mounds,  which  are  often  mistaken  by  the  inexperienced  for
Indian  graves.  "From  the  paucity  of  these  little  *  tree-
mounds,^  we  infer  that  no  very  great  antiquity  can  be  as-
signed to  the  dense  forests  of  Wisconsin,  for  during  a  long
period  of  time,  with  no  material  change  of  climate,  we  would
expect  to  find  great  numbers  of  these  little  monuments  of
ancient  storms  scattered  everywhere  over  the  ground.^'

But  there  is  other  more  direct  evidence  of  ancisEit  agri-
culture. In  many  places  the  ground  is  covered  with  small
mammilkry  elevations,  which  are  known  as  Indian  corn-
hills.  ''  They  are  without  order  of  arrangement,  being  scat-
tered over  the  ground  with  the  greatest  irregularity.  That
these  hillocks  were  formed  in  the  manner  indicated  by  their
najfiB,  is  inferred  from  the  present  custom  of  the  Indians.
The  com  is  planted  in  the  same  spot  each  successive  year,
and  the  soil  is  gradually  brought  up  to  the  size  of  a  little  hill
by  the  annual  additions.^'*  But  Mr.  Lapham  has  also  found
traces  of  an  earlier  and  more  systematic  cultivation,  lliese
consist  "  of  low,  parallel  ridges,  as  if  com  had  been  planted
in  drills.  They  average  four  feet  in  width,  twenty-five  of
them  having  been  counted  in  the  space  of  a  hundred  feet ;
and  the  depth  of  the  walk  between  them  is  about  six  inches.

*  Lapham,  Le,  p.  19.


AKTIQUITT  OF  THB   ANCIENT   REMAINS.  231

Tlieee  appearanoes^  which  are  here  denominated  'ancient
garden^bedfl/  indicate  an  earlier  and  more  perfect  system  of
cultimtieii  than  that  which  now  preyails;  for  the  present
Indians  do  not  appear  to  possess  the  ideas  of  taste  and  order
necessary  to  enable  them  to  arrange  objects  in  consecatiye
rows.  Traces  of  this  kind  of  cultivation,  though  not  very
abundant,  are  found  in  several  other  parts  of  the  State  (Wis-
conain).  The  garden  beds  are  of  various  sizes,  covering,
generally,  from  twenty  to  one  hundred  acres.  Some  of  them
are  reported  to  embrace  even  three  hundred  acres.  As  a
general  &ct,  they  exist  in  the  richest  soil,  as  it  is  found
in  the  prairies  and  bun  oak  plains.  In  the  latter  case,  trees
of  the  largest  kind  are  scattered  over  them.''


DATE.


In  the  "Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Valley  "  it
is  stated  that  no  earthwork  has  ever  been  found  on  the  first
or  lowest  terrace  of  any  of  the  great  rivers,  and  that  "  this
observation  is  confirmed  by  all  who  have  given  attention  to
the  subject."  If  true,  this  would,  indeed,  have  indicated  a
great  antiquity,  but  in  his  subsequent  work  Mr.  Sqider  in-
forms us  that  "they  occur  indiscriminately  upon  the  first  and
upon  the  superior  terraces,  as  also  upon  the  islands  of  the
lakes  and  rivers."  Messrs  Squier  and  Davis  *  are  of  opinion
that  the  decayed  state  of  the  skeletons  found  in  the  mounds
may  enable  us  to  form  "  some  approximate  estimate  of  their
remote  antiquity,"  especially  when  we  consider  that  the  earth
round  them  "  is  wonderfully  compact  and  dry,  and  that  the
conditions  for  their  preservation  are  exceedingly  favorable."
"In  the  barrows  of  the  ancient  Britons,"  they  add,  "entire
well  preserved  skeletons  are  found,  although  possessing  an
undoubted  antiquity  of  at  least  eighteen  hundred  years."
Dr.  Wilson  f  also  relies  much  on  this   fact,  which,  in  his

•  Le.  p.  168.  t  /.ft  vol.  i.  p.  869.


232  ooNDinoN  of  the  bones^

opinion,  ^'fiumislies  a  stronger  evidence  of  their  great  an-
tiquity than  any  of  the  proofs  that  have  been  derived  either
from  the  age  of  a  subsequent  fwest  growth^  eir  the  changea
wrought  on  the  river  terraces  wh^re  they  most  abound."  It
is  true  that  the  bones  in  Stone  age  graves  are  often  extremely
well  preserved;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  those  in  Saxon
barrows  have  in  many  cases  entirely  perished.  In  fact,
the  condition  of  ancient  bones  depends  so  much  on  the
circumstances  in  which  they  have  been  placed^  that  we
must  not  attribute  much  importance  to  this  argument.  The
evidence  derived  £rom  the  forests  is  more  reliable..  Thus
Oaptain  Peck*  observed  near  the  Ontonagon  river,  and  at  a
depth  of  twenty-five  feet,  some  stone  mauk  and  other  imple-
ments in  contact  with  a  vein  of  copper.  Above  these  was  the
fallen  trunk  of  a  large  cedar,  and  "over  all  grew  a  hemlock
tree,  the  roots  of  which  spread  entirely  above  the  fiiUeu
tree ''....'.  and  indicated,  in  his  estimation,,  a  growth  of
not  less  than  three  centuries^  to  which  must  then  be  added
the  age  of  the  cedar,  which  indicates  a  still  **  longer  successioik
of  centuries,  subsequent  to  that  protracted  period  during
which  the  deserted  trench  was  slowly  filled  up  with  accumu-
lations of  many  winters/'

The  late  President  Harrison,  in  an  address  to  the  Historical
Society  of  Ohio,  made  some  very  interesting  remarks  on
this  subject,  which  are  quoted  by  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis.t
"The  process,''  he  says,  "by  which  nature  restores  the
forest  to  its  original  state,  after  being  once  cleared,  is  ex-
tremely slow.  The  rich  lands  of  the  west  are,  indeed,  soon
covered  again,  but  the  character  of  the  growth  is  entirely
different,  and  continues  so  for  a  long  period.  In  several
places  upon  the  Ohio,  and  upon  the  farm  which  I  occupy,
clearings  were  made  in  the  first  settlement  of  the  country,
and  subsequently  abandoned  and  suffered  to  grow  up.    Som«

*  WQflon,  l^  YoL  i.  |u  256.  f  Lc,  p.  306«


AMERICAN    FORESTS.  233

of  these  new  forests  are  now  sure  of  fifty  jesrs*  growth,  hut
they  have  made  so  little  progress  towards  attaining  the  ap-
pearance of  the  immediately  contiguous  forest,  as  to  induce
any  man  of  reflection  to  determine  that  at  least  ten  times
fifty  years  must  elapse  before  their  complete  assimilation  can
be  efiiected.  We  find  in  the  ancient  works  all  that  variety
of  trees  which  give  such  unrivalled  beauty  to  our  forests,  in
natural  proportions.  The  first  growth  on  the  same  kind  of
land,  once  cleared  and  then  abandoned  to  nature,  on  the  con-
trary, is  nearly  homogeneous,  often  stinted  to  one  or  two,  at
most  three  kinds  of  timber.  If  the  ground  has  been  cul-
tivated, the  yellow  locust  will  thickly  spring  up;  if  not
cultivated  the  black  and  white  walnut  will  be  the  prevailing

growth Of  what  immense  age,  then,  must  be

the  works  so  often  referred  to,  covered  as  they  are  by  at
least  the  second  growth,  after  the  primitive  forest  state  was
regained?"

We  get  another  indication  of  antiquity  in  the  '^  garden
beds,"  which  we  have  already  described.  This  system  of  cul-
tivation has  long  been  replaced  by  the  simple  and  irregular
''  comhills ;"  and  yet,  according  to  Mr.  Lapham,*  tiie  garden
beds  are  much  more  recent  than  the  mounds,  across  which
they  scHnetimes  extend  in  the  same  manner  as  over  the
adjoining  grounds.  If,  therefore,  these  mounds  belong  to  the
same  era  as  those  which  are  covered  with  wood,  we  get  thus
indications  of  three  periods ;  the  first,  that  of  the  mounds
themselves ;  the  second,  that  of  the  garden  beds ;  and  the
third,  that  of  the  forests.

But  American  agriculture  was  not  imported  from  abroad;
it  resulted  from,  and  in  return  rendered  possible,  the  gradual
development  of  American  semi-civilisation.  This  is  proved
by  the  fact,  that  the  grains  of  the  Old  World  were  entirely
absent^  and  that  American  agriculture  was  founded  on  the

•  u  p.  Id.


234  INDICATION  OF   FOUR  PERIODS.

maize,  an  American  plant.     Thus,  tkerefore,  we  appear  to
haYe  indications  of  four  long  periods.

1.  That  in  which,  firom  an  original  barbarism,  the  Ameri-
can tribes  developed  a  knowledge  of  agriculture  and  a  power
of  combination.

2.  That  in  which  for  the  first  time,  mounds  were  erected,
and  other  great  works  undertaken.

3.  The  age  of  the  ^  garden  beds,"  which  occupy  some  at
least  of  the  mounds.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  these  par-
ticular '^ garden  beds"  were  not  in  use  until  after  the
mounds  had  lost  their  sacred  character  in  the  eyes  of  the
occupants  of  the  soil;  for  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that
works  executed  with  so  much  care  would  be  thus  desecrated
by  their  builders.

4.  The  period  in  which  man  relapsed  into  partial  bar-
barism; and  the  spots  which  had  been  first  forest,  then,
perhaps,  sacred  monuments,  and  thirdly  cultivated  ground,
relapsed  into  forest  once  more.

But  even  if  we  attribute  to  these  changes  aU  the  im-
portanoe  which  has  ever  been  claimed  for  them,  they  will  not
require  an  antiquity  of  more  than  three  thousand  years.  I
do  not,  of  course,  deny  that  the  period  may  have  been  very
much  greater,  but,  in  my  opinion  at  least,  it  need  not  be
greater.  At  the  same  time  there  are  other  observations,
which,  if  they  shall  eventually  prove  to  be  correct,  would
indicate  a  very  much  higher  antiquity.

One  of  these  is  an  account*  by  Dr.  A.  C.  Eoch  of  a  mas-
todon found  in  Gasconade  County,  Missouri,  which  had
apparently  been  stoned  to  death  by  the  Indians,  and  then
partially  consum^ed  by  fire.  The  fire,  he  says,  was  evidently
^'not  an  accidental  one,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  had  been
kindled  by  human  agency,  and,  acoording  to  all  appearance,
with  the  design  of  killing  the  huge  creature,  which  had  been
•  Traiu.  of  the  Academy  of  SekfnM  of  St.  Louis.    1867.    P.  61.


9CAN  AND  tUE  MA8T0DQK.  235

found  mired  in  the  mud  and  in  an  entirely  helpless  condition.


All  the  bones  which  had  not  been  burnt  by  the  fire  had  kept
their  original  position,  standing  upright  and  apparently  quite
undisturbed  in  the  clay ;  whereas  those  portions,  which  had
been  exposed  above  the  surface,  had  been  partially  ooiusumed
by  the  fire.


There  were,  also,  found  mingled  with  these  ashes  and  bones,
and  partly  protruding  out  of  them,  a  large  number  of  broken
pieces  of  rock,  which  had  eridently  been  carried  thither
from  the  shore  of  the  Bourbense  river,  to  be  hurled  at  the
animal  by  his  destroyers ;  for  the  above-mentioned  layer  of
clay  was  entirely  void  of  even  the  smallest  pebbles :  whereas,
on  going  to  the  river,  I  found  the  stratum  of  clay  cropping
out  at  the  bank,  and  resting  on  a  layer  of  shelving  rocks  of
the  same  kind  as  the  fragments;  from  which  place,  it  was
evident  they  had  been  carried  to  the  scene  of  action.    .

I  foimd,  also,  among  the  ashes,  bones,  and  rocks,  several
arrow-heads,  a  stone  spear-head,  and  some  stone  axes."

In  a  second  case  the  same  writer  assures  us  that  he  found
several  stone  arrow-heads  mingled  with*  the  bones  of  a  mas-
todon. "  One  of  the  arrow-heads  lay  imdemeath  the  thigh-
bone of  the  skeleton,  the  bone  actually  restiag  in  contact
upon  it;  so  that  it  could  not  have  been  brought  thither
after  the  deposit  of  the  bone;  a  fact  which  I  was  careful
thoroughly  to  investigate."

In  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  Dr.  Dickeson,  of  Natchez,
found  the  08  innominatum  of  a  man  with  some  bones  of
the  Mastodon  ohioticus,  which  had  fallen  from  the  side  of
a  cliff  undermined  by  a  rivulet ;  but,  as  Sir  C.  Lyell  has
already  pointed  out^  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  this  bone


236  DR.  douler's  calculation.

may  haye  been  deiived  from  one  of  the  Indian  graves,  whicli
are  very  nimierous  in  this  locality.  Again,  Count  Pourtalis  has
found  some  human  bones  in  a  calcareous  conglomerate,  esti-
mated by  Agassiz  to  be  ten  thousand  years  old ;  and  finally.
Dr.  Douler  obtained,  from  an  excavation  near  New  Orleans,
some  charcoal  and  a  human  skeleton,  to  which  he  is  inclined
to  attribute  an  antiquity  of  no  less  than  fifty  thousand  years.
None  of  these  cases,  however,  can  be  regarded  as  entirely  con-
clusive ;  and  on  the  whole,  though  the  idea  is  certainly  much
less  improbable  than  it  was  some  years  ago,  there  does  not
as  yet  appear  to  be  any  satisfactory  proof  that  man  co-existed
in  America  with  the  mammoth  and  mastodon.

If,  however,  the  facts  above  recorded  justify  the  conclusion
that  parts,  at  least,  of  North  America  once  supported  a  nu-
merous and  agricultural  population,  then  we  cannot  but
ask.  What  fatal  cause  destroyed  thi&  earlier  civilisation  P
Why  were  these  fortifications  forsaken — these  cities  in  ruins  P
How  were  the  populous  nations  which  onoe  inhabited  the  rich
American  valleys  reduced  to  the  poor  tribes  of  savages  which
the  Europeans  foimd  there  P  Did  the  North  and  South  once
before  rise  up  in  arms  against  one  another  P  ^'Did  the
terrible  appellation  of  '  The  Dark  and  Bloody  Land,'  applied
to  Kentucky,  commemorate  these  ancient  warsP"  Absit
omen.  Let  us  hope  that  our  kinsmen  in  America  may  yet
pause  ere  they,  in  like  manner,  sacrifice  a  common  prosperity
to  a  mutual  hatred.


237


CHAPTER     VIII.


CAVE-ICEN.


rB  principal  species  of  mammalia,  which  have  either
become  entirely  distinct,  or  yery  much  restricted  in
their  geographical  distribution,  since  the  appearance  of  man
in  Europe,  are —

The  cave-bear  {Ur^us  ipekeua).

The  cave-hyaena  {Myasna  spekea).

The  cave- tiger  (Felia  spebea).

The  mammoth  {Ekphas  primigenius).

The  woolly-haired  rhinoceros  {Rhinoceros  tichorinm).

The  hippopotamus  (Hippopotamus  major).

The  Irish  elk  {Megaceros  hibemicus).

The  musk  ox  {Ooibos  mosehatus).

The  reindeer  {Cervm  tarandus).

The  aurochs  {Bison  EuropcBm).

The  urus  {Bos  primigenius).
The  first  seven  of  these  appear  to  be  entirely  extinct,  but
as  it  is  now  evident  that  their  disappearance  was  due  to  a
gradual  change  of  circumstances,  rather  than  to  any  sudden
cataclysm,  or  general  destruction  of  life,  it  is  also  very  im-
probable that  their  extinction  was  simultaneous ;  and,  acting
on  this  idea,  M.  Lartet  has  attempted*  to  construct  a  palaeon-
tological  chronology.

The  remains  of  the  cave-bear  are  abimdant  in  Central

«  Ann.  des  Sci.  Nat.  1861,  p.  217.


238  CAVE-BEAR.      CAVE-LION.

Europe,  and  in  the  Southern  parts  of  BuBsia.  It  is  doubtful
whether  it  has  yet  been  discovered  north  of  the  Baltic  or
south  of  the  Alps,  but  it  appears  to  have  crossed  the  Alps,
and  is  recorded  by  Don  Casciano  de  Prado  as  occurring  in  a
cave  near  Segovia.  No  trace  of  it  has,  however,  yet  been
found  by  Mr.  Busk  and  Dr.  Falconer,  among  the  numerous
remains  from  Gibraltar.  The  oldest  specimen  yet  recorded
appears  to  be  that  mentioned  by  Owen,  as  having  been  found
in  the  pliocene  deposits  of  Boston  in  Norfolk,  associated  with
the  remains  of  Trogontherium,  PakBoy>alax,  etc.*  It  is  also
included  in  the  lists  of  species  found  near  Abbeville,  but
M.  Lartet  thinks  there  must  be  some  mistake  about  this,
as  he  has  been  unable  to  find  a  single  bone  of  this  species
in  any  of  the  collections  from  the  Somme  valley ;  and  of  all
the  quaternary  mammalia,  he  regards  the  cave-bear  as  having
been  the  one  which  was  the  first  to  perish.  Subsequent  in-
vestigations have  proved,  however,  that  it  does  occur,  though
sparingly,  in  the  river-drift  gravels.

The  cave-hysena,  and  cave-tiger,  are  found  associated  with
the  UrsHS  spelcBus  in  the  caverns.  They  have  also  been  dis-
covered by  M.  Delesse,  with  the  aurochs  and  the  woolly-
haired  rhinoceros,  in  a  bed  which  M.  Delesse  refers  to  the
lower  layers  of  thjB  Diluviiun.  They  do  not  appear  to  have
been  as  yet  met  with  in  the  upper  layers  of  the  river-drift
gravels,  or  in  the  peat  bogs*

On  the  other  hand,  M.  Lartet  hints  that  the  Uons  of
Thessaly,  which,  according  to  Herodotus,  attacked  the  beasts
of  burden  attached  to  the  army  of  Xerxes,t  may  possibly
have  belonged  to  this  species.  Nay,  more,  he  quotes  the
opinion  of  Dr.  Falconer,  that  the  large  FeUs  of  Northern
China  and  the  Altai  mountains  has  been  too  hastily  referred

*  History  of  British  Fossil  Mammals  and  Biids,  p.  106.
t  See  also  Mr.  A.  Newton's  interesting  Memoir  on  the  Zoology  of  Ancient
Europe.    Cam.  PhU.  Soc.,  Mar.  1862.


MAMMOTH,   AND  WOOLLT^HAIRED   RHINOCEROS.  239

to  the  Felis  iigris,  and  that  it  may  eventually  prove  to  be
the  lineal  desooiidant  and  living  representative  of  the
F.  spelaa.

The  geographical  range  of  the  mammoth  was  very  ex-
tensive. Its  remains  are  found  in  North  America,  from
Behring's  Straits  to  South  Carolina,  and  in  the  old  con-
tinent, &om  the  furthest  extremity  of  Siberia,  to  the  extreme
west  of  Europe ;  it  crossed  the  Alps»  and  established  itself
in  Italy,  but  it  has  not  yet  been  discovered  south  of  the
Pyrenees.  Neither  the  mammoth  nor  the  wooUy-haired
rhinoceros  have  been  found  in  any  stratum  anterior  to  the
river-drift  gravels.  M.  Lartet,  however,  follows  Murchi-
son,  De  Yemeuil,  and  Keyserling  in  believing  that  these
animals  lived  in  Siberia  long  before  they  found  their  way
into  Europe ;  that,  in  fact,  they  belonged  to  the  tertiary  fauna
of  Northern  Asia,  though  they  did  not  make  their  appear-
ance in  Europe  until  the  quaternary  period.  So  far  then  as
Europe  is  concerned,  these  two  species  seem  to  have  made
their  appearance  at  a  later  date,  and  they  perhaps  survived
a  more  recent  period  than  the  Urius  spelceus.

They  are,  indeed,  very  characteristic  of  the  river-drift  de-
posits, and  are  found  also  in  the  loess  of  the  Rhine  and  its
principal  tributaries,  but  they  have  not  yet  been  met  with  in
the  peat  bogs.  They  never  occur  in  the  £jokkenmoddings,
the  Lake-habitations,  or  the  tumuli,  nor  is  there  the  slightest
tradition  which  can  be  regarded  as  indicating,  even  in  the
most  obscure  manner,  a  recollection  of  the  existence  in
Europe  of  these  two  gigantic  Pachyderms.

The  magnificent  Irish  elk,  or  Megaceros  hibemicus,  which
attained  a  height  of  ten  feet  four  inches,  with  horns  mea-
suring eleven  feet  from  tip  to  tip,  appears  to  have  had  a
much  more  restricted  range.  Its  remains  have  been  found
in  Germany  as  far  as  Silesia,  in  France  down  to  the  Pyrenees,
and  it  appears  even  to  have  crossed  the  Alps.    It  seems.


240  IRISH  ELK.

howeyer,  to  have  been  most  abundant  in  the  British.  Isles,
and  especially  in  Ireland.  It  bas  been  found  at  Walton,  in
Essex,  and  at  Happisburgb,  in  strata  which  are  considered  to
belong  to  the  Norwich  Crag,  and  must  originally,  therefore,
haye  belonged  to  the  tertiary  fauna.  It  is  reported  to  have
been  frequently  found  in  peat  bogs,  but  Professor  Owen,  who
made  numerous  inquiries  on  the  subject,  belieyes  that,  in
reality,  the  bones  generally  occur  in  the  lacustrine  shell  marl,
which  underlies  the  peat  or  bog  earth.*

In  the  Mebelungen  Lied  of  the  twelfth  century,  a  mys-
terious animal  is  mentioned  under  the  name  of  schelch :

After  this  he  straightway  slew  a  bison  and  an  elk,
Of  the  strong  nri  four,  and  one  fierce  schelch.

It  has  been  supposed  by  some  writers  that  the  schelch  was,
in  fact,  the  Megaceros  hibemicua.  There  is,  however,  no  suf-
ficient reason  for  this  hypothesis,  and  we  must  remember  that
the  same  poem,  as  Dr.  Buckland  well  pointed  out,  contains
allusions  to  giants,  dwarfs,  pigmies,  and  fire-dragons.  Neither
Caesar  nor  Tacitus  mention  the  Irish  elk,  and  they  would
surely  not  have  omitted  such  a  remarkable  animal,  if  it  had
existed  in  their  time.  Moreover,  though  there  is  no  longer
any  doubt  that  this  species  coexisted  with  man,  the  evidence
of  this  has  been  obtained  from  the  bone-caves,  and  from
strata  belonging  to  the  age  of  the  river-drift  gravels.

No  remains  of  the  Irish  elk  have  yet  been  found  in  asso-
ciation with  bronze,  nor  indeed  are  we  aware  of  any  which
can  be  referred  to  the  later,  or  Neolithic  age.

The  reindeer  still  exists  in  Northern  Europe,  in  Siberia,
and  in  the  mountainous  districts  of  the  Caucasus.  Even  so
recently  as  the  time  of  Pallas  it  might  still  oe  met  with  on
the  wooded  simmiits  of  the  Oural  Mountains.  A  very
nearly-allied  species,  even  if  indeed  it  be  distinct,  is  widely

♦  Owen,  Le,  p.  466.


BsnnxBER.  241

distributed  in  Northern  America.  But,  as  far  as  concerns
Western  Europe,  it  must  be  regarded  as  an  extinct  species.
We  liave  no  eyidence  as  to  whether  it  crossed  the  Alps
or  the  Pyrenees,  but  it  was  certainly  abundant  at  one  time
in  England  and  France,  whence,  however,  it  is  unneces-
sary to  say,  it  has  long  disappeared.  Eyen  at  the  present
day  the  reindeer,  like  the  Laplander,  is  gradually  retiring
northwards,  imable  to  resist  the  pressure  of  advancing
civilisation.

Even  within  the  last  ten  years  a  few  families  of  Lapps
might  still  be  foimd  in  die  neighbourhood  of  Nystuen,  on
the  summit  of  the  Fillefjeld,  and  some  other  places  in  the
South  of  Norway,  but  none  are  now  to  be  found  on  this
side  of  the  Namsen  river.  The  reindeer  in  a  wild  state,
indeed',  even  at  the  present  day,  is  generally  distributed,
though  in  small  numbers,  over  the  highest  and  wildest  of
the  Norwegian  f  jelds,  protected  however  by  stringent  game
laws,  but  for  which  it  would,  probably,  have  ere  now  ceased
to  exist.

As  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  present  evidence,  the  first
appearance  of  the  reindeer  in  Europe  coincided  with  that  of
the  mammoth,  and  took  place  at  a  later  period  than  that  of
the  cave-bear  or  Irish  elk.  It  is  generally  found  wherever
the  mammoth  and  woolly-haired  rhinoceros  occur;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  as  its  remains  are  abundant  in  some
of  the  bone-caves  in  which  the  gigantic  Pachyderms  are
wanting,  it  is  probable  that  it  existed  to  a  still  later  period.
The  reindeer  has  not,  however,  been  found  in  the  Kjokken-
moddings,  nor  in  any  of  the  tumuli.  It  is  also  wanting  in
the  Swiss .  Lake- villages,  although  we  know  that  it  was  at
one  time  an  inhabitant  of  Switzerland,  bones  of  it  hav-
ing been  found  in  a  cave  at  L'Echelle,  between  the  great
and  little  Sal^ve,  near  Geneva,  where  they  were  mixed
with  worked  flints,  ashes,  and  remains  of  the  ox  and  horse.

16


342  AUR0CB8.

All  the  .bones  were  broken  in  tke  uBual  and  charactenBtio
manner.

As  might  naturally  have  been  ei^pected,  the  reindeer  haa
been  oocanonallj  found  in  the  peat  mosses  of  Sweden,  thongk
not»  I  beUeve,  as  yet  iii  those  of  England  and  France.  Nor
is  it  represented  on  any  of  the  ancient  British  or  Gallic
coins.  Caesar,  indeed,  mentions  it  as  existing  in  the  great
Heroynian  forest ;  but  his  description  is  both  imperfect  and
incorrect.  He  seems  to  have  heard  of  it  only  at  second
hand,  and  neyer  to  haye  met  with  anybody  who  had  actually
seen  one.  It  does  not  aj^ear  to  have  evw  been  exhibited  in
the  Roman  circus.

The  aurochs  was  common  in  central  and  southern  Europe,
and  appears  to  date  back  to  a  pmod  long  before  the
aarival  of  the  mammoth  or  wooUy-haired  rhinoceros.  It
existed  in  England  at  the  period  of  the  Norwich  Crag,  its
remains  occur  in  the  river-drifb  gravels,  the  bone-caves,  the
Lake-villages  of  Switzerland,  and  in  the  peat  bogs,  though
none  have  yet  been  found  in  the  shell-mounds  of  Denmark.
M.  Lartet  thinks  that  it  is  represented  on  a  coin  of  the
Santones,  which  was  shown  to  him  by  M.  de  Saulcy.  It  is
stated  by  Pliny  and  Seneca  to  have  existed  in  their  times,
with  the  urus,  in  the  great  forests  of  Germany.  Though
not  mentioned  by  Caasar,  it  is  alluded  to  ia  the  Niebelungen
Lied,  and  is  said  to  have  existed  in  Prussia  down  to  the  year
1775.  Indeed,  it  still  survives  in  the  imperial  forests  of
Lithuania,  where  it  is  preserved  by  the  Emperor  of  Husaia,
and  also,  according  to  Nordmann  and  Yon  Baer,  in  some
parts  of  Western  Asia.

The  urus  seems  to  have  had  a  wider  geographical  range
even  than  the  aurochs.  It  has  been  found  throughout
Europe,  in  England,  Dotmiark,  and  Sweden,  in  France  and
Germany,  across^  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees,  it  occurs  in  Italy
and  Spain,  and  even,  according  to  M.  Gervais,  in  Northern


URU8.  243

Afirioa.  In  die  Mnaeum  at  Lund  Is  a  skeleton  belonging  to
tliis  speciesy  in  which  one  of  die  vertebrsD  still  shows  traces
of  a  wound,  made,  in  the  opinion  of  Professor  Ifilsson,  by  a
flint  antyw.  Bones  of  tiiis  species  hare  also  been  met  with
ia  andent  tumuli,  as  well  as  in  the  Lake-habitations,  and  the
Kjokkenmoddinga.

OBBsar  particularly  mentions  the  urus  as  occurring  in  the
Hercynian  forest;  it  is  alluded  to  in  the  Niebelungen  Lied,
and,  according  to  Herberstein,  it  existed  in  Germany  down
to  the  sixteenth  century,  soon  after  which  it  seems  to  have
become  extinct,  unless,  indeed,  it  be  represented  by  the
celebrated  wild  •  cattle  of  Chillingham,  and  some  of  our
domestic  breeds.

As  the  practical  result  of  this  palsBontological  chronology,
deriyed  from  the  mftTiiTnRlia  characteristic  of  the  quaternary
period,  M.  Lartet  considers  that  we  may  establish  four
divisions  in  ''la  p^riode  de  I'humanit^  primitiye,  I'&ge  du
grand  ours  des  cavemes,  T&ge  de  I'^l^phant  et  du  rhino-
ceros, r&ge  du  renne,  et  T&ge  de  Taurochs.''  It  is  evi-
dent, I  think,  that  the  appearance  of  these  mammalia  in
Europe  was  not  simidtaneous,  and  that  their  disappearance
has  been  successive.  The  evidence  is  very  strong  that  the
aurochs  surfived  the  reindeer  in  Western  Europe,  and  almost
equally  so  that  the  reindeer  lived  on  to  a  later  period  than
the  mammotii  oi)  the  woolly-haired  rhinoceros.  But  the
chronological  distinction  between  these  two  species  and  the
cave-bear  does  not  appear  to  be  so  well  established.  Admit-
ting that  the  cave-bear  has  not  yet  been  found  in  the  river-
gravels  of  the  Somme  valley,  which  have  been  so  carefully
examined,  still  we  must  remember  that  the  animal  was  essen-
tially a  cave-dweller,  and  that  its  absence  is,  perhaps,  to  be
attributed  rather  to  the  absence  of  caves  than  to  the  extinc-
tion of  the  species.  Moreover,  the  bones  found  in  the
gravel  are  very  much  broken,  and  some  bones  of  the  large


244  VALTJB  OP   CAVB-BVIDENCE.

specimens  of  the  brown  bear  so  closely  resemble  those  of
ITratis  epekmis  that  it  is  not  easy  to  distinguish  them.

So  far  as  concerns  the  age  of  the  aurochs,  the  bone-caves
hare  not  yet  added  anything  to  the  knowledge  which  we
have  obtained  from  the  study  of  the  tumuli,  and  of  the  Swiss
lake-dwellings.  It  would  not  be  possible,  within  the  limits  of
the  present  chapter,  to  mention  all  the  caves  in  which  human
remains  have  been  found  in  association  with,  and  apparently
belonging  to  the  same  period  as  those  of  the  extinct  mam-
malia. I  will  only  call  attention  to  a  few  of  those  cases
which  have  been  most  carefiilly  studied,  and  ia  which  the
conclusions  appear  to  be  satisfactorily  established.

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  a  great  number  of  caves
present  evidence  of  having  been  inhabited  during  times  long
subsequent  to  those  which  we  are  now  considering ;  but  for
the  Neolithic  age,  as  well  as  for  all  later  periods,  we  have,
as  has  been  already  mentioned,  other  sources  of  information,
and  more  satisfactory  evidence  than  any  which  can  be  derived
from  the  exanunation  of  caves.

Some  writers,  indeed,  have  gone  so  far  as  to  question
altogether  the  value  of  what  may  be  called  cave-evidence.
They  have  suggested  that  the  bones  of  extinct  animals  may
have  lain  in  the  caves  for  ages  before  the  appearance  of  man ;
that  relics  of  the  human  period  may  have  been  introduced
subsequently ;  and  that  remains  belonging  to  very  different
periods  may  have  thus  been  mixed  together.  This  was,
indeed,  the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  M.  Desnoyers,  even  so
recently  as  the  year  1845,  in  his  article  on  Bone-caves.*
Unless  this  argument  admitted  of  a  satisfactory  answer,  it
must  be  conceded  that  the  evidence  derivable  from  cave
contents  would   always,  be   liable    to   grave  suspicion.     I

*  Becherches  G^ologiqnes  et  hiB-      Dictionnaire  Uniyerael  d'Histoire  Na-
toriques  but  lea  caremes,  particuli^re-      tnrelle.
ment  sur  les   carenies   h  oesemento.


CAV£S   IN  THE   OORDOQNE.  245

tnist^   however,   to  be  able  to  show  that  this  is  not  the
case.

During  the  last  year  M.  Lartet,  in  conjunction  with
Mr.  Christy^  has  examined  with  great  care  a  number  of  small
caves  and  rock-shelters  in  the  Dordogne,  some  of  which  had
already  attracted  the  attention  of  archaBologists.*  These
caves  are  particularly  interesting,  because,  so  far,  at  least,  as
we  can  judge  from  the  present  state  of  the  evidence,  they
belong  to  M.  Lartet^s  reindeer  period,  and  tend,  therefore,
to  connect  the  later  or  Polished  Stone  age  with  the  period
of  the  river-drifts  and  the  great  extinct  mammalia ;  repre-
senting a  period  about  which  we  had  previously  very
little  information.  Those  which  have  been  most  carefully
examined  are  ten  in  number,  viz.,  Laugerie,  La  Madelaine,
Les  Eyzies,  La  Gorge  d'Enfer,  Le  Moustier,  Liveyre,  Pey  de
VAz&,  Combe-Granal,  and  Badegoule,  most  of  which  I  have
mjTself  had  the  advantage  of  visiting.  Some  of  these,  as,  for
instance,  Les  Eyzies  and  Le  Moustier,  are  at  a  considerable
height  above  the  stream,  but  others — as  those  at  La  Made-
laine and  Laugerie — are  little  above  the  present  flood-line,
showing,  therefore,  that  the  level  of  the  river  is  now  nearly
the  same  as  it  was  at  the  period  during  which  these  caves
were  inhabited.

The  rivers  of  the  Dordogne  run  in  deep  valleys  cut  through
calcareous  strata ;  and  while  the  sides  of  the  valleys  in  chalk
districts  are  generally  sloping,  in  this  case,  owing  probably
to  the  hardness  of  the  rock,  they  are  very  frequently  vertical
Small  caves  and  grottoes  frequently  occur;  besides  which,
as  the  different  strata  possess  unequal  powers  of  resistance
against  atmospheric  influ^ices,  the  face  of  the  rock  is,  as  it
were,  scooped  out  in  many  places,  and  thus  '*  rock-shelters"
are  produced.    Jn  very  ancient  times  these  caves  and  rock-

•  De  rOrigine  et  de  PEnfance  dei  Arti  en  P^rigord.  Par  M.  l'Abb6  Audierne.


246  CAVES   IN   THE   DOKDOGNB.'

shelters  were  inliabited  bj  men,  who  haye  left  behind  them
abundant  eyldences  of  their  presence.  But  as  ciyilisation
advanced,  man,  no  longer  content  with  the  natural,  but  in-
convenient, abode  thus  offered  to  him,  excavated  chambers
for  himself,  and  in  places  the  whole  face  of  the  rock  is  honey-
combed with  doors  and  windows  leading  into  suites  of  rooms,
often  in  tiers  one  over  another,  so  as  to  suggest  the  idea  of  a
French  Petra.  In  the  troublous  times  of  the  middle  ages
many  of  these,  no  doubt,  served  as  very  efficient  fortifications,
and  even  now  some  of  them  are  still  in  use  as  storehouses,
and  for  other  purposes.  At  Brantdme  I  saw  an  old  ohapel
which  had  been  cut  in  the  solid  rock,  and  resembled  the
descriptions  given  of  the  celebrated  rock-cut  temples  in  India.
Apart  from  the  scientific  interest,  it  was  impossible  not
to  enjoy  the  beauty  of  the  scene  which  passed  before  our  eyes
as  we  dropped  down  the  Yez^re.  As  the  river  visited  some-
times one  side  of  its  valley,  sometimes  the  other,  so  we  had
at  one  moment  rich  meadow  lands  on  each  side,  or  found
ourselves  close  to  the  perpendicular  and  almost  overhanging
cliffl  Here  and  there  we  came  upon  some  picturesque  old
castle,  and  though  the  trees  were  not  in  full  leaf,  the  rooks
were  in  many  places  green  with  box  and  ivy  and  evergreen
oak,  which  harmonised  well  with  the  rich  yellow  brown  of
the  stone  itself.

But  to  return  to  the  bone-caves.  Remains  of  the  oave-
bear  have  been  found  at  the  Pey  de  I'Az^,  of  the  cave-hyasna
at  Le  Moustier,  and  separated  plates  of  elephant  molars  have
occurred  at  Le  Moustier  and  at  Laugerie,  accompanied  at  the
latter  place  by  a  piece  of  a  pelvis.  As  regards  the  two
first  species,  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet  regard  them  as  pro-
bably belonging  to  an  earlier  period  than  the  human  remains
foimd  in  the  same  caves.  The  presence  of  the  pelvis  has
been  regarded  as  an  evidence  of  the  contemporaneity  of  the
mammoth  with  the  reindeer  hunters  of  Laugerie,  and  it  is


AB8XNCB  OP  DOHtiBltC  AKIMALS.  247

certainly  difficult  to  see  why  they  should  have  brought  a
fossil  bone  into  their  caye,  more  especially  as  the  bones  of
elephants,  from  the  looseness  of  their  texture,  are  not  well
adapted  for  implements.  Still  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet  do
not  oommit  themselyes  to  any  opinion,  having,  as  they  say,
laid  down  "  une  loi  de  ne  procMer  dans  nos  inductions  que
par  ^yidances  incontestables.''

As  regards  the  Felia  spekea,  a  metacarpal  bone  belonging
probably  to  this  species,  and  bearing  marks  of  kniyes,  was
found  in  the  eaye  of  Les  Eyzies.

Still,  so  far  as  tibe  positive  zoological  eyidence  is  con*
cemed,  the  antiquity  of  the  human  remains  found  in  these
grottoes  rests  mainly  on  the  presence  of  the  reindeer,  as
regards  which  the  evidence  is  oonclusiye.  The  bones  of
this  species  are  all  brc^en  open  for  the  marrow;  many  of
them  bear  the  marks  of  knives,  and  at  Les  Eyzies  a  ver-
tebra was  found  which  had  been  pierced  by  a  flint  flake.
MM.  Christy  and  Lartet  are  quite  satisfied  that  this  bone
must  have  be^i  fresh  when  it  was  thus  transfixed.  More-
over, as  we  shall  presently  see^  tibere  is  still  more  conclusive
evidence  that  man.  and  the  reindeer  were  contemporaneous
in  .this  locality.

But  in  its  negative  aspect  the  zoological  evidence  is  also
very  instructive.  No  remains  have  been  found  which,  in  ihe
opinion  of  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet,  can  be  referred  to  do-
mestic  animals.  It  is  true  that  hemes  of  the  ox  and  hone
occur,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  they  belonged  to  domes-
ticated individuals.  Bemains  of  the  boar  are  very  rare,
and  if  these  animals  had  been  d(»nesticated  we  might  have
expected  to  find  them  in  greater  abundance.  The  sheep  and
goat  are  entirely  wanting,  and  what  is  still  more  remarkable,
even  the  dog  appears  to  be  absent.  At  the  same  time  the
bones  of  the  horse  and  reindeer,  especially  of  the  latter,  are
very  numerous,  and  I  do  not  feel  so  satisfied  as  MM.  Lartet


248  CAVES  IN  THE  DORDOGNE.

and  Christy,  tliat  some  of  them,  at  least,  may  not  haya
belcmged  to  domesticated  individuals.

A  glance  at  the  collections  made  by  MM.  Christy  and
Lartet,  or  that  of  M.  le  Yicomte  de  Lastic  &om  Bruniquel,
will  show  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  animal  remains
consists  of  teeth,  lower  jaws^  and  horns.  Other  bones  do
indeed  occur,  but  they  form  a  small  fraction  of  the  whole.
Tet  we  cannot  attribute  this  to  the  presence  of  dogs,
partly  because  no  remains  of  this  species  have  yet  been  dis-
covered, partly  because  the  bones  which  remain  have  not
been  gnawed,  but  principally  because  dogs  eat  only  certain
bones  and  parts  of  bones,  as  a  general  rule  selecting  the
spongy  portions,  and  rejecting  the  solid  shafts.

Mr.  Galton  has  pointed  out  that  some  of  the  savage
tribes  of  Africa,  not  content  with  the  flesh  of  the  animals
which  they  kill,  pound  up  also  the  bones  in  mortars,  and
then  suck  out  the  animal  juices  contained  in  them.  So  also,
according  to  Leems,  the  Danish  Laplanders  used  to  break  up
with  a  mallet  all  the  bones  which  contained  any  fat  or
marrow,  and  then  boil  them  until  all  the  fat  was  extracted.*
The  Esquimaux  also  mash  up  the  bones  for  the  sake  of  the

marrow  contained  in  them.t     Some  of  the  ancient  stone

■

hammers  and  mortars  were  no  doubt  used  for  this  purpose,
and  the  pn^rtions  of  the  different  bones  aflbrd  us,  I
think,  indirect  evidence  that  a  similar  custom  prevailed
among  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Southern  France.

Passing  on  now  to  the  flint  implements  found  in  these
caves,  we  must  first  call  attention  to  their  marvellous
abundanca  Without  any  exaggeration  they  may  be  said  to
be  innumerable.  Of  course  this  adds  greatly  to  the  value  of
the  conclusions,  but  it  need  not  surprise  us,  because  flint  is

*  Aooount  of  Daniflh  Lapland,  by  Leenu,  Copenhagen,  1767.     Tnuulated  in
Finkerton's  Voyages,  Vol.  i.,  p.  396.
t  Hall,  Life  with  the  Esquimaux,  toI.  ii.  pp.  147,  176.


FLINT  IMFLEBiENTS.  249

BO  brittle^  that  implements  made  of  it  must  have  been  easily
broken,  and,  in  that  case,  the  fragments  would  be  thrown
away  as  useless,  especially  in  a  chalk  district,  where  the
supply  of  flint  would,  of  course,  be  practically  inexhaustible.
Many  implements,  no  doubt,  would  be  left  unfinished,  having
been  rendered  useless,  either  by  som«  misdirected  blow,  or
some  flaw  in  the  flint.  Moreover,  we  should  naturally  expect
that  in  a  bone-breccia  of  this  nature,  the  flint-implements
would  be  relatively  more  abundant  than  in  a  Kjokkenmod-
ding.  Each  oyster  Aimishes  but  a  single  mouthful,  so  that
the  edible  portions  evidently  form  a  greater  proportion  of  the
whole,  in  the  mammalia  than  in  the  moUusca.  The  Ejok-
kenmoddings,  therefore,  would  grow,  ccBteris  paribus,  more
rapidly  than  the  bone-breccia,  and  supposing  the  flint-im-
plements to  be  equally  numerous  in  both  cases,  they  would,
of  course,  be  more  sparingly  distributed  in  the  former,  than
in  the  latter.

The  objects  of  stone  found  m  the  bone  caves  which  we  are
now  considering,  are  flakes,  both  simple  and  worked,  scrapers,
cores,  awls,  lance-heads,  cutters,  hammers,  and  mortar-stones.

The  simple  and  worked  flakes  are,  of  course,  very  numer-
ous, but  they  do  not  call  for  any  special  observations,  lliey
present  the  usual  varieties  of  size  and  form.

Though  less  numerous  than  the  flakes,  the  scrapers*  are  stiU
very  abundant.  On  the  whole  they  seem  to  me  longer  and
narrower  than  the  usual  Danish  type.  Some  of  them  were
probably  intended  to  be  used  in  the  hand,  as  both  ends  are
fashioned  for  scraping.  These  may  be  called  double-scrapers.
Others  were  apparently  fixed  in  handles,  as  the  end  opposite
to  the  scraper  is  broken,  sometimes  on  one  side,  sometimes
on  both,  so  as  to  form  a  tapering  extremity,  which  may  have
been  fixed  in  a  handle  either  of  wood,  bone,  or  horn.     Many

*  See  ante,  pp.  70,  71.


250  CAVES   IN    THE   DORDOGNB.

of  the  flakes  are  also  nipped  ofl"  at  one  end,  in  the  same
manner.  Perhaps,  as  no  trace  of  such  a  handle  has  yet  been
discovered  by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet,  vood  was  the  material
used  for  this  purpose.

Of  course,  where  there  was  a  manufactory  of  flint  flakea,
the  cores  or  nuclei,  &om  which  they  were  struck,  must  also  be
present.  I  was,  however,  astonished  at  the  number  of  them
in  these  caves ;  during  my  short  visit,  I  myself  picked  out
more  than  ninety.

Awls  and  saws  are  very  much  lees  frequent,  but  some  few
good  specimens  have  been  found.  At  scone  of  the  stations,
curious  flat  implem^its  (fig.  130)  are  met  with.  From  the
constancy  of  their  form,  which,  moreover,  is  somewhat  pecu-
liar, we  may  safely  infer  that  they  were  applied  to  some


definite  purpose.  For  hammers,  the  reindeer  hunters  seem
fo  have  used  round  stones,  a  good  many  of  which  occur
in  the  caves,  and  which  bear  unmistakeahle  marks  of  the
purpose  to  which  they  were  applied.  Some  of  them,
however,  may  have  served  also  as  heatera.  The  Ifoith
American  Indians,  the  Esquimaux,  and  some  other  savages,
having  no  pottery,  but  only  wooden  vessels,  which  could
not  be  put  on  the  fire,  used  to  heat  stones,  and  then  place
them  in  the  water  which  they  wished  to  hoik  Many  of
the  stones  found  in  these  caverns  appear  to  have  been
used  in  this  manner.


FLIKT  IMPLEMEirre.  251

These,  the  oommonest  sorts  of  flint  implements,  are  found
indiscriminately  in  all  the  grottoes,  but  there  are  some  other
types  which  appear  to  be  less  generally  distributed.  Thtis,
at  Laugerie  and  Badegoule,  fragments  of  leaf-shaped  lance-
heads,  almost  as  well  worked  as  some  of  those  from  Denmark,
are  far  from  uncommon.  If,  therefore,  we  were  to  attempt
any  classification  of  the  grottoes,  according  to  the  periods  of
their  occupation,  we  might  be  disposed  to  refer  these  to  a
somewhat  later  period  than  most  of  the  others.  On  the  con-
trary, to  judge  from  the  flint  implements,  the  station  at  Le
Moustier  would  be  the  most  ancient.  Though  it  would  per-
haps be  premature  to  attempt  any  such  classification,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  Le  Moustier  presents  some  types  not  yet
found  in  the  other  caves,  and  resembling  in  some  respects
those  of  the  drift.

One  of  these  peculiar  forms  has  one  side  left  unchipped,  and
apparently  intended  to  be  held  in  the  hand,  while  the  other
has  a  cutting  edge,  produced  by  a  number  of  small  blows.
Some  of  these  instruments  are  cf  large  size^  and  they  are
supposed  by  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet  to  have  been  used  for
cutting  wood,  and  perhaps  also  the  large  bones  of  mammalia-
Another  very  interesting  type  is  figured  oTcr-leaf  (figs.  131-3).
This  specimen  is  worked  on  both  sides,  but  more  frequently
one  of  them  is  left  flat.  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet  regard
this  type  as  identical  with  the  *^  lance-head"  implements
found  in  the  drift.  I  cannot  altogether  agree  with  them
in  this  comparison.  Not  only  are  the  Le  Moustier  specimens
smaller,  but  the  workmanship  is  difierent,  being  much  less
bold.  MoreoYer,  the  flat  surface  (a)  is  no  indLvidual  pecu-
liarity. It  is- very  frequently,  not  to  say  generally,  present,
and  occurs  also  on  the  similar  implement'  found  by  Mr.
Boyd  Dawkins  in  the  Hyaena  den  at  Wokey  Hole,  and
figured  by  him  in  the  Geological  Journal,  May,  1862,  No.
70,  p.  119.     This  very  interesting  type  seems  rather  to  be


252  CA.TES  IM  THE  DORDOGNE.

derived  from  the  "  cutters"  above  described,  in  which  case
ita  resemblance  (o  the  drift  forms  would  be  accidental  and
insignificant.  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet  indeed  call  the
implements  of  tJiis  type  "  lanceheads,"  but  it  may  well  be


Ftlni  Implcmoit  ftcun  Lc  UoiuUer.

doubted  whether  they  were  intended  for  use  in  this  manner^
though  there  are  Bpecimens  at  Le  Moustier  which  have  all  the


ABSENCE  OF  POLISHED  IMPLEMENTS.  253

appearance  of  having  been  intended  for  this  purpose.  On  the
whole^  then,  although  these  Le  Moustier  types  are  of  great
interest,  we  must  pause  before  we  regard  them  as  belonging
to  the  drifb  forms.

No  polished  implements  have  yet  been  found  in  any  of  these
caverns.  Yet  the  collection  made  by  the  late  M.  Mourcin,  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Perigueux,  contains,  among  5025  ob-
jects of  stone,  no  less  than  3002  polished  axes,  of  which,
however,  many  are  imperfect.  Doubtless,  among  the  im-
mense variety  of  forms  presented  by  the  flint  implements
from  these  caves,  ftirther  study  will  distinguish  other  types,
and  we  may  fairly  hope  that  it  will  throw  more  light  on
the  purposes  for  which  they  were  designed.

The  station  at  Moustier  has  not  as  yet  produced  any  im-
plements made  of  bone,  but  a  good  many  have  been  obtained
from  the  other  caves.  "They  consist  of  square  chisel-shaped
implements ;  round,  sharply  pointed,  awl-like  tools,  some  of
which  also  may  have  served  as  the  spike  of  a  fish-hook ;  har-
poon shaped  lanceheads ;  plain  or  barbed  arrow-heads  with
many  and  double  barbes,  cut  with  wonderful  vigour;  and
lastly,  eyed  needles  of  compact  bone  finely  pointed,  polished,
and  drilled  with  round  eyes  so  small  and  regular,  that  some
of  the  most  assured  and  acute  believers  in  all  the  other  find-
ings might  well  doubt  whether  they  coidd  indeed  have  been
drilled  with  stone,  until  their  repetition  by  the  hand  of  that
practical  and  conscientious  observer.  Monsieur  Lartet,  by  the
very  stone  implements  found  with  them,  has  dispelled  their
honest  doubts."*  Moreover,  V^e  must  remember  that  the
New  Zealanders  were  able  with  their  stone  tools  to  drill
holes  even  through  glass,  f

So  far,  then,  with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  the  well-
worked  lanceheads  of  Laugerie  and  Badegoule,  all  the  evi-
dence we  have  yet  obtained  from  these  caves  points  to  a

•  Traiifl.  Ethnolo^cal  Soc.  N.S.  vol.  iii.         f  Cook's  First  Voyage,  p.  464.


254  CAVES  IN  THE  DORDOOIfX.

Very  primitiye  period,  earlier  even,  than  that  of  the  first  Swias
Lake-YillageSy  or  Danish  shell-mounds.  No  fragments  of
metal  or  of  pottery  have  yet  heen  fonnd  which  can  be  re-
ferred with  confidence  to  the  Reindeer  period.

But  there  is  one  class  of  objects  in  these  caves  which,  taken
alone,  would  have  led  us  to  a  very  different  conclusion.  No
representation,  however  rude,  of  any  animal  or  plant  has  yet
been  found  in  any  of  the  Danish  sheU-mounds,  or  the  Stone-
age  Lake- villages.  Even  on  objects  of  the  Bronze  age,  they
are  so  rare,  that  it  is  doubtfiil  whether  a  single  weU  authen-
ticated instance  could  be  produced.  Yet  in  these  archaic
bone-caves,  many  very  fiiir  sketches  have  beai  found,
scratched  on  bone  or  stone  with  a  sharp  point,  probably  of
a  flint  implement.  In  some  cases  there  is  even  an  attempt
at  shading.  In  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,*  M.
Lartet  had  already  made  known  to  us  some  rude  draw-
ings found  in  the  Gave  of  Savign^,  and  in  his  last  memoir
he  has  described  and  figured  some  more  objects  of  a  similar
character.

In  the  lower  station  at  Laugerie  several  of  these  drawings
have  been  found ;  one  represents  a  large  herbivorous  animal,
but  unfortunately  without  the  head  or  forelegs;  a  second
also  is  apparently  intended  for  some  species  of  ox ;  a  third
represents  a  smaller  animal,  with  vertical  horns ;  another  is
evidently  intended  for  a  horse ;  and  a  fifth  is  very  interest-
ing, because,  from  the  shape  of  the  antlers  and  head,  it  is
evidently  intended  for  a  reindeer.  Several  similar  drawings
have  been  obtained  by  M.  de  Lastic  in  a  cave  at  BruniqueL

But  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  specimen  of  aU  is  a
poniard,  cut  out  of  a  reindeer's  horn  (fig,  134).  The
artist  has  ingeniously  adapted  the  position  of  the  animal  to
the  necessities  of  the  case.    The  horns  are  thrown  back  on

•  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat  1S61.    Vol.  zr.


BUDE  DRAWINGS   AND  SCUI^PTUKES.  255

the  neck,  the  fore-legs  are  doubled  up  under  the  bellj^  and
the  hind-legs  are  stretched  out  along  the  blade.  XJnfor*
tanately  the  poniard  seems  to  have  been  thrown  away  before

Fi«.  IH.


Handle  of  a  Poniard.

it  was  quite  finished,  but  seireral  of  the  details  indicate  that
the  animal  was  intended  for  a  reindeer.  Although  it  is
natural  to  feel  sosme  surprise  at  finding  these  works  of  art,
still  there  are  instances  among  recent  savages  of  a  certain
skill  in  drawing  and  sculpture,  being  accompanied  by  an
entire  ignorance  of  metallurgy.

In  considering  the  probable  condition  of  these  ancient
CaTe*men,  we  must  give  them  fiill  credit  for  their  love  of
art,  such  as  it  was;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  want  of
metal,  of  polished  flint  implements,  and  even  of  pottery  ;*  the
ignorance  of  agriculture,  and  the  i^parent  absence  of  all
domestic  aniTnalfi,  including  even  the  dog,  certainly  imply
a  vexy  low  state  of  civilisation,  and  a  very  considerable
antiquity*

There  is  also  evidence  that  a  considerable  change  of  cli-
mate must  have  taken  place.  The  ^reindeer  is  the  most
abundant  animal,  and  evidently  formed  the  principal  article
of  food,  while  we  know  that  this  animal  is  now  confined  to
arctic  clunates,  and  could  not  exist  in  the  south  of  France.
Again,  the  ibex  and  the  chamois,  both  of  which  are  now
restricted  to  the  snowy  summits  of  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees,

*  Potter^r  18,  howerer,  verj  lare  in      and  is  not  by  any  means  abundant  in
the  remaina  of  the  Irish  Crannogea,      the  Danish  shell-nioiinds.


256  HABITS  OF  THE   CAVE-DWELLERS.

and  a  species  of  spermophilus,  also  point  to  the  same  con-
clusion. The  presence  of  the  two  former  species  in  some  of
the  Swiss  Lake-dwellings  is  not  equally  significant,  because
there  they  are  in  the  neighbourhood  of  high  mountains,  but
the  highest  hills  of  the  Dordogne  do  not  reach  to  an  altitude
of  much  more  than  800  feet.

Another  very  interesting  q)ecies  which  has  recently  been
determined  by  M.  Lartet,.  is  the  Antilope  Saigo  of  Pallas,
which  now  abounds  on  the  Steppes  of  NoKh  Eastern  Europe
and  Western  Asia,  in  the  plains  of  the  Dnieper  and  the
Yolga,  round  the  shores  of  the  Caspian  and  as  far  as  the
Altai  Moimtains.  «Mr.  Christy  tells  us  that  the  northern
plains  of  Poland  and  the  valley  of  the  Dnieper  are  the
southern  limits  of  this  species  at  the  present  day*

Again,  the  accumulation  of  animal  remains  in  these
caves  is  itself,  as  Mr.  Christy  has  ingeniously  suggested,,  a
good  evidence  of  change  in  the  climate.  We  know  that  the
Esquimaux  at  present  allow  a  similar  deposit  to  take  place  in
their  dwellings,  but  this  can  only  be  done  in  Arctic  regions ;
in  such  a  cKmateas  that  now  existing  in  the  south  of  France,
such  an  accumulation  would,  except  of  course  in  the  depth  of
winter,  soon  become  a  mass  of  decomposition.

Doubtless  the  persevering  researches  of  my  friends  MM.
Christy  and  Lartet  will  ere  long  throw  more  light  on  the
subject,  and  enable  us  to  speak  with  greater  confidence ;  but
so  far  as  the  present  evidence  is  concerned,  it  appears  to  in-
dicate a  race  of  men  living  almost  as  some  of  the  Esquimaux
do  now,  and  as  the  Laplanders  did  a  few  hundred  years
ago ;  and  a  period  intermediate  between  that  of  the  Polished
Stone  implements  and  of  the  great  extinct  mamn&lia :  ap-
parently also  somewhat  more  ancient  than  that  of  the  shell-
mound  builders  of  Denmark.  But  if  these  Cave-men  shall
eventually  be  shown  to  have  been  contemporaneous  with  the
cave-tiger,  the  cave-bear,  the  cave-hyaBpa,  and  the  mammoth^


THS   fiSLGIAN   CAVES.  2&7

remains  of  which  have  been  found  in  doubtful  association
with  them,  then,  indeed,  they  must  be  referred  to  an  ev^i
more  remote  period.*

That  some  of  the  European  caves  were-  inhabited  by  man
during  the  time  of  these  extinct  mammah'a  seems  to  be  well
established.

Already  in  the  year  1828  MM.  Toumal  and  Christol,  in
the  south  of  France,  had  found  fragmienjts  of  pottery  and
human  bones  and  teeth,  intermingled  with  renminbi  of  extinct
animals;  and  M.  Toufnal  expressly  pointed  out  that  these
had  certainly  not  been  washed  in  by  any  diluvial  catastrophe,
but  must  have  been  introduced  gradually.  The>  presence  of
pottery,  however,  throws  much  doubt  on  the  supposed  an-
tiquity of  these  remains.

A  few  years  later,  in  1833  and  1834,  Dr.  Schmerlingf
published  an  account  of  his  researches  in  some  caves  near
Li^ge  in  Belgium.  In  four  or  five  of  these  he  found  human
bones,  and  in  all  of  them  rude  implements,  principally  flint
flakes,  were  discovered,  scattered  in  such  a  manner  among
the  remains  of  the  mammoth.  Rhinoceros  tichorhinu^,  cave-
hysena,  and  cave-bear,  that  Yk.  Schmerling  referred  them  to
the  same  period.  One  feels  a  natural  surprise  that  such
fiTtiinalii  as  these  should  ever  have  been  natives  of  England
and  France,  ever  have  wandered  about  among  oar  woods  or
along  our  streams ;  but  when  it  was  suggested  that  they  were
contemporaries  with  mam,  surprise  was  succeeded  by  in-
credulity. Yet  these  cave-researches  appear  to  have  been
conducted  with  care,  and  the  principal  results  have  been
confirmed  by  more  recent  discoveries*

*  From  another  bone  cave  in  the  descriptioD.  of  this  collection,  I  will  say

south  of  France — that  of  Bniniquel —  nothing  about  it  here.

M.  le  Vicomte  de  Lastic  has  made  a  f  Becherches  sur  les  ossements  fos-

large  collection,  the  greater  part  of  siles  d^couvertes  dans  les  cayemes  de

which  is  now  in  the  British  Museum,  la  province  de  li^ge.    Par  le  Dr.  P.  C*

-  As  PmfeMor  Owen  has  undertaken  the  Sohmerling.

17


258  Kent's  hole.

The  hesitation,  however,  with  which  the  statements  of
Dr.  Schmerling  were  receiired  by  scientific  men  arose  no
doubt  partly  from  the  fact  that  some  of  the  fossil  remains
discovered  by  him  were  certainly  referred  to  wrong  species,
and  partly  because,  with  reference  to  several  of  the  extinct
species,  and  especially  to  the  mammoth,  he  expressed  the
opinion  that  the  remains  had  been  brought  from  a  distance,
and  had  very  likely  been  washed  out  of  some  earlier  bed.
"Nous  n'h^sitons  point,"  he  says,  "A  exprimer  ici  notre
pens^e,  c'est  que  nous  doutons  fort  que  I'^l^phant,  lors  de
r^poque  du  remplissage  de  nos  oavemes,  habit&t  nos  con-
tr6es.  Au  contrair^,  nous  csoyons ;  plutdt  que  ces  restes
ont  4t&  ameil^s  de  loin,  ou  bien  que  ces  debris  ont  ^te
d^plac^s  d'un  terrain  plus  ancien  et.  ont  At&  entrain^s  dans

les  cavemes.**

»

Even,  therefOT^,  though  Dr.  Schmerling  might  be,  quite
right  in  his  conclusion  that  the  human  remains  had  bew
"enfouis  dans  ces  cavemes*jl  la  m6me  ^poque,  et  par  con-
sequent par  les^m^mes  causes  qui  y  ont  entrain^  une  masse
d'ossements  de  diffifrentes  espdces'^teintefs,"  still  it  would  not
necessarily  follow  that  man  had  livedrM  the  same  period  as
these  extinct  species.

In  the  year  1840  *Mr.  Godwin  Austen  communicated
to  the  Geological  Society  ^a  « memoir  on  the  G^ologj^
of  the  South  East«>of  ^Devonshire,*  and  in  his  description
of  Kent's  Hol^,  noar  Torquay,  \he  says  that  '^  human  re-
mains and  wotks>of  arjt,  such  as  arrow-heads  and  .knives
of  flint,  occuTiin:  alii  parts  of  the  cave  and  throughout  the
entire  thickness*  of  the  clay:  and  no  distinction  founded
on  condition,  distribution,  or  relative  position,  can  be  ob-
served, whereby  the  human  can  be  separated  from  the
other  reUquisB,"   which  included  bones  of  the  ''elephant,

«  TraiiBactioiiB  of  the  GeoL  Soc.  Ser.  2,  rol.  ru  p.  438.        «


BRIXHAM  CAVE.  259

rhinoceros,  ox,  deer,  horse,  bear,  hyaena,  and  a  feline  ani-
mal of  large  size."

The  value,  he  truly  adds,  '*  of  such  a  statement  must  rest
on  the  care  with  which  a  collector  may  haye  explored;  I
must  therefore  state  that  my  own  researches  were  constantly
conducted  in  parts  of  the  cave  which  had  never  been  dis-
turbed, and  in  every  instance  the  bones  were  procured  from
beneath  a  thick  covering  of  stalagmite ;  so  far,  then,  the
bones  and  works  of  man  must  have  been  introduced  into
the  cave  before  the  flooring  of  stalagmite  had  been
formed/'  These  statements,  however,  attracted  little  atten-
tion ;  and  the  very  similar  assertions  made  by  Mr.  Yivian,
in  a  paper  read  before  the  Geological  Society,  were  con-
sidered so  improbable  that  the  memoir  containing  them  was
not  published.

In  May,  1858,  Dr.  Falconer  called  the  attention  of  the
Geological  Society  to  a  newly-discovered  cave  at  Brixham,
near  Torquay,  and  a  committee  was  appointed  to  assist  him
in  examining  it.  Gbunts  of  money  were  obtained  for  the
same  object  from,  the  Boyal  Society  and  Miss  Burdett  Coutts.
In  addition  to  Dr.  Falconer,  Mr.  Pengelly,  Mr.  Prestwich,
and  Professor  Ramsay  were  intrusted  with  the  investigations.
In  September,  1858,  a  preliminary  report  was  made  to  the
Geological  Society,  but  it  is  very  much  to  be  regretted  that
the  results  have  not  yet  been  published  in  extenso.

The  deposits  in  the  cave  were,  in  descending  order —

1.  Stalagmite  of  irregular  thickness.

2.  Ochreous  cave  earth  with  limestone  breccia.

3.  Ochreous  cave  earth  with  comminuted  shale.

4.  Hounded  gravel.

The  organic  remains  belonged  to  the  following  species  : —

1.  Rhinoceros  ticAorhinus.  Teeth  in  considerable  nimibers
and  an  astragalus.


260  SICILIAN   CAVES.

2.  Bos  9p.    Teethi  jaws,  and  other  bones.

3.  Equus  8p.    A  few  remains.

4.  Cervus  tarandm.    The  reindeer — skull  and  horns.

5.  Cervtis  sp.    Horns.

6.  Urius  8pebBti9 — ^the  cave-bear.     Lower  jaws,  teeth^

and  the  bones  of  a  hind  leg.

7.  Hycsna  vpekea.      Lower  jaws,  teeth,   fragments  of

skulls,  and  other  bones.

Several  flint  flakes  were  also  found  indiscriminatelj  mixed
with  these  bones,  and,  according  to  all  appearance,  of  the
same  antiquity.  They  occtirred  at  various  depths,  from  ten
inches  to  eleven  feet,  and  some  of  them  were  in  the  gravel,
below  the  whole  of  the  ochreous  cave-earth.  One  of  them
was  found  close  to  the  bones  of  the  left  hind  leg  of  a  cave-
bear.  The  remains  comprised  not  only  the  femur,  tibia,  and
fibula,  but  even  the  kneepan  and  astragalus  were  in  their
respective  places.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  limb
must  have  been  imbedded  while  in  a  firesh  condition,  or  at
least  while  the  bones  were  held  together  by  the  ligaments.
As,  then,  they  must  have  been  deposited  soon  after  the  death
of  the  animal,  it  follows  that,  if  man  and  the  cave-*bear  were
not  contemporaneous,  the  cave-bear  was  the  more  recent  of
the  two.

Again,  in  the  grotto  of  Maccagnone,  in  Sicily,  Dr.  Falconer
found  human  traces,  consisting  of  ashes  and  rude  flint  imple-
ments in  a  breccia  containing  bones  of  the  El^has  antiquus,
of  the  hysena,  of  a  large  Ursua,  of  a  Felts  (probably  F,  spehea)^
and  especially  with  large  numbers  of  bones  belonging  to  the
hippopotamus.  The  *'  ceneri  impastate,"  or  concrete  of  ashes
had  at  one  time  filled  the  cavern,  and  a  large  piece  of  bone
breccia  was  still  cemented  to  the  roof  by  stalagmite,  but
owing  to  some  change  in  the  drainage,  the  greater  part  had
been  cleared  out  again.  The  presence  of  the  hippopotamus
sufficiently  proves  that  the  geographical  conditions  of  the


SICILIAN  GATES.  261

country  mnst  haye  been  very  different  from  what  they  are
now ;  but  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  Dr.  Falconer's  own
summary  of  his  observations  in  this  case :

**  The  vast  number  of  Hyi>popotam  implied  that  the  phy-
sical condition  of  the  country  must  have  been  greatly  different,
at  no  Tery  distant  geological  period,  from  what  obtains  now.
He  considered  that  all  deposits  ab{n>e  the  bone  breccia  had
been  accumulated  up  to  the  roof  by  materials  washed  in  from
above,  through  sinuous  crevices  or  flues  in  the  limestone,  and
that  the  uppermost  layer,  consisting  of  the  breccia  of  shells,
bone-splinters,  siliceous  objects,  burnt  clay,  bits  of  charcoal,
and  hjrsBna  coprolites,  had  been  cemented  to  the  roof  by
stalagmitic  infiltration.  The  entire  condition  of  the  large
fragile  Selices  proved  that  the  effect  had  been  produced  by
the  tranquil  agency  of  water,  as  distinct  from  any  tumultuous
action.  There  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  different
objects  in  the  roof  breccia  tcere  other  than  of  contemporaneous
origin :  subsequently  a  great  physical  alteration  in  the  con-
tour, altering  the  flow  of  superficial  water  and  of  the  sub-
terranean springs,  changed  all  the  conditions  previously
existing,  and  emptied  out  the  whole  of  the  loose  incoherent
contents,  leaving  only  the  portions  agglutinated  to  the  roof.
The  wreck  of  these  ejecta  was  visible  in  the  patches  of
*  ceneri  impastati,'  containing  fossil  bones,  below  the  mouth
of  the  cavern.  That  a  long  period  must  have  operated  in
the  extinction  of  the  hyeena,  cave-lion,  and  other  fossil
species,  is  certain,  but  no  index  remains  for  its  measurement.
The  author  would  call  the  carefiil  attention  of  cautious
geologists  to  the  inferences — ^that  the  Maccagnone  Cave  was
filled  up  to  the  roof  within  the  human  period,  so  that  a
thick  layer  of  bone -splinters,  teeth,  landsheUs,  hycenas'
coprolites,  and  human  objects,  was  agglutinated  to  the  roof
by  the  infiltration  of  water  holding  lime  in  solution.  That
subsequently,  and  within  the  human  period,  such  a  great


\


262  6IBAALTAK   CAVES.

amount  of  change  took  place  in  the  physical  configuration
of  the  district  as  to  have  caused  the  cave  to  be  washed
out  and  emptied  of  its  contents^  excepting  the  patches  of
material  cemented  to  the  roof  and  since  coated  with  addi-
tional stalagmite."

Similar  proofs  of  great  and  recent  geographical  changes
have  been  afforded  by  the  examination  of  certain  Spanish
caves.  In  the  Genista  Cave  at  Gibraltar  Mr.  Busk  and
Dr.  Falconer  have  discovered  Hycena  brunnea,  an  existing
AMcan  species^  the  leopard^  lym>  serval,  and  Barbary
stag.  M.  Lartet  has  also  determined  molars  c£  the  existing
AMcan  elephant  amiong  som^  bones,  found  in  a  cave  near
Madrid^

M.  Lartet*  haa  described  with  his  usual  ability  a  very
interesting  grotto^  or  small  cave,  which  was  discovered  some
years  ago  at  Aurignac>  in  the  south  of  France.  A  peasant
named  Bonnemaison^  seeing  a  rabbit  run  into  a  hole  on  a
steep  slope,  put  his>  hand  in^  and  to  his  surprise  pulled  out  a
human  bone.  Curiosity  urged  him  to  explore  faipther>  and
on  removing  a  quantity  of  rubbishy  he  found  a  large  block
of  stone,  which  almost  closed  up  the  entrance  to  a  small
chamber,  in  which  were  no  lesa  than  seventeen  human
skeletons.  Unfortunately  for  science^  the  mayor  of  Au-
rignac,  hearing  of  these  discoveries^  collected  the  human
bones,  had  them  reburied,.  and  when  M.  Lartet  some  years
afterwards  explored  the  cavern,,  they  could  not  be  found
again.

After  carefully  examining  the  locality^  M.  Lartet  came  to
the  conclusion  that  this  small  cavern  had  been  used  as  a
burial  place,  and  from  the  remains  of  bones  broken  for
marrow,  and  marks  of  fire  immediately  outside  the  cave,  he
inferred  that  feasts  had  been  held  there.

*  Ann.  des  Sc.  Nat.  1861,  p.  177.


AURIGNAC.  263

The  following  is  the  list  of  species  determined  by  M.  Lartet,
together  with  the  approximate  number  of  individuals  belong-
ing to  each : —

Knmber  of  indindual

1.  Ca,Ye  Hear  (Ursua  tpelcBiis)  5  —  6

2.  Brown  Bear  ( Z7.  arc^  ?)    1

3.  Badger  (Meles  taxiis)  1  —  2

4.  Polecat  {Putoriua  vulgaris)  \ 1

6.  Care  lAon  {FeiU  spekea) 1

6.  Wild  Cat  {F.  caius)     1

7.  'Hjdsna,  (Hycena  apelcea)   6  —  6

8.  Wo]£  {Cants  Lupus)     3

9.  Fox  {C.  vuipes)    18—20

10*  Mammoth    {Elephas  primigenius).

Two  molars  and  an  astragalus

11.  BhinoceroB  {Rhinoceros  tiehorMnus)    ,,,     1

12.  Horse  {Equus  caballus)    12—15

IZ.  A»»?*  {Kasinus)    ^ 1

14.  Boar  {Sm  scro/a).    Two  incisors

15.  &\Ag  {Cerms  elaphus)  1

16.  Irish  Elk  (Jlfcyac^ro^Atterwfcw^)....;....     1

17.  Bjoe  {G^  eapreolus)    3  —  4

18.  Reindeer  {C.  tarandus)    10—12

19.  A}irof:AiB  {Bison  Eun^cBus)  ,\ 12 — 16

Some  of  these  were  found  in  the  grotto,  others  outside ;  the
latter  had  been  gnawed  by  some  large  carnivorous  animal^  no
doubt  the  hysena,  coprolites  of  which  were  found  among  the
ashes.  On  the  other  hand,  the  bones  inside  the  cave  were
untouched,  from  which  M.  Lartet  concludes  that  after  the
funeral  feasts,  hyaenas  came  and  devoured  all  that  had  been
left  by  the  men,  but  that  they  could  not  effect  an  entrance
into  the  cave  on  account  of  the  large  block  of  stone  by  which

*  There  miist  sarely  be  some  mistake  about  thlB  species.    The  query  is  in  the
original.


264  AURIGNAC.

the  entrance  was  closed,  and  which  was  actually  found  in  its
place  by  Bonnemaison.

In  addition  to  the  hyaena,  the  animals  occurring  in  this
list,  and  yet  no  longer  existing,  or  known  historically  to  have
existed,  in  France,  are  the  reindeer,  cave-bear,  rhinocerosy
cave-Uon,  Irish  elk,  and  matmnoth.  The  contemporaneity
of  the  reindeer  with  man  is  very  evident ;  all  llie  bones  are
broken  for  marrow,  and  many  bear  the  marks  of  knives,
besides  which,  the  greater  number  of  the  bone  implements
are  made  out  of  the  bones  or  horns  of  this  species.  That  the
rhinoceros  also  was  contemporaneous  with  man  is  inferred
by  M.  Lal^t,  firstly,  on  chemical  grounds,  the  bones  of
this  species,  as  well  as  those  of  the  reindeer,  atirochs,  etc.,
having  retained  the  same  amount  of  nitrogen  as  the  human
bones  from  the  same  locality ;  and  secondly,  because  the  bones
appear  to  have  been  broken  by  man,  and  in  some  cases  are
marked  by  knives.  Moreover,  he  has  ingeniously  pointed
out  that  these  bones  must  have  belonged  to  an  individual
recently  killed,  because,  after  having  been  broken  by  man,
they  were  gnawed  by  the  hyaenas,  which  would  not  have
been  the  case  if  they  had  not  been  fre^  and  still  full  of
their  natural  jiiices.

The  elephant  was  represented  only  by  some  detached
plates  of  molars  and  a  calcaneum.  This  latter  was  the
anlff  gnawed  bone  found  in  the  interior  of  the  grotto.  It
cannot  be  doubted  that  these  plates  were  purposely  sepa-
rated, and  the  calcaneum  appears  to  have  been  placed  in
the  vault  at  the  time  of  the  last  interments ;  but  there  is
no  evidence  that  it  was  then  in  a  &esh  condition.  Indeed,
the  fact  of  its  being  gnawed  seems  rather  to  point  the
other  way.

Remains  of  the  Urstis  speltsus  (cave*bear)  were  much  more
abundant,  and  some  of  them  were  found  in  the  grotto.  In
one  case. a  whole  limb  appears  to  have  been  buried  with  the


WOKEY  HOLE.  265

flesh  on,  as  the  different  bones  were  all  found  together.  It  is
well  known  that  food  and  drink  were  in  ancient  times  fre-
quently buried  with  the  dead,  and  M.  Lartet  thinks  that  we
may  account  in  this  manner  for  tlie  bones  of  quadrupeds
found  in  the  grotto  at  Aurignac*

In  this  case,  then,  it  would  seem  that  we  haye  a  sepulture
belonging  to  the  period  at  which  the  caye-bear,  the  reindeer,
the  Irish  elk,  the  woolly-haired  rhinoceros,  and  the  mam-
moth, still  Uyed  in  the  south  of  France.  It  is,  howeyer,  yery
muck  to  be  regretted  that  M.  Lartet  was  not  present  when
the  place  was  first  examined,  for  it  must  be  confessed  that  if
he  had  seen  the  deposits  before  they  were  dii^turbed,  we
should  haye  been  able  to  feel  more  confidence  that  the
human  skeletons  belonged  to  the  same  period  as  the  other
remains.

Another  instructiye  case  is  that  of  the  HysBua-den  at
Wokey  Hole,  near  Wells,  which  has  been  ably  explored  and
described  by  Mr.  Boyd  Dawkins.*  In  this  case  the  caye  was
filled  with  debris  up  to  the  yery  roof,  and  it  appears  that  the
accumulation  of  material  has  taken  place  partly  by  the  dis-
integration of  the  dolomitic  conglomerate  forming  the  roof
and  walls  of  the  cayem,  and  partly  by  the  sediment  washed
in  gradually  by  rain  and  small  streams.  It  is  eyident  that
the  bones  and  stones  were  not  brought  into  the  caye  by  the
action  of  water ;  firstly,  because  none  of  the  bones  are  at  all
rolled;  secondly,  because,  though  seyeral  rude  flint  imple-
ments were  found  in  the  caye,  onfy  one  single  unvoorked  flint
was  met  with ;  and,  thirdly,  because,  in  some  cases,  fragments
of  the  same  bone  haye  been  found  close  together,  while,  if
they  had  been  brought  from  a  distance,  it  is  almost  incredible
that  they  should  haye  been  again  deposited  dose  to  one
another.    Again,  there  are  seyeral  layers — one  oyer  the  other

*  Geol.  Journal,  May,  1862,  p.  115,


266  CAYB-MEN.

— of  album  grsBCum,  that  is  to  say,  the  excrement  of  hyaenas.
Each  of  these  indicates,  of  course,  an  old  floor,  and  a  sepa-
rate period  of  occupation ;  so  that  the  presence  of,  at  least,
one  such  floor  above  some  of  the  flint  implements,  proves
two  things;  firstly,  that  the  hyaenas  which  produced  the
album  graDCimi  occupied  the  cave  after  the  savages  who
used  the  flint  instruments ;  and,  secondly,  that  these  im-
plements have  not  been  disturbed  by  water  since  the  period
of  the  hyaena.

As  regards  the  Cave-men  themselves,  we  have,  unfor-
tunately, but  very  little  information.  Indeed,  although
fragmentary  human  bones  have  been  frequently  found,  there
are,  as  yet,  only  two  cases  on  record  in  which  the  caves  have
Aimished  us  with  skulls  in  such  a  condition  as  to  allow  of
restoration.  One  of  these  was  found  by  I>r.  Schmerling  in
the  Cave  of  Engis,  near  Li^ge;  the  other,  .by  Dr.  Fuhlrott,
in  the  I^eanderthal,  near  Dusseldorf ;.  ihey  will  be  described
in  a  subsequent  chap|;er.

It  would  manifestly  be  highly  imprudent  to  generalise
from  two  specimens,  even  if  they  agreed  iik  their  characters,
and  if  their  antiquity  were  undoubted.  But  it  so  happens
that  as  reganls  the  Neanderthal  specimen,  the  evidence  of
antiquity  is  far  from  conclusive,  and  that  the  two  skulls  are
very  dissimilaxv

On  the  whole,  ih^efore,  though  w«  caimot  as  yet  deter-
mine  what  variety  or  varieties  of  ni,en  then  existed,  we  find
in  the  bon^^^  sufficient,  evidenee  that  man  was  coeval  in
Europe  with  the  great  group  of  quaternary  mammalia.  We
see,  .indeed,,  that  the  presence,  in  t bone-caves,  of  ancient
implemfints  and  human  remains,  associated '  with  those  of
extinct  mammalia,  is  no  rare  or  exceptional  phenomenon.
Nor  if  we  look  at  the  question  from  a  scientific  point  of
view,  is  there  any  thing  in  this  that  ought  to  excite  our
astonishment.      Since    the    period    at   which    these   oaves


CAVE-MEN.  267

were  filled  up,  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  have
resulted  rather  in  the  extinction,  than  in  the  creation  of
species.  The  stag,  horsoi  boar,  dog,  in  short,  all  our
existing  forms  of  xnammaliai  were  already  in  existence,
and  there  would  have  been  in  reality  more  just  cause  for
surprise  if  man  (done  h^A  be^u  unrepresented.


268


tJHAPTEH  IX.


t)N   THE   ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


[LE  we  have  been  straining  our  eyes  to  the  East,
and  eagerly  watching  excavations  in  Egypt  and
Assyria,  suddenly  a  new  light  has  arisen  in  the  midst  of  us ;
and  the  oldest  relics  of  man  yet  discovered  have  occurred,
not  among  the  ruins  of  Nineveh  or  Heliopolis,  not  on  the
sandy  plains  of  the  Nile  or  the  Euphrates^  but  in  the  pleasant
valleys  of  England  and  France,  along  the  banks  of  the  Seine
and  the  Somme,  the  Thames  and  the  Waveney.

So  unexpected  were  these  discoveries,  so  irrecocicileable
with  even  the  greatest  antiquity  until  lately  assigned  to  the
human  race,  that  they  were  long  regarded  with  neglect  and
suspicion.  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  to  whom  we  are  so  Much
indebted  for  this  great  step  in  the  history  of  mankind,  ob-
served, as  long  ago  as  the  year  1841,  in  some  sand  oon^
taining  mammalian  remains,  at  Menchecourt,  near  Abbeville^
a  flint,  rudely  fashioned  into  a  cutting  instrument.  In  the
following  years  other  weapons  were  found  under  similar
circumstances,  and  especially  during  the  formation  of  the
Champ  de  Mars  at  Abbeville,  where  a  large  quantity  of
gravel  was  moved  and  many  of  the  so-called  "  hatchets*'  were
discovered.  In  the  year  1846  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes  pub-
lished his  first  work  on  the  subject,  entitled  "  De  Tlndustrie
Primitive,  ou  les  Arts  et  leur  Origine."   In  this  he  announced,


M>.


-^


M.   BOXJCHER  DE   PERTHES.  269

that  he  had  found  human  implements  in  beds  unmistakeably
belonging  to  the  age  of  the  drift.  In  his  "  Antiquit^s  Cel-
tiques  et  Ant^diluviennes"  (1847)^  he  also  gave  numerous
illustrations  of  these  stone  weapons^  but  imfortunately  the
figures  were  so  small  as  scarcely  to  do  justice  to  the  originals.
For  seven  years  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes  made  few  converts ;
he  was  looked  upon  as  an  enthusiast,  almost  as  a  madman.
At  length,  in  1853,  Dr.  BigoUot,  till  then  sceptical,  examined
for  himself  the  drift  at  the  now  celebrated  St.  Acheul,  near
Amiens,  found  several  weapons,  and  believed.  Still  the  new
creed  met  with  but  little  favor;  prophets  are  proverbially
without  honor  in  their  own  country,  and  M.  Boucher  de
Perthes  was  no  exception  to  the  rule.  At  last,  however,  the
tide  turned  in  his  £eivor.  Dr.  Falconer,  passing  through
Abbeville,  visited  his  collection,  and  made  known  the  result
of  his  visit  to  Mr.  Joseph  Prestwich,  who,  with  Mr.  John
Evans,  proceeded  to  Abbeville.  I  have  always  regretted
that  I  was  unable  to  accompany  my  friends  on  this  occasion.
They  examined  carefully  not  only  the  flint  weapons,  but  also
the  beds  in  which  they  were  found.  For  such  an  investiga-
tion our  two  countrymen  were  especially  qualified  :  Mr.
Prestwich,  from  his  long  examination  and  great  knowledge
of  the  tertiary  and  quaternary  strata;  and  Mr.  Evans,  as
having  devoted  much  study  to  the  stone  implements  belong-
ing to  what  we  must  now  consider  as  the  second^  or  at  least
the  more  recent.  Stone  period.  On  their  return  to  England
Mr.  Prestwich  communicated  the  results  of  his  visit  to  the
£oyal  Society,*  while  Mr.  Evans  described  the  implements
themselves  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Anti-
quarie8.t

*  On  the  Occurrence  of  Flint  Implements  aflsodated  with  the  Remains  of  Ex-
tinct Species,  in  Beds  of  a  late  Geolo^cal  Period,  May  19,  1859.  Phil.  Trans.
1860.

t  Flint  Implements  in  the  Drift.    Archtsolo^  1860-62.


270  MESSRS.    PRESTWICH   AND  EVANS.

Shortly  afterwards  Mr.  Prestwich  returned  to  Amiens  and
Abbeville,  accompanied  by  Messrs.  Godwin- Austen,  J.  W.
Flower,  and  R.  W,  Mylne,  and  in  the  same  year  Sir  Charles
Lyell  visited  the  now  celebrated  localities.  In  1860  I  made
my  first  visit  with  Mr.  Busk  and  Captain  Galton,  under  the
guidance  of  Mr.  Prestwich,  while  Sir  Boderick  Murchison,
Professors  Henslow,  Eamsay,  Rogers,  Messrs.  H.  Christy,
Rupert  Jones,  James  Wyatt,  and  other  geologists,  followed
on  the  same  errand.  M.  L'Abb4  Cochet,  therefore,  in  his
'^  Rapport  adress^  &  Monsieur  le  S^nateur  Pr^fet  de  la  Seine-
Inf^rieure"  (1860),  does  no  more  than  justice  to  our  coun-
trymen, when  after  a  well-merited  tribute  of  praise  to  M.
Boucher  de  Perthes  and  Dr.  RigoUot,  he  adds,  "  Mais  ce  sont
les  G^ologues  Anglais,  en  tdte  desquels  il  faut  placer  d'abord
MM.  Prestwich  et  Evans  ....  qui  ....  ont  fini  par  Clever  &
la  dignity  de  &it  scientifique  la  d^couverte  de  M.  Boucher
de  Perthes."

Soon  after  his  return,  Mr.  Prestwich  addressed  a  commu-
nication to  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  through  M.  Elie  de
Beaumont,  in  which  he  urged  the  importance  of  these  dis-
coveries, and  expressed  a  hope  that  they  would  stimulate
^'les  g^ologues  de  tons  les  pays  &  une  ^tude  encore  plus
approfondie  des  terrains  quatemaires."  The  subject  being
thus  brought  prominently  before  the  geologists  of  Paris,
M.  Gaudry,  well  known  for  his  interesting  researches  in
Greece,  was  sent  to  examine  the  weapons  themselves,  and
the  localities  in  which  they  were  found.

M.  Gaudry  was  so  fortunate  as  to  find  several  flint  weapons
in  situ,  and  his  report,  which  entirely  confirmed  the  state-
ments made  by  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  led  others  to  visit
the  valley  of  the  Somme,  among  whom  I  may  mention  MM.
de  Quatrefages,  Lartet,  Collomb,  Hubert,  de  Vemeuil,  and
G.  Pouchet.

In  the  ''Antiquit^s  Celtiques,"  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes


SPECIMEN   DISCOVERED   IN  THE    LAST   CENTURY.  271

suggetsted  some  gravel  pits  near  Qrenelle  at  Paris,  as  being,
from  their  position  and  appearance,  likely  places  to  contain
flint  implements.  M.  Gosse,  of  Geneva,  has  actually  foimd
flint  implements  in  these  pits,  being  the  first  discovery
of  this  nature  in  the  valley  of  the  Seine.*  In  that  of
the  Oise,  a  small  hatchet  has  been  found  by  M.  Peign^
Delacourt,  at  Pr^cy,  near  Creil.

Not  have  these  discoveries  been  confined  to  France.  There
has  long  been  inthe  British  Museum  a  rude  stone  weapon,
described  as  follows : — "  No.  246.  A  British  weapon,  found
with  elephant' 8  tooth,  opposite  to  black  Mary's,  near  Grayes
inn  lane.  Conyers.  It  is  a  large  black  flint,  shaped  into  the
figure  of  a  spear's  point."  Mr.  Evans  tells  us,  moreover,
(Lc.  p.  22)  '^  that  a  rude  engraving  of  it  illustrates  a  letter
on  the  Antiquities  of  London,  by  Mr.  Bagford,  dated
1715,  printed  in  Heame's  edition  of  Leland's  Collectanea,
vol.  i.  6,  p.  Ixiii.  From  his  account  it  seems  to  have  been
found  with  a  skeleton  of  an  elephant  in  the  presence
of  Mr.  Conyers."  This  most  interesting  weapon  agrees
exactly  with    some  of  those  ibund  in  the  valley  of  the

.  Somme.

Mr.  Evans,  on  his  return  from  Abbeville,  observed  in  the
museum  belonging  to  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  some  speci-

rmens  exactly  like  those  in  the  collection  of  M.  Boucher  de
Perthes.  On  examination,  it  proved  that  they  had  been  pre-
sented by  Mr.  Frere,  who  found  them  with  bones  of  extinct

-animals  in  a  gravel  pit  at  Hoxne  in  Suflblk,  and  had  well
described  and  figured  them  in  the  ArcheBologia  for  the  year
1800.     This  communication  is  of  so  much  interest  that  I


•  M.  L' Abb6  Cochet  states  {I.e.  p.  8}  mistake  about  these  specimens ;  at  least

that  similar  weapons  have  been  found  M.  Ponchet,  who  receiyed  ns  at  Rouen

at  Sotteville,  near  Ronen,  and  are  de-  with  the  greatest  courtesy,  was  quite

posited   in   the   Mus^e  d'Antiquit^s.  unaware  of  any  such  discoTory,
There   seems,  howeyer,  to   be   some


272  KB.  freks'b  disootebt

have  thought  it  desirable  to  reproduce  his  figorea,  ledoced
one-half  (figs.  135-138).
Agtun,  twenty-five  years  ago,  Mr.  Whitburn,  of  Godalmiug,*


FUnt  Implonent  from  Hoiua.

Thile  examining  the  gravel  pits  between  Ouildford  and
C^odalming,  remarked  a  peculiar  flint,  which  he  carried  away,
and  has  since  preserved  in  his  collection.  It  belongs  to  the
"drift"  type,  but  is  very  rude.  Thus,  this  peculiar  type  of
flint  implement  has  been  actually  found  in  association  with
the  bones  of  the  mammoth  on  various  occasions  during
nearly  a  hundred  and  fifty  years !  While,  however,  these
instances  remarkably  corroborate  the  statements  made  by  M.

■  Frwtwicb,  OmL  Jour.  Aognit,  1861.


IN  1800.  273

Boucher  de  Perthes,  they  in  no  -way  detract  from  the  credit
due  to  that  gentleman.

In  addition  to  the  abova-mentioned,  eimihir  hatchets  have


been  akeady  found  in  Suffolk,  Kent,  Bedfordshire,  Hertford-
shire, Wiltshire,  Hampshire,  and  elsewhere.     In  the  first  of


274  SIMILAR  DISOOVERIES   IN   OTHER  COUNTIES.

these  counties,  Mr.  Warreii>  of  Ixworth,  found  one  on  a  heap
of  gravel  near  Icklingham,  which  having  been  accidentally
seen  by  Mr.  Evans  led  to  the  discovery  of  numerous  other
specimens.  One  of  these  specimens  closely  resembles  the  one
represented  in  pi.  1,  fig.  10,  which  was  given  to  me  by  M.
Marcotte  of  Abbeville,  who  obtained  it  from  Moulin  Quignon.

The  next  discovery  was  made  by  Mr.  Leech,  on  the  shore
between  Heme  Bay  and  Beculvers,  whence  many  specimens
have  been  obtained,  six  by  Mr.  Leech,  and  others  by  Messrs.
Evans,  Prestwich  and  Wyatt.  Li  the  gravel  near  Bedford,
again  associated  with  the  remains  of  the  mammoth,  rhino-
ceros, hippopotamus,  ox,  horse,  and  deer,  Mr.  Wyatt*  has
found  flint  implements  resembling  both  of  the  two  principal
types  found  at  Abbeville  and  Amiens.  This  case  is  very
interesting,  because  it  shows  that  the  drift  flint  hatchets  are
subsequent  to  the  boulder  clay ;  the  Bedford  valley  being
cut  through  hills  capped  by  a  deposit  of  that  period.  At
Hoxne  the  bed  containing  flint  implements  appear  actually
to  rest  on  the  botdder  clay.

Mr.  Evans  himself,  near  Abbot's  Langley,  in  Hertford-
shire, has  picked  up  on  the  surface  of  a  field  a  weathered
hatchet  with  the  top  broken  ofl*,  but  otherwise  identical  in
form  with  the  spearhead^shaped  sp^cim^is  from  Avnifma
and  Heme  Bay.

Another  implement  of  the  round  pointed  form  has  been
discovered  in  Kent  (Nov.  1861),  on  the  surface  of  the  ground
at  the  top  of  the  hill  on  the  east  side  of  the  Darent,  about
a  mile  E.S.E.  of  Horton  Kirby,  by  Mr.  Whitaker,  F.G.S.,  of
the  Geological  Survey  ;''t  and  several  more  have  since  been  ob-
tained by  Mr.  Whitaker  and  Mr.  Hughes.  Mr.  H.  G.  Nonnan
found  a  single  specimen  in  Kent,  near  Gbeenstreet  Green,  a

*  Flint  Implements  in  the  Drift.    By  J.  Wyatt.    Bedfordflhire  Arohitectiinl
and  ArchsBological  Society,  1862.
t  JSrtauf  Archnologia,  1861,  p.  18.


CAUTION  OF   GEOLOGISTS.  275

locality  which  is  interesting  as  having  produced  remains^
not  only  of  the  mammoth,  but  also  of  the  musk  ox.

Since  my  first  visit  in  1860, 1  have  been  several  times  to
the  YaUey  of  the  Somme,  and  have  examined  all  the  prin-
cipal pits :  though  I  have  never  met  with  a  perfect  hatchet,
I  have  found  two  implements,  which  were  quite  unmistake-
able,  though  rude  and  fragmentary.

But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  should  the  history  of  this
question  be  thus  recounted  ?  Why  should  it  be  treated  dif-
ferently from  any  other  scientific  discovery  ?  The  answer
is  not  difficult.  That  the  statement  by  Mr.  Frere  has  been
neglected  for  more  than  half  a  century ;  that  the  weapon
foimd  by  Mr.  Conyers  has  lain  unnoticed  for  more  than  double
that  time ;  that  the  discoveries  by  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes
have  been  ignored  for  fifteen  years ;  that  the  numerous  cases
in  which  caves  have  contained  the*  remains  of  men  together
with  those  of  extinct  animals  have  been  suppressed  or  ex-
plained away:*  are  facts  which  show  how  deeply  rooted
was  the  conviction  that  man  belonged  altogether  to  a  more
recent  order  of  things ;  and,  whatever  other  accusation  may
be  brought  against  them,  geologists  can  at  least  not  be  said
to  have  hastily  accepted  the  theory  of  the  coexistence  of  the
human  race  with  the  now  extinct  Pachydermata  of  I^orthem
Europe.

Though,  however,  the  distinguished  geologists  to  whom  I
have  referred,  have  all,  with  one  exception,  expressed  them-
selves more  or  less  strongly  as  to  the  great  antiquity  of  these
curious  weapons,  still,  I  do  not  wish  that  they  shotdd  be
received  as  judges ;  I  only  claim  the  right  to  summon  them
as  witnesses.

*  It  is  not  yet  ten  yean  since  a  com-  YiTian,  that  worked  flints  occnrred  in

mnnication  from  the  Torquay  Natural  Kent* s  Hole  with  remains  of  extinct

History  Society,  confirming  the  state-  species,  was  rejected  as  too  improbable

raents  made  long  before  by  Mr.  Godwin  for  publication.
Austen,  the  Ber.  Mr.  M^Enery  and  Mr.


276  THE   QUESTIONS   AT  ISSUE.

The  questions  to  be  decided  may  be  stated  as  follows : —

1st.  Are  the  so-called  flint  implements  of  human  work-
manship ?

2ndly.  Are  the  flint  implements  of  the  same  age  as  the
beds  in  which  they  are  founds  and  the  bones  of  the  extinct
aniTnalfl  with  which  they  occur  P

Srdly.  What  are  the  conditions  under  which  these  beds
were  deposited  ?  and  how  far  are  we  justified  in  imputing  to
them  a  great  antiquity  P

To  the  first  two  of  these  questions  an  affirmative  answer
would  be  given,  almost  unanimously,  by  those  geologists  who
have  given  any  special  attention  to  the  subject.  Fortunately,
however,  for  the  sake  of  the  discussion,  there  is.  one  exception ;
Blackwood's  Magazine  for  October,  1860,  contains  an  able
article  in  which  the  last  two  questions  are  maintained  to  be
still  unanswered,  and  in  which,  therefore,  a  verdict  of  "  Not  •
Proven "  is  demanded.  Not,  indeed,  that  there  is  any  dif-
ference of  opinion  as  to  the  weapons  themselves.  "They
bear,"  admits  the  writer  (p.  438),  "unmistakeably  the  indica-
tions of  having  been  shaped  by  the  skill  of  man."  "  For  more
than  twenty  years,"  says  another  competent  witness — Prof.
Kamsay,  "  I  have  daily  handled  stones,  whether  fashioned  by
nature  or  art,  and  the  flint  hatchets  of  Amiens  and  Abbeville
seem  to  me  as  clearly  works  of  art  as  any  Sheffield  whittle."*
But  best  of  all,  an  hour  or  two  spent  in  examining  the
forms  of  ordinary  flint  gravel,  would,  I  am  sure,  convince
any  man  that  these  stones,  rude  though  they  be,  are  unde-
niably fashioned  by  the  hand  of  man.

Still,  it  might  be  supposed  that  they  were  forgeries,  made  by
ingenious  workmen  to  entrap  unwary  geologists.    They  have,
however,  been  found  by  Messrs.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  Henslow,
Christy,  Flower,  Wyatt,  Evans,  myself,  and  others.    One  seen, ,
though  not  found  by  himself  in  situ,  is  thus  described  by

*  Athciueiim,  July  16,  1869.


EVIDBNCE  DERIVABLE  FROM  THE  FLINTS  THEMSELVES.      277

Mr.  Prestwich  :  "  It  was  lying  flat  in  the  gravel  at  a  depth  of
seventeen  feet  from  the  original  surface,  and  six  iEind  a  half
from  the  chalk.  One  side  slightly  projected.  The  gravel
around  was  undisturbed,  and  presented  its  usual  perpendicular
face.  I  carefully  examined  the  specimen,  and  saw  no  reason
to  doubt  that  it  was  in  its  natural  position,  for  the  gravel  is
generally  so  loose,  that  a  blow  with  a  pick  disturbs  and  brings
it  down  for  some  way  around ;  and  the  matrix  is  too  little
adhesive  to  admit  of  its  being  built  up  again  as  before  with  the

same  materials I  found  also  afterwards,  on  taking  out  the

flint,  that  it  was  the  thinnest  side  which  projected,  the  other
side  being  less  finished  and  much  thicker.'^*  But  evidence  of
this  nature,  though  interesting,  is  unnecessary ;  the  flints  speak
for  themseli^es.  Those  which  have  lain  in  siliceous  or  chalky
sands  are  more  or  less  polished  and  have  a  beautiful  glossiness
'  of  surface,  very  unlike  that  of  a  newly-broken  flint.  In
ochreous  sand,  ''especially  if  argillaceous,  they  are  stained
yellow,  whilst  in  ferruginous  sands  and  clays  they  assume  a
brown  colour,"  and  in  some  beds  they  become  white  and
porcelanous.  In  many  cases,  moreover,  they  have  lacrusta-
tions  of  carbonate  of  lime  and  small  dendritic  markings.
Freshly-broken  chalk  flints,  on  the  contrary,  are  of  a  dull
black  or  leaden  color ;  they  vary  a  little  in  darkness  but  not
in  color,  and  do  not  present  white  or  yellow  faces ;  moreover,
the  new  surfaces  are  dead,  and  want  the  glossiness  of  those
which  have  been  long  exposed.  It  is  almost  unnecessary  to
say,  that  they  have  no  dendritic  markings,  nor  are  they
incrusted  by  carbonate  of  lime.

Now  the  forgeries — ^for  there  are  forgeries — differ  from  the
genuine  implements  by  just  those  characters  which  distinguish
newly-broken  flints  from  those  which  have  lain  long  in  sand
or  gravel,  or  exposed  to  atmospheric  agencies.  They  are
black ;  never  white  or  yeUow ;  their  surfaces  are  not  glossy,

•  Phil.  Trans.  1860,  p.  292.


278  THE  FORaERtES*

but  dull  and  lustreless,  and  they  have  no  dendritic  markings
or  incrustations.  Nor  would  it  be  possible  for  an  in-
genious rogue  to  deceive  us  by  taking  a  stained  flint  and
fashioning  it  into  a  hatchet ;  because  the  discoloration  of  the
flint  is  quite  superficial^  seldom  more  than  a  quarter  of  an
inch  in  thickness,  and  follows  Ihe  outline  of  the  present
surface,  showing  that  the  change  of  color  was  subsequent  to
the  manufacture ;  while  if  such  a  flint  was  tampered  with,
the  fraud  would  be  easily  detected,  as  each  blow  would
remove  part  of  the  outer  coating,  and  expose  the  black  flint
inside,  as  may  be  seen  in  pL  1,  fig.  11.

Moreover,  it  must  be  remembered,  that  when  M.  Boucher
de  Perthes'  work  was  published,  the  weapons  therein  de-
scribed were  totally  imlike  any  familiar  to  archdBologists.
Since  that  time,  however,  not  only  have  similar  implements
been  found  both  in  England  and  France,  but,  as  already
m^itioned,  it  has  since  come  to  Ught  that  similar  weapons
were  in  two  cases  actually  described  and  figured  in  England
many  years  ago,  and  that  in  both  these  instances  they  were
found  in  association  with  the  bones  of  extinct  animals.  On
this  point,  therefore,  no  evidence  could  be  more  conclusive.

We  may,  then,  pass  on  to  the  second  subject,  and  consider.
Whether  the  Flint  implem^its  are  as  old  as  the  beds  in
which  they  occur,  and  as  the  remains  of  extinct  mammalia
with  which  they  are  associated.

It  has  been  suggested  by  some  writers,  that  though  they
are  really  found  in  the  mammaliferous  gravel,  they  may  be
comparatively  recent,  and  belong  really  to  the  Neolithic  or
later  Stone  age,  but  have  gradually  sunk  down  from  above
by  their  own  weight,  or  perhaps  have  been  buried  in  artificial
excavations.  There  are,  however,  no  cracks  or  fissures  by
which  the  hatchets  could  have  reached  their  present  positions,
and  the  strata  are  '^altogether  too  compact  and  immoveable
to  admit  of  any  such  insinuation  or  percolation  of  surface


PECUXIAEITIES  OF  THE  DRIFT  IMPLEMEinS.  279

objects.*  Not  could  any  ancient  excavations  have  been  made
and  filled  in  again  without  leaving  evident  traces  of  the
change.  Moreover,  we  may  in  this  case  also  appeal  to  the
flint  implements  themselves,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,
agree  in  color  and  appearance  with  the  gravel  in  which  they
occur ;  ahd  it  seems,  therefore,  only  reasonable  to  infer  that
they  have  been  subjected  to  the  same  influences.  Moreover,
if  they  belonged  to  the  later  Stone  period,  and  had  found
their  way  by  any  accident  into  these  gravels,  then  they  ought
to  correspond  with  the  other  flint  implements  of  the  Stone
period.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  The  flakes,  indeed,  offer  no
peculiarities  of  form.  Similar  splinters  of  flint,  or  obsidian,  have
been  used  from  the  want  of  metal  by  savage  tribes  in  almost
all  ages  and  all  countries.  The  other  implements,  on  the  con-
trary, are  very  characteristic.  All  those  hitherto  discovered
are  made  of  flint,  whereas  many  other  minerals,  such,  for  in-
stance, as  serpentine,  jade,  clayslate,  etc.,  were  used  in  the  later
Stone  age.  Their  forms  are  also  peculiar;  some  are  oval
(pi.  1,  fig.  11),  chipped  up  to  an  edge  all  round,  and  from  two
to  eight  or  nine  inches  in  length.  They  suggest  the  idea  of
alingstones,  but  some  of  them  at  least  seem  too  large  for  such
a  purpose.  A  second  type  is  also  oval,  but  somewhat  pointed
at  one  end  (pi.  1,  fig.  10,  and  figs.  135,  136).  Others  again
figs.  137,  138)  have  a  more  or  less  heavy  butt  end  and  are
pointed  at  the  other.  Mr.  Evans  ^eems  to  regard  these  f  as
having  served  as  spear  or  lance  heads.  He  treats  as  a  mere
variety  of  this  type  those  implements  in  which  the  cutting
end  is  roimded  off  but  not  pointed.  Some  of  these  were
evidently  intended  to  be  held  in  the  hand,  and  probably
served  a  different  purpose ;  they  may,  I  think,  fairly  be  con-
ndered  as  a  fourth  type,  though  it  must  be  confessed  that  all
these  types  run  very  much  into  one  another,  and  in  any
large  collection  many  intermediate  forms  may  be  found.    The

•  Blackwood,  Le.  f  U.  1860,  p.  11.


280  DRIFT   IMPLEMENTS  NEVER  POLISHED.

smaller  end  is,  in  all  cases,  the  one  adapted  for  cuttings
wliile  the  reyerse  is  almost  inyariably  the  case  in  the  oval
celts  of  the  Neolithic  Stone  age  (figs.  71  and  72).

Again,  the  flint  implements  of  the  drift  are  never  polished
or  ground,  but  are  always  left  rough.  We  may  safely  esti-
mate that  three  thousand  at  least  have  been  already  found
in  the  drift  gravels  of  England  and  France,  and  of  this  large
number  there  is  not  one  which  shows  a  trace  of  polishing  or
grinding ;  while  we  know  that  the  reverse  was  almost  always
the  case  with  the  celts  of  the  later  Stone  period.  It  is  true
that  the  latter  is  not  an  invariable  rule ;  thus,  in  Denmark
there  are  two  forms  of  so-called  "axes"  which  are  left  rough
— namely,  the  small  triangular  axes  of  the  Xjokkenmoddings
(figs.  81-83)  which  are  invariably  so,  and  the  large  square-
sided  axes  with  which  this  is  often  the  case.  But  these  two
forms  of  implements  resemble  in  no  other  way  those  which
are  found  in  the  drift,  and  could  not  for  a  moment  be  mis-
taken for  them.  It  is  not  going  too  far  to  say,  that  there  is
not  a  single  well-authenticated  instance  of  a  "celt"  being
found  in  the  drift,  or  of  an  implement  of  the  drift  type  being
discovered  either  in  a  timiulus,  or  associated  with  remains  of
the  later  Stone  age.

It  is  useless  to  speculate  upon  the  use  made  of  these  rude
yet  venerable  weapons.  Almost  as  well  might  we  ask,  to  what
use  could  they  not  be  a;^liedP  Numerous  and  specialised
as  are  our  modem  instruments,  who  would  care  to  describe
the  exact  use  of  a  knife  P  But  the  primitive  savage  had  no
such  choice  of  weapons ;  we  see  before  us  perhaps  the  whole
contents  of  his  workshop ;  and  with  these  implements,  rude  as
they  seem  to  us,  he  may  have  cut  down  trees,  scooped  them
out  into  canoes,  grubbed  up  roots,  attacked  his  enemies,  killed
and  cut  up  his  food,  made  holes  through  the  ice  in  winter,
prepared  firewood,  etc.  When,  however,  we  shall  have  con-
sidered the  physical  evidence  as  to  the  then  condition  of  the


ABSENCE  OF  HUMAN  BOITES.  281

country,  and  the  contemporary  animals,  we  shall  be  better
able  to  form  an  idea  of  the  habits  of  these  our  ancient  and
long  lost  progenitors.

If  we  except  the  Moulin  Quignon  jaw,  of  which  the  au-
thenticity is,  to  say  the  least,  very  doubtful,  no  bones  of
men  have  up  to  the  present  time  been  found  in  the  strata
containing  the  flint  implements.  This,  though  it  has  ap*
])eared  to  some  so  inexplicable  as  to  throw  a  doubt  on
the  whole  question,  is,  on  consideration,  less  extraordinary
than  it  might  at  first  sight  appear  to  be.  If,  for  instance,
we  turn  to  other  remains  of  human  settlements^  we  shall
find  a  repetition  of  the  same  phenomenon.  Thus  in  the
Danish  refuse-heaps,  where  worked  flints  are  a  thousand
times  more  plentiful  than  in  the  St.  Acheul  gravel,  himian
bones  are  of  the  greatest  rarity.  At  this  period,  as  in  the
Drift  age,  mankind  lived  by  hunting  and  fishing,  and
could  not,  therefore,  be  very  numerous.  In  the  era,  how-
ever, of  the  Swiss  Lake-habitations,  the  case  was  different.
M.  Troyon  estimates  the  population  of  the  ^'Pfahlbauten ''
during  the  Stone  age  as  about  32,000  ;  in  the  Bronze
era,  42,000.  On  these  calculations,  indeed,  even  their
ingenious  author  would  not  probably  place  much  reliance :
still,  the  number  of  the  Lake- villages  already  known  is
very  considerable ;  in  four  of  the  Swiss  lakes  only,  more
than  seventy  have  been  discovered,  and  some  of  them  were
of  great  extent:  Wangen,  for  instance,  being,  according  to
M.  Lohle,  supported  on  more  than  40,000  piles.  Yet,  if  we
exclude  a  few  bones  of  children,  human  remains  have  been
obtained  from  these  settlements  in  five  cases  only.  The  num-
ber of  flint  implements  obtained  hitherto  from  the  drift  of  the
Somme  valley,  is  not  supposed  to  have  greatly  exceeded  3000  ;*

*  One  of  the  tamnli  in  the  MifisU-      implements.   This,  howeyer,  most  hare
nppi  Valley  is  estimated  to  hare  alone      be^  a  rery  exceptional  case,
contained  nearly  four  thonaand  itone


282


CAUSES  OF  THE


the  settlement  at  Concise  alone  (Lake  of  Neufchatel)  has
supplied  about  24^000,  and  yet  has  not  produced  a  single
human  skeleton.*  Probably  this  absence  of  bones  is  in
part  attributable  to  the  habit  of  burying  or  burning;  the
instinct  of  man  has  long  been  in  most  cases  to  bury  his  dead
out  of  his  sight;  still,  so  far  as  the  drift  of  St.  Acheul  is
concerned,  the  difficulty  will  altogether  disappear  if  we
remember  that  no  trace  has  ever  yet  been  found  of  any  animal
as  small  as  a  man.  The  larger  and  more  solid  bones  of  the
elephant  and  hippopotamus,  the  ox,  horse,  and  stag  f  remain,
but  every  vestige  of  the  smaller  bones  has  perished.  TSo  one
supposes  that  this  scanty  list  fairly  represents  the  mammalian
fauna  of  this  time  and  place.  When  we  find  the  remains  of  the
wolf,  boar,  roedeer,  badger,  and  other  aTiimals  which  existed
during  the  drift  period,  then,  and  not  till  then,  we  may  per-
haps begin  to  wonder  at  the  entire  absence  of  human  skeletons.
We  must  also  remember  that  when  man  lived  on  the
produce  of  the  chase  there  must  have  been*  a  very  large
number  of  wild  animals  to  each  hunter.  Among  the  Lap-
landers, 100  reindeer  is  the  smallest  nimiber  on  which  a
man  can  subsist,  and  no  one  is  considered  rich  who  does  not
possess  at  least  from  300  to  500.  But  these  are  domesti-
cated, and  a  large  supply  of  nourishment  is  derived  from  their
milk.     LcL  the  case  of  wild  animals  we  may  safely  assume


*  Bapport  ^  la  Commiwion  dee  Mu-
sses, October,  1861,  p.  16.

t  The  bones  of  the  stag  owe  their
preservatioii  perhaps  to  another  cause.
Prof.  Riitimeyer  tells  ns  that  among
the  bones  from  the  Pfahlbauten  none
are  in  better  eondition  than  those  of
the  stag;  this  is  the  consequence,  he
says,  of  their  ''dichten  GefUge,  ihrer
Harte  nnd  Sprodigkeit,  so  wie  der
grossen  FetUoogkeit,"  peenliarities
which  recommended  them  so  strongly
to  the  men  of  the  Stone  age,  that  they


used  them  in  preference  to  all  others,
nay  almost  exclusively,  in  the  manu-
fiftcture  of  those  instruments  which
could  be  made  of  bone — (Fauna  der
Pfahlbauten,  p.  12).  How  common  the
bones  of  the  stag  are  in  quaternary
strata,  geologists  know,  and  we  hare
here,  perhaps,  an  explanation  of  the
fact.  The  antler  of  the  reindeer  is  also
preferred  at  the  present  day  by  the
Esquimaux  in  the  manufiicture  of  their
stone  weapons.  (Sir  E.  Belcher,  Trana.
Ethn.  Soc.  Tol.  i,  p.  139.)


SGABCnr  OF  HUMAN   BONES.  283

that  even  a  larger  number  would  be  necessary.  Again^  the
Hudson's  Bay  territory  is  said  to  comprise  about  900,000,000
acres.  The  number  of  Indians  is  estimated  at  139,000.
Allowing  one  wild  animal  to  each  twenty  acres,  this  would
give  about  300  animals  to  each  Indian ;  and  again,  if  we
consider  the  greater  longeyity  of  man,  we  must  multiply  this
by  six,  or  even  more.  Thus,  then,  it  seems  evident  that  the
bones  of  animals  are  likely  to  be  many  hundred  times  more
common  than  those  of  man  in  these  gravels.

As  yet  we  have  but  partly  answered  the  second  of  the  two
questions  with  which  we  started.  Even  admitting  that  the
flint  hatchets  are  coeval  with  the  gravel  in  which  they  occur,
it  remams  to  be  shown  that  the  bones  of  the  extinct  animals
belong  also  to  the  same  period.  This  has  been  doubted  by
some  geologists,  who  have  suggested  that  they  may  have
been  washed  out  of  earlier  strata.

Taking  the  river-drifb  gravels  as  a  whole,  the  following  are
the  mammalia;  bones  of  which  have  been  found  in  them :
The  mammoth,   Elephaaprimigenius,  Blum.

„      antiquus,  Falconer.
Rhinoceros  tichorhinui,  Cuv.

„  megarhinuSj  Ohristol.

Bippopotamus  major ^  Nesti.
The  musk  ox,      Ovihos  tno9chatu8,  Blain.
The  urus,  Bo8  primigenius,  Boj.

The  aurochs,       Biaan  priseus,  Boj.

SquuaJbsstHa,  Owen.
CervtM  euryeeroBy  Aldr.
„      elapAus,  Linn.
The  reindeer,  „      tarandus,  Linn.

Ur6us  9pelcBtis,  Blum.
FeHa  ipebea,  Owen.
Hycsna  spekea,  Cuv.
Bua


284  OONTBMPORANIETY  OF

Most  of  these  species  are  now  extinct.  Some  few,  as  the
Bos  primigenius  and  Bison  prisctis,  haye  come  down  to  historic
times;  the  reindeer,  eyen  now,  abounds  in  the  north;  but
only  one,  the  stag,  still  occurs  wild  in  Western  Europe.  If
these  bones,  then,  belonged  to  a  period  earlier  than  that  of
the  grayel,  where,  we  may  ask,  are  the  remains  of  the  ani-
mals which  did  exist  at  that  time  P  Moreoyer,  the  bones,
though  sometimes  much  worn  and  broken,  are  at  others,  and
even  according  to  Mr.  Prestwich,  "  as  a  general  rule*  either
not  rolled  at  aU,  or  are  slightly  so."

Secondly,  these  species,  and  particularly  the  mammoth  and
the  woolly-haired  rhinoceros,  are  the  characteristic  and  com-
monest, species  of  these  beds,  not  only  in  the  Yalley  of  the
Somme,  but  in  aU  the  drift  gravels  of  England  and  France ;
while  if  they  belonged  in  reality  to  an  earlier  period,  they
would  not  occur  so  constantly,  and  they  would  be  accompanied
by  other  species  characteristic  of  earlier  times.

Thirdly,  the  materials  forming  the  drift  gravels  of  the
Somme  YaUey  have  all  been  obtained  from  the  present  area
of  drainage,  and  there  are  in  this  district  no  older  beds,  from
which  the  remains  of  these  extinct  mammalia  could  possibly
have  been  derived.  There  are,  indeed,  outliers  of  tertiary
strata,  but  the  mammalian  remains  found  in  them  belong  to
other,  and  much  older  species.

Fourthly,  as  regards  the  rhinoceros,  we  have  the  express
testimony  of  M.  Baillon,  that  on  one  occasion  all  the  bones
of  a  hind  leg  were  found  in  their  natural  positions,  at
Menchecourt  near  Abbeville,  while  the  rest  of  the  skeleton
was«  found  at  a  little  distance.  In  this  case,  therefore,  the
animal  must  have  been  entombed  before  the  ligaments  had
decayed  away.

Finally,  as  regards  the  same  animal,  M.  Lartet  assures

*  Fhil.  Trans.  Lc.  p.  800.


THE  MAMMALIAN    REMAINS.  285

118*  that  some  of  the  bones  bear  the  marks  of  flint  im-
plements ;  nay  more  than  this,  he  has  eyen  satisfied  himself
'^by  comparative  trials  on  homologous  portions  of  exist-
ing animals,  that  incisions,  presenting  such  appearances,
oonld  only  be  made  in  fresh  bones,  still  retaining  their
cartilage."

There  seems,  then,  no  more  reason  for  supposing  that  the
bones  of  the  extinct  Tififi.TnTnft1ia  were  washed  out  of  earlier
strata  into  the  drift  gravels,  than  for  attributing  such  an
origin  to  the  implements  themselves ;  and  we  may,  I  think,
regard  it  as  well  established,  that  the  mammoth  and  woolly-
haired  rhinoceros,  as  well  as  the  other  mammalia  above-
mentioned,  co-existed  with  the  savages  who  used  the  rude
"  drift  hatchets,"  at  the  time  when  the  gravels  of  the  Somme
were  being  deposited.

The  second  of  the  three  questions  with  which  we  started
(p.  276),  may  therefore  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.

Must  we,  then,  carry  man  back  very  far  into  the  past,  or
may  we  retain  our  date  for  the  origin  of  mankind  by
bringing  the  extinct  animals  down  to  comparatively  re-
cent times?  The  absence  of  all  tradition  of  the  elephant
and  rhiQoceros  in  Europe  carries  us  back  far  indeed  in
years,  but  a  little  way  only,  when  measured  by  geological
standards,  and  we  must  therefore  solve  this  question  by
examining  the  drift  gravels  themselves,  the  materials  of
which  they  are  composed,  and  the  positions  which  they
occupy,  so  as  to  determine,  if  possible,  the  conditions  under
which  they  were  deposited,  and  the  lapse  of  time  which
they  indicate.

In  this  third  division  of  the  subject  I  shall  again  follow
Mr.  Prestwich,  who  has  long  studied  the  quaternary  beds,  and
has  done  more  than  any  other  man  to  render  them  intelligible.

*  Geological  Jour.  toI.  xyL,  p.  471.


286


THE   SOMME  VALLEY.


Fi«.i89.  ji-g^  jgg  gives  8  secticKn  across  the

valley  of  the  Sonune  at  Abbeville,  taken
jfrom  Mr.  Prestwich's  first  paper.*  We
should  find  almost  the  same  arrangement
and  position  of  the  different  beds,  not
only  at  St.  Acheul,  but  elsewhere  along
the  valley  of  the  Somme,  wherever  the
higher  beds  of  gravel  have  not  been
removed  by  subsequent  action  of  the
river.  Even  at  St.  Val^ry,  at  the  pre-
sent mouth  of  the  river,  I  found  a  bed
of  gravel  at  a  considerable  height  above
the  level  of  the  sea.  This  would  seem
to  show  that  at  the  period  of  these  high
level  gravels,  the  English  Channel  waa
narrower  than  it  is  at  present,  as  indeed
we  know  to  have  been  the  case  even  in
historical  times.  So  early  as  1605  our
countryman  Verstegan  pointed  out  that
the  waves  and  tides  were  eating  away
our  coasts.  Sir  C.  Lyellf  gives  much
information  on  this  subject,  and  it  ap-
pears that  even  so  lately  as  the  reign  of
I  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  town  of  Brighton
S  was  situated  on  the  site  now  occupied
^   by  the  Chain  Pier.

I       Mr.  Prestwich  has  pointed  out  t  that
I   a  section,  similar  to  that  of  the  Somme,
4  is  presented   by  the  Lark,   Waveney,
y  ^1   Ouse,  etc.,  while  it  is  well  shown  also

^    along  the  banks  of  the  Seine.    Probably,

Section  acrow  the  VaUej  of   indeed,   it   holds    gOOd    of   mOSt    of    OUT

the  Sonune  at  AbbeYille.       ***vi.%.v^^,  ^

•  Phil.  Trans.  1860.  t  See  Principlefl  of  Geology,  p.  316.

{  Phil.  Trans.  1864.


9T.    ACHEUL.  XOl

rivers,  that  along  the  aidee  of  their  valleys  are  patches  of  old
gravels  left  by  the  Btream  at  various  heights^  before  they  had
excavated  the  channels  to  their  present  depth.  Mr.  Frest-
wich  considers  that  the  beds  of  sand  and  gravel  can  generally
be  divided  into  two  more  or  less  distinct  seriee,  one  continuous
along 'the  bottom  of  the  valleys  and  rising  little  above  the
water  level — these  he  calls  the  low  level  gravels ;  the  other,
which  he  terms  the  upper  or  high  level  gravels,  occurring
in  detached  masses  at  an  elevation  of  from  fifty  to  two  hun-
dred feet  above  the  valley.  They  seem  to  me  to  be  only  the
two  extremes  of  a  single  series,  once  continuous,  but  now
g^ierally  presenting  some  interruption.  A  more  magnified
view  of  the  strata  at  St.  Aoheul,  near  Amiens,  is  shown  in


aecUoa  It  SU  AobnO.

fig.  140.      The  upper  layer  of  vegetable  soil  having  been
removed,  we  have

1.  A  bed  of  brick  earth  (a)  from  four  to  five  feet  in  thick-
ness, and  containing  a  few  angular  flints.

2.  Below  this  is  a  thin  layer  of  angular  gravel  (6),  one  to
two  feet  in  thickness.

3.  Still  lower  is  a  bed  of  sandy  marl  (c),  five  to  six  feet
thick,  with  land  and  fresh  water  shells,  which,  though  very
delicate,  are  in  most  cases  perfect.

4.  At  the  bottom  of  all  these,  and  immediately  overlying
the  chalk,  is  the  bed  of  partially  rounded  gravel  (d)  in  which


288  ST.    ACHBUL.

principally  the  flint  implements  are  found.     This  layer  also
contaius  many  wfiU-rolled  tertiary  pebbles.

In  the  early  Christian  period  this  spot  was  used  as  a
cemetery :  the  graves  generally  descend  into  the  marly  sand,
and  their  limits  are  very  distinctly  marked^  as  in  fig.  140/*;
an  important  fact,  as  showing  that  the  rest  of  the  strata  have
lain  undisturbed  for  1500  years.  Some  of  the  coffins  were
of  hard  chalk  (fig.  140  e),  some  of  wood,  in  which  latter  case
the  nails  and  clamps  only  remain,  every  particle  of  wood
having  perished,  without  leaving  even  a  stain  behind.
Passing  down  the  hill  towards  the  river,  all  these  strata  are
seen  to  die  out,  and  we  find  ourselves  on  the  bare  chalk;
but  again  at  a  lower  level  occurs  another  bed  of  gravel,
resembling  the  first,  and  capped  also  by  the  bed  of  brick
earth  which  is  generally  known  as  loess.  This  lower  bed  of
gravel  is  that  called  by  Mr.  Prestwich  the  lower  level  graveL

These  strata,  therefore,  are  witnesses  ;  but  of  what  ?  Are
they  older  than  the  valley,  or  the  valley  than  they  ?  are  they
the  result  of  causes  still  in  operation,  or  the  ofispring  of
cataclysms  now,  happily,  at  an  end  ?

If  we  can  show  that  the  present  river,  somewhat  swollen
perhaps,  owing  to  the  greater  extension  of  forests  in  ancient
times,  and  by  an  alteration  of  climate,  has  excavated  the
present  valley,  and  produced  the  strata  above  enumerated;
then  "  the  suggestion  of  an  antiquity  for  the  human  fiuhily
so  remote  as  is  here  implied,  in  the  length  of  ages  required
by  the  gentle  rivers  and  small  streams  of  eastern  France  to
erode  its  whole  plain  to  the  depths  at  which  they  now  flow,
acquires,  it  must  be  confessed,  a  fascinating  grandeur,  when,
by  similitude  of  feature  and  geology,  we  extend  the  hypo-
thesis to  the  whole  north-west  frontiers  of  the  continent,  and
assume,  that  from  the  estuary  of  the  Seine  to  the  eastern
shores  of  the  Baltic,  every  internal  feature  of  valley,  dale
and  ravine — ^in  short,  the  entire  intaglio  of  the  sur&ce — has


ORGANIC  REMAINS.  289

been  moulded  by  nnming  watera,  smoe  the  advent  of  the
hninan  race/'*

But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  maintained  that  the
pliant  facts  may  be  read  as  ''expressions  of  violent  and
sudden  mutations,  only  compatible  with  altogether  briefer
'peirioda"  The  argument  of  the  Paroxysmist,  I  still  quote
from  Blackwood^  would  probably  be  something  like  the
following : —

''  Assuming  the  pre-existing  relief,  or  excavation  rather,  of
the  sui&ce  to  have  approximated  to  that  now  prevailing,  he
will  account  for  the  gravel  by  supposing  a  sudden  rocking
movement  of  the  lands  and  the  bottom  of  the  sea  of  the
nature  of  an  earthquake,  or  a  succession  of  them,  to  have
launched  a  portion  of  the  temporarily  uplifted  waters  upon
the  surface  of  the  land/'

Let  us,  however,  examine  the  strata,  and  see  whether  the
evidence  they  give  is  in  reality  so  confused  and  contradictory.

Taking  the  section  at  St.  Acheul  and  commencing  at  the
bottom,  we  have  first  of  all  the  partially  rounded  high-level
gravel,  throughout  which,  and  especially  at  the  lower  part,
the  flint  implements  occur.

These  beds  but  rarely  contain  vegetable  remains.  Large
pieces  of  the  oak,  yew,  and  fir  have,  however,  been  determined
at  Hoxne.  The  mammalia,  also,  are  but  few ;  the  mammoth,
the  Elephas  antiquue,  with  species  of  Bos,  Cervua,  and  Equus
are  the  only  ones  which  have  yet  occurred  at  St.  Acheul,
though  beds  of  the  same  age  in  other  parts  of  England  and
France  have  added  the  Rhinoceros  txchorhinus,  and  the  Cervus
iarandus.  The  moUusca,  however,  are  more  numerous ;  they
have  been  identified  by  Mr.  J.  G.  Jefi&eys,  who  finds  in  the
upper  level  gravel  thirfy-six  species,  aU  of  them  land  or
freshwater  forms,  and  all  belonging  to  existing  species.  It
is  hardly  necessary  to  add,  that  these  sheUs  are  not  found  in

*  Blackwood's  Magazine,  October,  1860.

19


290  MINERALOGIGAL  CONTENTS

the  coarse  gravely  but  only  here  and  there,  where  quieter  *
conditions^  indicated  by  a  seam  of  iSner  materiaLsy  have  pre-
served them  from  destruction.  Here,  therefore,  we  have  a
conclusive  answer  to  the  suggestion  that  the  gravel  may
have  been  heaped  up  to  its  present  height  by  a  sudden  ir-
ruption of  the  sea.  In  that  case,  we  should  find  some  marine
remains ;  but  as  we  do  not,  as  all  the  fossils  belong  to  animaLs
which  live  on  the  land,  or  inhabit  fresh  waters,  it  is  at  once
evident  that  this  stratum^  not  being  subaerial,  must  be  a
ft^hwater  deposit.

But  the  gravel  itself  tells  us  even  more  than  this :  the
river  Somme  flows  through  a  country  in  which  ihere  are  no
rocks  older  than  the  chalk,  and  the  gravel  in  its  valley  con-
sists entirely  of  chalk  flints  and  tertiary  debris.*  The  Seine,
on  the  other  hand,  receives  tributaries  which  drain  other
formations.  In  the  valley  of  the  Yonn^  we  find  fragments  of
the  crystalline  rocks  brought  frt>m  the  Morvan»t  The  Aube
runs  through  cretaceous  and  Jurassic  strata,  and  the  gravels
along  its  valley  are  entirely  composed  of  materials  derived
from  these  formations.  The  valley  of  the  Oise  is  in  this
respect  particularly  instructive :  "  De  Maquenoise  &  Hirson  X
la  valine  ne  pr^sente  que  des  fragments  plus  ou  moins
roul^s  des  roches  de  transition  que  traverse  le  cours  de
la  riviere.  En  descendant  i  Etr^aupont,  on  y  trouve  des
oalcaires  jurassiques  et  des  silex  de  la  craie,  formations
qui  ont  succ^d^  aux  roches  anciennes.  A  Ghiise,  le  d^pdt
erratiqua  »  ....  est  compos^de  quartzites  et  de  schistes
de  transition  de  quelquefl  gres  plus  recents,  de  silex  de
la  craie,  et  surtout  de  quartz  laiteux,  dont*le  volume  varie
depuis  celui  de  la  tfite  jusqu'A  celui  de  grains  de  sable  ....
Au  del4  las  fragments  de  roches  anciennes  diminuent  gra-
duellement   en    volume   et    en   nombre."     At   Paris   the

*  Butenz,  Lc.  p.  98.  f  D'Archiac,  Progr^  da  la  G^ologie,  p.  168.

X  D'Arohiao,  i.e»  p.  155.


OF  THE  SIYER-DRIFr  GRAVELS.  291

granitic  debris  brought  down  by  the  Yonne  forms  a  notable
proportion  of  the  gravel;  and  at  Pr^cy,  ne%r  Creil  on  the
Oise,  the  fragments  of  the  ancient  rocks  are  abundant;,
but  lower  down  the  Seine  at  Mantes,  they  diminish  very
much  in  quantity,  and  at  Bouen  and  Pont  -de  I'Arche  I
flaw  none,  though  a  longer  search  would  doubtless  have  shown
fragments  of  thenL  This  case  of  the  Oise  is  however  in-
terestingy  not  only  on  account  of  the  valuable  evidence  con-
tained in  the  above  quotation ;  but  because,  though  the  river
flows,  as  a  ghmce  at  the  map  will  show,  immediately  across
and  at  right  angles  to  the  Somme,  yet  none  of  the  ancient
rocks  which  form  the  valley  of  the  Oise  have  supplied  any
debris  to  the  vaUey  of  the  Somme :  and  this,  though  the  two
livers  are  at  one  point  within  six  miles  of  one  another,  and
separated  by  a  ridge  only  eighty  feet  in  height.

The  same  division  occurs  between  the  Seine  and  the  Loire :
''  Bien  que  la  ligne  de  partage  des  eau^  de  la  Loire  et  de  ]k
Seine,  entre  St.  Amand  (Niivre)  et  Artenay,  au  nord  d' Orleans,
soit  &  peine  sensible,  aucun  debris  de  roches  venant  du  centre
de  la  France,  par  la  valine  de  la  Loire  n'est  pass^  dans  le
bassin  de  la  Seine.*

In  the  Yivarais  near  Auvergne,  ^'Les  d^pdts  diluviens
sont  composes  des  mftmes  roches  que  celles  que  les  rividrea
actuelles  entratnent  dans  les  valines,  et  sont  les  debris  de»
seules  montagnes  de  la  Lozin,  du  Tanargue  et  du  M^z^ne,
qui  entourent  le  bassin  du  Yivarais.'' f

Again,  ^

^'Le  diluvium  des  valines  de  TAisne  et  de  I'Aire  ne  ren-
ferme  que  les  debris  plus  ou  moins  roid^s  des  terrains  que
ces  rividres  coupent  dans  leur  cours."$

Finally,  Mr.  Prestwich  has  pointed  out  that  the  same
thing  holds  good  in  various  English  rivers.    The  conclusion

*  ly^rchuu^  ^'^»  p<  164.  f  B'Axchiac,  Le,  p.  160.

i  JCaUKw.  BnlL  G«ol.  toI.  lii.  p.  681.


292     '  OBJECTIONS  TO  THE

deduced  by  M.  D'Archiac  from  the  consideration  of  these
observations,  a^j^d  specially  from  those  concerning  the  yalley
of  the  S^e,  is  ''Que  les  courants  diluyiens  ne  venaient
point  d'une  direction  unique  mais  qu'ils  conyergaient  des
bords  du  bassin  vers  son  centre,  suivant  les  depressions  pr^-
existantes,  et  que  kur  Sihatian  au  leur  farce  de  transport  ne
sufflsait  pas  pour  /aire  passer  lea  dSbris  qu'ils  eharriaient  d'une
de  ces  valines  dans  V autre*' *

Considering,  however,  all  these  facts,  remembering  that
the  constituents  of  these  river-drift  gravels,  are,  in  all  cases,
derived  from  beds  now  in  situ  along  the  valley,  that  they
have  not  only  followed  the  lines  of  these  valleys,  but  have
done  so  in  the  direction  of  the  present  waterflow,  and
without  in  any  case  passing  across  from  one  river  system
to  another,  it  seems  quite  unnecessary  to  call  in  the  assistance
of  diluvial  waves,  or  indeed  any  other  agency  than  that  of
the  rivers  themselves.

There  are,  however,  certain  facts  in  the  case  which  have
been  regarded  by  most  geologists  as  fatal  to  this  hypothesis,
and  which  prevented  M.  D'Archiac,  and  we  may  add  the
French  geologists  generally,  from  adopting  an  explanation  ao
simple  and  so  obvious.  These  difficulties  appear  to  have
been  two-fold;  or  at  least  the  two  principal  were,  firstly,
the  large  sandstone  blocks  which  are  scattered  throughout
the  river  gravels  of  NoHhem  and  Central  France;  and,
secondly,  the  height  at  which  the  upper  level  gravels  stand
above  the  present  water  line.  We  will  consider  these  two
objections  separately.

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  presence  of  the  sandstone  blocks
in  the  gravels  appear  at  first  sight  to  be  irreconcileable  with
our  hypothesis.  In  some  places  they  occur  frequently,  and  are
of  considerable  size ;  the  largest  I  have  myself  seen  is  repre-
sented in  the  section,  fig.  141,  taken  close  to  the  railway

•  l,e.  p.  168.


FBOFOSED  THBOKT.


statioQ  at  JoinTille.  It  was  8ft.  6m.  in  lengtli,  with  a  width
of  2ft.  Sin.  and  a  thickness  of  3ft.  4iu.  Even  when  we
rememher  that  at  the  time  of  its  deposition  the  valley  was
not  excavated  to  its  present  depth,  we  must  still  feel  Uiat  a


BnUon  »t  Ja!n<nu«.

body  of  water  with  power  to  move  such  masses  as  these  must
have  been  very  different  from  any  floods  now  occurring  in
those  valleys,  and  might  feirly  deserve  the  name  of  a
cataclysm.  But  whence  could  we  obtain  so  great  a  quan-
tity of  water  P  We  have  already  seen  that  the  gravel  of
the  Oise,  though  so  near,  is  entirely  unlike  that  of  the
Somme,  while  that  of  the  Seine,  again,  is  quite  difierent  from
that  of  any  of  the  neighbouring  rivers.  These  rivers,  there-
fore, cannot  have  drained  a  larger  area  than  at  present ;  the
river  systems  must  have  been  the  same  as  now.  Xor  would
the  supposition,  after  all,  account  for  the  phenomena.  We
should  but  fall  from  Scylla  into  Charybdis.  Around  the
blocks  we  see  no  evidence  of  violent  action ;  in  the  section  at
JoinviUe,  the  grey  aubangular  gravel  passed  under  the  large
block  above-mentioned,  with  scarcely  any  traces  of  disturbance.
But  a  flood  which  could  bring  down  so  great  a  mass  would  cer-
tainly have  swept  away  the  comparatively  light  and  moveable
gravel  below.  We  cannot,  therefore,  account  for  the  phe-
nomena by  aqueous  action,  because  a  flood  which  would
deposit  the  sandstone  blocks  would  r^nove  the  underlying
gravel,  and  a  flood  which  would  deposit  the  gravel  would


294  FAUNA   OF  TUB

not  move  the  blocks.  The  Deus  ex  machine  has  not  only
been  called  in  most  unnecessarily^  but,  when  examined,  turns
out  to  be  but  an  idol  after  all.

Driven,  then,  to  seek  some  other  explanation  of  the  diffi-
cidty,  Mr.  Prestwich  falls  back  on  that  of  floating  ice.
Here  we  have  an  agency  which  would  satisfactorily  explain
all  the  difficulties  of  the  case.  The  ''packing"  and  pro-
pelling action  of  ice  would  also  account  for  some  irregulari-
ties in  the  arrangement  of  the  beds  which  are  yery  difficult
otherwise  to  imderstand.  We  are,  indeed,  irresistibly  re-
minded of  the  figure  giyen  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell*  from  a
view  taken  by  Lieut.  Bowen,  of  the  boulders  drifted  by  ic©
on  the  shores  of  the  St.  Lawrence.  Sir  C.  Lyell's  work
is  in  the  hands  of  almost  every  geologist,  and  it  wilt,
perhaps,  therefore,  be  imnecessary  for  me  to  quote  the
accompanying  description,  accurately  as  it  portrays  what
must,  we  think,  have  been  taking  place  in  the  valley  of  the
Somme  thousands  of  years  ago,  just  as  it  does  in  that  of  the
St.  Lawrefice  at  the  present  time.  Not  is  it  the  physical  evi-
dence only,  which  points  to  an  arctic  climate  during  the  period
now  imder  consideration  ;  the  fauna  also  tells  the  same  tale.
The  moUusca,  indeed,  do  not  afford  much  evidence,  but
though  mainly  the  same  as  those  now  living  in  the  ooimtry,
they  have  northern  tendencies,  34  out  of  36  species  being
at  present  found  in  Sweden,t  while  29  occur  in  Lombardy.
These  latter,  however,  are  principally  species  having  a  very
wide  range,  and  we  shall  see  still  more  clearly  that  the
leaning  of  the  moUuscan  fauna  is  towards  the  north,  if  we
remember  that  out  of  77  Finland  species,  31  have  been
found  in  the  upper  level  gravels,  while  of  193  Lombard
species  only  29  have  as  yet  occurred.

The  evidence  derived  from  the  mammalia  is  more  con-
clusive.    The  presence  of  the  reindeer  is  itself  a  clear  indi-

«  PrincipleB,  1868,  p.  220.  f  Proo.  Boy.  Soc.,  1862,  p.  44.


BTVER-DBIPT   G&AVELS.  295

cation  of  a  cold  dimate^  and  the  circnmstanoes  attending  the
discoyeiy  of  the  tichorhine  rhinoceros  in  Siberia,  the  fact  that
the.  mammoth  of  the  Lena  was  enyeloped  in  ice  so  soon  after
death,  that  the  flesh  had  not  had  time  to  decay,  as  well  as
the  manner  in  which  the  extinct  Fachydermata  were  pro-
Tided  against  cold,  clearly  show  that  the  Elqphas  primigenius
and  the  Mhinaceras  tieharAinus,  unlike  their  congeners  of  to-
day, were  inhabitants  rather  of  arctic,  than  of  tropical,
climates.

If  we  were  to  take  the  river  gravelB  as  a  whole,  the
evidence  as  to  climate  would  be  still  stronger,  because  to  the
above  species  we  might  then  add  the  Norwegian  lemming,
the  Mjfodes  tarqiuiUiS,  and  last,  not  least,  the  musk  ox.  These
three  species,  have,  however,  not  yet  been  found  in  the
upper  level  gravels.

Taking'  the  fSftima  and  flora  as  his  guide,  Mr.  Frestwich
assumes  that  a  country  where  the  oak,  the  yew,  the  fir,  and
the  bilberry  flourished,  where  the  deer,  ox,  horse,  and  rein-
deer abounded,  and  where. the  rivers  froze  so  as  to  transport
large  boulders  for  considerable  distances,  "  presents  conditions
which  would  probably  accord  with  a  mean  winter  cold  of  not
less  than  20^,  while  it  may  have  been  as  low  as  10^,  or  even
lower.  This  would  be  from  19^  to  29°*  below**  our  present
temperature.  While,  however,  the  evidence  of  a  more  severe
climate  seems  to  be  conclusive,  we  are  hardly  as  yet  in  a
condition  to  estimate  with  any  degree  of  probability  the
actual  amount  of  change  which  has  taken  place.

It  must  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  temperature  of
Western  Europe  is  at  present  exceptionally  mild ;  if  we  go
either  to  the  east  or  west,  to  Canada  or  Siberia,  we  find
countries  under  the  same  latitude  as  London  and  Faris,
suffering  under  a  far  more  severe  climate.

The  river  St.  Lawrence,  to  which  I  have  already  pointed

•  Fjreftwicli,  Phil.  Tnma.  1864,  p.  281.


296  CLIMATE  OF  THB

as  throwing  so  much  light  on  the  transport  of  the  blodca
now  in  question,  is  actually  in  a  lower  latitude  than  the  Seine
,  or  the  Somme.  Moreoyer,  geologists  are  agreed  that  at  the
period  of  the  boulder  clay,  a  period  immediately  preceding-
that  now  under  consideration,  the  cold  in  Western  Europe
must  hare  been  far  more  intense  than  it  is  at  present.  The
subject  has  been  discussed  in  an  excellent  paper  by  Mr.
Hopkins*  (then  President  of  the  Geological  Society),  and  it
is  admitted  (p.  61)  that  many  of  our  rivers  have  probably
followed  their  present  directions  '^eyer  since  the  glacial
period."  Mr.  Prestwich's  hypothesis  inyolyes  therefore  in
reality  no  change  in  our  views  ae  to  the  climate  of  Western
Europe.  He  only  supposes  that,  in  this  early  period  of  our
riyers,  the  temperature  resembled  that  which  had  preceded,
more  than  that  which  now  preyails;  or,  rather,  perhaps,
that,  in  this  intermediate  period,  the  climate  had  neither
the  extreme  severity  of  the  glacial  era,  nor  the.  exceptional
mildness  of  modem  times.

But  though  thuB  explaining  the  manner  in  which  the
sandstone  blocks  may  have  been  transported,  these  considera-
tions throw  no  light  on  the  change  of  conditions  which  must
have  taken  place  to  produce  an  alteration  of  climate  so  great
AS  that  which  is  supposed  to  have  taken  place.

In  Mr.  Hopkins'  memoir  on  the  subject,  the  principal
causes  which  have  been  suggested  for  this  change  of  climate
are  the  following: —

Firstly.   A  variation  in  the  intensity  of  solar  radiation.

To  this  theory  Mr.  Hopkins  sees  no  d  priori  objection ;  but
he  does  not  feel  disposed  to  attach  much  weight  to  it,  because
it  is  ^'  a  mere  hjrpothesis  framed  to  account  for  a  single  and
limited  class  of  facts,  and  unsupported  by  the  testimony  of
any  other  class  of  allied,  but  independent  phenomena.''

It  is,  however,  open  to  the  objections  stated  with  great

*  GeoL  Journal,  1852,  p.  56.


mVXR-DBIFT   PBRIOD.  297

.4bTce  hj  Professor  Tyndall,*  who  argaes  that  the  ancient
glaciers  indicate  the  action  of  heat  as  much  as  of  cold.
*^  Gold,"  he  says,  **  will  not  produce  glaciers.  You  may  have
the  bitterest  north-east  winds  here  in  London  throughout  the
winter,  without  a  single  flake  of  snow.  Gold  must  have  the
fitting  object  to  operate  upon,  and  this  object — ^the  aqueous
vapour  of  the  air — ^is  t!ic  direct  product  of  heat.  Let  us  put
this  glacier  question  in  another  form :  the  latent  heat  of
aqueous  vapour,  at  the  temperature  of  its  production  in  the
tropics,  is  about  1,000^  Fahr.,  for  the  latent  heat  grows
larger  as  the  temperature  of  evaporation  descends.  A  pound
of  water  thus  vapourised  at  the  equator,  has  absorbed  one
thousand  times  the  quantity  of  heat  which  would  raise  a

pound  of  the  liquid  one  degree  in  temperature It  is

perfectly  manifest  that  by  weakening  the  sun's  action,  either
through  a  defect  of  emission,  or  by  the  steeping  of  the  entire
solar  system  in  space  of  a  low  temperature,  we  should  be
cutting  off  the  glaciers  at  their  source."

Secondly.  Admitting  the  proper  motion  of  the  sun,  it  has
been  suggested  that  we  may  have  recently  passed  from  a
colder  into  a  warmer  region  of  space.

I  must  refer  to  Mr.  Hopkins'  memoir  for  his  objections  to
this  suggestion ;  they  certainly  appear  to  ''render  the  theory
utterly  inapplicable  to  the  explanation  of  the  changes  of
temperature  at  the  more  recent  geological  epochs."

This  hjrpothesis,  moreover,  is  liable  to  the  same  fiital  ob-
jection 1^  the  first.  To  produce  snow  requires  both  heat  and
cold ;  the  first  to  cause  evaporation,  the  second  to  produce
condensation.  In  fact,  what  we  require  is  a  greater  contrast
between  the  temperature  of  the  tropics  and  that  of  our  lati-
tudes; so  that,  paradoxical  as  it  may  appear,  the  primary
cause  of  the  ''  glacial "  epoch  may  be,  after  all,  an  elevation
of  temperature  in  the  tropics,  causing  a  greater  amount  of

*  Heat  CoDflidered  aa  a  Mode  of  Motion,  p.  192«


298  MODES  OF  AOOODNTING    FOR

evaporation  in  the  equatorial  regions  and  consequently  a
greater  supply  of  the  raw  material  of  snow  in  the  temperate
regions  during  the  winter  months.

Thirdly.  The  effect  of  an  altered  position  of  land  and  water.

This  cause,  which  has  been  advocated  by  Sir  C.  Lyell
might,  indeed,  have  the  effect  attributed  to  it ;  but  it  seems
scarcely  applicable  to  the  present  difficulty,  because  the
geography  of  Western  Europe  must  have  been  nearly  the
same  during  the  period  under  consideration,  as  it  is  at
present.

Fourthly.  An  alteration  in  the  earth's  axis.

The  possibility  of  such  a  change  has  been  denied  by
many  astronomers.  Sir  J.  W.  Lubbock,  on  the  contrary,  has
maintained*  that  it  would  necessarily  follow  from  upheavals
and  depressions  of  the  earth's  surface,  if  only  they  were  of
sufficient  magnitude.  The  same  view  has  recently  been  taken
by  other  mathematicians.  This  suggestion,  however,  like
the  preceding,  involves  immense  geographical  changes,  and
would  therefore  necessarily  have  required  an  enormous  lapse
of  time.

Fifthly.  Mr.  Hopkins  inclines  to  find  another  solution  of
the  difficidty  in  the  supposition  that  the  Gulf  Stream  did
not.  at  this  period  warm  the  shores  of  Europe.  '^A  de-
pression of  2000  feet  would^"  he  says,  **  convert  the  Missis-
sippi into  a  great  arm  of  the  sea,  of  which  the  present  Gulf
of  Mexico  would  form  the  southern  extremity,  and  which
would  communicate  at  its  northern  extremity  with  the
waters  occupying  the  ....  great  valley  now  occupied  by
the  chain  of  lakes."  In  this  case  the  Gnlf  Stream  woidd  no
longer  be  deflected  by  the  American  coasts,  but  would  pass
directly  up  this  channel  into  the  Arctic  Sea ;  and  as  every
great  ocean  current  must  have  its  counter  current^  it  is
probable  that  there  would  be  a  flow  of  cold  water  from  the

•  GeoL  Jour,  toI.  t.  p.  4.


THE  CHANGE  OF  CLIKATE.  299

north,  between  the  coasts  of  Norway  and  Greenland.  The
absence  of  the  Ghilf  Stream  would  probably  lower  the
January  temperature  of  Western  Europe  ten  degrees,  while
the  presence  of  a  cold  current  from  the  jiorth  would  make
a  farther  difference  of  about  three  or  four  degrees;*  an
alteration  of  the  climate  which  would  apparently  be  sufficient
to  account  for  all  the  phenomena.  This  theory,  Mr.  Hopkins
considers  as  no  mere  hjrpothesis,  but  as  necessarily  following
from  the  submergence  of  North  America,  which  has  been
inferred  firom  evidence  of  a  different  nature.

In  this  cAse,  of  course,  the  periods  of  great  cold  in  Europe
and  in  America  must  have  been  successive,  and  not  syn-
chronous; and  it  must  also  be  observed,  that  in  this  sug-
gested deflection  of  the  Gulf  Stream,  Mr.  Hopkins  was
contemplating  a  period  anterior  to  that  of  the  present
rivers.  For  if  we  are  to  adopt  this  solution  of  the  diffi-
culty, an  immense  time  would  be  required.  If,  when  the
gravels  and  loess  of  the  Somme  and  the  S^e  were  being
deposited,  the  Gulf  Stream  was  passing  up  what  is  now  the
Yalley  of  the  Mississippi,  then  it  follows  that  the  formation
of  the  loess  in  that  valley  and  its  delta,  an  accumulation
which  Sir  C.  Lyell  has  shown  to  require  a  period  of  about
100,000  years,  would  be  subsequent  to  the  excavation  of  the
Somme  Yalley,  and  to  the  presence  of  man  in  Western
Europe.

Thus,  therefore,  though  the  alteration  of  climate  ap-
parently indicated  by  the  zoological  contents  and  the  physi-
cal condition  of  the  beds  might,  by  increasing  the  power  of
the  floods,  add  to  the  erosive  action  of  the  river,  and  by
this  means  diminish,  on  the  one  hand,  the  time  required  for
the  excavation  of  the  valley,  still  the  very  alteration  itself
appears,  on  the  other,  to  require  an  even  greater  lapse  of  time.

But  though  the  presence  of  the  sandstone  blocks,  and

•  Hopkim,  Lo,  p.  85.


300  ABSENCE  OF  MAKINE  REMAINS.

the  occasional  contortions  of  the  strata,  are  in  perfect  ac-
cordance with  the  view  of  Mr.  Prestwich,  that  the  graTds
have  been  deposited  by  the  rivers^  our  second  difficulty  still
remains  —  namely,  the  height  at  which  the  upper -level
gravels  stand  above  the  present  water-line.  We  cannot
wonder  that  these  beds  have  generally  been  attributed  to
violent  cataclysms.

M.  Soucher  de  Perthes  has  always  been  of  this  opinion.
*'  Ce  coquillage,"  he  says,  ^*  cet  ^l^phant,  cette  hache,  ou  la
main  qui  la  fabriqua,  furent  done  t^moins  du  cataclysme  qui
donna  a  notre  pays  sa  configuration  pr6sent&"  *

M.  C.  D'Orbigny,  observing  that  the  fossils  found  in  these
quaternary  beds  are  all  either  of  land  or  freshwater  animals,
correctly  dismisses  the  theory  of  any  marine  action,  and  ex-
presses himself  as  follows : — '^  En  effet  I'opinion  de  la  plupart
des  g^ologues  est  que  les  cataclysmes  diluviens  ont  eu  pour
causes  pr^dominantes  de  fortes  oscillations  de  I'^corce  ter-
restre,  des  soul^vements  de  montagnes  au  milieu  de  I'oc^an,
d^ou  seraient  r^sult6es  de  grandes  Erosions.  Par  consequent
les  puissants  courants  d'eau  marine,  auxquels  on  attribue  ces
Erosions  diluviennes,  auraient  dfi  laisser  sur  les  continents
des  traces  authentiques  de  leur  passage,  tels  que  de  nom-
breux  debris  de  coquilles,  de  poissons  et  autres  aniTWRii-g
marins  analogues  k  ceux  qui  vivent  actuellement  dans  la
mer.  Or,  ainsi  que  M.  Cordier  I'a  fait  remarquer  depuis
longtemps  &  son  cours  de  g^ologie,  rien  de  semblable  n'a  kt6
constate.  Sur  tous  les  points  du  globe  oii  Ton  a  etudi^  les
dep6ts  diluviens,  on  a  reconnu  que,  sauf  quelques  rares  ex-
ceptions trds  contestables,  il  n'existe  dans  ces  depdts  aucun
fossile  marin :  ou  bien  ce  sent  des  fossiles  arrach^s  aux
terrains  pr^existants,  dont  la  denudation  a  foumi  les  ma-
teriaux  qui  composent  le  diluvium.  En  sorte  que  les  depots
diluviens  semblent  avoir  eu   pour  cause  des  phenomdnee

•  Mem.  Soc.  d'Em.  1' Abbeville,  1861,  p.  475.


INAPPLICABILITY  OP   CATACLYSMS.  301

m^t^rologiques,  et  paraissent  £tre  le  r^sultat  d'inmieiiBes
inondatioiis  d^eau  dauce^  et  non  d'eau  marine,  qui,  se  pre-
cipitant des  points  Aleves  vers  la  mer,  aundent  d^nud^  nne
grande  partie  de  la  surface  du  sol^  balay^  la  g^n^ralit^  des
fitres  organises  et  pour  ainsi  dire  nivel^,  coordonn^  les  bassins
hydrographiques  actuels.''*

Such  cataclysms  as  those  supposed  by  M.  D'Orbigny,  and
many  other  French  geologists,  even  if  admitted,  would  not
account  for  the  results  before  us.  We  have  seen  that  the
transport  of  materials  has  not  followed  any  single  direction,
but  has  in  all  cases  followed  the  lines  of  the  present  valleys,
and  the  direction  of  the  present  waterflow;  that  the  rocks
of  one  valley  are  never  transported  into  another;  that  the
condition  of  the  loess  is  irreconcileable  with  a  great  rush
of  water;  that  the  tnaTmnfLla  and  molluscs  are  the  same
throughout  the  period ;  while,  finally,  the  perfect  preserva-
tion of  many  of  the  most  delicate  shells  is  clear  proof  that
they  have  not  been  subjected  to  any  violent  action.

We  must,  moreover,  bear  in  mind  that  the  gravels  and
sands  are  themselves  both  the  proof  and  the  results  of  an
immense  denudation.  In  a  chalk  country,  such  as  that
through  which  the  Somme  flows,  each  cubic  foot  of  flint,
gravel  or  sand,  represents  the  removal  of  at  the  very  least
twenty  cubic  feet  of  chalk,  all  of  which,  as  we  have  already
seen,  must  have  been  removed  from  the  present  area  of
drainage.  In  considering,  therefore,  the  formation  of  these
upper  and  older  gravels,  we  must  not  picture  to  ourselves  the
original  valley  as  it  now  is,  but  must,  in  imagination,  restore
all  that  immense  mass  of  chalk  which  has  been  destroyed  in
the  formation  of  the  lower  level  gravels  and  sands.  Mr.
Prestwich  has  endeavoured  to  illustrate  this  by  a  diagram,t

•  C.  D'0rbig:n7,  Bol.  Geo.  2nd  Ber.  Y.  xiii.  p.  66.    See  also  D'Arduao,  l.e.
paasiin.
t  Proceed.  Bey.  Soc.  1862,  p.  41.


302  ALTERATION  OF  THE  BIVER  LEVEL

and  I  must  once  more  repeat  that  this  is  no  mere  hypothesis,
since  the  mass  of  sand  and  grayel  cannot  have  been  pro-
duced without  an  immense  removal  of  the  chalk.  On  the
whole,  then,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  upper-level
gravels  were  deposited  by  the  existing  river,  before  it  had  ex-
cavated the  valley  to  its  present  depth  and  when  consequently
it  ran  at  a  level  considerably  higher  than  the  present.

Far,  therefore,  from  requiring  an  immense  flood  of  water,
two  hundred  feet  in  depth,  the  accumulation  of  the  gravel
may  have  been  effected  by  an  annual  volume  of  water,  differ-
ing little  from  that  of  the  present  river.

A  given  quantity  of  water  will,  however,  produce  very-
different  effects,  according  to  the  manner  in  which  it  passes.
**  We  learn  from  observation,  that  a  velocity  of  three  inches
per  second  at  the  bottom  will  just  begin  to  work  upon  fine
clay  fit  for  pottery,  and  however  firm  and  compact  it  may  be,
it  will  tear  it  up.  Yet  no  beds  are  more  stable  than  clay
when  the  velocities  do  not  exceed  this :  for  the  water  even
takes  away  the  impalpable  particles  of  the  superficial  clay,
leaving  the  particles  of  sand  sticking  by  their  lower  half  in
the  rest  of  the  clay,  which  they  now  protect,  making  a  very
permanent  bottom,  if  the  stream  does  not  bring  down  gravel
or  coarse  sand,  which  will  rub  off  this  very  thin  crust,  and
allow  another  layer  to  be  worn  off.  A  velocity  of  six  inches
will  lift  fine  sand,  eight  inches  will  lift  sand  as  coarse  as
linseed,  twelve  inches  will  sweep  along  fine  gravel,  twenty-
four  inches  will  roll  along  rounded  pebbles  an  inch  diameter,
and  it  requires  three  feet  per  second  at  the  bottom  to  sweep
along  shivery  angular  stones  of  the  size  of  an  egg."  *
.  If,  therefore,  we  are  justified  in  assuming  a  colder  climate
than  that  now  existing,  we  shoidd  much  increase  the  erosive
action  of  the  river,  not  only  because  the  rains  would  fall  on
a  frozen  surface,  but  because  the  rainfall  of  the  winter  months

•  Cjrc.  Brit.  Article  "RiTew,"  p.  274.


OWING  TO  THE   EXCAVATION  OF  THE  YALLST.  303

wonld  accumulate  on  the  higli  groundB  in  the  form  of  ice  and
snow,  and  woidd  every  spring  produce  floods  much  greater
than  any  which  now  occur.

We  now  come  to  the  light*colored  sandy  marl  (fig.  138  c).
It  is  described  by  Mr.  Prestwich  as  follows :  "  White  siliceous
sand  and  light-colored  marl,  mixed  with  fine  chalk  grit,  a
few  large  sub-angular  flints,  and  an  occasional  sandstone
block,  irregular  patches  of  flint  gravel,  bedding  waved  and
contorted,  here  and  there  layers  with  diagonal  seams,  a  few
03hreous  bands,  portions  concreted.  Sand  and  freshwater
shells  common,  some  mammalian  remains."

In  the  pits  at  Amiens  this  bed  is  generally  distinct  from
the  underljring  gravels,  owing  perhaps  to  the  upper  portion
of  the  gravel  having  been  removed;  but  in  several  pkces
(Pr^cy,  Ivry,  Bio^tre,  etc.)  this  section  is  complete,  the
coarser  gravel  below  becoming  finer  and  finer,  and  at  length
passing  above  into  siliceous  sand.  These  sections  evidently
indicate  a  gradual  loss  of  power  in  the  water  at  these  parti-
cidmr  spots ;  rapid  enough  at  first  to  bring  down  large  pebbles,
Hm  force  became  less  and  less  until  at  length  it  was  only  able
to  deposit  fine  sand.  This,  therefore,  appears  to  indicate  a
slight  change  in  the  course  of  the  river,  and  gradual  exca-
vation of  the  valley,  which,  by  supplying  the  floods  with  a
lower  bed,  left  the  waters  at  this  height  with  a  gradually
diTninifthing  force  and  velocity.

The  upper  part  of  the  section  at  St.  Acheul  consists  of
brick  earth  (fig.  131  a),  passing  below  into  angular  gravel,
while  between  this  and  the  underlying  sandy  marl  is  some-
times a  small  layer  of  darker  brick  earth.  These  beds,  how-
ever, vary  much  even  in  adjoining  sections.  Taken  as  a
whole,  they  are  regarded  by  Mr.  Prestwich  as  the  represen-
tatives of  that  remarkable  loamy  deposit  which  is  found
overlying  the  gravels  in  all  these  valleys  of  Northern  France,
and  which,  as  the  celebrated  *^  loess  "  of  the  Bhine,  attains  a


304  LOKSS.

thickness  of  three  hundred  feet.  The  greatest  development
of  it  which  I  have  seen  in  the  north  of  France  was  in  a  pit
in  the  Bue  de  la  Chevalerie,  near  Ivry,  where  it  was  twenty-
two  feet  thick ;  some  of  this>  however^  may  have  been  recon-
structed loess  brought  down  by  rain  from  the  higher  g;round
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.  Assuming  that  thi»  loSss
is  composed  of  fine  particles  deposited  from  standing  or
slowly-moving  waters^  we  might  be  disposed  to  wonder  »t
not  finding  in  it  any  traces  of  vegetable  remains.  We  know,
>however,  from  the  arrangement  of  the  nails  and  hasps  that
in  some  of  the  St.  Acheul  tombs  wooden  cofiins  were  used,
while  the  size  of  the  nails  eliows  that  the  planks  must  have
been  tolerably  thick ;  yet  every  trace  of  wood  has  been  re-
moved>  and  not  even  a  stain  is  left  to  indicate  its  presence.
We  need  not,  therefore,  wonder  at  the  absence  of  vegetable
remains  in  the  drift.

Such  is  a  general  account  of  those  gravel  pits  which  lie  at
a  height  of  from  eighty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above
the  present  water  level  of  the  valleys^  and  which  along  the
Somme  are  found  in  some  places  evai  at  a  height  of  two
hundred  feet.

Let  us  now  visit  some  of  the  pits  at  the  lower  levels.  At
about  thirty  feet  lower,  as  for  instance  at  Menchecourt,  near
Abbeville,  and  at  St.  Roch,  near  Amiens,  where  the  gravels
slope  from  a  height  of  sixty  feet  down  to  the  bottom  of  the
valley,  we  find  almost  a  repetition  of  the  same  succession ;
coarse  sub-angular  gravel  below,  finer  materials  above.  So
similar,  indeed,  are  these  beds  to  those  already  described,
that  it  will  be  unnecessary  for  me  to  give  any  special  de-
scription of  them.

It  seems  highly  probable  that  when  the  fauna  and  flora
of  the  upper  and  lower  level  gravels  shall  have  been  more
thoroughly  investigated,  they  will  be  foimd  to  be  almost
identicaL    At  present,  however,  the  species  obtained  from


FAUNA  OF  THE  LOW  LEVEL  GRAVELS.


305


the  lower  level  gravels  are  more  nuinerous  than  those  from
the  upper  levels.

Mr.  Frestwich  gives  the  following  table  of  the  maimnalia :


BRPVORD.

Great  Northern

BailwaT,  or

Sommerliouse

HiU.

ABBEVILLE
Mencheoourt.

AMIENS.
St.Eoch.

PARIS.

Grenelle,  Ivry,

CUchy,  or  the

BoedeBenUly.

Elephai  primigemufl,  3hm, .

•

•  *

•  ••

•  ■  •

•

•  r

•
•
•

•

•

•
•••

•
•
•
•
*
*

•  •  •

•

•

•••

•
•

•

.*•

...
•••
•  •  •

«
*

•

...

•

•
•

•  »  •

•
•

•

•  •  •

•

•  9

•

Bhiaooenw  tichorhiniu,  Omf.

XJima  speUevs,  Blum.

HTSUia  spelsa.  Odd,

Felifl  spelflMi,  GMd.

Bm  primigeniiUy  B^,

Bifion  pTueiuu  Boi.

EqnuB  (pofisiblj  two  species]
Genms  euryceros,  Aldr.

Hippopotamiu  major,  Jferti.
Sus

To  this  list  we  must  add  the  lemming,  the  My  odes  iorquatuSy
and  the  mnsk  ox,  which  has  been  found  at  two  spots  in  the
Thames  valley,  as  well  as  at  Ghauny  on  the  Oise.

The  moUusca  are  fifty-two  in  number,  of  which  forty-two
now  live  in  Sweden,  thirty-seven  in  Finland,  and  thirty-eight
in  Lombardy.  Bearing  in  mind  that  Lombardy  is  much
richer  than  Finland  in  moUusca,  this  assemblage  has  rather
a  northern  aspect.

There  are,  however,  three  species  which  seem  to  point
southwards.  It  may  be  fairly  objected  that  the  Hippopotamus
major f  bones  of  which  occur  in  the  drift,  coidd  scarcely  have
existed  in  a  cold  country.  Mr.  Frestwich,  indeed,  suggests
that  this  species  may,  perhaps,  like  its  gigantic  relatives,

20


306  FAUNA  OF  THE  LOW  LEVEL  GRAVELS.

have  been  fitted  to  flonrisli  in  an  arctic  climate.  But  there
is  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  its  occurrence :  it  has  not
yet  been  found  in  the  "  diluvium ''  of  Germany,*  and  though
remains  of  it  have  undoubtedly  occurred  in  the  drift-gravel
of  the  Somme,  there  is  some  reason  to  believe  that  they  are
not  in  quite  the  same  condition  as  the  bones  of  the  elephant
and  rhinoceros ;  it  is  just  possible,  therefore,  that  they  may
belong,  as  Dr.  Falconer  has  suggested,  to  an  anterior  period.
Until  lately,  we  should  haye  regarded  the  tiger  as  an  essen-
tially tropical  animal ;  yet  it  is  well  known  to  be  common  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Aral,  in  the  forty-fifth  degree  of
north  latitude :  and  '^  the  last  tiger  killed,  in  1828,  on  the
Lena,  in  lat.  524^,  was  in  a  climate  colder  than  that  of
St.  Petersburg  and  Stockholm."  t  Finally,  the  Cyrena  fiu-
minalis  now  lives  in  the  Nile ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is
found  also  in  the  rivers  of  Central  Asia.

While  admitting  these  difficulties,  it  is  still,  I  think,  felt
by  most  Palseontologists,  that  though  the  presence  of  one
arctic  species  would  scarcely  perhaps  justify  any  very  decided
inference  as  to  climate,  still  that  the  co-existence  of  such  a
group  as  this — ^the  musk  ox,  the  reindeer,  the  lemming,  the
Myodes  tarquatuSy  the  Siberian  mammoth,  and  its  faithful
companion  the  woolly-haired  rhinoceros — decidedly  indicates,
even  though  it  may  not  prove,  the  continued  existence  of  a
climate  unlike  that  now  prevailing  in  Western  Europe.

Finally,  the  lowest  portion  of  the  valley  is  at  present  oc-
cupied by  a  bed  of  gravel,  covered  by  silt  and  peat,  which
latter  is  in  some  places  more  than  twenty  feet  thick,  and  is
extensively  worked  for  fuel.  These  strata  have  afforded  to
the  antiquaries  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  especially  to
M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  a  rich  harvest  of  interesting  relics
belonging  to  various  periods.     The  depth  at  which  these

*  Sir  G.  Lyell,  Supplement  to  Manual,  p.  8.
t  LyeU's  PrincipleB,  p.  77.


PEAT.  307

objects  are  found  has  been  carefully  noted  by  M.  Boucher
de  Perthes.

"Prenant/'  he  says,  "pour  terme  moyen  du  sol  de  la
Tall^e,  une  hauteur  de  2  metres  audessus  du  niveau  de  la
Somme,  c'est  ft  30  ft  40  centundtres  de  la  surface  qu'on
rencontre  le  plus  abondamment  les  traces  du  moyen-ftge.
Cinquante  centundtres  plus  bas,  on  commence  ft  trouver  des
dfebris  romains,  puis  gallo-romains.  On  continue  ft  suivre
ces  demiers  pendant  un  mdtre,  c'est  ft  dire  jusqu*au  niveau
de  la  Somme.  Apr^s  eux,  viennent  les  vestiges  gaulois  purs
qui  descendent  sans  interruption  jusqu'ft  pr^s  de  2  metres
audessous  de  ce  niveau,  preuve  de  la  longue  habitation  de  ces
peuples  dans  la  valine.  C'est  ft  un  m^tre  plus  bas,  ou  ft  4
mdtres  environ  audessous  de  ce  m6me  niveau,  qu'on  arrive  au
centre  du  sol  que  nous  avons  nomm^  Celtique,  celui  que
fouldrent  les  Ghtidois  primitives  ou  les  peuples  qui  les  pr^c^-
ddrent;"  and  which  belonged,  therefore,  to  the  ordinary
stone  period.  It  is,  however,  hardly  necessary  to  add  that
these  thicknesses  are  only  given  by  M:  Boucher  de  Perthes
"  comme  terme  approximatif."

The  "Antiquit^s  Celtiques"  was  published  several  years
before  the  Swiss  archaeologists  had  made  us  acquainted  with
the  nature  of  the  Pfahlbauten ;  but,  from  some  indications
given  by  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes,  it  would  appear  that  there
must  have  been,  at  one  time,  lake-habitations  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Abbeville.  He  found  considerable  platforms  of
wood,  with  large  quantities  of  bones,  stone  implements,  and
handles  closely  resembling  those  which  come  from  the  Swiss
lakes.

These  weapons  cannot  for  an  instant  be  confounded  with
the  ruder  ones  from  the  drift  gravel.  They  are  ground  to  a
smooth  surface  and  a  cutting  edge,  while  the  more  ancient
ones  are  merely  chipped,  not  one  of  the  many  hundreds
already  found  having  shown  the  slightest  trace  of  grinding.


308  BECAPrrULATION.

Yet  though  the  former  belong  to  the  Stone  age,  to  a  time  so
remote  that  the  use  of  metal  was  apparently  still  imknown
in  Western  Europe,  they  are  separated  from  the  earlier
weapons  of  the  upper-leTel  drift  by  the  whole  period  neooB-
sary  for  the  excavation  of  the  Sonune  Yalley,  to  a  depth  of
more  than  one  hundred  feet.

If,  therefore,  we  get  no  definite  date  for  the  arriyal  of
man  in  these  countries,  we  can  at  least  form  a  vivid  idea  of
his  antiquity.  He  must  have  seen  the  Somme  running  at  a
height  of  about  a  hundred  feet  above  its  present  leveL
It  is,  indeed,  probable  that  he  date9  back  in  Northern  France
almost,  if  not  quite,  as  far  aa  the  rivers  themselves.  The
&una  of  the  coimtry  must  have  been  indeed  unlike  what  it  is
now.  Along  the  banks  of  the  rivers  ranged  a  savage  raoe
of  hunters  and  fishermen,  and  in  the  forests  wandered  the
mammoth,  the  two-^homed  woolly  rhinoceros,  a  species  of
tiger,  the  musk  ox,  the  reindeer,  and  the  urus.

Yet  the  geography  of  France  cannot  have  been  very
different  from  what  it  is  at  present.  The  present  rivers  ran
in  their  present  directions,  and  the  sea  even  then  lay  between
the  Somme  and  the  Adur,  though  the  Qhannel  was  jxpt  so
wide  as  it  is  at  present.

Gradually  the  river  deepened  its  valley;  ineffective,  or
even  perhaps  constructive,  in  autumn  and  winter,  the  melt-
ing of  the  snows  turned  it  every  spring  into  a  roaring
torrent,  These  floods  were  probably  more  destructive  to
animals  even  than  man  himself ;  while,  however  rude  they
may  have  been,  our  predecessors  can  hardly  be  supposed  to
have  been  incapable  of  foreseeing  and  consequently  escaping
the  danger.  While  the  water,  at  an  elevation  of  one
hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  its  present  level,  as  for  instance
at  Liercourt,  had  sufficient  force  to  deposit  coarse  gravel ;  at
a  still  higher  level  it  would  part  with  finer  particles,  and
would  thus  form  the  loess  which,  at  the  same  time,  would


msoAprruLATtoii.  309

here  and  tliere  receive  angular  flints  and  shells  brought  down
bom  the  hills  in  a  more  or  less  transverse  direction  by  the
rivulets  after  heavy  rains.

Mr.  Frestwich  regards  the  difference  of  level  between  the
upper  gravels  and  the  loess  as  '*  a  measure  of  the  floods  of
that  period.''  If  the  gravel  beds  were  complete,  this  would
no  doubt  be  the  case ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  the  upper^level
gravels  are  mere  fragments  of  an  originally  almost  con-
tinuous deposit,  and  under  these  circumstances  the  present
cannot  be  taken  as  evidence  of  the  original  difference.

As  the  valley  became  deeper  and  deeper  the  gravel  would
be  deposited  at  lower  and  lower  levels^  the  loess  always
following  it;*  thus  we  must  not  consider  the  loess  as  a
distinct  bed,  but  as  one  which  was  being  formed  during
the  same  time,  though  never  at  the  same  place  as  the
beds  of  gravel.     In  fig.  142  I  have  given  a  diagram,  the

Fto.  14S.


CHALK


Diagnm  to  Bhow  the  Belattons  of  tlie  LoCm  and  the  GraTds.

better  to  illustrate  my  meaning;  the  loess  is  indicated  by
letters  with  a  dash  and  is  dotted,  while  the  gravels  are  repre-
sented  as  rudely  stratified.  In  this  case  I  suppose  the  river
to  have  run  originally  on  the  level  (1),  and  to  have
deposited  the  gravel  (a)  and  the  loess  {a') ;  after  a  certain
amount  of  erosion  which  would  reduce  the  level  to  (2),
the  gravel  would  be  spread  out  at  (6),  and  loess  at  {V).
Similarly  the  loess  {cf)  would  be  contemporaneous  with  the
gravel  (c).

•  See  Mr.  FMtwich'i  paper  read  before  the  Boyal  Society,  June  19ih,  1862.


310  BECAPITULATION.

Thus,  wliile  in  each  section  the  lower  b^  would  of  course
be  the  oldest,  still  the  upper-level  gravels  as  a  whole  would
be  the  most  ancient,  and  the  beds  lying  in  the  lower  parts
of  the  valley  the  most  modem.

For  convenience  I  have  represented  the  sides  of  the  valley
as  forming  a  series  of  terraces;  and  though  this  is  not
actually  the  case,  there  are  several  places  in  which  such
terraces  do  occur.

It  is,  however,  well  known  that  rivers  continually  tend  to
shift  their  courses ;  nor  is  the  Somme  any  exception  to  the
rule ;  the  vaUey  itself  indeed  is  comparatively  straight,  but
within  it  the  river  winds  considerably,  and  when  in  one
of  its  curves,  the  current  crosses  ^'  its  general  line  of  descent^
it  eats  out  a  curve  in  the  opposite  bank,  or  in  the  side  of  the
hills  bounding  the  valley,  from  which  curve  it  is  turned  back
again  at  an  equal  angle,  so  that  it  recrosses  the  line  of
descent,  and  gradually  hoUows  out  another  curve  lower  down
in  the  opposite  bank,"  till  the  whole  sides  of  the  valley,  or
river-bed,  ''present  a  succession  of  salient  and  retiring
angles/'*  During  these  wanderings  from  one  side  of  the
valley  to  the  other,  the  river  continually  undermines  and
removes  the  gravels  which  at  an  earlier  period  it  had  de-
posited. Thus  the  upper-level  gravels  are  now  only  to  be
found  here  and  there,  as  it  were,  in  patches,  while  in  many
parts  they  have  altogether  disappeared ;  as,  for  instance,  on
the  right  side  of  the  valley  between  Amiens  and  Pont
E^my,  where  hardly  a  trace  of  the  high-level  gravels  is  to
be  seen.

The  neighbouring  shores  of  England  and  France  show
various  traces  of  a  slight  and  recent  elevation  of  the  land.
Raised  beaches  have  been  observed  at  an  elevation  of  from
five  to  ten  feet  at  various  points  along  the  coasts  of  Sussex
and  the  Fas  de  Calais.    Marine  shells  also  occur  at  Abbeville

*  Lyell,  Principles,  p.  206.


BBCAPXTULATIOK.  311

about  twenty-five  feet  aboye  the  sea-leveL*  No  doubt  this
change  of  level  has  had  an  important  bearing  on  the  excava-
tion of  the  valley,  but  I  cannot  quite  agree  with  Mr.  Prest-
widb  as  to  the  effect  which  it  has  produced.!

At  length  the  excavation  of  the  valley  was  completed ;  the
climate  had  gradually  become  more  like  our  own,  and  whether
from  this  change,  or  whether  perhaps  yielding  to  the  ir-
resistible power  of  man,  the  great  Pachydermata  became

.  extinct.  Under  new  conditions,  the  river,  unable  to  cany
oat  to  sea  the  finer  particles  brought  down  from  the  higher
levels,  deposited  them  in  the  valley,  and  thus  raised  some-
what its  general  level,  checking  the  velocity  of  the  stream,
and  producing  extensive  marshes,  in  which  a  thick  deposit  of
peat  was  gradually  formed.  We  have,  unfortunately,  no  trust-
worthy estimate  as  to  the  rate  of  formation  of  this  substance,
but  on  any  supposition  the  production  of  a  mass  in  some
places  more  than  thirty  feet  in  thickness  must  have  acquired
a  very  considerable  period.  Yet  it  is  in  these  beds  that  we
find  the  remains  of  the  Neolithic  or  later  Stone  period.
From  the  tombs  at  St.  Acheul,  from  the  Soman  remains
found  in  the  superficial  layers  of  the  peat,  at  about  the
present  level  of  the  river,  we  know  that  fifteen  hundred

.  years  have  produced  scarcely  any  change  in  the  configuration
of  the  vaUey.  In  the  peat,  and  at  a  depth  of  about  fifteen
feet  in  the  alluvium  at  Abbeville,  are  the  remains  of  the
Stone  period,  which  we  believe  from  the  researches  in  Den-
mark and  Switzeiiand  to  be  of  an  age  so  great  that  it  can
only  be  expressed  in  thousands  of  years.  Tet  all  these  are
subsequent  to  the  excavation  of  the  valley ;  what  antiquity,
then,  are  we  to  ascribe  to  the  men  who  lived  when  the

*  The  higher  level  grayek  in  some  croachment  of  the  sea  on  the  land,  and

places  fringe  the  coast  at  an  elevation  the  consequent  intersection  of  the  old

of  as  mnch  as  one  hnndred  feet ;  this  river  beds  at  a  higher  level
phenomenon,  however,  I  should  be  dia-         f  Phil.  Trans.  1864,  p.  297.
posed  to  reifer  principally  to  an  en-


312  LAPSE  OF  TIME.

Somme  was  but  begmning  its  great  task  P  No  one  can  pro-
perly appreciate  the  time  required  who  has  not  stood  on  the
heights  of  laercourt,  Picquigny,  or  on  one  of  the  other  points
overlooking  the  valley :  nor,  I  am  sure,  could  any  geologist
return  £rom  such  a  visit  without  an  overpowering  sense  of
the  change  which  has  taken  place,  and  the  enormous  time
which  must  have  elapsed  since  the  first  appearance  of  man
in  Western  Europe.


313


CHAPTER  X.
OK  THB  ANTiQuiTT  OF  MAN,  Continued.

IT  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  preceding  chapters
do  not  contain  all  the  facts  upon  which  those  who
believe  in  the  great  antiquity  of  the  hiunan  race  chiefly  rely.
It  is,  indeed,  by  no  means  only  of  late  years,  or  among
archaBologistSy  that  the  difficulties  in  Archbishop  Usher's
chronology  have  been  felt  to  be  insuperable.  Historians,
philologists,  and  physiologists  have  alike  admitted  that  the
short  period  allowed  could  hardly  be  reconciled  with  the
history  of  some  eastern  nations,  that  it  did  not  leave  room
for  the  development  either  of  the  different  languages,  or  of
the  numeroas  physical  peculiarities,  by*  which  the  various
races  of  men  are  distinguished.

Thus,  Dr.  Prichard  says,  ''Many  writers  who  have  been  by
no  means  inclined  to  raise  objections  against  the  authority  of
the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  in  particular  Michaelis,  have  felt
themselves  embarrassed  by  the  shortness  of  the  interval
between  the  Noachic  Deluge  and  the  period  at  which  the
records  of  various  nations  commence,  or  the  earliest  date  to
which  their  historical  memorials  lead  us  back.  The  extrava-
gant claims  to  a  remote  and  almost  fathomless  antiquity,
made  by  the  fabulists  of  many  ancient  nations,  have  vanished
before  the  touch  of  accurate  criticism ;  but  after  abstracting
aU  that  is  apparently  mythological  from  the  early  traditions
of  the  Indians,  Egyptians,  and  some  other  nations,  the  pro-


314  VARIETIES  OF  MAN   BEPRBSEKTED

bable  history  of  some  of  them  seems  still  to  reach  up  to  a
period  too  remote  to  be  reconciled  with  the  short  chronology
of  Usher  and  Fetayius.  This  has  been  so  universally  felt
by  all  those  writers  who  have  entered  on  the  investigation
of  primeval  history  that  it  is  superfluous  to  dwell  upon
the  subject."*

Baron  Bunsen,  one  of  the  ablest  among  those  who  regard
the  various  forms  of  language  as  having  had  a  common
origin,  is  forced  to  claim  for  the  human  race  an  antiquity  of
at  least  20,000  years.  Again,  the  ingenious  author  of  **  The
Genesis  of  the  Earth  and  of  Man,"t  says  truly  that  ''one
of  the  greatest  of  the  difficulties  that  beset  us  when  we
endeavour  to  account  for  the  commonly  supposed  descent  of
all  mankind  from  a  single  pair,  ....  lies  in  the  fact
of  our  finding,  upon  Egyptian  monuments,  mostly  of  the
thirteenth,  fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  centuries  before  the
Christian  era,  representations  of  individuals  of  numerous
nations,  African,  Asiatic,  and  European,  differing  in  phy*
sical  characteristics  as  widely  as  any  equal  number  of  nations
of  the  present  age  that  could  be  grouped  together;  among
these  being  negro^  of  the  true  Nigritian  stamp,  depicted
with  a  fidelity,  as  to  colour  and  features,  hardly  to  be  sur-
passed by  an  accomplished  modem  artist.  That  such  diver-
sities had  been  produced  by  natural  means  in  the  interval
between  that  remote  age  and  the  time  of  Noah,  probably  no
one  versed  in  the  sciences  of  anatomy  and  physiology  will
consider  credible,"  and  he  concludes,  therefore,  that  the
human  race  cannot  have  been  derived  from  a  single  pair.
For,  just  as  the  philological  difficulties  will  not,  of  course,
affect  those  who  accept  literally  the  account  given  in  our
English  version  of  the  miraculous  creation  of  languages  at
the  Tower  of  Babel;   so  in  the  same  way  ''the  shortaiess

*  Prichard.    ResearcheB  into  the  Physical  History  of  Mankiml,  YoL  y.|  p.  553*

t  Le.  p.  117.


OK  ANCIENT  EGYPTIAN  SCULFTUBES.  315

of  the  period  allowed  by  the  received  chronology,  for  the
development  of  those  physical  varieties  which  distinguish
the  different  races  of  men/'*  though  felt  as  "one  of  the
greatest  difBculties  connected  with  the  opinion  that  all
mankind  are  descended  from  one  primitive  stock/'  will  not
affect  those  who  believe  in  the  existence  of  separate  species
of  men.

But  I  can  do  no  more  than  allude  to  these  questions,  and
must  return  to  the  archseological  and  geological  considera*
tions  which  fall  more  strictly  within  the  scope  of  my  present
work.

I  have  been  much  struck,  when  standing  at  the  feet  of
glaciers,  by  the  great  size  of  the  terminal  moraines,  and  the
length  of  time  which  must  have  been  required  for  their  forma*
tion.  Let  us  take  as  an  instance  the  Kigaard  glacier  in  the  Yus-
tedal,  on  the  Sognefjord.  The  Norwegian  glaciers  no  doubt
covered  formerly  a  much  larger  area  than  that  which  they
now  occupy.  They  retreated  as  the  cold  diminished;  but
we  have  already  seen  that  man  was  present  in  Western
Europe,  when  the  general  temperature  was  several  degrees
lower  than  it  is  at  present ;  and  we  shall  probably,  therefore,
be  within  the  mark  if  we  suppose  that  the  glacier  at  Yustedal
has  retreated  at  least  a  mile  up  the  valley  since  the  period  of
the  river-drift  gravels,  and  the  entrance  of  man  into  Europe.
Kow  the  terminal  moraine  of  the  glacier  covers  the  whole  of
this  space  with  great  blocks  of  stones,  thousands  and  hun*
dreds  of  thousands  in  number,  and  yet,  although  all  these
have  probably  be^i  brought  down  in  the  human  period,  I
could  only  see  a  few  blocks  on  the  lower  end  of  the  glacier
itself.

As  far  as  Denmark  is  concerned  we  must,  for  the  present,
rely  principally  on  the  double  change  which  has  taken  place
in  the  prevalent  vegetation.    Now  the  beech  forests  are  the

*  Prichard,  he,  p.  552.


316  THE  VEGETATION  OF  DENMABK.

pride  of  the  country,  and,  as  far  as  tradition  goea,  they  have
always  been  so.  But,  as  is  shown  by  the  peat^bogs,  this  is  a
mistake.  The  large  mosses  do  not  help  ns  very  much  in  this
matter,  but  there  are,  in  many  of  the  forests,  small  and  deep
depressions,  filled  with  peat,  and  called  skov-mose.  These,
as  might  naturally  be  expected,  contain  many  trees  which,
grew  on  their  edges,  and  at  length  fell  into  them.  At  the
bottom  is  usually  an  amorphous  peat,  above  is  a  layer  of
pines — a  tree  which  does  not  now  grow  naturally  in  Ben-
mark.  Higher  up  the  pinea  disappear,  and  are  replaced  by
oaks,  and  white  birches,  neither  of  which  are  now  common
in  Denmark;  while  the  upper  layer  consists  principally  of
the  Betula  verrucosa,  and  corresponds  to  the  present,  whicli
we  may  call  the  Beech^  period.  Professor  Steenstrup  has
found  stone  implements  among  the  stems  of  the  pines,
and  as  the  capercaiLne,  which  feeds  on  tiie  yotmg  shoots  of
the  pine,  has  been  found  in  the  Kjokkenmoddings,  it  seems
likely,  to  say  the  least,  that  these  shell-mounds  belonged  to
the  Pine  period,  and  that  the  three  great  stages  of  oivilifla-
tion  correspond  in  some  measure  with  these  three  periods  of
arborescent  v^^etation.  For  one  species  of  tree  thus  to  dis-
place another,  and  in  its  turn  to  be  supplanted  by  a  thirds
would  evidently  require  a  great  lapse  of  time,  but  one  which,
as  yet|  we  have  no  means  of  measuring.

Turning  now  from  Denmark  to  Switzerland^  there  are  two
cases  in  which  a  more  definite  estimate  has  been  attempted.
We  must  not,  indeed,  place  too  much  reliance  on  them  as
yet,  but  if  many  calculations  made  on  different  data  shall
agree  in  the  main,  we  may  at  length  come  to  some  approxi-
mate conclusion.

The  first  of  these  calculations  we  owe  to  M.  Morlot.  The
torrent  of  the  Tinidre,  at  the  point  where  it  falls  into  the  Lake
of  Geneva,  near  Yilleneuve,  has  gradually  built  up  a  cone  of
gravel  and  alluvium.    In  the  formation  of  the  railway  this


THB  COIfE  OF  THE  TINIBRE.  317

cone  has  been  bisected  for  a  length  of  one  thousand  feet,  and
to  a  depth,  in  the  central  part,  of  about  thirty-two  feet  six
inches  above  the  level  of  the  railway.    The  section  of  the  cone
thus  obtained  shows  a  very  regular  structure,  which  proves
that  its  formation  was  gradual.     It  is  composed  of  the  same
materials  (sand,  gravel,  and  larger  blocks)  as  those  which  are
even  now  brought  down  by  the  stream.   The  amount  of  detritus
does,  indeed,  differ  slightly  from  year  to  year,  but  in  the  long
run  the  differences  compensate  for  one  another,  so  that  when
considering  long  periods,  and  the  structure  of  the  whole  mass,
the  influences  of  the  temporary  variations,  which  arise  from
meteorological  causes,  altogether  disappear,  and  need  not
therefore  be  taken  into  account.    Documents  preserved  in
the  archives  of  Yilleneuve  show  that  in  the  year  1710  the
stream  was  dammed  up,  and  its  course  a  little  altered,  which
makes  the  present  cone  sKghtly  irregular.     That  the  change
wat  not  of  any  great  antiquity  is  also  shown  by  the  fact  that
on  the  side  where  the  cone  was  protected  by  the  dykes,  the
vegetable  soil,  where  it  has  been  affected  by  cultivation,  does
not  exceed  two  to  three  inches  in  thickness.      On  the  side
thus  protected  by  the  dykes  the  railway  cutting  has  exposed
three  layers  of  vegetable  soil,  each  of  which  must,  at  one
time,  have  formed  the  surface  of  the  cone.     They  are  regu-
larly intercalated  among  the  gravel,  and  exactly  parallel  to
one  another,  as  well  as  to  the  present  surface  of  the  cone,
which  itself  follows  a  very  regular  curve.    The  first  of  these
ancient  surfaces  was  followed  on  the  south  side  of  the  cone,
over  a  surface  of  15,000  square  feet :  it  had  a  thickness  of
four  to  six  inches,  and  occurred  at  a  depth  of  about  four  feet
(1.14  metre  measured  to  the  base  of  the  layer)  below  the
present  surface  of  the  cone.    This  layer,  which  belonged  to
the  Roman  period,  contained  tiles  and  a  Boman  coin.

The  second  layer  was  followed  over  a  surface  of  25,000
square  feet ;  it  was  six  inches  in  thickness,  and  lay  at  a  depth


318  THE  GONE  OF  THB  TINlkllE.

of  ten  feet  (2.97  metres)  including  the  thickness  of  the  layer.
In  it  haye  been  found  several  fragments  of  unglazed  potteiy,
and  a  pair  of  tweezers  in  bronze.  The  third  layer  has  been
followed  for  3^500  square  feet ;  it  was  six  or  seyen  inches  in
thickness,  and  lay  at  a  depth  of  nineteen  feet  (5.69  metres)
below  the  present  surface :  in  it  were  found  some  fragments
of  yery  rude  pottery,  some  pieces  of  charcoal,  some  broken
bones,  and  a  human  skeleton  with  a  small,  round,  and  yery
thick  skull.  Fragments  of  charcoal  were  eyen  found  a  foot
deeper,  and  it  is  also  worthy  of  notice  that  no  trace  of  tiles
was  found  below  the  upper  layer  of  earth.

Towards  the  centre  of  the  cone,  the  three  layers  disappear,
since,  at  this  part,  the  torrent  has  most  force,  and  has  de-
posited the  coarsest  materials,  eyen  some  blocks  as  much  as
three  feet  in  diameter.  The  further  we  go  from  this  central
region,  the  smaller  are  the  materials  deposited,  and  the  more
easily  might  a  layer  of  earth,  formed  since  the  last  great
inundations,  be  coyered  oyer  by  fresh  deposits.  Thus,  at  a
depth  of  ten  feet,  in  the  grayel  on  the  south  of  the  cone,  at
a  part  where  the  layer  of  earth  belonging  to  the  Bronze  age
had  already  disappeared,  two  un-rolled  bronze  implements
were  discoyered.  They  had  probably  been  retained  by  their
weight,  when  the  earth  which  once  coyered  them  was  washed
away  by  the  torrent.  After  disappearing  towards  the  centre
of  the  cone,  the  three  layers  reappear  on  the  north  side,  at
slightly  greater  depth,  but  with  the  same  regularity,  and  the
same  relative  position.  The  layer  of  the  Stone  age  was  but
slightly  interrupted,  while  that  of  the  Bronze  era  was  easily
distinguishable  by  its  peculiar  character  and  color.

Here,  therefore,  we  have  phenomena  so  regular  and  so
well  marked  that  M.  Morlot  has  thought  himself  justified
in  applying  to  them  a  calculation,  with  some  little  con-
fidence of  at  least  approximate  accuracy.  Making  some
allowances;    for  instance,   admitting  three  hundred  years


THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  THIOLS.  319

of  one  himdred  and  fifty,  for  the  period  since  the
embankment,  and  taking  the  Boman  period  as  representing
an  antiquity  of  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  centuries,  he  obtains
for  the  age  of  Bronze  an  antiquity  of  from  2,900  years  to
4,200  years,  for  that  of  the  Stone  period  from  4,700  to  7,000
years,  and  for  the  whole  cone  an  age  of  from  7,400  to  11,000
years.  M.  Morlot  thinks  that  we  should  be  most  nearly
correct  in  deducting  two  hundred  years  only  for  the  action  of
the  dykes,  and  in  attributing  to  the  Boman  layer  an  anti-
quity of  sixteen  centuries,  that  is  to  say,  in  referring  it  to
the  middle  of  the  third  century.  This  would  give  an  antiquity
of  3,800  years  for  the  Bronze  age,  and  6,400  years  for  that  of
Stone ;  but,  on  the  whole,  he  is  inclined  to  suppose  for  the
former  an  antiquity  of  from  3,000  to  4,000  years,  and  for  the
latter  of  from  5,000  to  7,000  years.

Not  less  ingenious  is  the  attempt  which  has  been  made  by
M.  GiUi^ron,*  Professor  at  the  College  of  Neuveville,  to  obtain
a  date  for  the  Lake-habitation  at  the  Pont  de  Thidle.  This
stream  connects  the  Lakes  of  Neufchatel  and  Bienne.  During
the  first  part  of  its  course,  the  valley  is  narrow,  and  the
bridge,  close  to  which  the  Lake-dwelling  has  been  discovered,
is  situated  at  the  narrowest  spot.  A  little  further  down  the
valley  suddenly  expands,  and  from  this  point  remains  of  the
same  width  until  it  joins  the  Lake  of  Bienne.  It  is  evident
that  tKe  valley,  as  far  as  the  bridge  over  the  Thi^le,  was  once
occupied  by  the  lake,  which  has  gradually  been  silted  up  by
the  action  of  forces  still  in  operation,  and,  if  we  could  ascer-
tain how  long  it  would  have  taken  to  e£Pect  this  change,  we
should  then  know  approximately  the  date  of  the  remains
found- at  the  Pont  de  Thi^le,  which  are  evidently  those  of
a  Lake-dwelling.  The  Abbey  of  St.  Jean,  which  stands  in
this  valley,  about  375  metres  from  the  present  shore  of  the
lake,  was  founded,  according  to  ancient  documents,  between

*  Notice  Biir  lea  Habitatioiu  Lacustres  du  Pont  de  ThiMe.    Forrentniy,  1863.


320  THE  YALLST  OF  THB  THIELB.

the  years  1090  and  1106,  and  is  therefore  about  750  years  old.
It  is  possible  that  the  abbey  may  not  have  been  built  exactly
on  the  then  edge  of  the  lake ;  but  eyen  if  this  were  the  case,
the  gain  of  land  will  only  have  been  875  metres  in  750  years.
Prof.  Gilli^ron  does  not  compare  with  this  the  whole  space
between  the  convent  and  the  Lake-dwelling,  because  in  the
narrower  part  of  the  valley  in  which  the  latter  is  situated,
the  gain  may  have  been  more  rapid ;  but  if  we  only  go  to  the
point  at  which  the  basin  contracts,  we  shall  have  a  distance
of  3,000  metres,  which  would  upon  these  data  indicate  a  mini-
mum antiquity  of  6,750  years.  This  calculation  assumes  that
the  shape  of  the  bottom  of  the  valley  was  originally  uniform.
M.  Morlot  agrees  with  Prof.  GiUi^ron  in  believing  that
this  was  the  case,  and  £rom  the  general  configuration  of  the
valley  it  seems  to  me  also  to  be  a  reasonable  supposition.
Moreover,  the  soundings  taken  by  M.  Hisely  in  the  Lake  of
Bienne  show  that  the  variations  in  depth  are  but  of  slight
importance.  These  two  calculations,  then,  appear  to  indi-
cate that  6,000  or  7,000  years  ago  Switzerland  was  already
inhabited  by  men  who  used  poUshed  stone  implements,
but  how  long  they  had  been  there,  or  how  many  cen-
turies elapsed  before  the  discovery  of  metal,  we  have  as  yet
no  evidence  to  show.

A  still  greater  antiquity  is  obtained  by  Mr.  Homer  as  the
result  of  his  Egyptian  researches,  which  were  undertaken  at
the  joint  expense  of  the  Boyal  Society  and  the  Egyptian
government.  It  is  well  known  that  the  valley  of  the  Nile  is
overflowed  every  year,  and  even  as  long  ago  as  the  time  of
Herodotus  it  was  inferred  that  Egypt  had  been  formerly
an  arm  of  the  sea,  filled  up  gradually  and  converted  into  diy
land  by  the  mud  brought  down  from  the  upper  country.

In  the  g^reat  work  on  Egypt,  which  we  owe  to  the  French
philosophers  who  accompanied  Napoleon's  expedition  to  that
country,  an   attempt  was   made  to   estimate   the   secular


THE   VALLEY  OF  THE  NILE.  321

eleyation  thus  produced^  and  it  was  assumed  to  be  five
inches  in  a  centuiy.  This  general  average  was  consistent^
however^  with  great  differences  at  different  parts,  and  Mr.
Homer,  therefore,  did  not  consider  himself  justified  in
applying  this  estimate  to  particular  cases,  even  if  he  had
been  satisfied  with  the  evidence  on  ^which  it  rested.  He
preferred  to  examine  the  accumulation  which  had  taken  place
round  monuments  of  known  age,  and  selected  two— namely,
the  obelisk  at  Heliopolis,  and  the  statue  of  Rameses  II.  in
Memphis.  ''The  obelisk  is  believed  to  have  been  erected
2300  years  B.C.,  and  adding  1850,  the  year  when  the  observa-
tion was  made  (June,  1851,  Le.  before  the  inundation  of  that
year),  we  have  4150  years  in  which  the  eleven  feet  of  sedi-
ment were  deposited,  which  is  at  the  rate  of  3.18  inches  in  a
century."*  But  Mr.  Homer  himself  admits  that  "entire
reliance  cannot  be  placed  on  this  conclusion,  principally
because  it  is  possible  that  the  site  originally  chosen  for  the
temple  and  city  of  Heliopolis  was  a  portion  of  land  somewhat
raised  above  the  level  of  the  rest  of  the  desert."  He  relies,
therefore,  principally  on  the  evidence  supplied  by  the  colossal
statue  in  Memphis.  In  this  case  the  present  surface  is  10
feet  6f  inches  above  the  base  of  the  platform  on  which  the
statue  stood.  Assuming  that  the  platform  was  sunk  14 J
inches  below  the  surface  of  the  ground  at  the  time  it  was
laid,  we  have  a  depth*  of  sediment  from  the  present  surface
to  that  level  of  9  feet  4  inches.  Rameses  is  supposed  by
Lepsius  to  have  reigned  from  1394  to  1328  b.c,  which  would
give  an  antiquity  of  3215  years,  and  consequently  a  mean
increase  of  3^  inches  in  a  century.  Having  thus  obtained  an
approximate  measure  of  the  rate  of  deposit  in  that  part  of  the
Nile  vaUey,  Mr.  Homer  dug  several  pits  to  a  considerable
depth,  and  in  one  of  them,  close  to  the  statue  and  at  the

•  Homer,  Phil.  Trail*.  185S,  p.  73.

21


322  MR.  horner's

depth  of  39  feet,  a  piece  of  pottery  was  founds  which  upon  the
above  data  would  indicate  an  antiquity  of  about  13,000  yeara.

In  many  other  excavations,  pieces  of  pottery  and  other
indications  of  man  were  found  at  even  greater  depths,  but  it
must  be  confessed  that  there  are  several  reasons  whidi
render  the  calculations  very  doubtful.  For  instance,  it  is
impossible  to  ascertain  how  far  the  pedestal  of  the  statue
was  inserted  into  the  ground ;  Mr.  Homer  has  allowed  14|
inches,  but  if  it  was  much  deeper,  the  rate  of  deposition
would  be  diminished,  and  the  age  increased.  On  the  other
hand,  if  the  statue  was  on  raised  ground,  of  course  the  reverse
would  be  the  case.

Moreover,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  ancient  Egyptians
were  in  the  habit  of  enclosing  with  embankments,  the  co^eas
on  which  they  erected  temples,  statues,  etc.,  so  as  to  keep
out  the  waters  of  the  Nile.

Whenever,  then,  says  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  "the  waters  at
length  break  into  such  depressions,  they  must  at  first  carry
with  them  into  the  enclosure  much  mud  washed  from  the
steep  surrounding  banks,  so  that  a  greater  quantity  would  be
deposited  in  a  few  years  than,  perhaps,  in  as  many  centuries
on  the  great  plain  outside  the  depressed  area,  where  no  such
disturbing  causes  intervened."  But  the  rapidity  of  depo-
sition will  be  in  proportion  to  the  previous  retardation,  and
will  only  tend  to  bring  the  depressed  area  up  to  the  general
level.  Supposing,  for  instance,  that  the  monument  of
Barneses,  erected  on  the  flat  plain  of  Memphis  3200  years
ago,  was  protected  by  embankments  for  the  first  2000  years,
and  that  during  that  time  the  plain  outside  was  gradually
raised  five  feet  ten  inches,  being  at  the  rate  of  three  and  a
half  inches  in  a  century.  When  the  embankment  gave
way,  the  space  enclosed  would  soon  be  filled  up  to  the
general  level,  and  a  thickness  of  five  feet  ten  inches  might
be  deposited  in  a  few  years :   still  this  exceptionally  rapid


B6TPTIAN  BESEABCHES.  323

accimmlatlon  would  only  be  the  complement  of  the  excep-
tional want  of  deposit  which  had  preceded  it ;  and^  conse-
quently,  when  the  level  of  the  surrounding  plain  had  been
attained,  then  although  the  mud  coTering  the  base  of  the
statue  may  have  been  altogether  deposited  in  the  last  few
hundred  years,  f.e.  since  the  embankments  have  been  neg-
lected, the  thickness  of  the  deposit  wiU  still  be  a  measure  of
the  general  elevation  which  has  taken  place  on  the  sur-
rounding plain  since  the  erection  of  the  monument.

Even  if  the  embankments  had  remained  mtact  to  this
day,  and  the  monument  stood  now  in  the  hollow  thus  pro-
duced, Mr.  Homer^s  argument  would  not  be  invalidated,  but
rather  confirmed.  The  depth  of  the  hollow  would  give  iu9  a
measure  of  the  deposit  which  had  taken  place  since  the
erection  of  the  monument,  or  raliier  since  the  formation  of
the  embankment.  If,  however,  the  monument  had  been
erected  in  an  area  already  depressed  by  the  action  of  still
older  embankments,  the  calculation  would  be  vitieEted,  but  in
this  case  the  rate  of  deposition  would  appear  to  be  greater
than  it  really  is,  and  the  age  consequently  would  be  under-
rated. There  are  other  causes,  however,  which  prevent  me
from  accepting  unreservedly  the  conclusions  of  Mr.  Homer,
although  his  experiments  are  of  great  importance,  and  much
credit  is  due  to  the  Egyptian  government  for  the  liberal
manner  in  which  they  assisted  Mr.  Homer  and  the  Royal
Society  in  this  investigation.

We  have  already  mentioned  the  evidence  on  which  M.
Morlot  has  endeavoured  to  estimate  the  age  of  the  Gone  de
la  Tinidre  and  which  gave  about  six  thousand  years  for  the
lower  layer  of  vegetable  soil,  and  ten  thousand  years  for
the  whole  of  the  existing  cone.  But  above  this  existing
cone  is  another,  which  was  formed  when  the  lake  stood  at  a
higher  level  than  at  present,  and  which  M.  Morlot  refers  to
the  period  of  the  river-drift  gravels.     This  drift-age  cone,


324  TH^   AGE  OF  THE

however^  is  about  twelve  times  as  large  as  that  now  forming,
and  would  appear,  therefore;  on  the  same  data,  to  indicate
an  antiquity  of  more  than  one  hundred  thousand  years.

In  his  "  Travels  in  North  America,"  Sir  C.  LyeU  has  en-
deavoured to  estimate  the  age  of  the  Mississippi  delta^  in  the
following  manner : — "  Dr.  Riddle/'  he  says,  "  communicated
to  me,  at  New  Orleans,  the  result  of  a  series  of  experiments
which  he  had  made  to  ascertain  the  proportion  of  sediment
contained  in  the  waters  of  the  Mississippi.  He  concluded
that  the  mean  annual  amount  of  solid  matter  was  to  the
water  as  tVtt  ^  weight,  or  about  -jt^tt  in  volume.  Since
that  period  he  has  made  another  series  of  experiments,  and
his  tables  show  that  the  quantity  of  mud  held  in  suspension^
increases  regularly  with  the  increased  height  and  velocity  of
the  streanL  On  the  whole,  comparing  the  flood  season  with
that  of  clearest  water,  his  experiments,  continued  down  to
1849,  give  an  average  annual  quantity  of  solid  matter  some-
what less  than  his  first  estimate,  but  not  varying  materially
from  it;  From  these  observations,  and  those  of  Dr.  Car-
penter and  Mr.  Forskey  (an  eminent  engineer,  to  whom  I
have  before  alluded),  on  the  average  width,  depth,  and
velocity  of  the  Mississippi,  the  mean  annual  discharge  of
water  and  sediment  were  deduced.  I  then  assumed  528  feet,
or  the  tenth  of  a  mile,  as  the  probable  thickness  of  the
deposit  of  mud  and  sand  in  the  delta  ;  founding  my  conjec-
ture chiefly  on  the  depth  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  between  the
southern  point  of  Florida  and  the  Balize,  which  equals,  on
an  average,  one  hundred  fathoms,  and  partly  on  some
borings,  si^  hundred  feet  deep,  in  the  delta  near  Lake  Pont-
chartrain,  north  of  "New  Orleans,  in  which  the  bottom  of  the
alluvial  matter  is  said  not  to  have  been  reached.  The  area
of  the  delta  being  about  13,600  squajre  statute  miles,  and  the
quantity  of  solid  matter  annually  brought  down  by  the  river
3,702,758,400  cubio  feeti  it  must  have  taken  67,000  years


Mississippi  delta.  325

for  tlie  formation  of  the  whole ;  and  if  the  alluyial  matter
of  the  plain  above  be  264  feet  deep,  or  half  that  of  the  delta,
it  must  have  required  33,500  more  years  for  its  accumtdation,
even  if  its  area  be  estimated  as  only  equal  to  that  of  the
delta,  whereas  it  is,  in  fact,  larger/'  Moreover,  as  Sir
Charles  has  himself  pointed  out,  a  very  large  proportion  of
the  mud  brought  down  by  the  river  is  not  deposited  in  the
delta,  but  is  carried  out  into  the  Ghilf.  In  the  "  Antiquity  of
Man,"*  he  refers  to  the  above-given  calculation,  and  admits
that  the  discharge  of  water  se6ms  to  have  been  much  under-
*  rated  by  the  earlier  experimenters.  Messrs.  Humphreys  and
Abbot,  who  have  recently  surveyed  the  delta,  **  also  remark
that  the  river  pushes  along  its  bottom  into  the  gulf  a  certain
quantity  of  sand  and  gravel,"  which  "  would,  they  suppose,
augment  the  volume  of  solid  matter  by  about  one-tenth."
This,  of  course,  would  greatly  diminish  the  time  required ;
but  taking  into  consideration  the  quantity  of  mud  which  is
carried  out  to  sea,  and  which  was  not  allowed  for  in  the
previous  calculation.  Sir  Charles  Lyell  still  regards  100,000
years  as  a  moderate  estimate ;  and  he  considers,  that  *'  the
alluvium  of  the  Somme  containing  flint  implements  and  the
remains  of  the  mammoth  and  hyaona,"  is  no  less  ancient.

Sir  C.  Lyell  has  alsof  attempted  to  form  an  estimate  of
the  duration  of  the  glacial  epoch,  assuming  that  the  different
movements  of  elevation  and  depression  proceeded  at  an  average
rate  of  2^  feet  in  a  century.  As  the  simplest  "series  of
changes  in  physical  geography  which  can  possibly  accoimt
for  the  phenomena  of  the  glacial  period,"  he  gives  the  fol-
lowing : —

"  First,  a  continental  period,  towards  the  close  of  which
the  forest  of  Cromer  flourished :  when  the  land  was  at  leaeft
500  feet  above  its  present  level,  perhaps  much  highejr,  and

*  Appendk  to  Third  Ed.  of  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  p.  16.
t  Antiquity  of  Kan,  pp.  282,  285.


326  GEOLOGICAL  CHANGES  IN  TECE

its  extent  probably  greater  than  that  giyen  in  the  map,
fig.  ilJ*  In  this  map  the  British  Isles,  including  the
Hebrides,  Orkneys,  and  Shetlands,  are  connected  with  one
another  and  with  the  Continent,  the  whole  German  Ocean
being  laid  dry.

''Secondly,  a  period  of  submergence,  by  which  the  land
north  of  the  Thames  and  Bristol  Channel,  and  that  of  Ireland^
was  gradually  reduced  to  such  an  archipelago  as  is  pictured  in
map,  fig,  40 ;  and  finally  to  such  a  general  preyalence  of  sea
as  is  seen  in  map,  fig.  39,  only  the  tops  of  the  mountains  being
left  above  water.  '  This  was  the  period  of  great  submergence  •
and  of  floating  ice,  when  the  Scandinavian  flora,  which  over-
spread the  lower  groimds  during  the  first  continental  period,
may  have  obtained  exclusive  possession  of  the  only  lands  not
covered  with  perpetual  snow.

"Thirdly,  a  second  continental  period,  when  the  bed  of
the  glacial  sea,  with  its  marine  shells  and  erratic  blocks,  was
laid  dry,  and  when  the  quantity  of  land  equalled  that  of  the
first  period.''

It  is  evident  that  such  changes  as  these  would  require  a
great  lapse  of  time.  Sir  Charles  Lyell  admits  that  the
average  change  of  2^  feet  in  a  century  is  a  purely  arbitrary
and  conjectural  rate,  that  there  are  cases  in  which  a  change
of  as  much  as  six  feet  in  a  century  appears  to  have  taken
place,  still  it  is  in  his  opinion  probable  that  the  rate  assumed
in  a  century  is,  if  anything,  above  the  average,  and  in  this  I
believe  that  most  geologists  would  be  disposed  to  agree  with
him.

On  this  hypothesis  the  submergence  of  Wales  to  the  extent
of  1,400  feet,  would  require  56,000  years ;  but  *'  taking  Prof.
Bamsay's  estimate  of  800  feet  more,  that  elevation  being
required  for  the  deposition  of  some  of  the  stratified  drift,  we
must  demand  an  additional  period  of  32,000  years,  amounting
in  all  to  88,000 ;  and  the  same  time  would  be  required  for


QUATEBNABT  PERIOD.    '  732

re-eleyation  of  the  tract  to  its  present  height.  But  if  the
land  rose  in  the  second  continental  period  no  more  than  600
feet  aboye  the  present  levels  this  ....  would  have  taken
another  24,000  years ;  the  whole'  of  the  grand  oscillation^
comprising  the  submergence  and  re-emergence,  having  taken,
in  round  numbers,  224,000  years  for  its  completion;  and
this,  eyen  if  there  were  no  pause  or  stationary  period,  when
ihe  downward  moyement  ceased,  and  before  it  was  converted
into  an  upward  one."

To  the  geologist  these  figures,  large  as  they  are,  will  have
no  appearance  of  improbability.  All  the  facts  of  geology
tend  to  indicate  cm  antiquity  of  which  we  are  but  beginning
to  form  a  dim  idea.  Take,  for  instance,  one  single  formation
—our  well-known  chalk.  This  consists  entirely  of  shells  and
fragments  of  shells  deposited  at  the  bottom  of  an  ancient  sea
far  away  from  any  continent.  Such  a  process  as  this  must  be
very  slow ;  probably  we  should  be  much  above  the  mark  if  we
were  to  assume  a  rate  of  deposition  of  ten  inches  in  a  century.
Kow  the  chalk  is  more  than  a  thousand  feet  in  thickness,
and  would  have  required  therefore  more  than  120,000  years
for  its  formation.  The  fossiliferous  beds  of  Great  Britain  as
a  whole  are  more  than  70,000  feet  in  thickness,  and  many
which  with  us  measure  only  a  few  inches,  on  the  continent
expand  into  strata  of  immense  depth ;  while  others  of  great
importance  elsewhere  are  wholly  wanting  with  us,  for  it  is
evident  that  during  all  the  different  periods  in  which  Great
Britain  has  been  dry  land,  strata  have  been  forming  (as  is,
for  example,  the  case  now)  elsewhere,  and  not  with  us.
Moreover,  we  must  remember  that  many  of  the  strata  now
existing  have  been  formed  at  the  expense  of  older  ones ;  thus
all  the  flint  gravels  in  the  south-east  of  England  have  been
produced  by  the  destruction  of  chalk.  This  again  is  a  very
slow  process.  It  has  been  estimated  that'  a  cUff  500  feet
high  will  be  worn  away  at  the  rate  of  an  inch  in  a  century.


328  THE  WEALDEN   VALLEY.

This  may  seem  a  low  rate^  but  we  must  bear  in  mind  tbat
along  any  line  of  coast  there  are  comparatively  few  points
which  are  suffering  at  one  time,  and  that  even  on  these  when
a  fall  of  cliff  has  taken  place,  the  fragments  serve  as  a  pro-
tection to  the  coast  until  they  have  been  gradually  removed
by  the  waves.  The  Wealden  Valley  is  twenty-two  miles  in
breadth,  and  on  these  data  it  has  been  calculated  that  the
denudation  of  the  Weald  must  have  required  more  than
150,000,000  of  years.

There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  interest  of  these  calcula-
tions, and  they  have  also  the  great  merit  of  giving  definition
to  our  ideas.  We  must  not,  however,  attribute  to  them  a
value  which  has  been  distinctly  disclaimed  even  by  their
authors.  "  Dans  tons  les  cas,"  says  M.  Morlot,  "  fl  doit  fetre
bien  entendu  que  Tauteur  n'expose  le  present  calcul  que
comme  une  premiere  imparfaite  et  hasardeuse  tentative,  sans
valeur  absolue  en  elle-meme,  tant  qu'elle  n'aura  pas  ^t^
v^rifi^e  au  moyen  d'autres  essais  du  m&me  genre."  More-
over, we  must  remember  that  these  estimates  are  brought
forward  not  as  a  proof,  but  as  a  measure,  of  antiquity.  Our
belief  in  the  antiquity  of  man  rests  not  on  any  isolated  calcu-
lations, but  on  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  since  his
appearance ;  changes  in  the  geography,  in  the  fauna,  and  in
the  climate  of  Europe.  Valleys  have  been  deepened,  widened,
and  partially  filled  up  again;  caves  through  which  sub-
terranean rivers  once  ran  are  now  left  dry ;  even  the  con-
figuration of  land  has  been  materially  altered,  and  AMca
finally  separated  from  Europe.

Our  climate  has  greatly  changed  for  the  better,  and  with
it  the  fauna  has  materially  altered.  In  some  cases,  for  in-
stance, in  that  of  the  hippopotamus  and  of  the  African  ele-
phant, we  may  probably  look  to  the  diminution  of  food  and
the  presence  of  man  as  the  main  causes  of  their  disappearance ;
the  extinction  of  the  mammoth,  the  Slephas  antiquus,  and  the


TIMS.  329

Rhinaeeraa  tteharAinus,  may  possiblj  be  due  to  the  same  in-
fluences ;  but  tHe  retreat  of  the  reindeer  and  the  musk  ox  are
probably  in  great  measure  owing  to  the  change  of  climate.
These  and  similar  facts^  though  they  afford  us  no  means  of
measurement,  impress  us  with  a  vague  and  overpowering
sense  of  antiquity.  All  geologists,  indeed,  are  now  prepared
to  admit  that  man  has  existed  on  our  earth  for  a  much  longer
period  than  was  until  recently  supposed  to  have  been  the
case.

But  it  may  be  doubted  whether  even  geologists  yet  realise
the  great  antiquity  of  our  race.

"When  speculations  on  the  long  series  of  events  which
occurred  in  the  glacial  and  post-glacial  periods  are  indulged
in/'  says  Sir  C.  Lyell,*  "  the  imagination  is  apt  to  take  alarm
at  the  immensity  of  the  time  required  to  interpret  the  monu-
ments of  these  ages,  all  referable  to  the  era  of  existing  species.
"Sn  order  to  abridge  the  number  of  centuries  which  would
oti^erwise  be  indispensable,,  a  disposition  is  shown  by  many
to  C(^gnify  the  rate  of  change  in  pre-lnstoric  times^  by  in-
vesting the  causes  which  have  modified  the  animate  and  the
inanimate  world  with  extraordinary  and  excessive  energy.
....  We  of  the  Uving  generation^  when  called  upon  to
make  granta  of  thousands  of  centuries,  in  order  to  explain
the  events  of  what  is  called  the  modem  period,  shrink
naturally  at  first  from  making  what  seema  so  lavish  on  ex-
penditure of  past  time."

Turning  now  to  the  Ethnology  of  the  drift  period,  we
have  only  two  skulls  which  can  be  referred  with,  any  degree
of  plrobability  to  the  age  of  the  extinct  mamioalia.  One  of
them  was  foimd  by  Dr.  Schmerling  in  the  Cave  of  Engis,
near  Li^ge^  the  other  by  Dr.  Fuhlrott>  also  in  a  cave,  in  the
Neanderthal,  near  Dusseldorf.

•  Address  to  the  Brit.  Ass.  1864,  p.  21.    Bath.


(30  THE  ENGIS  SKULL.

The  first  of  these  two  Bkulls  (figs.  143,  144)  might  have
^"■'*»-  been  that  of  a

modem  Euro-
pean, BO  far  at
least  aa  form
is  concerned.
"  There  is  no
mark  of  de-
gradation about
any  part  of  ite
stmctare.  It  is,
in  fact,  a  fair
average  human
skull,  which
might  have  be-
l(mgedtoaphilo>
s<^er,  or  might
have  contained
the  thoughtless
brains  of  a  sa-
vage." '

The   case,  he
^'-  '"•  adds, "  of  the  Neander-

thal skull  (figa.  145-
147)  is  veiy  different.
Under  whatever  aspect
we  view  this  cranium,
whether  we  regard  it«
vertical  depression,  tho
\  enormous  thickness  of
its  Bupraciliary  ridges,
its  sloping  occiput,  or
Tin  Engii  Bknu.  its  long  and  straight

•Hmlej'.    Afaa't  Place  in  Natnre,  p.  116.


332  THE  MABKINGS  ON   BONES  FBOH  THE

sqiiaiaosal  suture^  we  meet  with  ape-like  diaracters^  stamping
it  as  the  most  pithecoid  of  human  crania  yet  discovered.''  It
has  been  suggested  that  this  Neanderthal  skull  may  have  been
that  of  an  idiot.  There  is  not,  howeyer,  the  slightest  reason
for  any  such  hypothesis,  and  though  the  shape  of  the  skull
is  so  remarkable,  the  brain  appears  to  have  been  of  con-
siderable size,  and,  indeed,  is  estimated  by  Professor  Huxley
at  about  seventy-fiye  cubic  inches,  which  is  the  average
capacity  of  the  Polynesian  and  Hottentot  skulls.  It  must,
however,  be  admitted  that  though  the  antiquity  of  this
skuU  is  no  doubt  great,  there  is  no  satisfactory  proof  that  it
belonged  to  the  period  of  the  extinct  mammah'a.  Moreover,
as  Mr.  Busk  has  already  pointed  out,*  "we  have  yet  to
determine  whether  the  conformation  in  question  be  merely
an  individual  peculiarity,  or  a  typical  character.''

As  regards  the  Engis  skull,  there  seems  no  reason  to
doubt  that  it  really  belonged  to  a  man  who  was  contempo-
raneous with  the  mammoth,,  the  cave-bear,  and  other  extinct
mammalia,  in  which  case,,  as  Professor  Huxley  has  well
pointed  out„  "  the  first  tracea  of  the  primordial  stock  whence
mivn  has  proceeded  need  no  longer  be  sought,  by  those  who
entertain  any  form  of  the  doctrine  of  progressive  develop-
ment, in  the  newest  tertiaries ;  but  that  they  may  be  looked
for  in  an  epoch  more  distant  from  the  age  of  the  Ekphaspri"
migenius  than  that  is  &om  us."

Already  M.  Desnoyersf  has  called  attention  to  some
marks,  noticed  by  him  on  bones  found  in  the  upper  pliocene
beds  of  St.  Prest,  and  belonging  to  the  Ekphaa  meridianalUy
Rhinoceros  leptorhinus,  'HtppopotamiM  major,  several  species  of
deer  (including  the  gigantic  Megaceros  camutorum,  Langel),
and  two  species  of  Bos.  M.  Desnoyers  has  examined  a
considerable  number  of  these  bones,  and  he  comes  to  the
conclusion  ''que  les  entailles,   que    les   traces  d'incisions,

*  Nat  Hist.  Bev.  1861,  p.  172.  f  Compter  Bendus.  June  8,  1863.


PLIOCENE   BEDS  OF   ST.    PBEST.  333

d'exconation  ou  de  choc,  que  les  stries  transversales^  recti-
lignesy  ou  sinueuses,  ou  elliptiques^  plus  aigues  &  une  ex-
tr^mit^  qu'a  Tautre^  tantdt  polies,  tant6t  subdiyis^es  en
pluaieurs  stries  plus  fines  occupant  la  cavity  des  premieres;
en  un  mot,  que  des  traces  tout  k  fait  analogues  &  celles  que
produiraient  les  outils  de  silex  tranchants  k  point  plus  ou
moins  aigue,  a  bords  plus  ou  moins  dentel^s,  se  yoyaient  sur
la  plupart  de  ces  ossements."

Among  the  bones  of  the  deer  were  seyeral  crania,  all  of
which  haye  been  broken  in  one  way,  namely,  by  a  yiolent
blow  giyen  on  the  skull  between,  and  at  the  base  of,  the  horns.
M.  Steenstrup  has  noticed  fractures  of  this  kind  in  other
less  ancient  skulls  of  ruminants,  and  at  the  present  day
some  of  the  Northern  tribes  treat  the  skulk  of  ruminants  in
the  same  manner.  Through  the  courtesy  of  M.  Desnoyers,
I  haye  had  the  opportunity  of  examining  some  of  the
scratched  bones  from  Saint  Prest.  The  markings  fully  bear
out  the  description  giyen  by  him,  and  some  of  them  at  least
appeared  to  me  to  be  probably  of  human  origin ;  at  the  same
time,  and  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  I  am  not
prepared  to  say  that  there  is  no  other  manner  in  which  they
might  haye  been  produced.

Sir  Charles  Lyell  himself  thinks  that  we  may  expect  to
find  remains  of  man  in  the  pliocene  strata,  but  there  he
draws  the  line,  and  says  that  in  miocene  time,  ''had  some
other  rational  being,  representing  man,  then  flourished,  some
signs  of  his  existence  could  hardly  haye  escaped  unnoticed,
in  the  shape  of  implements  of  stone  or  metal,  more  frequent
and  more  durable  than  the  osseous  remains  of  any  of  the
mammalia.''

Without  expressing  any  opinion  as  to  the  mental  con-
dition of  our  ancestors  in  the  miocene  period,  it  seems  to  me
eyident  that  the  argument  deriyed  from  the  absence  of
human  remains,  whateyer  may  be  its  yalue,  is  as  applicable  to


334  MIOCEKE  MAN.

pliocene  as  to  miocene  times.  But  those  who  have  learnt
geology  at  the  feet  of  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  and  look  up  to
him  as  their  master  in  the  science^  will  be  the  least  able  to
agree  with  him  on  thiis  point,  for  the  imperfection  of  the
geological  record  has  hitherto  been  urged  upon  tis  ahnost  as
strongly  by  Sir  C.  Lyell  as  by  Mr.  Darwin.  It  is  true  that
few  of  our  existing  species  or  even  genera  have  as  yet  been
found  in  miocene  strata ;  but  if  man  constitutes  a  separate
family  of  mamTnalia,  as  he  does  in  the  opinion  of  the  highest
authorities,  then,  according  to  all  palaoontological  analogies^,
he  must  have  had  representatives  in  miocene  times.  We
need  not,  however,  expect  to  find  the  proofs  in  Europe ;  our
nearest  relatives  in  the  animal  kingdom  are  confined  to  hot»
almost  to  tropical,  climates,  and  it  is  in  such  countries  that
we  must  look  for  the  earliest  traces  of  the  human  race.


335


CHAPTER      XL


MODERN  SAVAGES.


ALTHOUGH  our  knowledge  of  ancient  times  has  of
late  years  greatly  increased,  it  is  still  yery  imperfect,
and  we  cannot  afford  to  neglect  any  possible  source  of  in-
formation. It  LB  evident  that  history  cannot  throw  much
light  on  the  early  condition  of  man,  because  the  discovery
— or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  the  use — of  metal  has  in
aU  cases  preceded  that  of  writing.  Even  as  regards  the
Age  of  Bronze  we  derive  little  information  from  it,  and
although,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Age  of  Stone  is  vaguely
alluded  to  in  the  earliest  European  writers,  their  statements
have  generally  been  looked  upon  a6  imaginative  rather  than
historical;  and  are,  indeed,  confined  to  a  mere  mention  of
the  fact  that  there  was  a  time  when  metal  was  unknown.
Nor  will  tradition  supply  the  place  of  history.  At  best  it
is  untrustworthy  and  short-lived.  Thus,  in  1770  the  New
Zealanders  had  no  recollection  of  Tasman's  visit.*  Yet  this
took  place  in  1643,  leSs  than  130  years  before,  and  must  have
been  to  them  an  event  of  the  greatest  possible  importance
and  interest.  In  the  same  way  the  North  American  Indians
soon  lost  all  tradition  of  De  Soto's  expedition,  although
*'  by  its  striking  incidents  it  was  so  well  stated  to  impress  the
Indian  mind.'*  f

*  Cook's  Fint  Voyage  lonnd  the  World.    Hawkesworth's  Voyages,  toL  ii.  p.  388.

t  Schoolcraft's  Indian  Tribes,  toI.  ii.,  p.  xii.


336  MODERN   SAVAGES.

I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  tradition  would  neyer  preserve
for  a  long  period  the  memory  of  any  remarkable  event ;  the
above-mentioned  facts  prove  only  that  it  will  not  always  do
so :  but  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  discuss  this  question,  as
there  is  in  Europe  no  tradition  of  the  Stone  Age,  and  when
arrow-heads  are  foimd,  the  ignorant  peasantry  refer  them  to
the  elves  or  fairies ;  stone  axes  are  regarded  as  thimderbolts,
and  are  used,  not  only  in  Europe  but  also  in  various  other
parts  of  the  world,  for  magical  purposes.

Deprived  then,  as  regards  the  Stone  Age,  of  any  assistance
firom  history,  but  relieved  at  the  same  time  from  the  em-
barrassing interference  of  tradition,  the  archaeologist  can  only
follow  the  methods  which  have  been  so  successfully  pursued
in  geology — ^the  rude  bone-  and  stone-implements  of  bygone
ages  being  to  the  one,  what  the  remains  of  extinct  animals
are  to  the  other.  The  analogy  may  be  pursued  even  further
than  this.  Many  mammalia  which  are  extinct  in  Europe
have  representatives  still  living  in  other  countries.  Our
fossil  pachyderms,  for  instance,  would  be  almost  unintelligible
but  for  the  species  which  still  inhabit  some  parts  of  Asia  and
Africa;  the  secondary  marsupials  are  illustrated  by^their
existing  representatives  in  Australia  and  South  America;
and  in  the  same  manner  if  we  wish  clearly  to  imderstand  the
antiquities  of  Europe,  we  must  compare  them  with  the  rude
implements  and  weapons  still,  or  untU  lately,  used  by
savage  races  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  fact,  the  Yan
Diemaner  and  South  American  are  ta  the  antiquary,  what
the  opossum  and  the  sloth  are  to  the  geologist.

A  chapter,  therefore,  devoted  to  the  consideration  of
modem  savages  will  certainly  not  be  out  of  place;  and
though  it  would  require  volumes  to  do  justice  to  the  subject,
still  it  may  be  possible,  even  in  a  few  pages,  to  bring  together
a  certain  number  of  facts,  which  will  throw  light  on  the
ancient  remains  found  in  Europe,  and  on  the  condition  of


NO  EVIDENCE  OF  DEGRADATION.  337

the  early  races  wliich  inhabited  our  continent.  In  order,
however,  to  limit  the  subject  as  much  as  possible,  I  propose,
with  one  exception,  to  describe  only  the  ''non-metallic
savages  ^'  (if  such  an  expression  may  be  permitted)  and  even
of  these,  only  some  of  the  most  instructive,  or  of  those
which  have  been  carefully  observed  by  travellers.

It  is  a  common  opinion  that  savages  are,  as  a  general  rule,
only  the  miserable  remnants  of  nations  once  more  civilised ;
but,  although  there  are  some  well-established  cases  of
national  decay,  there  is  no  scientific  evidence  which  would
justify  us  in  asserting  that  this  is  generally  the  case.  No
doubt  there  are  many  instances  in  which  nations,  once  pro-
gressive, have  not  only  ceased  to  advance  in  civilisation,  but
have  even  fallen  back.  Still  if  we  compare  the  accounts  of
early  travellers  with  the  state  of  things  now  existing,  we
shall  find  no  evidence  of  any  general  degradation.  The
Australians,  Bushmen,  and  Fuegians  lived  when  first  ob-
served almost  exactiy  as  they  do  now.  In  some  savage
tribes  we  even  find  traces  of  improvement ;  the  Bachapins,
when  visited  by  Burchell,  had  just  introduced  the  art  of
working  in  iron  ;  the  largest  erection  in  Tahiti  was  con-
structed by  the  generation  living  at  the  time  of  Captain
Cook's  visit,  and  the  practice  of  cannibalism  had  been  re-
centiy  abandoned;*  again,  outriggers  are  said  to  have  been
recently  adopted  by  the  Andaman  Islanders ;  and  if  certain
races,  as  for  instance  some  of  the  American  tribes,  have  fallen
back,  tliis  has  perhaps  been  due,  less  to  any  inherent  tendency
than  to  the  injurious  effect  of  European  influence.  Moreover,
if  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  etc.,  had
ever  been  inhabited  by  a  race  of  men  more  advanced  than
those  whom  we  are  in  the  habit  of  regarding  as  the  abori-
gines, some  evidence  of  this  would  surely  have  remained;  and

*  Fonter,  Observatioiis  made  dnrine  a  Voyage  Bound  the  World,  p.  327.
See  also  Ellu,  Polynesiaii  Beseaiches,  tSL  ii.,  p.  29.

22


338  HOTTENTOTB.

this  not  being  the  case,  none  of  our  trayellerB  having  obserred
any  ruins,  or  other  traces  of-  a  more  advanced  civilisation,
there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  sufficient  reason  for  sup-
posing these  miserable  beings  to  be  at  all  inferior  to  the
ancestors  &om  whom  they  are  descended.

The  HoUentot9.

Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  the  use  of  metal  has
been  long  known  throughout  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  while
in  America,  in  Australia,  and  in  the  Oceanic  Islands,  all  im-
plements and  weapons  were,  imtil  within  the  last  three  hundred
years,  made  of  wood,  bone,  stone,  or  other  similar  materials.

The  semi-civilised  nations  of  Central  America  formed,
indeed,  a  striking  exception  to  the  ryle,  since  they  were
acquainted  with  the  use  of  bronze.  The  North  American
Indians  also  had  copper  hatchets,  but  these  were  simply
hammered  into  shape,  without  the  assistance  of  heat.  Here,
therefore,  we  seem  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  manner  in  which
our  ancestors  may  have  acquired  the  knowledge  of  metaL  No
doubt  the  possession  of  iron  generally  marks  a  great  advance
in  civilisation ;  still  the  process  is  very  gradual,  and  there  are
some  nations  which,  though  provided  with  metal  implements
are,  nevertheless,  but  little  removed  from  a  state  of  barbcuism.

Thus  the  Hottentots,  who  were  not  only  acquainted  with
the  use,  but  even  with  the  manxifacture,  of  iron,  and  who
possessed  large  numbers  of  sheep  and  cattle,  were  yet  in
many  respects  among  the  most  disgusting  of  savages.  Even
Kolben,  who  generally  takes  a  favorable  view  of  them,
admits  that  they  are  in  many  respects  the  filthiest  people  in
the  world.*  We  might  go  farther,  and  say  the  filthiest
animals;  I  think  no  species  of  mammal  could  be  fairly
compared  with  them  in  this  respect.  Their  bodies  were
covered  with  grease,  their  clothes  were  never  washed,  and

*  Kolben's  History  of  the  Capo  of  Good  Hope,  toL  i,  p.  47.


BBBSS.      HOUSES.      IMPLEMENTS.  339

ikeir  liair  was  loaded  **  firom  day  to  day  with  such  a  quantity
of  soot  and  fat,  and  it  gathers  so  much  dust  and  other  filth,
which  they  leave  to  clot  and  harden  in  it,  for  they  never  cleanse
it,  that  it  looks  like  a  crust  or  cap  of  black  mortar.''  *  They
wore  a  skin  over  the  back,  fastened  in  front.  They  carried
this  as  long  as  they  lived,  and  were  buried  in  it  when  they
died.  Their  only  other  garment  was  a  square  piece  of  skin,
tied  round  the  waist  by  a  string,  and  left  to  hang  down  in
firont.  In  winter,  however,  they  sometimes  used  a  cap.  For
ornaments  they  wore  rings  of  iron,  copper,  ivory,  or  leather.
The  latter  had  the  advantage  of  serving  for  food  in  bad  times.
Their  huts  were  generally  oval,  about  fourteen  feet  by
ten  in  diameter^  and  seldom  more  than  four  or  five  in
height.  They  were  made  of  sticks  and  mats.  The  sticks
were  fastened  into  the  ground  at  both  ends,  or  if  not  long
enough,  two  were  plaeed  opposite  to  one  another,  and  secured
together  at  the  top.  One  end  of  the  hut  was  left  open  to
form  the  door.  The  mats  were  made  of  bulrushes  and  flags
dried  in  the  sun,  and  so  closely  fitted  together  that  only  the
heaviest  rain  could  penetrate  them-f  "With  respect  to
household  furniture,*'  says  Thunberg,}  "they  have  little  or
none.  The  same  dress  that  covers  a  part  of  their  body  by
day,  serves  them  also  for  bedding  at  night."  Their  victuals
are  boiled  in  leathern  sacs  and  water,  by  means  of  heated
stones,  but  sometimes  in  earthen  pots.§  Milk  is  kept  in
leathern  sacs,  bladders  of  animals,  and  baskets  made  of
platted  rushes,  perfectly  watertight.  These,  a  tobacco  pouch
of  skin,  a  tobacco  pipe  of  stone  or  wood,  and  their  weapons,
constitute  the  whole  catalogue  of  their  effects.  According
to   Kolben,  they  sometimes  broiled  their  meat,   sometimes

•  Kolben,  l.e.  p.  188.  %  Page  141.

t  Thnnberg,   Pinkerton's   Trayels,  $  This,  however,  they  appear  to  haye

vol.  xvi.,  p.  33 ;  Kolben,  l.o,  p.  221 ;  learnt  irom  the  fiuropeana.
Sparrman,  vol.  i,  p.  195.


340  METHODS  OF   KILLING  GAME.

boiled  it  in  bloody  to  whicli  they  often  added  milk ;  "  this
thej  look  on  as  a  glorious  disk."  They  were,  koweyer,  botk
filtky  and  careless  about  tkeir  cookery,  and  tke  meat  was  often
eaten  kalf  putrid,  and  more  than  kalf  raw.*

Their  weapons  consisted  of  bows  and  poisoned  arrows,
spears,  jayelinfl  or  assagais,  stones,  and  darting  sticks  or
^'kirris,''  about  three  feet  long  and  an  inch  thick.  With
these  weapons  th^  were  very  skilftd,  and  feared  not
to  attack  the  elephant,  the  rhinoceros,  or  eyen  the  lion.
Large  animals  were  also  sometimes  killed  in  pitfalls,  from
six  to  eight  feet  deep,  and  about  four  feet  in  diameter.
They  fixed  a  strong  pointed  stake  in  the  middle.  '^Into  this
hole  an  elephant  falling  with  his  &re-feet  (it  is  not  of  di-
mensions to  receiye  his  whole  body)  he  is  pierced  in  the  neck
and  breast  with  the  stake  and  there  held  securely,'' t  for  the
more  he  struggled  the  farther  it  penetrated.  They  caught
fish  both  with  hooks  and  in  nets.  They  also  ate  wild  fruits
and  roots  of  yarious  kinds,  which  howeyer  they  did  not  take
the  trouble  to  cultiyate.

For  domestic  animals  the  Hottentots  had  oxen,  sheep,  and
dogs.  It  might  haye  naturally  been  supposed  that  oxen  were
used  in  the  same  manner  all  oyer  the  world.  They  seem  eyi-
dently  adapted  either  for  draught  or  for  food«  With  the  dog
the  case  is  different ;  we  ourselyes  use  him  in  yarious  ways,  and
one  feels  therefore  the  less  surprise  at  the  different  seryices
which  he  performs  for  different  races  of  sayages.  But  eyen
with  regard  to  ^cattle  the  same  was  the  case ;  besides  what  we
may  call  their  nonnal  uses^  the  Yeddahs,  or  wild  inhabitants
of  Gey  Ion,  used  oxen  in  hunting.;  and  the  Hottentots  trained
some  to  serye  as  what  we  may  call  sheep-oxen,  or  icow-oxen,
— ^that  is  to  say  to  guard  and  manage  the  flocks  and  herds, —
and  others  as  war-oxen,  a  function  which  might  haye  been

•  Thimbexg,  p.  141 ;  Kolben,  p.  208 ;   Hams,  Wild  Sports  of  A£nca,  p.  142.

t  Eolben,  p.  250.


METALLUBOT.  341

considered  as  opposed  to  the  whole  character  of  the  beast^  but
in  which,  nevertheless,  they  appear  to  have  been  very  useful.

The  Hottentots  of  late  years  not  only  used  iron  weapons,
but  even  made  such  for  themselves*  The  ore  was  smelted
in  the  following  manner  :*  ''They  make  a  hole  in  a  raised
ground,  large  enough  to  contain  a  good  quantity  of  iron-
stones, which  are  found  here  and  there  in  plenty  in  the
Hottentot  countries.  In  this  holo  they  melt  out  the  iron
j&om  the  ore.  About  a  foot  and  a  half  from  this  hole,  upon
the  descent,,  they  make  another,  something  less.  This  is  the
receiver  of  the  melted  iron,  which  runs  into  it  by  a  narrow
channel  they  cut  from  one  hole  to  the  other.  Before  they
put  the  ironstones  into  the  hole  where  the  iron  is  to  be
smelted  out  of  them,  they  make  a  fire  in  the  hole,  quite  up
to  the  mouth  of  it,  in  order  to  make  the  earth  about  it
thoroughly  hot.  When  they  suppose  the  earth  about  it  is
well  heated,  they  fill  the  hole  aknost  up  with  ironstones.
They  then  make  a  large  fire  over  the  stones,  which  they
supply  from  time  to  time  with  i^el,  tiU  the  iron  is  melted
and  all  of  it  is  run  into  the  receiver.  Ab  soon  as  the  iron  in
the  receiver  is  cold,  they  take  it  out,  and  break  it  to  pieces
with  stones.  These  pieces  the  Hottentots,  as  they  have  occa-
sion, heat  in  other  fires,  and  with  stones  beat  'em  out  and  shape
'em  to  weapons.     They  rarely  make  anything  else  of  iron."

I  do  not  describe  the  Hottentot  customs,  few  of  them  being
fit  for  publication.  They  are,  however,  extremely  curious,  and
are  fidly  described  by  Thunberg,t  Kolben,  J  Cook,§  Sparr-
man,!!  and  other  travellers.  The  Hottentots  can  hardly  be
said  to  have  had  any  religion,^  [though  they  seem  to  have

*  Kolben,  l.e.  p.  239.  IT  Thnnberg, ^^.p.Hl,  etc.;  Kolben,

t  le,  pp.  141,  142.  pp.  37,  93,  etc.     Beeckman  thoaght

}  Pp.  113,  115,  118,  121,  153,  252.  they  bad  no  religioii  at  all.    Pinker-

§  Hawkesworth'a  Voyages,  yoI.  iii.,  ton's  Voyages,  yoI.  ii.,  p.  153 ;  so  also,

p.  791.  Harris,  WUd  Sports  of  Africa,  p.  160 ;

I  Vol.  i.,  p.  357.  Sparrman,  yoI.  i.,  p.  207.


342  GHARACTER.

liad  some  notion  of  a  Deity.  Even  Kolben  admits  that  they
hiad  not  '^any  institution  of  worship."  The  older  writers,
indeed,  considered  certain  dances  as  being  religions  cere-
monies. This  was  stoutly  denied  by  the  natives  themselyeSy*
in  spite  of  which  £olben  assures  us  that  they  were  ''acts  of
their  reUgion/'  adding  candidly,  ''let  the  Hottentots  say
what  they  will."  They  are  very  fond  of  smoking,  and  are
great  drunkards.  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  Kolben  gives
them  a  good  character  for  int^^ty,  chastity,  fidelity,  and
liberality,  assuring  us  that  they  '^are  certainly  the  most
Mendly,  the  most  liberal,  and  the  most  benevolent  people  to
one  another  that  ever  appeared  upon  earth.t  At  the  same
time  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  he  can  reconcile  this  statement
with  the  admitted  fact  that  as  soon  as  any  man  or  woman  is  so
enfeebled  by  old  age  that  he  or  she  is  unable  to  work,  and  can
"  no  longer  " — ^I  am  quoting  from  Kolben  himself — ^"  be  of
any  manner  of  service  in  anything,  they  are  thrust  out  of
the  society  and  confined  to  a  solitary  hut  at  a  considerable
distance  from  the  kraal,  there,  with  a  small  stock  of  provi-
sions placed  within  their  reach,  but  without  any  one  to
comfort  or  assist  'em,  to  die  either  of  age  or  hunger,  or  be
devoured  by  some  wild  beast."^  This,  it  must  be  remem-
bered, was  no  exceptional  atrocity,  but  a  general  custom,  and
applied  to  the  rich  as  well  as  the  poor,  for  if  an  old  man  had
property  it  was  taken  away  from  him.  Infanticide,  again,  was
very  common  among  them,  and  was  not  regarded  as  a  crime.
Girls  were  generally  the  victims,  and  if  a  woman  had  twinfi,
the  ugliest  of  them  was  almost  always  exposed  or  buried  alive.
This  was  done  with  the  consent  of  "  the  whole  kraal,  which
generally  allows  it  without  taking  much  pains  to  look  into
it."§  The  poverty  and  the  hardships  which  they  had  to
undergo  may  perhaps  plead  as  some  excuse  for  these  two

*  Spamnan,  vol.  i.,  p.  212  \  Kolben,  Le,  f  l,e,  p.  384.

X  Lc  p.  821.  §  U,  p.  144.


VEDDAHS  OF  CEYLON.  343

lumatural  cucitoins.  But  there  is  another,  which  I  will  relate
also  on  the  authority  of  Kolben,*  and  which  appears  to  me
quite  incompatible  with  the  good  character  he  ascribes  to  the
Hottentots.  When  a  boy  came  of  age  he  was  admitted  into
the  society  of  men,  with  certain  ceremonies,  which,  though
ludicrous,  are  so  disgusting  that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine
how  they  can  have  originated :  after  this  he  was  entirely
excluded  from  the  society  of  women ;  he  was  not  allowed  to
eat  or  drink  with  them,  nor  to  join  in  any  of  their  entertain-
ments. But  the  worst  has  yet  to  follow.  "A  Hottentot,
thus  discharged  from  the  tuition  of  his  mother,  may  insult
her  when  he  will  with  impunity.  He  may  cudgel  her,  if  he
pleases,  only  for  his  humour,  without  any  danger  of  being
called  to  an  account  for  it.  And  these  things  I  have  often
known  done.  Nor,"  adds  Kolben,  '^are  such  unnatural  ex-
travagancies attended  with  the  least  scandaL"  I  will  say
no  more  about  the  character  of  the  Hottentots.

The  Bushmen  resembled  the  Hottentots  in  many  things,
but  were  eyen  more  uncivilised.  They  had  no  knowledge
of  metallurgy,  no  domestic  animals,  and  no  canoes.  They
frequently  stole  the  cattle  of  their  more  advanced  neighbours,
but  always  killed  and  ate  them  as  quickly  as  possible.  Their
principal  weapons  were  bows  and  poisoned  arrows.

The  Veddahs.

The  Veddahs  or  wild  tribes  who  inhabit  the  interior  of
Ceylon  have  been  described  by  Enox,t  Tennent,^  and
Bailey.§  They  live  in  huts  very  rudely  formed  of  boughs
and  bark,  and  cultivate  small  patches  of  chena,  but  subsist
principally  on  honey  and  the  produce  of  the  chase.  Their
weapons   consist   of   axes   and   bows   and  arrows.     With

•  ke,  p.  122.  t  Ceylon.

t  An  Historical  Belation  of  Ceylon.  {  TransactioDs  of  the  Ethnological

1681.  Society.   New  Ser.   VoL  ii.,  p.  278.


344  VEDDAHS.

the  latter  they  are  not  very  skilftil,  as  they  pursue
only  the  larger  game,  and  the  art  of  hunting  consists  in
creeping  close  xip  to  their  prey  and  taking  it  unawares.
They  are  very  good  deer-stalkers,  and  besides  excellent  dogs,
have  also  hunting  buffaloes.  These  are  so  trained  that  they
are  easily  guided  by  a  string  tied  round  the  horn,  and  are
used  at  night.  The  buffalo  feeds,  the  man  crouches  behind
him,  and  thus,  unseen  and  unsuspected,  steals  upon  his
prey.

They  have  no  pottery,  and  their  cooking  is  very  primitive.
They  wear  scarcely  any  clothes,  nothing  in  fact  but  a  scrap
of  dirty  rag,  supported  in  front  by  a  string  tied  round  the
waist.  Perhaps  the  women's  cloth  is  a  trifle  larger  than  the
men's,  but  that  appears  to  be  the  only  difference.  They  are
very  dirty,  and  very  small ;  the  ordinary  height  of  the  men
being  from  four  feet  six  to  five  feet  one,  and  of  the  women
from  four  feet  four  to  four  feet  eight.  Mr.  Bailey  thinks
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  conceive  more  barbarous
specimens  of  the  human  raxje.

They  have,  however,  one  remarkable  peculiarity  which  it
would  be  unfair  to  omit.  They  are  kind,  affectionate,  and  con-
stant to  their  wives ;  abhor  polygamy,  and  have  a  proverb  that
''  Death  alone  can  separate  husband  and  wife."  In  this  they
are  very  unlike  their  more  civilised  neighbours.*  An  in-
telligent Kandyan  chief  with  whom  Mr.  Bailey  visited  these
Yeddahs  was  ''perfectly  scandalised  at  the  utter  barbarism  of
living  with  only  one  wife,  and  never  parting  until  separated  by
death."  It  was,  he  said,  "just  like  the  wanderoos"  (monkeys).
Even  in  their  marriage  relations,  however,  the  Yeddahs  can-
not altogether  be  commended,  as  it  is— or  was  until  quite
lately — very  usual  with  them  for  a  man  to  marry  his  younger
sister.    This  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  marriage  with  an

*  It  is  only  fair  to  add  that  the  Kandyaiw  are  said  to  hare  much  improTed  in
thiB  respect  of  late  years.


ANDAMAN   ISLANDEBS.  345

elder  sister  seems  to  them  as  horrible  as  it  does  to  us.     They
do  not  seem  to  have  any  religion.

The  Andaman  Islanders,

The  Minoopies  or  inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands  have
been  described  by  Dr.  Mouatt*  and  Prof.  Owen,  who  consider
that  they  "  are,  perhaps,  the  most  primitive,  or  lowest  in  the
scale  of  civilisation  of  the  human  race."  Their  huts  consist
of  four  posts,  the  two  front  ones  six  to  eight  feet  high,  the  back
ones  only  one  or  two  feet.  They  are  open  at  the  sides,  and
covered  with  a  roof  of  bamboo,  or  a  few  pahn-leaves  bound
tightly  together.  The  Mincopies  live  chiefly  on  fruit,  man-
groves, and  shell-fish.  Sometimes,  however,  they  kill  the
small  pigs,  which  run  wild  in  the  jungle.

They  have  single-tree  canoes,  hollowed  out  with  a  /-shaped
axe,  assisted  probably  by  the  action  of  fire.  They  are  ac-
quainted with  the  use  of  outriggers,  which,  however,  appear
to  have  been  of  recent  introduction,  as  they  are  not  alluded
to  by  the  earlier  writers,  f  Their  arrows  and  spears  are  now
generally  tipped  with  iron  and  glass,  which  they  obtain  from
wrecks,  and  which  have  replaced  bone.  Their  harpoons,  like
those  of  so  many  other  savages,  have  a  moveable  head,  and  a
long  cord  by  which  this  may  be  held  when  fixed  in  the  victim.  J
They  are  very  skilful  with  the  bow,  and  "make  practice  at
forty  or  fifty  yards  with  unerring  certainty."  Their  nets  are
made  with .  great  ingenuity  and  neatness.  They  have  no
pottery,  but  use  either  shells  or  pieces  of  bamboo  to  hold
water.  They  kill  fish  by  harpoons,  or  with  small  hand  nets
they  take  any  that  are  left  by  the  tide,  and  it  is  even  said
that  they  are  able  to  dive  and  catch  them  with  their  hands.  §

They  cover  themselves  with  mud,  and  also  tattoo„  but  wear

*AdYentare8  and  ReBearches  among  the  Andaman  Islanders.     Alao  in  the
Tranaactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society.    New  Ser.    Vol.  ii.,  p.  42.
t  Monativ  Le,  p.  317.        t  Mouatt,  I.e.  p.  326.      {  Mouatt,  l,e,  pp.  810,  833.


346  AUSTKALIANS.

no  clothes.  Indeed  they  appear  to  be  entirely  without  any
sense  of  shame,  and  many  of  their  habits  are  like  those  of
beasts.  They  have  no  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being,  no  religion,
nor  any  belief  in  a  future  state  of  existence.  After  deatifa,
the  corpse  is  buried  in  a  sitting  posture.  When  it  is  sup-
posed to  be  entirely  decayed,  the  skeleton  is  dug  up,  and
each  of  the  relations  appropriates  a  bona  In  the  case  of  a
married  man,  the  widow  takes  the  skull  and  wears  it  sus-
pended by  a  cord  round  her  neck.*

They  have  no  dogs,  nor  any  domestic  animals,  unless,
indeed^  their  poultry  may  be  regarded  as  such.

Uhe  Auatraliame.

The  natives  of  Axistralia  were  scarcely,  if  at  all,  farther
advanced  in  civilisation  than  those  of  the  Andaman  Islands.
The  "houses"  observed-  by  Captain  Cook  "at  Botany
Bay,  where  they  were  best,  were  just  high  enough  for  a
man  to  sit  upright  in;  but  not  large  enough  for  him  to
extend  himself  in  his  whole  length  in  any  direction :  they
were  built  with  pliable  rods  about  as  thick  as  a  man^s  finger,
iji  the  form  of  an  oven,  by  sticking  the  two  ends  into  the
ground,  and  then  covering  them  with  palm  leaves  and  broad
pieces  of  bark ;  the  door  is  nothing  but  a  large  hole  at  <»ie
end."  Further  north,  where  the  climate  was  warmer,  the
huts  were  even  less  substantial,  and  being  completely  open
on  one  side,  scarcely  deserve  even  the  name  of  huts,  and
were  little  more  than  a  protection  against  the  wind.  Finally,
the  natives  observed  by  Dampier  near  C.  Lev^que,  on  the
north-west  coast,  seem  to  have  had  no  houses  at  all.  Round
their  dwelling-places  Captain  Cook  observed  "  vast  heaps  of
shells,  the  fish  of  which  we  supposed  had  been  their  food^'f
Captain  Grey  also  describes  similar  shell-mounds,}  some  of

•  Mouatt,  l.e.  p.  S27.  t  First  Voyage,  yoL  iii.,  p.  598.

X  l,e,  Tol.  i.,  p.  110.    See  also  King's  Australia,  toI.  i.,  p.  87t


FOOD.  347

wHch  covered  quite  half  an  acre,  and  were  as  much  as  ten
feet  high.  They  seem,  however,  to  have  been  first  noticed
by  Dampier.*

The  food  of  the  Australian  savages  differs  much  in  difiEerent
parts  of  the  continent.  I^ealdag  generally,  it  may  be  said
to  consist  of  various  roots,  fruits,  fungi,  shellfish,  frogs,
insects,  birds'  eggs,  birds,  fish,  turtles,  kangaroo,  dog,  and
sometimes  of  seal  and  whalcf  They  are  n^t,  however,  so
far  as  I  am  aware,  able  to  kOl  whales  for  themselves,  but
when  one  is  washed  on  shore  it  is  a  real  godsend  to  them.
Fires  are  iitnmediately  lit,  to  give  notice  of  the  joyful  event.
Then  they  rub  themselves  all  over  with  blubber,  and
anoint  their  favourite  wives  in  the  same  way ;  after  which
they  cut  down  through  the  blubber  to  the  beef,  which  they
sometimes  eat  raw  and  sometimes  broil  on  pointed  sticks.
As  ofiher  natives  arrive  they  ^'  fiurly  eat  their  way  into  the
whale,  and  you  see  them  climbing  in  and  about  the  stinking
carcase,  choosing  titbits."  For  days  "they  remain  by  the
carcase,  rubbed  from  head  to  foot  with  stinking  blubber,
gorged  to  repletion  with  putrid  meat — out  of  temper  from
indigestion,  and  therefore  engaged  in  constant  &ays — suffer-
ing &om  a  cutaneous  disorder  by  high  feeding — ^and  alto-
gether a  disgusting  spectacle.  There  is  no  sight  in  the
world,"  Captain  Grey  adds,  "more  revolting  than  to  see  a
young  and  gracefully-formed  native  girl  steppiug  out  of  the
carcase  of  a  putrid  whale."  The  Australians  also  mash  up
bones  and  suck  out  the  fat  contained  in  them,  as  already
described  (p.  248).  They  are  excessively  fond  of  fatty
substances.

In  a  cave  on  the  north-eastern  coast,  Mr.  Cunningham
observed  certain  "tolerable  figures  of  sharks,  porpoises,
turtles,    lizards,    trepang,    starfish,    clubs,    canoes,  water-

♦  Pinkerton's  Voyages,  vol.  ii.,  p.  473.
t  Grey's  Ezploratioiu  in  North- West  and  Western  Australia,  p.  263.


348  CLOTHING.      OKNAMENTS.

gourds,  and  some  quadrupeds  which  were  probably  in-
tended to  represent  kangaroos  and  dogs."*  It  is,  however,
doubtful  whether  these  are  the  work  of  the  present  natives.
The  Alfouras  do  not  claim  them,  but  on  the  contrary  ascribe
them  to  diabolical  agency.  Moreover,  they  are,  according  to
Mr.  Oldfield,  "  quite  unable  to  realise  the  most  vivid  artistic
representations.  On  being  shown  a  large  colored  engraving
of  an  aboriginal  New  Hollander,  one  declared  it  to  be  a  ship,
another  a  kangaroo,  and  so  on ;  not  one  of  a  dozen  identify-
ing the  portrait  as  having  any  connection  with  himself."  f

The  Australians  observed  by  Cook  and  Dampier  were  en-
tirely destitute  of  clothing,  and  their  principal  ornament
consisted  of  a  bone,  five  or  six  inches  long,  and  half  an  inch
thick,  thrust  through  the  cartilage  of  the  nose.  They  did
not  tattoo.  On  the  north-west  coast.  King  observed  some
of  the  natives  with  a  very  peculiar  decoration.  At  every
three  inches  between  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  and  the
navel,  the  body  was  scarified  in  horizontal  bands,  the  cica-
trices of  which  were  at  least  an  inch  in  diameter  and  raised
half  an  inch  from  the  body.$  Some  of  them  fastened  to
their  hair,  by  means  of  gum,  teeth  of  kangaroos  or  of  men,
dogs'  tails,  fish  bones,  bits  of  wood,  and  other  objects  which
they  regarded  as  ornamental.  Frequently  they  wore  pieces
of  opossum,  or  kangaroo-skin — not  for  decency,  however,
but  for  warmth,  and  while  hunting  as  a  protection  from
thorns.  According  to  D'Urville,  however,  the  natives  of
New  South  Wales  did  not  think  it  decent  that  young
children  should  go  quite  naked.  §

On  the  north-eastern  coasts  they  use  canoes  made  frx)m
the  trunks  of  trees,  each  canoe  being  formed  from  a  single

•  Kmg,  Tol.  ii.,  p.  26 ;  Grey,  vol.  i.,  p.  269.

t  Oldfleld  on  the  Aborigines  of  Anstralia.     Transactions  of  the  Ethnological
Society.    New  Ser.    Vol.  iii.
X  le,  p.  42.  {  Voyage  de  I' Astrolabe,  toI.  L,  p.  471.


RAFTS.      IMFLEBCENTS.  349

trunk,  probably  hollowed  by  fire.  "  They  are  about  fourteen
feet  long,  and  being  very  narrow,  are  fitted  with  an  out-
rigger."* Further  south  they  were  nothing  but  a  piece  of
bark,  tied  together  at  the  ends  and  kept  open  in  the  middle
by  small  bows  of  wood.  The  western  tribes  had  no  canoes,t
owing,  according  to  King,$  to  the  absence  of  large  timber.  §
Instead  of  a  boat  they  use  a  log  of  wood,  on  which  they  sit
astride,  with  a  bit  of  bark  in  each  hand  as  a  paddle.  Some
tribes  fasten  four  or  five  mangrove  stems  together  so  as  to
make  a  kind  of  very  small  float  or  raft.  The  tribe  observed
by  Dampier  were,  even  worse  off  in  this  respect ;  they  had
"no  boats,  canoes,  or  bark  logs."  Yet  they  dwelt  on  the
shore,  lived  principally  on  fish,  and  swam  about  from  island
to  island.  The  absence  of  canoes  is  very  remarkable  in  a
people  whose  habits  were  so  aquatic,  and  whose  food  was
deriyed  almost  entirely  from  the  sea.

Their  implements  are  very  simple.  They  have  no  know-
ledge of  pottery,  and  carry  water  in  a  small  vessel  made
of  bark.  They  are  quite  ignorant  of  warm  water,  which
strikes  them  with  great  amazement.  ||  Some  of  them  carry
^'a  small  bag,  about  the  size  of  a  moderate  cabbage-net,
which  is  made  by  laying  threads  loop  within  loop,  some-
what in  the  manner  of  knitting  used  by  our  ladies  to  make
purses.  This  bag  the  man  carries  loose  upon  his  back  by
a  small  string  which  passes  over  his  head ;  it  generally  con-
tains a  lump  or  two  of  paint  and  resin,  some  fishhooks  and
lines,  a  shell  or  two,  out  of  which  their  hooks  are  made,  a
few  points  of  darts,  and  their  usual  ornaments,  which  in-
cludes the  whole  worldly  treasure  of  the  richest  man  ajoiong
them."

*  Freycinet.    Voyage  antonr  dn  Monde,  toI.  il.,  p.  705.
t  Cook's  First  Voyage,  vol.  iii.,  p.  643.
}  l.e,  Yol.  L,  pp.  38,  43,  49 ;  yoI.  ii.,  pp.  66,  69.

j  In  his  yiew,  howeyer,  of  Careening  Bay,  the  country  appears  to  be  well
wooded.  I  lyUnrille,  toI.  i.,  p.  461.


OOU  HAHHEItS.       KNTVSS.       aPBABS.

Pi».  14B.  A  very  similar  inventory  is  given  by  Capt.  Gfrey,
who  adds,  however,  a  flat  stone  to  pound  roots  with,*
They  have  also  stone  hatchets,  hammers,  tnivee,  pieces
of  flint,  and  sticks  to  dig  up  roots.  The  hammer
is  used  for  killing  seals  or  other  animals,  and  for
breaking  open  shell-fish.  The  handle  is  irom  twelve
to  fifteen  inches  long,  pointed  at  one  end,  and  having
OB  each  side  at  the  other  a  hard  stone  &stened  on
by  a  mass  of  gum.  The  knives  have  a  similar
handle,  and  at  the  end  a  few  splinters  of  quartz  or
flint,  arranged  iu  a  row  and  stuck  on  with  gum  in
the  some  manner.

The  natives  of  Botany  Bay  had  fish-hooks,  but  no
nets;  on  the  contrary,  Capt.  Grey,  in  describing
those  of  Western  Australia,  mentions  nets,  but  not
hooks ;  and,  according  to  Dampier,  the  natives
of  the  north-west  had  "no  instruments  to  catch
great  fish. "  Those  seen  by  King  were  also
without  hooks  or  nets.f  Throughout  the  conti-
nent they  were  ignorant  both  c^  slings  and  bows
and  arrows.  On  the  other  hand  they  had  spears,
clubs  (fig.  148),  shields,  and  two  very  peculiar
instruments,  namely,  the  throwing  stick  and  the
boomerang  (fig.  149).  The  spear,  however,  is  their
national  weapon.  These  "are  about  ten  feet  long,
and  very  slender,  made  of  cane  or  wood,  tapering  to
a  point,  which  is  barbed.  They  ore  light,  and  one
would  scarcely  be  inclined  to  believe  that  they  could
be  darted  with  any  force :  nor  could  they,  without
the  aid  of  the  wummera,  a  straight  flat  stick,  three
feet  in  length,  terminating  in  a  socket  of  bone  or
hide,  into  which  the  end  of  the  spear  is  fixed.  The
wummera  is  grat^)ed  in   the  right  hand  by  three

•  t.c.  p.  266.  t  l.t.  'ol.  ii.,  p.  187


THROWINO   mCK.       BOOUEBAHO.  351

fingers,  the  spear  lying  betweea  the  fore-finger  and  thomb.
PrevioQB  to  throwing  it,  a  tremulous  or  vibratoiy  motion
ie  given  to  it,  which  is  supposed  to  add  to  the  accuracy  of
the  aim:  in  projecting  the  apear,  the  wummera  is  retained
in  the  hand,  and  the  use  of  this  simple  contrivance  adds
greatly  to  the  projectile  force  given  to  nn.  i4>.

the  spear.  They  are  veil  practised  in  .
the  use  of  these  weapons."*  Lideed, '
Capt.  Grey  tells  us  that  he  lias  often
seen  them  kill  a  pigeon  with  s  spetir
at  a  distance  of  thirty  yards,  and  Capt.
Cook  says  that  "  at  a  distance  of  fifty
yards  these  Indians  were  more  sure  of
their  mark  tlian  we  could  be  with  a
single  bullet. "t  The  very  long  Austra-
lian spears  are  not  thrown  with  the
wummera,  but  by  the  strength  of  the
arm  alone.  They  have  also  several  other
kinds  of  spears ;  one  of  them,  used  for
striking  turtle,  has  a  moveable,  barbed,
blade,  which  is  attached  by  a  string  to
the  butt  end  of  the  spear;  when  the
turtle  is  struck,  the  shaft  becomes  de-
tached from  the  point,  which  remains
fixed  in  the  body,  while  the  shaft  serves,
partly  to  impede  the  motionB,and  partly
as  a  float  to  indicate  the  position  of  ,
the  turtle.  A  similar  weapon  is  used  by
the   Esquimaux,  the    Mincopies,    the  Bootceimg.

Brazilian  Indians,  Mid  other  savages.  But  the  moat  extra-
ordinary weapon,  and  one  quite  peculiar  to  Australia,  is  the
boomerang.  This  is  a  curved  stick,  generally  rounded  on  one
side,  nat  on  the  other,  about  three  feet  long  and  two  inches  wide,
*  United  Stata  Eiplor.  Eiped.,  toI.  i.,  p.  191.  f  Cook,  I.e.  p.  S42.


352  BOOMERANG.

by  three-quarters  of  an  inch  thick.  At  first  sight  it  looks
something  like  a  very  rude  wooden  sword.  It  was  nsed  both^
in  the  chase  and  in  war.  '^  It  is  grasped  at  one  end  in  the
right  hand,  and  is  thrown  sickle-wise,  either  upwards  into
the  air,  or  downwards  so  as  to  strike  the  ground  at  some
distance  from  the  thrower.  In  the  first  case  it  flies  with  a
rotary  motion,  as  its  shape  would  indicate;  after  ascending
to  a  great  height  in  the  air,  it  suddenly  returns  in  an
elliptical  orbit  to  a  spot  near  its  starting  point.  On
throwing  it  downwards  on  the  ground,  it  rebounds  in  a
straight  line,  pursuing  a  ricochet  motion  until  it  strikes  the
object  at  which  it  is  thrown.  Birds  and  small  animals  are
killed  with  it,  and  it  is  also  used  in  killing  ducks.  The
most  singular  curve  described  by  it  is  when  thrown  into  the
air,  above  the  angle  of  45° ;  its  flight  is  always  then  back-
wards, and  the  native  who  throws  it  stands  with  his  back,
instead  of  his  face,  to  the  object  he  is  desirous  of  hitting."  *
Mr.  Merry,  a  gentleman  who  resided  for  some  time  in  Aus-
tralia, informs  me  that  on  one  occasion,  in  order  to  test  the
skill  with  which  the  boomerang  could  be  thrown,  he  offered  a
reward  of  sixpence  for  every  time  the  boomerang  was  made
to  return  to  the  spot  from  which  it  was  thrown.  He  drew
a  circle  of  five  or  six  feet  on  the  sand,  and  although  the
boomerang  was  thrown  with  much  force,  the  native  suc-
ceeded in  making  it  fall  within  the  circle  five  times  out
of  twelve.  Mr.  01dfield,t  on  the  contrary,  speaks  much  less
favorably  of  the  boomerang.  It  is,  he  says,  but  little  used
in  war,  nor  do  the  natives  "  ever  attempt  to  kill  a  solitary
bird  or  beast  by  means  of"  it.  On  the  other  hand,  in
swampy  localities  where  waterfowl ''  congregate  largely,  the
boomerang  is  of  essential  use ;  for  a  great  number  of  them
being  simultaneously  hurled  into  a  large  flock  of  waterfowl,
ensures  the  capture  of  considerable  numbers."

*  TTnited  States  Ezplor.  Exped.,  le,     f  TnuB.  Ethn.  Soo.,  N.  S.  toI.  iii.,  p.  264.


FIBE.      POLYGAMY.      SUPEBSTITION.  353

They  obtain  fire  by  rubbing  together  two  pieces  of  wood.
The  process,  however,  being  one  of  considerable  labor,  par-
ticularly in  damp  weather,  great  care  is  taken  to  prevent  the
fire,  when  once  lighted,  from  becoming  extinguished.  For
this  reason  they  often  carry  with  them  a  cone  of  banksia,
which  bums  slowly  like  amadou.*

The  Australians  observed  by  Captain  Cook  had  ^^no  idea
of  traffic,  nor,"  he  says,  "could  we  communicate  any  to
them:  they  received  the  things  which  we  gave  them,  but
never  appeared  to  understand  our  signs  when  we  required  a
return.  The  same  indifference  which  prevented  them  from
buying  what  we  had,  prevented  them  also  fix)m  attempting
to  steal :  if  they  had  coveted  more,  they  would  have  been
less  honest."  t  I^  other  parts,  however,  they  are  more  ad-
vanced in  this  respect.  Various  kinds  of  pigments,  feathers,
shells,  implements,  and  especially  flints„  are  the  principal
articles  of  barter.

Polygamy  is  permitted ;  but  a  man  who  takes  more  than
two  wives  is  looked  upon  as  a  selfish  and  imreasonable  per-
son. If  a  married  man  dies,  his  brother  inherits  the  wife,
who  "  goes  to  her  second  husband's  hut  three  days  after  the
death  of  her  first."  This  custom  does  not  say  much  for  the
strength  of  their  affections.

They  have  no  religion,  nor  any  idea  of  prayer ;  but  most
of  them  believe  in  evil  spirits,  and  all  have  great  dread  of
witchcraft.  In  fact,  they  have  a  remarkable  superstition
that  no  one  ever  dies  a  natural  death.

Captain  Wilkes  {  describes  an  Australian  funeral  as  foUo\i«.
Almost  immediately  after  death  the  corpse  was  arranged  in
a  sitting  posture,  the  knees  bent  up  close  to  the  body,  the
he£id  pressed  forwards,  and  the  whole  body  closely  tied  up  in
a  blanket.     An  oval  grave  was  then  dug,  about  six  feet

•  D'Urville,  vol.  i.,  p.  194.  t  i-c.  p.  636.

X  I'O.  Tol.  ii.,  p.  196.    Fitsroy,  ie,  toI.  ii.,  p.  628.

28


354  BURIAL.      NXJMBEBS.

long,  three  wide,  and  five  deep.  At  the  bottom  was  a  bed  of
leaves,  covered  with  an  opossum-skin  cloak,  and  with  a  stuffed
bag  of  kangaroo-skin  for  a  pillow ;  on  this  the  body  was  laid
with  its  implements  and  weapons.  Above  the  corpse  were
strewn  leaves  and  branches,  and  the  hole  was  then  filled  up
with  stones.  Finally,  the  earth  which  had  been  removed
was  put  over  the  whole,  making  a  mound  eight  or  nine  feet
high.  According  to  D'XJrville,  the  natives  of  New  South
Wales  bory  the  young,  and  bum  the  old.*  Other  tribes
dispose  of  their  dead  in  other  ways ;  but  none  of  them  were
addicted  to  cannibalism  as  a  matter  of  habit  or  choice,  al-
though they  were  not  unfrequently  driven  to  it  by  the
scarcity  of  other  food.

No  single  fact,  perhaps,  gives  us  a  more  vivid  idea  t)f  the
mental  condition  of  these  miserable  savages,  than  the  obser-
vation that  they  cannot  count  their  own  fingers — ^not  even
those  of  one  hand.  Mr.  Orawfurdf  has  examined  the  nu-
merals of  thirty  Australian  languages,  '^and  in  no  instance
do  they  appear  to  go  beyond  the  number  four."  Mr.  Scott
Nind,  indeed,  has  given  an  account  of  the  Australians  of
King  George's  Sound  to  which  a  vocabulary  is  annexed,
containing  the  numerals,  which  are  made  to  reach  the
number  five.  The  term  for  this  last  imit,  however,  turns
out  to  be  only  the  word  ^'many.'*  In  fact,  the  word  "five"
conveys  to  them  the  idea  of  a  great  number^  as  a  "  hundred  "
or  a  "  thousand  "  does  to  us.

The  Tasmanians.

The  inhabitants  of  Yan  Dieman's  Land  were  quite  as
wretched  as  those  of  Australia.  According  to  Captain  Cook's
account  they  had  no  houses,  no  clothes,  no  canoes,  no  in-
strument to  catch  large  fish,  no  nets,  no  hooks ;  they  lived

*  Vol  i.,  p.  472.  t  Tranaaotions  of  Ethn.  Soo.,  New  Series,  toL  il,  p.  84.


TASMANIANS.  355

on  mussels,  cockles,  and  periwinkles,  and  their  only  weapon
was  a  straight  pole,  sharpened  at  one  end.*  Mr.  Dove  in-
forms us  that  they  are  entirely  without  any  "moral  views
and  impressions.'^  Indeed,  he  scarcely  appears  to  regard
them  as  rational  beings.f  They  have  no  meems  of  expressing
abstract  ideas;  they  have  not  even  a  word  for  a  "tree.*'
Although  fire  was  well  known  to  them,  some  tribes,  at  least,
appear  to  have  been  ignorant  whence  it  was  originally  ob-
tained, or  how,  if  extinguished,  it  could  be  re-lighted.  "In
all  their  wanderings,"  says  Mr.  Dove,  "  they  were  particularly
carefid  to  bear  in  their  hands  the  materials  for  kindling  a  fire.
Their  memory  supplies  them  with  no  instances  of  a  period  in
which  they  were  obliged  to  draw  on  their  inventive  powers
for  the  means  of  resuscitating  an  element  so  essentitd  to  their
health  and  comfort  as  flame.  How  it  came  originally  into
their  possession  is  imknown.  Whether  it  may  be  viewed  as
the  gift  of  nature,  or  the  product  of  art  and  sagacity,  they

cannot  recollect  a  period  when  it  was  a  desideratimi

It  was  the  part  of  the  femtdes  especially  to  carry  a  firebrand
in  their  hands,  which  was  studiously  refreshed  from  time  to
time  as  it  became  dull  and  evanescent."  X

Feegee  Islanders.

The  islands  of  the  Pacific  contain  two  very  distinct  races
of  men — ^the  Negrito  and  the  Polynesian.  My  space  does
not  permit  me  to  enter  into  the  interesting  questions  of  their
relationships  and  affinities.

The  inhabitants  of  the  Feegee  Islands  have  been  described
by  many  writers  as  negroes.  They  are  darker  than  the
Polynesians.  The  jaws  are  larger,  and  the  hair,  though  not
exactly  woolly,  is  frizzled.  They  are  a  powerful  race,  but  not
so  graceM  as  the  Polynesians.     Their  language  is,  however,

*  Third  Voyage,  toI.  i.,  p.  100.       f  Tasmanian  Jour,  of  Nat.  Sci.,  vol.  L,  p.  249.

X  Tasmanian  Jour,  of  Nat;  Sci.  toI.  i.,  p.  250.


356  FOOD.      WEAPONS.      HOUSES.

more  Polynesian  tlian  Negrito.  Their  institutions,  customs,
and  manners,  were  partly  Polynesian,  partly  Negrito.*  It
is  remarkable  that  they  did  not  use  the  consonants  "  b/'  "  d,"
or  "g"  without  placing  "m'^  or  "n"  before  them,  as  for
instance  Mbau,  Nduandua,  Ngata.  It  is  well  known  how
frequent  these  sounds  are  in  Negro  names.

The  food  of  the  Feegee  Islanders  consisted  of  fish,  turtle,
shell-fish,  crabs,  human  flesh  whenever  it  could  be  obtained,
taro,  yams,  mandrai,  bananas,  and  cocoa-nuts,  in  addition  to
which  the  higher  classes  occasionally  indulged  in  pigs  and
fowls.  They  drank  ava  habitually,  and  at  all  their  cere-
monies.

Their  weapons  consisted  of  spears,  slings,  clubs,  bows  and
arrows.  The  spears  were  from  ten  to  fifteen  feet  long,  and
were  generally  made  of  cocoa-nut  wood ;  the  end  was  pointed
and  charred ;  sometimes,  though  not  often,  a  sharp  bone  was
used  for  the  point.  They  had  several  kinds  of  clubs,  all
made  of  iron  wood.  That  most  esteemed  was  about  three
feet  long,  with  a  heavy  knob  at  the  end.  Another  kind
was  somewhat  shovel-shaped,  and  might  rather  be  called
a  short  sword.  The  ula  was  a  short  heavy  club,  about
eighteen  inches  long,  with  a  large  and  heavy  knob.  It  was
used  as  a  missile,  and  the  natives  threw  it  with  great
accuracy  and  force.  These  were  their  principal  weapons,  the
bows  and  arrows  being  weak  and  light.  They  were,  how-
ever, used  in  war,  as  well  as  in  killing  fish.  The  fortified
towns  of  the  Feegeeans  had  an  earthen  *  *  rampart,  about  six  feet
thick,  &ced  with  large  stones,  surmounted  by  a  reed  fence  or
cocoa-nut  trunks,  and  surrounded  by  a  muddy  moat.''  f

Their  houses  were  oblong,  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  long,
and  fifteen  feet  high.  They  were  made  of  cocoa-nut  wood
and  tree  fern,  and  were  sometimes  very  well  built.    They  had

*  Latham.   Varieties  of  Man,  p.  226.
t  WiUianiB.    Figi  and  the  Figians,  vol.  i.,  p.  48.


RELIGION.      CANOES.  357

two  doorways  on  opposite  sides,  from  three  to  four  feet  high
and  four  feet  wide.  The  sides  were  made  of  posts  about
three  feet  apart^  and  filled  in  with  wickerwork.  The  roof
had  a  steep  pitch  ;  the  rafters  were  generally  of  palm
wood,  thatched  with  wild  sugar  cane,  under  which  they
placed  fern  leaves.  A  mat  served  as  a  door,  and  a  few  flat
stones  near  the  middle  of  the  house  acted  as  the  fireplaces
The  houses  were  seldom  divided  by  partitions,  but  the  two
ends  were  raised  about  a  foot,  and  were  covered  with  layers
of  mats  on  which  the  natives  slept.

Their  temples  were  pyramidal  in  form  and  were  often
erected  on  terraced  mounds,  like  those  of  Centr£d  America/
They  also  venerated  certain  upright  stones,t  resembling  those
which  we  regard  as  Druidical.  The  Feegeeans,  says  Mr.
Hazlewood,  "  consider  the  gods  as  beings  of  like  passions
with  themselves.  They  love  and  hate ;  they  are  proud  and
revengeful,  and  make  war,  and  kill  and  eat  each  other;
and  are,  in  fact,  savages  and  cannibals  like  themselves."
"Cruelty,"  says  Captain  Erskine,^  "a  craving  for  blood,
and  especially  for  himian  flesh  as  food,  are  characteristic  of
the  gods."  Yet  the  Feegeeans  looked  upon  the  Samoans
with  horror  because  they  had  no  religion,  no  belief  in  any
such  deities,  nor  any  of  the  sanguinary  rites  which  prevailed
in  other  islands.

The  Feegee  canoes  were  very  well  constructed.  They
were  generally  double,  of  unequal  size,  the  smaller  one
serving  as  an  outrigger.  The  larger  ones  were  sometimes
more  than  a  hundred  feet  in  length.  The  two  canoes
were  connected  by  a  platform,  generally  about  fifteen  feet
wide  and  projecting  two  or  three  feet  beyond  the  sides.
The  bottom    of   each  consisted    of   a  single  plank ;    the

•  B.  Seemann.    In  the  Vacation  Tourist  for  1861,  p.  269.
t  Figi  and  the  Figians,  vol.  i.,  p.  220.
X  Journal  of  a  Gmiae  in  the  Western  Pacific,  p.  247..


358  POTTERY.      GAMES.

sides  were  fitted  by  doyetailingy  and  closely  united  by
lashings  passed  tbrougb  flanges  left  on  eacb  of  the  pieces.
The  joints  were  closed  by  the  gum  of  the  bread-firuit  tree.
The  sails  were  large,  and  made  of  mats.  The  mast  was  gene-
rally about  half  the  length  of  the  canoe,  and  the  yard  and
boom  usually  twice  as  long  as  the  mast.  Their  principal  tool
was  an  adze,  formerly  of  stone,  but  now  generally  of  iron.
For  boring  holes  they  used  the  long  spines  of  the  echina,
pointed  bones,  and,  when  they  could  get  them,  nails.  Small
teeth,  such  as  those  of  rats  and  mice,  were  used  for  carving ;
and  their  knives  were  made  of  the  outside  of  a  piece  of
bamboo,  shaped  into  form  while  green.  After  being  dried
it  was  charred,  and  thus  became  very  hard  and  sharp,  so
that  it  might  be  used  in  surgical  operations.  They  differed
from  the  Polynesians  in  using  earthenware  pots  for  cooking.
These  were  graceful  and  well  made,  though  the  potter's  wheel
was  unknown.  The  pottery  was  all  made  by  women.  Their
tools  were  very  simple,  consisting  of  a  smaU  round  fiat  stone
to  fashion  the  inside,  and  a  fiat  mallet  or  spatula  for  the
surface,  which  they  made  almost  as  round  as  if  it  had  been
turned  in  a  lathe.  Forks  appear  to  have  been  long  in  use
among  the  Feegeeans;  a  remarkable  fact,  if  we  remember
that  they  were  unknown  in  Northern  Europe  until  the  seven-
teenth century.

The  Feegeeans  have  several  kinds  of  games.  They  are
fond  of  swinging,  and  of  throwing  stones  or  fruits  at  a  mark.
They  have  also  a  game  resembling  skittles.  Their  dances,
like  those  of  so  many  other  nations,  are  anything  but  decorous.
Their  musictd  instruments  are  the  conch-shell,  the  nose-fiute,
pipes,  a  Jew's-harp  made  of  a  strip  of  bamboo,  and  several
sorts  of  drums.    They  are  also  fond  of  poetry.

Their  agricultural  implements  have  been  described  by
Mr.  Williams.  The  digging-sticks  are  made  of  a  young
mangrove  tree.     They  are  about  the  size  of  an  ordinary  hay


•    I


AGRICULTURE.      WOMEN.  359

fork,  and  the  lower  end  **  is  tapered  off  on  one  side,  after  the
shape  of  a  quill  toothpick.  In  digging  this  flattened  side  is
kept  downwards.  When  preparing  a  piece  of  ground  for
yams,  a  number  of  men  are  employed,  divided  into  groups  of
three  or  four.  Each  man  being  furnished  with  a  digging-
stick,  they  drive  them  into  the  ground  so  as  to  enclose  a
circle  of  about  two  feet  in  diameter.  When,  by  repeated
strokes,  the  sticks  reach  the  depth  of  eighteen  inches,  they
are  used  as  levers,  and  the  mass  of  soil  between  them  is  thus
loosened  and  raised."*  The  clods  are  then  broken  up  by  boys
with  short  sticks.  Weeding  "  is  accomplished  by  means  of
a  tool  used  like  a  Dutch  hoe,  the  workman  squatting  so  as  to
bring  the  handle  nearly  level  with  the  ground.  The  blade
used  formerly  to  be  ma^e  of  a  bone  from  the  back  of  a  turtle,
or  a  plate  of  tortoise-shell,  or  the  valve  of  a  large  oyster,  or
large  kind  of  pinna.  In  the  windward  islands  they  use  a
large  dibble,  eight  feet  long,  about  eighteen  inches  in  cir-
cumference, and  tapering  to  a  point*  They  had  also  pruning
knives  of"  tortoise-shell  lashed  to  the  end  of  a  rod  ten  feet
long.  They  are  skilful  in  basket-making,  and  have  good
strong  nets,  made  of  creepers  or  of  sinnet.

The  women  were  kept  in  great  subjection.  "The  men
frequently  tie  them  up  and  flog  them.  Like  other  property,
wives  might  be  sold  at  pleasure,  and  the  usual  price  is  a
musket.  Those  who  purchase  them  may  do  with  them  as
they  please,  even  to  knocking  them  on  the  head."  Erskine,
however,  gives  a  more  satisfactory  account  of  the  position
held  by  the  women ;  and  it  appears  that  they  are  on  the
whole  more  chaste  than  is  the  case  in  some  of  the  other
Pacific  Islands;  which  is  saying  something  for  them,  but
certainly  not  much.

Although  but  scantily  clothed,  the  Feegeeans  are  said  to
have  been  very  particular  about  their  garments  and  their

*  Figi  and  the  Figians,  toI.  i.,  p.  63.


360  CLOTHES.      TATTOO.

paint.  They  were  specially  proud  of  their  hair,  and  if  it  was
short  they  wore  a  wig  as  a  substitute.  Some  of  these  wigs
were  beautihilly  made.  The  men  wore  "  tapa,"  which  is  a
kind  of  cloth  obtained  from  the  inner  bark  of  the  paper-
mulberry,  and  made  into  a  sash,  from  three  to  one  hun-
dred yards  in  length.  Six  or  ten  yards  is,  however,  the
usual  quantity,  and  it  is  passed  between  the  legs  and  round
the  waist.*  The  women  are  not  permitted  to  use  "tapa,"
and  their  dress  is  more  scanty  than  that  of  the  men ;  con-
sisting, indeed,  only  of  the  "  liku,"  a  kind  of  band,  made  of
the  bark  of  hibiscus,  and  fastened  roimd  the  waist.  It  ends
in  a  fringe,  which  is  worn  short  by  the  girls,  but  longer
after  marriage.  Nevertheless,  though  almost  naked,  the
Feegeeans  are  said  to  have  been  very  modest,  and  if  any  one
were  found  entirely  without  clothes.  Captain  Wilkes  thinks
that  the  offender  would  be  immediately  put  to  death.

Tattooing  is  confined  to  the  women,  who  are  ornamented
in  this  manner  on  the  fingers,  the  comers  of  the  mouth,  and
oddly  enough,  on  those  parts  of  the  body  which  are  covered
by  the  "  liku."  The  process  is  very  painful,  but  submission
to  it  is  regarded  as  a  religious  duty,  f

The  graves  of  the  common  people  are  only  marked  by  a
few  stones,  but  over  those  of  chiefs  they  build  small  houses
from  two  to  six  feet  high,  or  ia  some  cases  erect  large  cairns
of  stone ;  these  also  are  sometimes  ''  set  up  to  mark  the  spot
where  a  man  has  died."  X  The  body  is  buried  ia  a  sitting
posture.  The  usual  sign  of  mourning  is  to  crop  the  hair  or
beard,  or  both.  Very  often  also  they  bum  the  skin  into
blisters,  and  cut  off  the  end-joints  of  the  small  toe  and  little
finger.

Among  the  Feegeeans,  parricide  is  not  a  crime,  but  a
custom.     Parents  are    generally  killed  by  their  children.

*  Figi  and  the  Figians,  yol.  i.,  p.  156.         f  Ibid.  p.  160 ;  WUkes,  Le,  p.  366.

I  Figi  and  the  Figians,  toI.  i.,  p.  192.


BUBIAL.  361

Sometimes  the  aged  people  make  up  their  minds  that  it  is
time  to  die ;  sometimes  it  is  the  children  who  give  notice  to
their  parents  that  they  are  a  burden  to  them.  In  either
case,  the  friends  and  relatives  are  summoned,  a  consultation
takes  place,  and  a  day  is  fixed  for  the  ceremony,  which  com-
mences with  a  great  feast.  The  missionaries  have  often
witnessed  these  horrible  tragedies.  On  one  occasion  a  young
man  invited  Mr.  Hunt  to  attend  his  mother^s  funeral,  which
was  just  going  to  take  place.  Mr.  Hunt  accepted  the  invita-
tion, but  when  the  funeral  procession  started,  he  was  sur-
prised to  see  no  corpse,  and  accordingly  made  enquiries,  when
the  young  savage  '^  pointed  out  his  mother,*  who  was  walking
along  with  them,  as  gay  and  lively  as  any  of  them  present,
and  apparently  as  much  pleased.  .  .  .  He  added  that  it
was  from  love  for  his  mother  that  he  had  done  so ;  that  in
consequence  of  the  same  love,  they  were  now  going  to  bury
her,  and  that  none  but  themselves  could  or  ought  to  do  so

sacred  an  office she  was  their  mother,  and  they

were  her  children,  and  they  ought  to  put  her  to  death."  In
such  cases  the  grave  is  dug'  about  four  feet  deep,  the  relatives
and  friends  begin  their  lamentations,  take  an  affectionate
parting,  and  bury  the  poor  victim  alive.  It  is  surprising
after  this  to  hear  that  Mr.  Hunt  regarded  the  Feegeeans
as  being  kind  and  affectionate  to  their  parents,  but  in  fact
"  they  considered  this  custom  so  great  a  proof  of  affection,
that  none  but  children  could  be  found  to  perform  it."
The  fact  is  that  they  not  only  believe  in  a  fature  state,
but  are  persuaded  that  as  they  leave  this  life  so  they  will
rise  again.f  They  have,  therefore,  a  powerftd  motive  for
quitting  this  world  before  they  are  weakened  by  old  age ;
and  so  general  was  this  belief,  so  powerful  the  influence
which  it  had  upon  them,  that  in  one  town  containing  several
hundred  inhabitants,  Capt.  Wilkes  did  not  see  one  man  over

•  Wilkes,  l.e,  p.  95.  f^^g^  and  the  Figians,  toI.  i.,  p.  183.


362  SUPEBSTITION.

forty  years  of  age ;  and  on  asking  for  the  old  people  was
informed  that  they  were  all  buried.  Again,  during  the  first
year  of  Mr.  Hunt's  residence  at  Somo*sonio,  there  was  only
one  instance  of  natural  death;  all  the  aged  and  diseased
having  been  strangled  or  buried  alive.

When  a  chief  died  it  was  usual  to  "  send  with  him  *'  some
of  his  inl3men  and  some  slaves.  At  the  death  of  Ngavindi,
Mr.  Calvert  went  to  Mbau  hoping  "  to  prevent  the  strangling
of  women,  but  was  too  late.  Three  had  been  murdered.  Tha-
kombau  proposed  to  strangle  his  sister,  the  chief  wife  of  the
deceased,  as  was  the  usual  custom ;  but  the  Lasakau  people
begged  that  she  might  be  spared,  and  that  her  child  might
become  their  chief.  Ngavindi's  mother  offered  herself  as  a
substitute,  and  was  strangled.  The  dead  chief  lay  in  state,
with  a  dead  wife  by  his  side,  on  a  raised  platform ;  the  corpse
of  his  mother  on  a  bier  at  his  feet,  and  a  murdered  servant
on  a  mat  in  the  midst  of  the  house.  A  large  grave  was  dug
in  the  foimdation  of  a  house  near  by,  in  which  the  servant
was  laid  first,  and  uponi  her  the  other  three  corpses,  wrapped
and  wound  up  together.''  *  In  these  cases  the  wives  gene-
rally die  voluntarily,  believing  that  thus  only  can  they  hope
to  go  to  heaven.  Horrible  as  are  these  facts,  they  at  least
show  how  strong  must  be  the  belief  felt  in  a  fature  state  of
existence.

Still,  though  we  may  allow  the  goodness  of  the  motive  to
extenuate  some  of  these  atrocities,  it  n^ust  be  allowed  that
human  life  was  but  little  regarded  ia  Feegee.  Not  only
infanticide,  but  also  human  sacrifices,  were  very  common,
and  in  fact  scarcely  anything  was  undertaken  without  the
latter.  When  the  king  launched  a  canoe,  ten  or  more  men
were  slaughtered  on  the  deck,  in  order  that  it  might  be
washed  with  human  blood.  But  there  is  even  worse  to  be
told.     The  Feegeeans  were  most  inveterate  cannibals,  and  so

*  Figi  and  the  Figians,  yoI.  ii.,  p.  301.


CANNIBALISM.  363

fond  were  they  of  human  flesh,  that  "  the  greatest  praise  they
can  bestow  on  any  delicacy  is  to  say  that  it  is  as  tender  as  a
dead  man."  Nay,  they  were  even  so  fastidious  as  to  dislike
the  taste  of  white  men,*  to  prefer  the  flesh  of  women  to  that
of  men,  and  to  consider  the  arm  above  the  elbow,  and  the
thigh  as  the  best  joints ;  and  so  greedy,  that  human  flesh  was
reserred  for  the  men,  being  considered  too  good  to  be  wasted
upon  the  women.  When  the  king  gave  a  feast  human  flesh
always  formed  one  of  the  dishes,  and  though  the  bodies
of  enemies  slain  in*  battle  were  always  eaten,  they  did  not
aflbrd  a  sufficient  supply,  but  slayes  were  fattened  up  for  the
market.  Sometimes  they  roasted  them  alive  and  ate  them  at
cffiLce,  while  at  others  they  kept  bodies  uintil  they  were  far
gone  in  decay.  Ba  Undre-undre,  Chief  of  Raki-raki,  was
said  to  have  eaten  nine  hundred  persons  himself,  permitting
no  one  to  share  them  with  him.t

It  was  not  from  any  want  of  food  that  the  Feegeeans  were
cannibals.  On  one  occasion  they  oflered  to  the  God  of  War
^Hen  thousand  yams  (weighing  from  six  to  twelve  pounds
each),  thirty  turtles,  forty  roots  of  yaquona  (some  very  large),
many  hundreds  of  native  puddings  (two  tons),  one  hundred
and  -fifty  giant  oysters,  fifteen  water-melons,  cocoa-nuts,  a
large  number  of  violet  land  crabs,  taro,  and  ripe  bananas.'^  j:
At  a  public  feast  Mr.  Williams  once  saw  "  two  hundred  men
employed  for  nearly  six  hours  in  collecting  and  piling  cooked
food.  There  were  six  mounds  of  yams,,  taro,  vakalolo,  pigs,,
and  turtles :  these  contained  about  fifty  tons  of  cooked  yams
and  taro,  fifteen  tons  of  sweet  pudding,  seventy  turtles^  five
cartloads  of  yaquona,  and  about  two  hundred  tons  of  un-
cooked yams.  One  pudding,  at  a  Lak^mba  feast,  measured
twenty-one  feet  in  circumference.'*  Yet  so  habitual  has
cannibalism  become,  that  they  have  no  word  for  a  corpse

*  So  also  did  the  Australians,  the  f  FigiandtheFigian8,Yol.i.,p.218.

Tongans,  and  the  New  Zealanders.  X  Ibid.  yoI.  i.,  p.  44.


364  MURDER.

which  does  not  include  the  idea  of  something  edible.  Human
flesh  is  known  as  ''puaka  balava,"  or  "long  pig."*  "On
contemplating  the  character  of  this  extraordinary  people,"
says  Erskine^t  '^  ^^^  mind  is  struck  with  wonder  and  awe  at
the  mixture  of  a  complicated  and  carefully-conducted  political
system,  highly  finished  manners,  and  ceremonious  politeness,
with  a  ferocity  and  practice  of  savage  vices  which  is  probably
unparalleled  in  any  other  part  of  the  world."  "  Mulder,"
says  Mr.  Williams,  "is  not  an  occasional  thing  in  Figi,  but
habitual,  systematic,  and  classed  among  ordinary  transac-
tione."  J  Elsewhere  he  telk  us  that  no  Feegeean  ever  feels
safe  with  a  stranger  at  his  heels, §  and  that  to  be  "an  ac-
knowledged murderer  is  the  object  of  the  Figian's  restless
ambition.''  ||  On  the  Island  of  Yanua  Levu,  even  among  the
women,  there  were  "few  who  had  not  in  some  way  been
murderers."^  To  this  they  are  trained  up  from  infancy.
"  One  of  the  first  lessons  taught  the  infant  is  to  strike  its
mother."  At  Some  Somo,  Mr.  Williams  saw  mothers  leading
their  children  "  to  kick  and  tread  upon  the  dead  bodies  of
enemies."**  No  wonder  that  under  these  circumstances  "  a
happy  and  united  household  is  most  rare."  Indeed  it  is
nearly  impossible,  for  by  an  arrangement,  which  seems
almost  incredible,  "  brothers  and  sisters,  first  cousins,  fathers
and  sons-in-law,  mothers  and  daughters-in-law,  and  brothers
and  sisters-in-law  are  severally  forbidden  to  speak  to  each
other,  or  to  eat  from  the  same  dish."  ft  Yet  amid  so  much
that  is  horrible,  there  is  still  something  in  the  Feegeean
which  redeems  his  character  from  utter  atrocity.    If  he  hates

♦  Erekine,  Le,  p.  260.    Other  mam-  f  Erekine,  U.  p.  272,

malia,  when  introduced  into  the  South  %  Figi  and  the  Figians,  toI.  i.,  p.  134.

Sea  Islands,  receiyed  names  indicative  of  §/.0.  p.  133.

their  similarity  to  this  their  principal  ||  I.e.  p.  112.

quadruped :  thus  the  horse  was  called  %  I.e.  p.  180.

the  **  man-carrying  pig"  in  Tahiti,  the  •♦  /.*.  p.  177.

sheep  was  the  **hog  with  teeth  on  its  ft  l,e,  p.  136.
forehead"  (Forster,  le.  p.  384).


liiAORIES.  365

deeply,  he  also  loves  truly ;  if  his  revenge  never  dies,  his
fidelity  and  loyalty  are  strong  and  enduring.  Thakombau
was  a  thorough  Feegeean.  Almost  to  the  last  he  opposed
the  missionaries.  He  was  not  only  heathen,  but  anti-
christian.  At  length  being  converted,  he  called  his  people
together,  and,  says  Mr.  Calvert,  "What  a  congregation  he
had ! — ^husbands,  whose  wives  he  had  dishonoured  !  widows,
whose  husbands  he  had  slain !  sisters,  whose  relatives  had
been  strangled  by  his  orders !  relatives,  whose  friends  he
had  eaten !  and  children,  the  descendants  of  those  he  had
murdered,  and  who  had  vowed  to  avenge  the  wrongs  inflicted
on  their  fathers!"*  Yet  even  this  man — an  adulterer,  a
parricide,  and  a  cannibal ;  whose  hands  were  stained  with  a
hundred  murders — ^had  still  something  noble  and  loveable
about  him;  so  much  so  indeed  that,  in  spite  of  his  crimes,
he  secured  the  affection,  the  firiendship,  even  the  respect,  of
a  man  so  excellent  as  Mr.  Calvert.

The  Merries.

The  New  Zealanders  are'  the  most  southemly  representatives
of  the  great  Polynesian  family.  Their  principal  food  consisted
of  fern  roots,  which  they  scorched  over  the  fire,  and  then
beat  with  a  stick,  till  the  bark  and  dry  outside  fell  off;  the
remainder  being  a  soft  substance,  rather  clammy  and  sweet,
not  unpleasant  to  the  taste,  but  mixed  with  numerous  stringy
fibres  which  are  very  disagreeablcf  In  the  northern  dis-
tricts were  large  plantations  of  yams  and  sweet  potatoes.
They  also  cultivated  gourds,  which  were  used  for  vessels,  as
they  had  no  pottery.  Their  only  instrument  for  tillage  was
"  a  long  narrow  stake  sharpened  to  an  edge  at  ona  end,  with
a  short  piece  fastened  transversely  at  a  little  distance  above

*  Figi  and  the  Figians,  Lc,  vol.  ii.,  f  Dieffenbach's  New  Zealand,  toI.

p.  857.  ii-i  P'  11.


366  FOOD.      DRESS.

it,  for  the  conTenience  of  pressing  it  down  with  the  foot/
Their  animal  food  consisted  principally  of  fish  and  shell-fish,
and  Captain  Cook  observed  large  shell-mounds  near  their
houses.  They  sometimes  also,  ^though  rarely,  killed  rails,
penguins,  shags,  and  other  birds.  They  obtained  fire  from
two  pieces  of  wood,  in  the  usual  manner.*  A  New  Zealand
stone  adze  is  represented  in  figs.  82-84,  p.  73.

The  only  quadrupeds  in  the  islands  were  dogs  and  rats.
They  had  no  hogs,  and  the  dogs  were  kept  entirely  for  food.
It  is  remarkable  that  although  in  many  ways  so  much  farther
advanced  in  civilisation  than  the  Nootka  Columbians,  and
although  animtd  food  was  so  much  in  demand,  they  seem  to
have  devised  no  way  of  killing  the  whales  which  frequented
their  coasts.  They  were,  however,  skilful  in  fishing,  having
excellent  lines,  hooks  made  of  bone  and  shell,  and  very
large  nets  which  were  made  of  the  leaves  of  a  kind
of  flax,  split  into  strips  of  the  proper  breadth  and  tied
together.  In  making  the  lines  the  leaves  are  "  scraped  by
a  shell,  which  removes  the  upper  or  green  part,  and  leaves
the  strong,  white  fibres,  that  run  longitudinally  along  the
under  side."t  This  kind  of  cordage  has  even  been  pre-
ferred to  that  made  of  European  hemp.

Of  these  leaves  also  they  made  most  of  their  clothes,  for
though  acquainted  with  the  manufacture  of  bark-cloth,  it  was
very  scarce,  and  worn  only  as  an  ornament.  The  leaves  were
split  into  three  or  four  slips,  which  were  interwoven  into  a
kind  of  stuff,  something  between  netting  and  cloth.  Dog's-
wool  was  also  used  for  the  same  purpose.:^  The  dress  was
alike  in  both  sexes,  and  consisted  of  two  parts ;  one  piece  of
their  rude  cloth  (if  so  it  may  be  called)  was  tied  over  the
shoulders  and  reached  to  the  knees,  being  fastened  in  £ront

•  D'Urville,  vol.  ii.,  p.  479.

t  FitzToy'B  Voyage  of  the  Adyenture  and  Beagle,  vol.  iL,  p.  599.

J  D'Umlle,  yol.  ii.,  p.  600.


ORNAMENTS.      HOUSES.  367

by  a  pieoe  of  string  or  a  bone  bodkin ;  the  otber  piece  was
wrapped  round  the  waist,  and  reached  nearly  to  the  ground.
This  garment,  howeyer,  was  worn  by  the  men  only  on  par-
ticular occasions.

For  ornament  they  wore  combs  of  wood  or  bone,  feathers,
necklaces,  bracelets,  and  anklets  of  bones  and  shells,  and
ear-rings  made  of  albatross-down.  Many  of  them  had  also
small  grotesque  figures  of  jade,  which  were  sxispended  from
the  neck  and  were  regarded  as  very  precious.  The  New  Zea-
landers  were  also  tattooed  with  great  dexterity  and  elegance ;
not  only  on  the  body,  but  even  on  the  face,  the  general
effect  of  which  was  in  many  cases  far  from  unpleasant.  The
process,  however,  was  extremely  painftd,  so  much  so,  indeed,
that  it  could  not  be  supported  aU  at  once,  but  was  sometimes
spread  over  several  months,  or  even  years.  The  lips  and  the
comers  of  the  eyes  were  the  part  that  hurt  most.  To  have
shrunk  from  it  would,  however,  have  been  a  great  disgrace.

Their  houses  were  about  eighteen  or  twenty  feet  long,
eight  or  ten  broad,  and  five  or  six  high.  The  sides  sloped
quite  down  to  the  ground,  differing  in  this  respect  from  those
of  Tahiti,  which  are  left  open  at  the  sides.  This  was  done,
however,  not  for  the  sake  of  privacy,  but  to  keep  out  the
wind  and  rain.  The  sides  were  made  of  sticks,  closely
thatched  with  grass  and  hay,  and  the  door  was  at  one  end,
just  high  enough  to  admit  a  man  on  all  fours.  Another  hole
served  both  for  window  and  chimney.  The  roof  was  often
carved,  and  they  frequently  attached  to  the  end  of  the  ridge
pole  a  monstrous  representation  of  the  proprietor.*

Their  villages  were  all  fortified.  They  chose  the  strongest
natural  situations,  and  fortified  them  with  a  pallisade  about
ten  feet  high.  The  weaker  sides  were  also  defended  "by
&  double  ditch,  the  innermost  of  which  has  a  bank,  and
an  additional  pallisade."     The  stakes  were  driven  obliquely

«  Dieffenbach,  I.e.  p.  69.


368  F0ETIFICATI0N8.,  WEAPONS.    CAKOES.

into  the  ground,  so  that  they  projected  over  the  ditch,
which  "from  the  bottom  to  the  top  or  crown  of  the
bank  is  fonr-and-twenty  feet.  Close  within  the  innermost
pallisade  is  a  stage,  twenty  feet  high,  forty  feet  long,  and
six  broad ;  it  is  8i^port«d  by  strong  poets,  and  ia  intended
as  a  station  for  those  who  defend  the  place,  from  which  they
may  annoy  the  assailants  by  darts  and  stones,  heaps  of  which
lay  ready  for  use.  Another  stage  of  the  same  kind  ctnn-
mands  the  steep  avenue  from  the  back,  and  stands  also
within  the  pallisade."*  Within  the  pallisades  they  had
reduced  the  ground  "not  to  one  level,  but  to  several,  rising
in  stages  one  above  the  other,  like  an  amphitheatre,  each  of
which  is  enclosed  within  its  separate  pallisade."  These
different  platforms  communicated  only  by  narrow  passages,  so
that  each  one  was  capable  of  separate  defence ;  and  they  were
no.  i».  provided  with  large  stores  of  dried  fish,  fern-

roots,  etc.  As  the  natives,  when  first  dis<
covered,  had  no  bows  and  arrows,  nor  even
slings,  in  fact  no  "missile  weapon  except  the
lance,  which  was  thrown  by  hand,"  such  posi-
tions as  these  must  have  been  almost  improg-
nable.  Their  principal  weapon  was  the
patoo  patoo  (Fig.  150)  which  was  fastened  to
the  wrist  by  a  strong  strap,  lest  it  should  be
wrenched  from  them.  They  had  no  defen-
sive armour,  but  besides  their  weapons  the
chiefs  carried  a  "  staff  of  distinction."

Their    canoes  were  well   built    and    re-
sembled those  of  tlie  other  islands.     Many
of  them,  however,  were  broad  enough  to  sail
without  an  outrigger.     The  two  ends  were
Pmtoo  p«ioo.        often  ingeniously  carved.
The  dead  were  wrapped  in  native  cloth,  and  either  buried
■  Cook's  Firat  Vojaige,  p.  343.  t  Fonter's  Obwrvatioiu,  l.e.  p.  S26.


BTJBIAL.      MUSIC.      CHARACTER.  369

in  a  contracted  posturei  or  exposed  for  a  while  on  small
square  platforms;  when  the  flesh  had  decayed  away^  the
bones  were  washed,  and  finally  deposited  in  a  small  coTered
box,  which  was  generally  elevated  on  a  column  in  or  near
the  Tillage.*  In  some  districts,  however,  they  were  usually
thrown  into  the  sea,  except  indeed  those  that  were  killed  in
battle.  These  were  generally  eaten  hy  their  enemies.  None
of  the  objects  used  by  the  dead  during  his  last  illness  were
ever  employed  again ;  t  they  were  generally  broken  or  buried
with  the  deceased.  In  one  case  a  moa's  egg  has  been  found
in  the  hands  of  a  dead  Maori,  who  was  buried  as  usual  in  a
sitting  posture.  The  egg  was  perfect,  J  and  may  have  been
intended  to  serve  as  food  for  the  dead.

Their  principal  musical  instrument  was  the  flute,  of  which
they  had  three  or  four  varieties.  D'UrviUe  §  also  observed
among  them  a  kind  of  lyre,  with  three  or  four  strings.  They
used  large  shells,  too,  aa  a  kind  of  trumpet.  They  were  very
fond  of  singing,  of  poetry,  and  of  dances.  The  latter  were
of  two  kinds,  warlike  and  amorous*

.,  In  character  the  New  Zealanders  were  proud,  jealous,
irritable,  cruel,  and  implacable ;  but  at  the  same  time  sen-
sible, generous,  sincere,  hospitable,  and  aflectionate.  Like
other  Polynesians,  the  Maories  were  much  given  to  in-
fanticide. ||  The  girls  before  marriage  were  allowed  great
freedom.  When  once  married,  however,  the  women  were
faithful  and  affectionate  to  their  husbands,  by  whom,  on  the
other  hand,  they  were  generally  treated  with  both  kindness
and  respect.  On  the  whole,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the
position  of  the  women  among  the  New  Zealanders  was  hr
from  imsatisfactory.  The  Maories  were  perpetually  at  war
during  life,  and  hoped  to  continue  so  after  death.     Heaven

*  Dieffenbachj  l,e.  p.  63 ;  Fitzroy,  l.e.  p.  679.        f  D'Unille,  yol.  li.,  p.  5Z6f,
X  Zoolog:i8t,  February,  1865,  p.  9464.  {  l,e,  Tol.  ii.,  p.  601.

I  Bieffenbach,  Le.  p.  16.

24


370  KELiaioF.

they  regarded  as  a  place  where  fliere  would  be  contmual  feaste
of  fish  and  sweet  potatoes ;  where  they  would  be  always  fight-
ijagy  and  always  victorious.  Whether  they  can  be  said  to  have
had  a  religion,  or  not,  depends  upon  the  meaning  we  attach
to  the  word.  They  believed  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,
but  not  in  the  resurrecticMQ.  of  the  body,  an  article  of  fSsdth
which,  as  Mr.  Marsdrai  tells  us,  flie  nussionaries  could  not
induce  them  to  accept.  They  had  no  idea  of  an  Almighty
God,  but  believed  in  a  spirit  named  Atouai  who  was  a  cruel
cannibal  like  themselves.  When  any  one  was  ill,  Atoua  was
supposed  to  be  devouring  his  inside,  and  they  endeavoured
to  lighten  hm  away  by  curses  and  threats.*  This  we  may
regard  as  a  Ipnd  of  negative  worship ;  but  on  other  occasions
they  certainly  offered  human  and  other  sacrific^^  in  the  vain
hope  of  appeasing  his  wrath.  They  did  not  worship  idols,
but  many  of  the  priests  seem  to  have  really  thought  that
they  had  been  in  actual  oommunioatiQn  with  the  Atoua ;  and
some  of  ihe  eaxlj  missionaries  were  indined  to  believe  that
Satan  may  have  been  permitted  to  practise  a  deception  upon
them*  in  order  to  strengthen  his  power.  However  extra-
ordinary this  may  appear,  the  same  was  the  case  in  Tahiti.
''  In  addition,'*  says  Mr.  Illis,  ''  to  the  firm  belief  which
many  who  were  sorcerers,  or  agents  of  the  infernal  powers,
and  others  who  were  the  victims  oj^  incantation,  still  main-
tain, some  of  the  early  missionaries  are  disposed  to  think
this  wafl  the  fSBu;t."t  Even  Mr.  Ellis  himself  was  of  the
same  opinion.  With  such  low  ideas  of  the  Divinity,  it  is
perhaps  not  surprising  that  some  of  flie  chie&  were  looked
upon  as  gods,  even  during  Ufe.  Watches  and  white  men
also  were  at  first  regarded  as  deities ;  the  latter  not  perhaps
unnaturally,  as  being  armed  with  thunder  and  lightning.

The  cannibalism  of  the  New  Zealander  was  a  very  different
habit  from  that  of  flie  Feegeean.     No  doubt  he  enjoyed  his

*  Mitrionary  BegiBter,  Not.  1819.      f  Polynesian  Besearches,  toI.  ii.,  p.  226.


CAl^NIBALISBi.  371

meals  of  human  flesh;  all  people  appear  to  have  done  .so,
who  have  once  overcome  the  natural  horror  which  must,  one
would  suppose,  have  been  at  first  experienced.  But  the
cannibalifim  of  a  New  Zealander  was  a  ceremony,  not  a  meal ;
the  object  was  something  very  different  from  mere  sensual  gra-
tification ;  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  his  religion,  as  a
sort  of  unholy  sacrament.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  after
a  battle,  the  bodies  which  they  preferred  were  not  those  of
plump  young  men,  or  tender  damsels,  but  of  the  most  celebrated
chiefs,  however  old  and  dry  they  might  be,*  In  fact,  they
believed  that  it  was  not  only  the  material  substance  which
they  thus  appropriated,  but  also  the  spirit,  the  ability,  and  the
glory  of  him  whom  they  devoured.  The'  greater  the  number
of  corpses  they  had  eaten,  the  higher  they  thought  would
be  their  position  in  the  world  to  come.  Under  such  a  creed
there  is  a  certain  diabolical  nobility  about  the  habit,
which  is,  at  any  rate,  far  removed  from  the  grovelling  sen-
suality of  a  Feegee.  To  be  eaten  was,  on  the  other  hand,  the
greatest  misfortune  that  could  happen  to  a  New  Zealander ;
since  he  believed  that  the  soul  was  thus  destroyed  as  well  as
the  body.  The  chief  who  could  both  kill  and  devour  his  enemy
had  nothing  more  to  fear  &om  him  either  in  this  world  or
the  next ;  on  the  contrary,  the  strength,  ability,  and  prestige
against  which  he  had  had  to  contend,  were  not  only  con-
quered, but,  by  this  dreadful  process,  incorporated  with,  and
added  to  his  own.

In  other  cases  slaves  were  killed  and  eaten  in  honor  of
the  gods.  The  New  Zealanders  declared  that  criminals  alone
were  thus  treated.  Even  if  this  was  the  case,  the  custom  was
horrible  enough ;  but  religious  persecutions  have  scarcely
ceased  in  Europe  even  now,  nor  is  it  so  very  long  since  the
fire  and  the  stake  were  regarded  as  necessary  for  the  preser-
vation of  Christianity  itself.     E'hongui  evidently  considered

•  D'UrYille,  vol.  ii.,  p.  547.


372  TAHITI.

tbat  the  whole  analogy  of  nature  was  in  favor  of  cannibalijBm.
He  was  surprised  at  the  horror  of  it  felt  by  D'TJryille.  Big
fish,  he  said,  eat  little  fish;  insects  devour  insects;  large
birds  feed  upon  small  ones ;  it  is  in  accordance  with  the
whole  analogy  of  nature  that  men  should  eat  flieir  enemies.*

TahUi.

Tahiti,  the  Queen  of  Islands,  has  excited  the  wonder
and  admiration  of  almost  all  those  by  whom  it  has  been
visited.  In  some  respects  the  Tahitians  were  surpassed  by
other  South  Sea  Islanders ;  the  Feegeeans,  for  instance,  being
as  we  have  seen,  acquainted  with  pottery, — ^but  on  the  whole
they  may  be  taken  as  representing  the  highest  stage  in  civil-
isation to  which  man  has  in  any  country  raised  himself  before
the  discovery  or  introduction  of  metallic  implements.  It  is
not,  indeed,  at  all  probable  that  any  inhabitants  of  the  great
continents  were  so  far  advanced  in  civilisation  during  their
Stone  age.  Doubtless,  the  Society  Islanders  would  not  have
remained  without  metal,  if  the  country  had  afforded  them
the  means  of  obtaining  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  Europe  were  confined  to  the  use  of  stone-
weapons  only  until  they  became  acquainted  with  the  su-
periority of,  and  acquired  the  art  of  working  in  copper,
bronze,  or  iron ;  and  it  is  evident  that  a  nation  would  in  all
probability  discover  the  use  of  metal,  before  attaining  the
highest  pitch  of  civilisation  which,  without  such  aid,  it
would  be  possible  for  mankind  to  attain.

The  tools  of  the  Tahitians  when  first  discovered  were  made
of  stone,  bone,  shell,  or  wood.  Of  metal  they  had  no  idea.
When  they  first  obtained  nails,  they  mistook  them  for  the
young  shoots  of  some  very  hard  wood,  and  hoping  that  life
might  not  be  quite  extinct,  planted  a  number  of  them  care-
fully in  their  gardens.t

•  Vol.  ii.,  p,  548.  t  Ellis,  Polyneaan  Besearches,  p.  298.


IHPLEHEHT8.  o7o

In  a  very  short  time,  howerer,  the  earlier  weapons  were
entirely  replaced  hy  those  of  iron ;  and  iu  his  last  voyage
Captain  Cook  tells  us  *  that  "  a  8tone  hatchet  is,  at  present,
as  rare  a  thing  amongst  them,  aa  an  iron  one  vas  eight  years
ago ;  and  a  chisel  of  bone  or  stone  is  not  to  be  seen."
The  stone  axee,  or  rather  p,o_  m,

adzes,  were  of  Tarious
sizes ;  those  intended  for
cutting  down  trees  weigh  I
six  or  seven  pounds,  the
little  ones  which  were  used
for  carving,  only  a  few
ounces.  All  of  them  re-
quired continual  sharp-
ening, and  a  stone  was
always  kept  in  readiness
for  this  purpose.  The  na-
tives were  very  skilful  in
the  use  of  their  adzes,
nevertheless  to  feU  a  tree
was  a  work  of  several
days.  The  chisels,  or
gouges,  were  of  bone,
generally  that  of  a  man's
arm  betwewi  the  wrist
and  elbow.  Pieces  of  co-
ral were  used  as  rasps,
and  splinters  of  bamboo
for  knives.  For  cultiva-
ting the  ground  they  had  ^^^  ^^  ^  ,.^  ^„^
instruments  of  hard  wood,
about  five  feet  long,  narrow,  with  sharp  edges  and  pointed.

•  Yojage  to  the  Faciflc  Ocean,  toI.  ii ,  p.  1  ST.


374  FISH-HOOKS.      NETS.

ThesetheytiBed  as  spades  or  hoes.*  They  had  fish-hooks  made
of  mother-of-pearl,  and  every  fisherman  made  them  for  him-
self.    They  generally  served  for  the  double  purpose  of  hook
Tio.  IS!.  and  bait.    "The  shellf  is  firet  cut  into

square  pieces,  by  the  edge  of   another
shell,   and   wrought   into    a    form    cor-
responding with  the  outline  of  the  hook
by  pieces  of  coral,  which  are  suflSciently
rough  to  perform  the  office  of  a  file ;  a
hole  is  then  bored  in  the  middle,  the
drill  being  no  other  than  the  first  stcme
they  pick  up  that  has  a'  sharp  comer;
this  they  fiz  into  the  end  of  a  piece  of
bamboo,  and  turn  it  between  the  hands
like  a  chocolate  mill ;  when  the  shell  is
perforated  and  the  bole  sufficiently  wide,
a  small  file  of  coral  is  introduced,  by  the
application  of  which  the   book  is  in   a
f  short  time  completed,  few  costing  the
:  artificer  more  time  than  a  quarter  of  an
hour.    From  the  bark  of  the  Foerou,  a
species  of  Hibiscus,  they  made  ropes  and
lines,  Irom  the  thickness  of  an  inch  to  the
s™u>B^n.h.h«t     8izeofaBmallpacktbread;withthe8ethey
make  nets  for  fishing."     They  had  also  a  kind  of  seine  net,
made  "  of  a  coarse  broad  grass,  the  blades  of  which  are  like
flags :  these  they  twist  and  tie  together  in  a  loose  manner,
till  the  net,  which  is  about  as  wide  as  a  large  sack,  is  £rom
sixty  to  eighty  iathoms  long ;  this  they  haul  in  shoal-smooth
water,  and  its  own  weight  keeps  it  so  close  to  the  ground
that  scarcely   a  single  fish  can  escape."     They  also  used
certain  leaves  and    fruit  which,   when  thrown  into  the

*  Wilson,  UiniDnuy  Tojage  to  the  Sonth  Pidfic,  p.  i*6.
t  Gook'i  Voya^  Bomid  the  World,  toI.  i.,  p.  <SS ;  Tol.  ii.,  p.  3L8.


BASKETS.      MAIS.      CLOTH.  875

water,  inebriated  the  fish  to  such  a  degree^  that  thejr  might
be  caaght  by  the  hands.*  Their  fishing-lines  were  made
of  the  bark  of  the  Erowa,  a  kind  of  nettle  which  grows  in
the  monntains,  and  were  described  as  ^*  the  best  fishing-lines
in  the  world,"  better  even  Hibxi  our  strongest  silk  lines.
They  also  nsed  ihe  fibres  of  the  cocoa-nut  for  making  threads,
with  which  they  fastened  together  the  yarions  parts  of  their
canoes.  They  were  rety  dexterous  in  making  basket  and
wioker-worky  ''of  a  thousand  different  patterns,  many  of
tham  exceedingly  neat;''  they  also  made  many  sorts  of  mats
from  rashes^  grass,  and  bark,  which  were  woren  with  great
neatness  iuid  regulaority,  although  entirely  by  hand  and  with-
out any  loom  or  machinery,  f  But  their  principal  manu-
fSsMsture  was  a  kind  of  cloth,  made  from  bark,  and  of  which
.there  were  three  varieties,  obtained  nspectively  from  the
paper-mulberry,  which  was  the  best,  the  bread-fruit  tree,  and
a  kind  of  fig*  This  last»  though  less  omatnental,  was  more
useful  than  either  of  the  others,  because  it  resisted  water,
which  they  did  not.  All  three  kinds  of  doth  were  made  in
the  same  way,  the  difference  between  them  being  only  in  the
material.  Wh«i  the  trees  were  of  a  proper  size,  tiiat  is  to
say  about  six  or  eight  feet  high,  and  somewhat  thicker  than  a
man's  thumb,  they  were  pulled  up  and  ihe  roots  and  branches
were  cut  offl  The  bark  being  slit  up  longitudinally,  it  peeled
off  readily,  and  was  then  soaked  for  some  time  in  running
water.  After  this  the  green  outside  bark  was  carefully  8cn^>ed
off  with  a  sheU,  and  the  strips  were  laid  out  in  the  evening  to
dry,  being  placed  one  by  the  side  of  another  "  till  they  at%
about  a  foot  broad,  and  two  or  three  layers  are  also  laid  one
upon  ike  other."  By  the  morning  a  great  part  of  the  water
had  drained  off  or  evaporated,  and  ''  the  several  fibres  adhere
together,  so  as  that  the  whole  may  be  raised  from  the  ground

*  Fonter,  Obferratione  made  daring  a  Voyage  Bound  the  World,  p.  463 ;
EUis,  ToL  iL,  p.  288.  f  £1U%  toL  ii.,  pp.  179, 180.


376  DRES8.

in  one  piece."  It  was  then  placed  on  the  smooth  side  of  a
long  piece  of  wood,  and  beaten  by  the  women-servants  with
a  wooden  instrument,  shaped  like  a  square  razor-strap,  and
about  a  foot  long.  The  four  sides  of  this  instrument  were
'^marked,  lengthways,  witib  smaSL  gpooves  or  furrows,  of
different  degrees  of  fineness ;  those  on  one  side  being  of  a
width  and  depth  sufficient  to  receive  a  small  packthread,  and
the  others  finer  in  a  regular  gradation,  so  that  the  last  are
not  more  than  equal  to  sewing  silk.''  Th^  beat  the  cloth
first  with  the  coarsest  side  and  afterwards  with  the  others,
ending  with  the  finest :  under  this  treatment  it  expanded
greatly,  and  might  be  made  almost  as  thin  as  a  muslin.  The
different  pieces  of  bark  by  this  treatment  were  so  closely
fisustened  together,  that  the  cloth  might  be  washed  and  wrung
out  without  any  fear  of  tearing ;  but  even  if  it  were  acci-
dentally broken,  it  was  repaired  without  difficidty,  by  pasting
on  a  patch  with  a  gluten  prepared  from  the  root  of  the  pea ;
this  was  done  so  nicely  that  it  could  not  be  disoovered.  This
cloth  was  cool  and  agreeable  to  the  touch,  being  even  softer
than  our  broadcloth.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the
fineness  was  regulated  according  to  the  purpose  for  which  it
was  intended.  The  two  first  kinds  were  easily  bleached,  and
then  dyed  of  various  colors,  generally  red  and  yellow.  Both
of  these  were  vegetable  colors,  and  not  very  fast.

They  had  various  slarange  and  complicated  dresses  for  great
occasions,  but  their  ordinary  clothes  were  very  simple,  and
consisted  of  two  parts.  One  of  them  was  a  piece  of  cloth
with  a  hole  **  in  the  middle  to  put  the  head  through,"  and
long  enough  to  reach  from  the  shoulder  to  the  knee.  The
other  was  wrapped  round  the  waist  so  as  to  hang  down  like  a
petticoat,  as  low  as  the  knee ;  this  was  called  the  Parou.  Fre-
quently also  they  wore  a  piece  of  cloth  tied  round  the  head  like
a  turban.    The  dress  of  the  Queen  is  thus  described  by  Ellis  :*

•  l.p.  p.  148.


ORNAKEirrS.      HOUSES.  377

"  She  was  .attired  in  a  light,  loose,  and  flowing  dress  of
beautifully  white  native  cloth,  tasteftilly  fastened  on  the
left  shoulder,  and  reaching  to  the  ande ;  her  hair  waa  rather
lighter  than  that  of  the  natives  in  general;  and  on  her
head  she  wore  a  light  and  elegant  native  bonnet,  of  green
and  yellow  cocoa-nut  leaves;  each  ear  was  perforated,  and
in  the  perforation  two  or  three  flowers  of  the  fragrant  Cape
jessamine  were  inserted."  The  dress  of  the  men  was  very
similar,  but  instead  of  the  petticoat,  they  brought  the  cloth
between  the  legs ;  this  was  called  the  Maro.  In  hot  weather*
and  at  noon  both  sexes  went  almost  naked,  wearing  only  the
cloth  round  the  waist  Besides  the  turbans  and  head-dresses
of  leaves,  they  sometimes  wore  long  plaits  of  human  hair,
which  they  wound  about  the  head  in  such  a  manner  as
to  produce  a  very  pretty  eflect.  They  were  very  clean
both  in  their  persons  and  their  clothes ;  constantly  washing
three  times  a  day.  Ornaments  were  worn  by  the  m^
as  much  as  by  the  women^  and  consisted  of  feathers,
flowers,  pieces  of  shells,  and  pearls.  Tattooing  also  was
almost  universal.;  and  a  person  not  properly  tattooed  would
'^be  as  much  reproached  and  shimned,  as  if  with  us  he
should  go  about  the  streets  naked.'' f  They  anointed  their
heads  frequently  with  perfumed  cocoa-nut  oil,  but  had  no
combs,  which  in  so  hot  a  country  must  have  been  much
wanted.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  hair  of  flie  grown-up
people  was  very  neatly  dressed.

Their  houses  were  used  principally  as  dormitories.  They
were  made  of  wood,  and  were  generally  about  twenty-four
feet  long,  eleven  wide,  and  nine  feet  high.  They  had  no
side  waUs,  but  the  roof  reached  to  within  about  three  feet
and  a  half  of  the  ground.  Palm  leaves  took  the  place  of
thatch,  and  the  floor  was  generally  covered  with  soft  hay.

*  The  Sandwich  Islanders  had  small  square  fans  of  mat  or  wicker-work,  with
handles  of  the  same  or  of  wood.  t  Wilson,  /.«.  p.  356.


378  cAivoBs.    MUflia

The  canoes  resembled  those  of  the  Feegeeans,  but  are  said
to  have  been  scarcely  so  well  built.  To  prepare  the  planks
was  no  easy  task,  but  the  great  difficulty  was  to  fasten  them
together.  This  was  effected  by  '*  strong  thongs  of  plaiting,
which  are  passed  several  times  through  holes  that  are  bored
wifli  a  gouge  or  auger  of  bone."*  The  length  of  the  canoes
varied  from  ninety  feet  to  ten,  **  but  the  breadth  is  by  no
means  in  proportion ;  for  those  of  ten  feet  are  about  a  foot
wide,  and  those  of  more  than  seventy  are  scarcely  two."t
These  larger  ones  were  not,  however,  used  singly,  but  were
fastened  together  side  by  side,  in  the  mauner  already  de-
scribed. A  canoe  without  an  outrigger  seemed  to  them  an
impossibility,  f  The  labor  of  constructing^  these  canoes  must
have  been  very  great ;  nevertheless,,  the  South  Sea  Islanders
possessed  large  numbers  of  them.  Chi  one  occasion  Captain
Cook  saw  more  than  three  hundred  in  one  place;  and,
without  counting  the  smaller  vessels,,  he  estimated  the  whole
naval  force  of  the  Society  Islands  at  one  thousand  seven
hundred  war  canoes,  manned  by  sixty-eight  thousand  men.§

Their  principal  musical  instrument  was  the  drum ;  it  was
made  from  a  piece  of  solid  wood,.  hoUowed  out,  and  covered  over
with  shark^s  skin.  They  had  also  a  kind  of  trumpet  made  of
a  large  shell,  with  a  hole  at  the  small  end  into  which  they
fastened  a  bamboo  cane  about  three  feet  long.  Their  flutes
were  of  bamboo,  and  were  blown  with  the  nose.  They  had
various  kinds  of  games,  some  of  which  appeared  to  have
resembled  our  hockey  and  football.  They  were  also  very
fond  of  dancing.

They  were)  quite  ignorant  of  pottery,  but  had  large  dishes
made  of  polished  wood.  The  shells  of  cocoa-nuts  were  used
as  water-bottles  and  cups.    They  were  scraped  thin,  polished,

*  Cook*i  First  Yojage,   p.    225 ;  t  Ellis,  l,e,  yol.  ii.,  p.  56,

Fonter,  Lc.  p.  459.  {  Gook'i    Second   Voyage,   toI.  L,

t  Cook's  First  Voyage,  p.  221.  p.  849.


FURNITURE.      WEAPONS.  879

often  very  ingeniously  carved,  and  kept  extremely  clean.
OeneraUy  the  natives  of  Tahiti  sat  cross-legged  on  mats
spread  on  the  floor  ;  bnt  the  chiefs  had  often  four-legged
stools.  Chairs  and  tables  were  unknown.  They  slept
also  on  mats  and  used  a  wooden  pillow,  very  much  resem-
bling a  small  stooL  The  upper  side  was  curved,  like  the
seat  of  the  stool,  to  admit  the  head.  Each  house  also  con-
tained a  light  post,  planted  in  the  floor,  and  with  several
projections,  from  which  the  various  dishes,  calabashes  of
water,  baskets  of  food,  etc,  were  hung.*

Their  weapons  were  formidable,  though  simple.  They
consisted  of  slings,  pikes  headed  with  stone,  and  long  clubs
made  of  hard,  heavy  wood.  "With  the  former  they  were  very
skilftd.  Their  slingstones  were  of  two  kinds,  ''either  smooth,
being  polished  by  friction  in  the  bed  of  a  river,  or  sharp,
angular  and  rugged;  these  were  called  qfai  ara — ^fficed  or
edged  stones.''  f  We  have  already  mentioned  (p.  76)  that
two  sorts  of  slingstones,  closely  corresponding  to  these,  were
used  by  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  Europe.  It  would  be
interesting  to  know  the  relative  advantage  of  the  two  classes,
which  surely  cannot  have  been  used  for  exactly  the  same
purposes.  They  had  also  bows  and  arrows ;  which,  however,
were  not  sufficiently  strong  to  be  used  in  warfare.  The  bow
strings  were  made  of  Eoava  bark.$  The  Society  Islanders
are  said  to  have  been  cruel  in  war,  but  according  to
Captain  Cook  ''  they  are  seldom  disturbed  by  either  foreign
or  domestic  troubles.*'  Though  not  cowards,  they  regard  it
as  ''  much  less  disgraceM  to  run  away  from  an  enemy  with
whole  bones,  than  to  fight  and  be  wounded." §

"  Of  tame  animals  they  had  only  hogs,  dogs,  and  poultry  ;||
neither  was  there  a  wild  animal  in  the  island,  except  ducks,


*  Ellis,  l.e.  vol.  ii.,  p.  184.
t  EUis,  l.e.  vol.  ii.,  p.  49.
X  Wilson,  l.e,  p.  368.


{  Wilson,  I.e.  p.  363.
I  Wallis'  Voyage  Round  the  World;
Hawkesworth's  Voyages,  toL  L,  p.  482.


880  FOOD.      FIRE.

pigeons,  parroquets,  with  a  few  other  birds,  and  rats,  there
being  no  other  quadruped,  nor  any  serpent."*  The  dogs
were  kept  entirely  for  food,  and  Captain  Cook  assures  us  that
"  a  South  Sea  dog  was  Kttle  inferior  to  an  English  lamb ;  their
excellence  is  probably  owing  to  their  being  kept  up,  and  fed
wholly  on  vegetables."  The  natives  preferred  dog  to  pork.
From  the  sea  they  obtained  excellent  fish  and  sheU-fish.  They
had  also  bread-fruit,  bananas,  plantains,  yams,  cocoa-nuts,  pota-
toes, the  sugar  cane,  a  fruit  not  unlike  an  apple,  and  several
other  plants  which  served  for  fruit,  and  required  very  little
culture.  The  bread-fruit  tree  supplied  them  with  abundance
of  fresh  fruit  for  eight  months,  and  during  the  other  four
they  used  "  mahie,"  which  is  a  kind  of  sour  paste,  prepared
from  the  fermented  ripe  fruit.  It  is  probable  that  nine-
tenths  of  their  diet  consisted  of  vegetable  food ;  and  the
common  people  scarcdy  ever  tasted  either  pork  or  dog,
although  the  hogs  appear  to  have  been  very  abundant.

They  obtained  fire  by  friction.  When  the  wood  was  quite
dry  the  process  did  not  take  longer  than  two  minutes^  but  in
wet  weather  it  was  very  tedious.  Having  no  pottery,  they
did  not  boil  their  food.  It  is  impossible,  says  Wallis,  ''to
describe  the  astonishment  they  expressed  when  they  saw  the
gunner,  who,  while  he  kept  the  market,  used  to  dine  on
shore,  dress  his  pork  and  poultry  by  boilinj^  them  in  a  pot ;
having,  as  I  have  before  observed,  no  vessel  that  would  bear
the  fire,  they  had  no  idea  of  hot  water."  t  Captain  Cook
also  expressly  states  that  ''they  have  but  two  ways  of  ap-
plying fire  to  dress  flieir  food,  broiling  and  baking."^
Mr.  Tylor,  however,  has  pointed  out§  that  they  were  ac-
quainted with  the  use  of  boiling  stones,  and  that  they
could  not  therefore  have  been  entirely  ignorant  of  hot
water.      In  order  to  bake  a  hog,  they  made  a  small  pit

•  Cook'B  Voyage  Bound  the  World,  p.  187.  t  ^.«.  vol.  i.,  p.  484.

I  Second  Voyage,  yoI.  ii.,  p.  197.  }  Early  History  of  Mankind,  p.  266.


w

OCX>KERT.      AVA.  381

in  the  ground,  which  they  paved  with  large  stones,  over
which  they  then  lighted  a  fire.  When  the  stones  were
hot  enough,  they  took  out  the  embers,  raked  away  the
ashes,  and  covered  the  stones  with  green  cocoa-nut
leaves.  The  animal  which  was  to  be  dressed,  having  been
cleaned  and  prepared,  was  wrapped  up  in  plantain  leaves,
and  covered  with  the  hot  embers,  on  which  again  they  placed
bread-fruit  and  yams,  which  also  were  wrapped  up  in  plan-
tain leaves.  Over  these  they  spread  the  rest  of  the  embers,
and  some  hot  stones,  finally  covering  the  whole  with  earth.
The  meat  thus  cooked  is  described  as  being  tender  and  full
of  gravy ;  in  fact  both  WaUis  and  Cook  considered  that  it
was  "  better  in  every  respect  than  when  it  is  dressed  in  any
other  way."  For  sauce  they  used  salt  water,  without  which
no  meal  was  ever  eaten,  and  a  kind  of  thick  paste  made  from
the  kernels  of  cocoa-nuts.  At  their  meals  they  drank  either
water  or  cocoa-nut  juice.  The  Sandwich  Islanders  were
very  fond  of  salt  meat,  and  had  regular  salt-pans  on  the
sea-shore.*

The  only  intoxicating  Kquor  was  the  ava,  an  infusion
made  from  the  root,  stalks,  and  leaves  of  a  kind  of  pepper,
which  however,  fortunately  for  them,  was  entirely  forbidden
to  the  women  and  seldom  permitted  to  the  lower  classes.
In  some  of  the  other  islands  this  liquid  was  prepared  in  a
very  disgusting  way.  The  roots  were  broken  in  pieces,
cleaned,  chewed,  and  then  placed  in  a  wooden  bowl,  mixed
with  a  certain  quantity  of  water,  and  stirred  up  with  the
hands.  In  Tahiti,  however,  the  chewing  was  dispensed  with.
The  wooden  bowls  out  of  which  the  chiefs  drank  their  ava
were  often  veiy  feir  8pecimen8  of  carving.  In  the  Sand-
wich  Islands  they  are  described  as  having  been  ''usually
about  eight  or  ten  inches  in  diameter,  perfectly  round,  and
beautifully  polished.     They  are  supported  by  three,   and

•  Thizd  Voyage,  vol.  iii.,  p.  151.


382  A  chief's  dinner.

sometimes  four^  small  human  figures,  ia  various  attitudes.
Some  of  them  rest  on  the  hands  of  their  supporters,  extended
oyer  the  head ;  others  on  the  head  and  hands ;  and  some  on
the  shoulders.''  These  figures  are  said  to  have  been  '^  ac-
curately proportioned  and  neatly  finished,  and  even  the
anatomy  of  the  muscles,  in  supporting  the  weight,  well
expressed.'**

Captain  Gookf  gives  an  interesting  description  of  the
manner  in  which  the  chiefs  dined.  They  had  no  table,  and
each  person  ate  alone  and  in  silence.  Some  leaves  were  spread
on  the  ground  to  serve  as  a  tablecloth,  and  a  basket  was  set  by
the  chief  containing  his  provision,  which,  if  fish  or  flesh,  was
ready  dressed  and  wrapped  in  leaves.  Two  cocoa-nut  shells
were  put  by  the  side,  one  containing  salt  water  and  the  other
&esh.  He  first  washed  his  hands  and  mouth  thoroughly
with  the  fresh  water,  and  this  '^  he  repeats  almost  continually
through  the  meal.  He  then  takes  part  of  his  provision  out
of  the  basket,  which  generally  consists  of  a  small  fish  or  two,
two  or  three  bread-fruits,  fourteen  or  fifteen  ripe  bananas,  or
six  or  seven  apples."  He  began  by  eating  some  bread-fruit,
at  the  same  time  breaking  one  of  the  fishes  into  the  salt
water.  He  then  took  up  the  bits  of  fish  in  his  fingers,  in
such  a  maimer  as  to  get  with  it  as  much  salt  water  as
possible,  and  very  frequently  he  took  a  mouthful  of  the  salt
water,  either  out  of  the  cocoa-nut  or  in  his  hand.  Sometimes
also  he  drank  the  juice  of  a  cocoa-nut.  When  he  had  done
his  bread-fruit  and  fish,  he  began  his  plantains  or  apples,
after  which  he  ate  some  more  bread-fruit,  beaten  into  a  sort
of  paste  and  generally  flavored  with  some  banana  or  some
other  fruit.  For  a  knife  he  used  either  a  shell  or  a  piece  of
split  bamboo,  and  in  conclusion  he  again  washed  his  hands
and  mouth.     They  were  quite  unacquainted  with  forks,  and

♦  Third  Voyage,  vol.  iii.,  p.  148.  f  First  VoyagCi  vol.  ii.,  p.  200.


80LITART  MSALS.  383

Captain  Wallis*  tells  us  that,  during  hxB  yiflit,  one  of  the
natives  who  ''tried  to  feed  himself  with  that  instrum^ity
could  not  guide  it,  but  by  the  mere  force  of  habit  his  hand
came  to  his  mouth  and  the  Tictuals  at  the  end  of  the  fork
went  away  to  his  ear."  Nor  do  they  use  plates.  Poulaho,
Ohief  of  the  Friendly  Islands,  dining  one  day  cm  board  the
ship,  was  so  much  struck  by  the  pewter  plates,  that  Captain
Cook  gave  him  one.  He  did  not^  however,  intend  to  employ
it  in  the  usual  manner,  but  said  that  ^'  whenever  he  should
have  occasion  to  visit  any  of  the  other  islands,  he  would
leave  this  plate  behind  him  at  Tongataboo,  as  a  sort  of
representative  in  his  absence."  t

Captain  Cook  was  much  surprised  to  find  that  a  people
who  were  so  booMb,  and  who  enjoyed  8o  much  the  society
of  women,  never  made  their  meals  together.  Even  brothers
and  sisters  had  each  their  own  basket,  and  when  they  wished
to  eat  would  go  out,  ''  sit  down  upon  the  ground,  at  two  or
three  yards  distance  from  each  other,  and  turning  their  faces
different  ways,  take  their  repast  without  interchanging  a
single  word."  They  ate  alone,  they  said,  "because  it  was
right,"  but  why  it  was  right  they  were  unable  to  explain.
We  must,  however,  remember  that  these  isknd^rs  were
together  much  more  than  we  are.  We  enjoy  a  sociable
meal,  because  our  numerous  avocations  keep  us  apsui;  so
much  at  other  times  ;  but  among  a  people  whose  wants
were  supplied  with  so  little  exertion  on  their  part,  who  were
all  day  long  together,  and  had  no  rooms  into  which  they
could  retire  and  be  alone,  it  must  have  been  a  great  thing  to
have  some  way  of  escaping  from  their  friends  and  being
quiet,  without  giving  offence.  As  there  were  no  stated  times
for  meals,  a  man  who  wished  to  be  alone  need  only  to  take
out  his  basket  of  provisions,  and  he  might  be  sure  that  he

•  Voyage  Bound  the  World,  p.  482.  f  Third  Voyage,  toI.  i,  p.  326.


384  RURGERY.

wotdd  not  be  disturbed.  This  cnstoniy  therefore,  seems  to
have  been  both  ingenious  and  convenient.*

Although  they  usually  went  to  bed  soon  after  dark,  still  the
natives  of  Tahiti  were  not  entirely  without  candles;  for
which  they  used  the  '^kernels  of  a  kind  of  oily  nut,  which
they  stick  one  over  another  upon  a  skewer  that  is  thrust
through  the  middle  of  them."  These  candles  burned  a  con-
siderable time  and  are  said  to  have  given  a  pretty  good  light.
The  Society  Islanders  had  no  knowledge  of  medicine  as  dis-
tinct from  witchcraft ;  but  some  wonderM  stories  are  told  of
their  skill  in  surgery.  I  will  give  perhaps  the  most  extra-
ordinary. "  It  is  related/'  says  Mr.  Ellis,  "  although,"  he
adds,  with  perfect  gravity,  "  I  confess  I  can  scarcely  believe
it,  that  on  some  occasions,  when  the  brain  has  been  injured
as  well  as  the  bone,  they  have  opened  the  skull,  taken  out
the  injured  portion  of  the  brain,  and,  having  a  pig  ready,
have  killed  it,  taken  out  the  pig's  brains,  put  them  in  the
man's  head,  and  covered  them  up."t

The  nostrils  of  the  female  infants  were  often  pressed  or
spread  out  during  infancy,  because  they  looked  on  a  flat  nose
as  a  mark  of  beauty.  In  the  same  way  the  boys  sometimes
had  their  forehead  and  the  back  of  their  head  pressed  up-
wards, so  that  the  upper  part  of  the  skull  appeared  in  the
shape  of  a  wedge.  This  was  supposed  to  make  them  look
more  formidable  in  war.  X

The  dead  were  not  buried  at  once,  but  were  placed  on  a  plat-
form raised  several  feet  above  the  groimd,  and  neatly  railed
in  with  bamboo.     The  body  was  covered  with  a  cloth,  and

*  Since  the  above  was  written,  I  dinner  or  breakfast  was  brought  to  me.

have  met  with  the  following  passage  in  This  gave  me  a  few  moments'  relief
Bnrchell :  "  I  had  sufficient  reason  for  ^  from  the  fatigue  of  incessant  oouTersa-

admiring  one  of  the  customs  of  the  tion."    Trayels  in  Southern  Africa,  yoI.

Bachapins ;  that,  notwithstanding  they  ii.,  p.  408.

never  at  any  other  time  left  me  alone,  f  I.e.  vol.  ii.,  p.  277.

they  always  retired  the  moment  my  %  ^^^  ^'C  vol.  i.,  p.  848.


BURIAL.      BURIAL-PLACES.  385

sheltered  by  a  roof.  By  the  side  are  deposited  the  weapons
of  the  deceased  and  a  supply  of  food  and  water.  When  the
body  has  entirely  decayed,  the  bones  are  collected,  carefiilly
-cleaned  and  buried,  according  to  the  rank  of  the  deceased,
either  within  or  without  a  "morai."*  The  krgest  moral
seen  by  Captain  Cook  was  the  one  prepared  for  Oamo  and
Oberea,  who  were  the  then  reigning  sovereigns.  This  was
indeed  the  '' principal  piece  of  architecture  in  the  island.
It  was  a  pile  of  stonework,  raised  pyramidically,  upon  an
oblong  base,  or  square,  two  hundred  and  sixty  seven  feet
long,  and  eighty-seven  wide.  It  was  built  like  the  small
pyramidal  mounts  upon  which  we  sometimes  fix  the  pillar  of
a  sun-dial,  where  each  side  is  a  flight  of  steps ;  the  steps,
however,  at  the  sides,  were  broader  than  those  at  the  ends,
so  that  it  terminated  not  in  a  square  of  the  same  figure  with
the  base,  but  in  a  ridge,  like  the  roof  of  a  house :  there
were  eleven  of  these  steps,  each  of  which  was  four  feet  high,
so  that  the  height  of  the  pile  was  forty-four  feet ;  each  step
was  formed  of  one  course  of  white  coral  stone,  which  was
neatly  squared  and  polished ;  the  rest  of  the  mass,  for  there
was  no  hollow  within,  consisted  of  round  pebbles,  which,
fix>m  the  regularity  of  their  figure,  seemed  to  have  been
wrought."  f  A  very  similar  account  of  this  structure  has
been  more  recently  given  by  Wilson,  J  who  makes  the  size
and  height  a  little  greater ;  and  when  it  is  considered  that
this  was  raised  without  the  assistance  of  iron  tools  to  shape
the  stones,  or  of  mortar  to  fasten  them  together,  it  is  im-
possible not  to  be  struck  with  admiration  at  the  magnitude

*  In  some  cases  the  head  is  not  iii.,  p.  6).     In  the  Friendly  Islands,

buried  with  the  other  hones,  hut  is  D'Hrrille  saw   a   similar  mansoleum

deposited  in  a  kind  of  box.  built  with  blocks  of  stone,  some  of

t  Cook's  Voyage  Bound  the  World,  which  were  twenty  feet  long,  six  or

vol.  ii.,  p,  166.    Similar  bnt  somewhat  eight  broad,  and  two  in  height.    They

smaller  morais  were  obserred  in  the  were  neatly  squared.  /.«.  yol.  iy.,  p.  106.

Sandwich  Islands  (Third  Voyage,  toI.  %  ^•^*  P*  ^^7*

25


386  RELIGION.

of  the  enterprise,  and  the  skill  with  which  it  appears  to  have
been  carried  out.  It  is,  perhaps,  the  most  important  monu-
ment which  is  known  to  have  been  constructed  with  stone
tools  only,  and  renders  it  the  less  unlikely  that  some  of  the
large  tumuli  and  other  ancient  monimients  of  Europe  may
belong  to  the  Stone  age.  When  a  chief  died,  his  relations
and  attendants  cut  and  mangled  themselyes  in  a  dreadful
maimer.  They  ran  spears  through  their  thighs,  arms,  and
cheeks,  and  beat  themselyes  about  the  head  with  clubs  "  till
the  blood  ran  down  in  streams."  They  also  frequently  cut
off  the  little  finger  on  these  occasions;  a  curious  custom,
which  is  common  also  in  the  Friendly  Islands.

In  Tiarrabou,  Captain  £!ook  saw  a  rude  figure  of  a  man,
made  of  basket-work  and  about  seven  feet  high.  This  was
intended  as  a  representation  of  one  of  the  inferior  gods,  but
was  said  to  be  the  only  one  on  the  island ;  for  the  natives,
though  they  worshipped  numerous  deities,  to  whom  also
human  sacrifices  were  sometimes  offered,  yet  were  not
idolaters.  Ellis,  however,  saw  among  them  many  rude
idols.*  Captain  Cook  found  their  religion  "like  that  of
most  other  countries,  involved  in  mystery,  and  perplexed
with  apparent  inconsistencies."  t  They  believed  in  the  im-
mortality of  the  soul,  and  in  "two  situations  of  different
degrees  of  happiness,  somewhat  analogous  to  our  heaven  and
hell,"  but  far  from  regarding  them  as  places  of  reward  and
pimishment,  thought  that  the  happiest  lot  was  of  course
intended  for  the  chiefs  and  superior  classes,  the  other  for
the  people  of  inferior  rank.  X  Indeed,  they  did  not  suppose
that  their  actions  here  in  the  least  influenced  their  future
state ;  so  that  their  religion  did  not  act  upon  them  by  pro-
mises or  threats,  and  "their  expressions  of  adoration  and

♦  Ellis,  l.c.  vol.  i.,  p.  526 ;  "Wilson,  Le,  p.  242,

t  See  also  Forster,  Le,  p.  539.

J  Cook's  First  Voyage,  vol.  ii.,  p.  239 :  Ellis,  vol.  i.,  p.  518.


CHARACTER.


887


reverence,  whether  by  words  or  actions,  arise  only  from  a
hmnhle  sense  of  their  own  inferiority,  and  the  ineffiible  ex-
cellence of  divine  perfection."  However  mistaken  they  may
have  been  on  many  points,  however  wrong  many  of  their
customs  doubtless  appear  to  us,  surely  under  such  a  creed  as
this,  good  actions  become  doubly  virtuous,  and  virtue  itself
shines  the  brighter.

They  had  no  laws,  nor  courts  of  justice.  Personal  security
and  the  rights  of  private  property  were  but  little  regarded
among  them.  The  chiefs  and  priests  exercised  an  authority
founded  on  fear  and  superstition.  They  had  no  word  for
"law"  in  the  language.*  It  is  only  fair  to  the  chiefs  to  add
that  they  were  above  being  idle,  and  thought  it  a  disgrace  if
they  did  not  excel  in  all  departments  of  labor.f  In  character
the  inhabitants  of  Tahiti,  according  to  Captain  Cook,  "  were
liberal,  brave,  open,  and  candid,  without  either  suspicion  or
treachery,  cruelty,  or  revenge."  J  They  were  very  anxious
for  education.  The  women  were  affectionate,  tender,  and
obedient ;  the  men  mild,  generous,  slow  to  take  offence,
and  easily  satisfied.  Both  sexes  were  very  healthy.  "I
never  saw  any  one,"  says  Forster,§  "of  a  morose,  peevish,
discontented  disposition  in  the  whole  nation  ;  they  all  join  to
their  cheerful  temper,  a  politeness  and  elegance  which  is
happily  blended  with  the  most  innocent  simplicity  of  man-
ners." Murders  were  very  rare  among  them;  and  though
much  licence  was  permitted  to  the  young  women  before
marriage,  the  married  women,  according  to  Captain  Cook,||
were  as  well  behaved  "as  in  any  other  country  whatever."
They  were  very  thievish ;  but  we  must  consider  the  immense
temptations  to  which  they  were  subjected  and  the,  to  them,
inestimable  value  of  the  articles  which  they  stole.      Like


♦  Ellis,  l.e,  Tol.  ii.,  p.  427.

t  Ellis,  I.e.  vol.  ii.  p.  178.

i  First  Voyage,  toI.  ii.,  p.  188.


§  I.e.  p.  682.

n  Voyage  to  the  South  Pole,  vol.  i.,
p.  187.


388  CHARACTER.

other  sayages  they  resembled  children  in  many  respects,
their  sorrows  were  transient,  their  passions  suddenly  and
strongly  expressed.  On  one  occasion,  Oberea,  the  qneen,
who  was  then  about  forty  years  old,  took  a  particular  fancy
to  a  large  doll,  which  was  accordingly  presented  to  her.
Shortly  afterwards  they  met  Tootahah,  one  of  the  principal
chiefs,  who  became  so  jealous  of  Oberea's  doll,  that  they
were  obliged  to  give  him  one  also.

There  are  scarcely  any  nations,  whether  barbarous  or
oiyilised,  in  which  the  relations  of  the  two  sexes  are  quite
satisfactory.  Savages,  almost  without  exception,  treat  their
women  as  slaves,  and  civilised  nations  too  often  avoid  this
error  only  to  fall  into  others.

The  inhabitants  of  Tahiti  are  said  to  have  been  absolutely
without  any  ideas  of  decency,  or  rather  as  Captain  Cook  puts
it,  perhaps  more  correctly,  "  of  indecency."  This  no  doubt
arose  in  part  &om  their  large  open  houses,  which  were  not
divided  into  separate  rooms.  However  this  may  be,  where
there  was  no  sin,  they  saw  no  shame,  and  it  must  be  confessed
that  in  many  points  their  idea  of  sin  was  very  different  from
ours.  Before,  however,  we  condemn  them,  let  us  remember
that  a  dinner  party  would  have  seemed  as  wrong  to  them  as
many  of  their  customs  do  to  us.  If  the  freedom  both  in
language  and  in  action  which  they  permitted  to  themselves,
seems  to  us  in  many  respects  objectionable,  we  must  not
forget  that  our  ideas  of  delicacy  shut  out  from  general  con-
versation many  subjects  of  great  interest  and  importance.

A  considerable  number  of  the  principal  people  of  both
sexes  in  Tahiti  were  formed  into  an  association  called  the
"  Arreoy,"  all  the  members  of  which  were  regarded  as  being
married  to  one  another.  If  any  of  the  women  of  the  society
had  a  child  it  was  almost  invariably  killed ;  but  if  it  was
allowed  to  live,  the  father  and  mother  were  regarded  as
having  definitively  engaged  themselves  to  one  another,  and


CHARACTER.  389

were  ejected  from  the  association ;  the  woman  being  known
trGm.  that  time  as  a  '^  bearer  of  children/'  which  was  among
this  extraordinary  people  a  term  of  reproach.  The  existence
of  such  a  society  shows  how  fimdamentally  the  idea  of  virtue
may  differ  in  different  countries.  Yet  the  married  women  were
faithful  to  their  husbands^  and  beautifully  modest.  It  is  impos-
sible, indeed,  to  acquit  even  them  of  the  charge  of  infanticide,
for  which  we  may  find  a  cause,  though  not  an  excuse.  I  do  nert;
allude  to  the  curious  law  that  a  child,  as  soon  as  it  was  bom,
inherited  the  titles,  rank,  and  property  of  its  fetther,  so  that  a
man  who  was  yesterday  a  chief  might  be  thus  at  once  reduced
to  the  condition  of  a  private  person  ;  nor  to  the  fact  tiiat  any
Arreoy  who  spared  her  infant  was  at  once  excluded  irom
that  society.  We  cannot  suppose  that  such  customs  were
without  their  effect;  but  a  more  powerful  reason  may  per-
haps be  found  in  the  fact^  that  their  numbers  were  already
large,  the  means  of  subsistence  Kmited,  and  that  as  but  few
were  carried  off  either  by  disease  or  in  war,  the  population
would  soon  have  outgrown  their  supplies,  if  some  means  were
not  taken  to  check  the  natural  increase  of  numbers.*  How-
evOT  this  may  be,  infanticide  appears  to  have  been  dreadAilly
prevalent  amongst  them.  It  has  been  estimated  that  two-
thirds  €^  the  children  were  destroyed  by  their  own  parent8,t
and  both  Mr.  Nott  and  Mr.  Ellis  agree  that  during  the  whole
of  their  residence  in  the  island,  until  the  adoption  of  Christi-
anity, they  did  not  know  a  single  case  of  a  mother  who  had
not  been  guilty  of  this  crime.

According  to  Wilson,:^  their  language  contained  no  word  for
'^  thanks,"  and  even  Cook  admits  that  they  had  no  respect  for
old  age.  Fitzroy  goes  still  farther,  and  assures  us  that  ''they
scrupled  not  to  destroy  their  aged  or  sick — yes,  even  their
parents,  if  disabled  by  age  or  sickness."  §    No  such  accusa-

•  See,  for  instance,  Kotzebue's  New  Voyage,  voL  i.,  p.  308.

t  £UiB|  Tol.  i.,  pp.  334,  336.  I  Le,  p.  365.  {  Le.  Vol.  ii.  p.  651.


390  cHARAcrrER.

tion  is,  however,  brought  against  them  by  earlier  writers,
so  that  such  actions  are  probably  very  rare,  and  the  result
perhaps,  as  among  the  Feegeeans,  of  misdirected  affection
rather  than  of  deliberate  cruelty.

They  had  no  money ;  and  though  it  was  easy  to  obtain
the  necessaries  of  life,  to  accumulate  property  was  almost
impossible.  Again,  the  absence  of  spirituous  liquors,  and
the  relations  between  the  sexes  (however  unsatisfactory  in
other  respects)  took  away  from  them  some  of  the  principal
incentives  to  crime.  On  the  whole,  then,  if  we  judge  them
by  a  South  Sea  standard,  the  natives  of  the  Society  Islands
appear  to  have  been  very  free  from  crime.

In  spite  of  the  differences  which  sometimes  arose  in  conse-
quence of  their  thievish  disposition,  and  also  perhaps  in  great
measure  from  their  not  being  able  perfectly  to  understand
each  other.  Captain  Cook  and  lys  officers  lived  with  the
natives  "  in  the  most  cordial  friendship,"  and  took  leave  of
them  with  great  regret.  Mr.  Ellis,  on  the  contrary,  assures
us  that  ''no  portion  of  the  human  race  was  ever  perhaps
sunk  lower  in  brutal  licentiousness  and  moral  degradation
than  this  isolated  people."*  Such  a  statement  is  surely  quite
inconsistent  with  the  account  he  gives  of  their  anxiety  to
possess  copies  of  the  Bible  when  it  was  translated  into  their
language.  "They  were,"  he  says,  "deemed  by  them  more
precious  than  gold — ^yea,  than  much  fine  gold,"  and  "  became
at  once  the  constant  companion  of  their  possessors,  and  the
source  of  their  highest  enjoyment."t

The  inhabitants  of  the  Friendly,  or  Tonga,  and  of  the  Sand-
wich Islands  are  also  very  well  described  by  Capt.  Cook,  but
they  belonged  to  the  same  race  as  those  of  Tahiti  and  New
Zealand,  and  resembled  them  in  religion,  language,  canoes,
houses,  weapons,  food,  habits,  etc.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable
that  the  Sandwich  Islanders  in  many  respects,  as  for  instance

*  Ellis,  Le.  Tol.  ii.  p.  29.  f  Ellis,  l.e,  rol.  i.  pp.  893-40S.


THE  TONGANS.  391

in  their  dances,  houses,  tattooing,  etc.,  resembled  the  New
Zealanders  even  more  than  their  nearer  neighbours  in  the
Society  and  Friendly  Islands.  In  the  Friendly  Islands  Capt.
Cook  observed  a  very  singular  luxury  in  which  the  chiefs
indidged  themselves.  When  one  of  them  wished  to  go  to
sleep,  two  women  came  and  sat  by  him,  "  beating  briskly  on
his  body  and  legs  with  both  fists,  as  on  a  drum,  till  he  fell
asleep,  and  continuing  it  the  whole  night,  with  some  short
intervals."  When  the  chief  is  sound  asleep  they  sometimes
rest  themselves  a  little,  "  but  resume  it  if  they  observe  any
appearance  of  his  waking."*  A  similar  statement  is  made  by
Wilson  in  his  Missionary  Voyage,  f  In  all  the  islands  the
chiefs  appear  to  have  been  treated  with  respect  none  the  less
profoimd,  because  shown  in  ways  which  seem  to  us  peculiar.
One  of  them  was  to  imcover  the  body  from  the  waist,  and  it
seems  to  have  been  a  matter  of  indifference,  or  rather  of  con-
venience, whether  this  was  done-  upwards  or  downwards.  J
In  the  Friendly  Islands  it  was  accounted  a  striking  mark  of
rudeness  to  speak  to  the  king  while  standing  up.

There  was  also  a  certain  amount  of  commerce  between  the
different  islands.  Bora-bora  and  Otahaw  produced  abundance
of  cocoa-nut  oil,  which  was  exchanged  at  Tahiti  for  cloth.
The  Low  Islands  again  could  not  successfully  grow  the  paper-
mulberry;  but  they  had  a  breed  of  dogs  with  long  silky
hair,  which  was  much  prized  in  the  other  islands.

•  Third  Voyage,  vol.  i ,  p.  323.  t  U.  p.  237.

J  CooVa  First  Voyage,  vol.  ii.,  p.  125.


392


CHAPTER  XIL


MODEBN  SAVAGES — conHnued,


rB  Esquimaux,  and  the  Esquimaux  alone  among  savage
races,  occupy  both  the  Old  and  the  New  World.
They  inhabit  the  shores  of  the  Arctic  Ocean  firom  Siberia
to  Greenland ;  and  throughout  this  great  extent  of  country
the  language,  appearance,  occupations,  weapons,  and  habits
of  the  natives  are  very  similar,  and  it  must  be  added  that
the  latter  are  most  ingenious.  The  language  of  the  Innuit
or  Esquimaux  is  akin  to  that  of  the  North  American  Indians
in  structure,  while  their  appearance  has  a  decided  likeness,
particularly  about  the  eyes,  to  the  Chinese  and  Tartars.

Their  dwellings  are  of  two  kinds.  The  summer  they  pass
in  tents  or  wigwams,  with  the  entrance  to  the  south  or
south-east.  In  those  observed  by  Captain  Parry,  the  tent-
poles  were,  in  the  absence  of  wood,  formed  of  stags*  horns,
or  bones  lashed  together.  The  lower  borders  of  the  skins
were  held  down  by  large  stones.  These  were  sometimes  built
up  into  regular  circles,  eight  or  ziine  feet  in  diameter  and
four  or  five  feet  high.*  These  circles  were  at  first  supposed
to  be  the  remains  of  winter-houses,  but  it  was  subsequently
ascertained  that  they  were  exclusively  used  for  extending  the
skins  of  the  summer-tents.  Near  these  "  hut  circles  "  long
rows  of  standing  stones  were  several  times  observed.f  The
winter-houses,  in  the  southern  districts  are  constructed  of

•  Parry's  Voyage,  1821-3,  pp.  17,  61.  t  Ac.  pp.  62,  285,  363.


BsauiMiiTTx.  393

earth  or  drift-timber^  which  is  very  abundant  in  some  places.
In  the  north,  however,  wood  becomes  extremely  rare.  The
Esquimaux  at  the  northern  end  of  Baffin's  Bay,*  who  had
no  wood,  excepting  twigs  of  a  dwarfish  heath,  were  so  little
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  timber  that  several  of  them
Buccesaiyely  seused  on  the  spare  top-mast  of  the  Isabella,
evidently  with  the  intention  of  stealing  it,  and  quite
nnoonscious  of  its  weight.  In  the  absence  of  wood  their
IkOQses  were  built  of  ice  and  snow;  those  of  ice  are
beautiful,  and  almost  transparent,  so  that  even  at  some
little  distance  it  is  possible  to  see  everything  that  takes  place
in  them.  They  are  much  colder  than  those  ef  snow,  which
therefore  are  generally  preferred.  West  of  the  Bocky
Mountains,  the  winter  houses  were  usually  underground.
A  Kamskatchadale  ^^yourt"  is  thus  described  by  Captain
Cook:t  "An  oblong  square,  of  dimensions  proportionate
to  the  number  of  persons  for  whom  it  is  intended  (for  it
is  proper  to  observe  that  several  families  live  together  in
the  same  jourt)y  is  dug  into  the  earth  to  the  depth  of  about
six  feet.  Within  this  space  strong  posts,  or  wooden  pillars,
are  fastened  in  the  ground,  at  proper  distances  from  each
other,  on  which  are  extended  the  beams  for  the  support  of
the  roof,  which  is  formed  by  joists  resting  on  the  ground
with  one  end  and  on  the  beams  with  the  other.  The  inter-
stices between  the  joists  are  filled  up  with  a  strong  wicker-
work,  and  the  whole  covered  with  turf ;  so  that  a  jourt  has
externally  the  appearance  of  a  low  round  hillock.  A  hole  is
left  in  the  centre,  which  serves  for  chimney,  window,  and
entrance,  and  the  inhabitants  pass  in  and  out  by  means  of  a
staxmg  p(de  (instead  of  a  ladder)  notched  deep  enough  to
afford  a  little  holding  for  the  toe.'^  More  often,  however,
the  entrance  consisted  of  an  underground  passage.

•  B088,  Baffin's  Baj,  p.  122.

t  Cook's  Voyages  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  vol.  iii.  p.  374.    See  also  toI.  iii.  p.  450.


394  DWELLIKGS.

As  a  general  rule  we  may  say  that  the  western  yourte  are
subterranean,  while  those  of  the  tribes  who  live  east  of  the
Rocky  Mountains  are  generally  above  ground.  The  manner
in  which  the  Esquimaux  construct  their  snow  igloos  has
been  well  described  by  Captain  Parry.  They  choose*  a
drift  of  hard  and  compact  snow,  and  from  this  they  cut
oblong  slabs,  six  or  seven  inches  thick  and  about  two  fedt  in
length.  With  these  they  build  a  circular  wall,  inclining
inwards  so  as  to  form  a  dome,  which  is  sometimes  as  much
as  nine  or  ten  feet  high  and  from  eight  to  fifteen  feet  in
diameter.  A  small  door  is  then  cut  on  the  south  side.  It  is
about  three  feet  high,  two  and  a  half  wide  at  the  bottom,  and
leads  into  a  passage,  about  ten  feet  long,  and  with  a  step  in
the  middle,  the  half  next  the  hut  being  lower  than  either
the  floor  of  the  hut  or  the  outer  passage.  For  the  admission
of  light  a  round  hole  is  cut  on  one  side  of  the  roof  and  a
circular  plate  of  ice,  three  or  four  inches  thick  and  two  feet
in  diameter,  is  let  into  it.  If  several  jGemiilies  intend  to  live
together,  other  chambers  are  constructed  which  open  into  the
first,  and  then  after  a  quantity  of  snow  has  been  shovelled
up  on  the  outside,  the  shell  of  the  building  is  regarded  as
finished.  The  next  thing  is  to  raise  a  bank  of  snow  two  and
a  half  feet  high  all  round  the  interior  of  the  building,  except
on  the  side  next  the  door.  This  bank  forms  the  bed.  Over
it  is  laid  some  gravel,  upon  that  again  paddles,  tent-poles,
pieces  of  whalebone,  twigs  of  birch  and  of  andromeda,  etc.,
and  finally  a  number  of  deer-skins,  which  form  a  soft  and
luxurious  couch.  They  have  no  fireplace,  properly  so  called,
that  is  to  say  no  hearth,  but  each  family  has  a  separate  lamp
or  shallow  vessel  of  lapis  ollaris,  in  which  they  bum  sealV
oil,  with  a  wick  made  of  dry  moss.

Although  they  had  no  knowledge  of  pottery.  Captain  Cook
aaw  at  Unalashka  vessels  "  of  a  flat  stone,  with  sides  of  clay,

•  Parry,  Le.  p.  600.


DWELLINGS.  396

not  unlike  a  standing  pye/'*  We  here  obtain  an  idea  of
the  manner  in  which  the  knowledge  of  pottery  may  have
been  developed.  After  using  clay  to  raise  the  sides  of  their
stone  vessels,  it  would  naturally  occur  to  them  that  the  same
substance  would  serve  for  the  bottom  also,  and  thus  the  use
of  stone  might  be  replaced  by  a  more  convenient  material.

The  snow  houses  melt  away  every  spring ;  but  in  some  places
the  Esquimaux  construct  their  dwellings  on  a  similar  plan,
but  with  the  bones  of  whales  and  walruses  on  a  foundation  of
stones,  and  with  a  covering  of  earth.  The  snow-houses  are
of  course  pretty  clean  at  first,  but  they  generally  become
very  filthy.  The  bone-huts  are  even  dirtier,  because  more
durable.  "  In  every  direction  round  the  huts,*'  says  Captain
Parry,  "  were  lying  innumerable  bones  of  walruses  and  seals,
together  with  skulls  of  dogs,  bears,  and  foxes,  on  many  of
which  a  part  of  the  putrid  flesh  stiU  remaining  sent  forth
the  most  offensive  effluvia."t  He  even  observed  a  number
of  human  bones  lying  about  among  the  rest.^  The  inside  of
the  huts,  "from  their  extreme  closeness  and  accumulated
filth,  emitted  an  almost  insupportable  stench,  to  which  an
abundant  supply  of  raw  and  half-putrid  walrus  flesh  in  no
small  degree  contributed.*' §

On  the  north-western  coasts  of  America  the  natives  find
plenty  of  drift-wood,  and  the  floors  of  their  yourts  are,  accord-
ing to  Belcher,  made  of  split  timber,  nicely  smoothed  and  care-
fully caulked  with  moss.  Underneath  is  often  a  large  store-
room, for  in  summer  they  kill  many  reindeer,  whales,  walrus,
seals,  swans,  ducks,  etc.,  the  greater  part  of  which  are  laid  by
for  winter  use.  One  of  these  winter  stores  is  thus  expressively,
though  somewhat  hastily,  described  by  Sir  E.  Belcher :  ||  "  It  was
frozen  into  a  solid  mass  beneath,  but  loose  from  those  on  the

*  CooVb  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  yoI.  ii.,  p.  510.

t  Parry,  l.c,  p.  280.  %  ^^  ^^  Lyon's  Journal,  p.  236.

{  Parry,  l,e.  p.  358.  ||  Trans.  £tbn.  Soo.,  New  Ser.,  vol.  i.,  p.  132.


396  COOKERY.

sorfaoe,  and  seemed  to  be  incorporated,  by  some  unexplained
process,  into  a  gelatinous  anotCy  wbich  tkey  scraped  np  easQy
with  the  hand  and  ate  with  satisfaction — fish-oil  predomi-
nating. It  was  not  offensive  nor  putrid.  How  many  years
the  lower  mass  may  hare  remained  there  I  could  not  deter-
mine;  but  estiinatiAg  th«  supply  in  on*  yourt  as  proportioned
for  ten  people — the  allowance  of  inhabitants  for  each  yourt
— the  daily  proportion  for  the  complete  store  would  allow  for
three  hxmdred  days,  or  about  twenty-four  pounds  per  souL"
He  estimates  the  quantity  of  solid  meat  in  this  storehouse
alone  at  71,424  pounds.  Captain  Ross  also  mentions*  the
large  stores  of  food  laid  up  by  the  Esquimaux  of  Boothia
Felix  duriQg  the  summer  for  wiater  use.  The  habit  does  not,
however,  appear  to  be  general  among  the  Esquimaux,  though
they  all  of  them  make  ''  caches  "  of  meat  imder  stone  cairns.

Charlevoix  derives  the  name  Esquimaux  from  the  Indian
word  JEskimantaik,  which  means  '^  eaters  of  raw  food ; "  many
of  these  northern  tribes  being  in  the  habit  of  eating  th^
meat  uncooked.  We  must  in  justice  to  them  remember
that  several  of  our  Arctic  Expeditions  have  adopted  the
same  custom,  which  seems  indeed  in  those  latitudes,  highly
conducive  to  health.f

Their  food  if  cooked  at  all  is  broiled  or  boiled.  Their
vessels  being  of  stone  or  wood  cannot,  indeed,  be  put  on
the  fire ;  but  heated  stones  are  thrown  in  until  the  water
becomes  hot  enough,  and  the  food  is  cooked.  Of  course,
the  result  is  a  mess  of  soot,  dirt,  and  ashes,  which  would,
according  to  our  ideas,  be  almost  intolerable ;  but,  if  the
stench  a£  their  houses  does  not  take  away  a  man's  appetite,
nothing  else  would  be  likely  to  do  so.  They  never  wash  their
pots  or  kettles ;  the  dogs  save  them  this  troublei    Those  who

*  Narratiye  of  a  Second  Voyage,  p.  251 ;  and  Appendix,  p.  21.      See  sIbo
Hall*8  life  with  the  Eaqmrnanx,  toI.  ii.,  p.  311 ;  Kane's  Arotie  Eiplorationft,
Tol.  ii.,  p.  133.
.t  See,  for  ioBtance,  Kane's  Arctic  Explorations,  toI.  ii.,  p.  14.


FOOD.  397

hare  arriyed  at  a  dim  consciousnes  of  their  dirtiness,  do
generally  but  make  matters  worse,  for  if  they  wish  to
treat  a  guest  "  genteelly,  they  first  lick  the  piece  of  meat
he  is  to  eat  clean  from  the  blood  and  scum  it  had.  con-
tracted in  the  kettle,  with  their  tongue;  and  should  any
one  not  kindly  accept  it,  he  would  be  looked  upon  as  an
unmannerly  man  for  despising  their  civility/'*  The  Esqui-
maux observed  by  Dr.  Bae  at  Repulse  Bay  were,  however,
much  cleaner  in  their  habits.

Their  food  consists  principally  of  reindeer,  musk  ox,  walrus,
seals,  birds,  and  salmon.  They  will,  however,  eat  any  kind
of  animal  food.  They  are  very  fond  of  fat  and  marrow,
to  get  at  which  they  pound  the  bones  with  a  stone.  The
southern  tribes  get  a  few  berries  in  summer,  but  those  who
live  in  the  north  have  scarcely  any  vegetable  food  except
that  which  they  obtain  in  a  half-digested  form  from  the
stomach  of  the  reindeer,  and  this  they  regard  as  a  great
deKcacy;t  the  northernmost  of  all,  being  unable  to  kill
reindeer,  are  entirely  deprived  of  vegetable  food.  Their
drink  consists  of  blood  or  water,  of  which  they  consume
large  quantities;  thawing  snow  over  a  lamp,  which  is
generally  made  of  lapis  oUaris.

"I  was  once  present,'* f  says  Captain  Cook,  "when  the
chief  of  Oonalashka  made  his  dinner  of  the  raw  head  of  a
large  halibut,  just  caught.  Before  any  was  given  to  the
chief,  two  of  his  servants  eat  the  gills,  without  any  other
dressing  besides  squeezing  out  the  slime.  This  done,  one  of
them  cut  off  the  head  of  the  fish,  took  it  to  the  sea  and
washed  it,  then  came  with  it  and  sat  down  by  the  chief:
first  pulling  up  some  grass,  upon  a  part  of  which  the  head
was  laid,  and  the  rest  was  strewed  before  the  chief.     He

*  Grants,  p.  168 ;  Parry,  Second  Voyage,  p.  293 ;  Lyon's  Joomal,  p.  142.
t  Bobs.    NarratiTe  of  a  Second  Voyage,  p.  352.
i  Cook's  Third  Voyage,  toI.  ii ,  p.  511.


398  FOOD.

then  cut  large  pieces  off  the  cheeks,  and  laid  these  within  the
reach  of  the  great  man,  who  swallowed  them  with  as  much
satisfaction  as  we  should  do  raw  oysters.  When  he  had
done,  the  remains  of  the  head  were  cut  in  pieces,  and  given
to  the  attendants,  who  tore  off  the  meat  with  their  teeth,
and  gnawed  the  bones  like  so  many  dogs."

Captain  Lyon  gives  an  even  more  disgusting  account  of
an  Esquimaux  meal.  "From  Kooilittuck," *  he  says,  "I
learnt  a  new  Eskimaux  luxury:  he  had  eaten  till  he  was
drunk,  and  every  moment  fell  asleep,  with  a  flushed  and
burning  face,  and  his  mouth  open :  by  his  side  sat  Amalooa
(his  wife),  who  was  attending  her  cooking  pot,  and  at  short
intervals  awakened  her  spouse,  in  order  to  cram  as  much  as
was  possible  of  a  large  piece  of  half-boiled  flesh  into  his
mouth  with  the  assistance  of  her  forefinger,  and  having
filled  it  quite  full,  cut  off  the  morsel  close  to  his  lips.  This
he  slowly  chewed,  and  as  soon  as  a  small  vacancy  became
perceptible,  this  was  filled  again  by  a  lump  of  raw  blubber.
During  this  operation  the  happy  man  moved  no  part  of  him
but  his  jaws,  not  even  opening  his  eyes;  but  his  extreme
satisfaction  was  occasionally  shown  by  a  most  expressive
grunt,  whenever  he  enjoyed  sufficient  room  for  the  passage
of  sound.  The  drippings  of  the  savoury  repast  had  so
plentifully  covered  his  face  and  neck,  that  I  had  no  hesita-
tion in  determiniQg  that  a  man  may  look  more  like  a  beast
by  over-eating  than  by  drinking  to  excess.  The  women
having  fed  all  their  better  halves  to  sleep,  and  not  having
neglected  themselves,  had  now  nothing  to  do  but  to  talk  and
beg  as  usual."

A  feast  among  some  of  the  more  civilised  Esquimaux  of
Greenland  is  thus  described  by  Crantz.t  "A  factor  being
invited  to  a  great  entertainment  with  several  topping  Green-

*  Lyon's  Journal,  p.  181 ;  see  also  Ross,  Le.  p.  448.
t  History  of  Greenland,  toI.  i.,  p.  172.


FOOD.  399

landers,  counted  the  following  dishes :  1.  Dried  herrings.  2.
Dried  seal's  flesh.  3.  Boiled  ditto.  4.  Half  raw  and  rotten
ditto,  called  Mikiak.  5.  Boiled  willocks.  6.  A  piece  of  a
half  rotten  whale's  tail :  this  was  the  dainty  dish  or  haunch
of  venison  to  which  the  guests  were  properly  invited.  7.
Dried  salmon.  8.  Dried  reindeer  venison.  9.  A  dessert  of
crowberries  mixed  with  the  chyle  out  of  the  maw  of  a  rein-
deer.    10.  The  same,  enriched  with  train  oil."

During  the  greater  part  of  the  year  they  have  considerable
difficulty  in  obtaining  water  enough  even  to  drink.  It  may
seem  surprising  that  people  who  are  surrounded  by  snow
and  ice  should  suffer  for  want  of  water,  but  the  amount  of
heat  required  to  melt  snow  is  so  great,  that  a  man  with-
out the  means  of  obtaining  fire  might  die  of  thirst  in
these  arctic  regions  as  easily  as  in  the  sandy  deserts  of
Africa.  Any  direct  "  resort  to  snow,"  says  Kane,  "  for  the
purpose  of  allaying  thirst  was  followed  by  bloody  lips  and
tongue;  it  burnt  like  caustic."*  When  the  Esquimaux
visited  Captain  Parry,  they  were  always  anxious  for  water,
which  they  drank  in  such  quantities,  "  that  it  was  impossible
to  furnish  them  with  half  as  much  as  they  desired."  f  In
the  extreme  north  one  of  the  principal  duties  of  the  women
in  the  winter  is  to  thaw  snow  over  their  lamps,  feeding  the
wick  with  oil,  if  it  does  not  rise  well  of  its  own  accord ;  J
the  natural  heat  of  the  room  is  not  sufficient  to  melt  snow,
as  the  temperature  of  the  huts  is  always  kept  if  possible
below  the  jfreezing-point.  In  South  Greenland,  however,
the  huts  are  built  of  turf,  etc.,  and  are  very  warm.§  But
we  must  remember  that  coolness,  rather  than  heat,  is  re-
quired by  the  Esquimaux  who  live  in  snow  dwellings,
because  if  the  temperature  rises  to  thirty-two  degrees,  the
continual  dripping  from  the  roof  produces  extreme  incon-

•  Arctic  Explorations,  vol.  i.,  p.  190,  f  I.e.  p.  188.

X  Osbom's  Arctic  Journal,  p.  17.  }  Egede,  l.c,  p.  116.


400  FIRE.

venience;  and,  in  fact,  the  most  unhealtliy  season  Is  the
spring,  when  the  weather  is  too  warm  for  snow  huts,  and  too
cold  for  tents.  Thus,  therefore,  the  Esquimaux,  though  living
in  a  climate  so  extremely  rigorous,  would  be  debarred  fix)m  the
use  of  fires  by  the  very  nature  of  their  dwellings,  even  if  they
were  able  to  obtain  the  necessary  materials.  They  never,  says
Simpson,  ^'seem  to  think  of  fire  as  a  means  of  imparting
warmth  ;"*  their  lamps  are  used  for  cooking,  for  light,  and
for  melting  snow  and  drying  clothes,  rather  than  to  warm
the  air,t  and  as,  nevertheless,  the  body  temperature  of  the
Esquimaux  is  almost  the  same  as  ours,  it  is  evident  that  they
must  require  a  large  amount  of  animal  food.  The  quantity
of  meat  which  they  consume  is  astonishing ;  and  it  is  worthy
of  remark  that  from  the  scarcity  of  wood  in  the  far  north,
they  use  the  same  substance  for  food  and  fiiel ;  the  calorific
material  being  the  same — ^namely,  blubber — ^whether  the  heat
is  to  be  obtained  by  digestion  or  combustion ;  whether  the
material  is  to  be  placed  in  a  lamp  and  burnt,  or  to  be  eaten
and  digested.  In  summer,  however,  when  it  is  less  neces-
sary to  keep  down  the  general  temperature,  they  sometimes
bum  bones  well  saturated  with  oQ.  For  obtaining  fire  the
Esquimaux  generally  use  lumps  of  iron  pyrites  and  quartz,
from  which  they  strike  sparks  on  to  moss  which  has  been
well  dried  and  rubbed  between  the  hands.}  They  are  also
acquainted  with  the  method  of  obtaining  it  by  friction,  §
which  is  a  slower  and  more  laborious  process.  It  appears,
however,  to  be  the  one  generally  pursued  by  the  Greenland
Esquimaux.  ||

It  has  been  generally  assumed  that  man  could  scarcely  live
in  temperate  climates,  and  certainly  not  in  the  arctic  regions,
without  the  advantage  of  fire.     From  the  above  facts,  how-

*  DiBCOveries  in  North  America,  p.  346.  f  Kane,  l,e.  vol.  ii.,  p.  202.

X  Kane,  Le,  toI.  i.,  p.  879;  Parrj,  I.e.  p.  504;  Bobs,  l,c,  p.  613.
§  Lyon's  Journal,  p  290.  ||  Egede,  l.e,  p.  138.


FIKE.      IMPLEMENTS.  401

ever,  as  well  as  from  others  which  will  presently  be  re-
corded, it  may  be  doubted  whether  this  is  really  the  ease.
Esquimaux  do  not  use  fire  to  warm  their  dwellings ;  cookery
is  with  them  a  refinement,  and  even  the  melting  of  snow
might  be  effected  by  the  natural  heat  of  the  body.  In  fact,
those  Esquimaux  who  live  on  reindeer,  more  than  on  seal,
having  little  blubber,  make  small  use  of  fire.

In  the  South  the  men  have  bows  and  arrows,  harpoons,
spears,  lines,  fish-hooks,  knives,  snow -knives,  ice -chisels,
snow-shovels,  groovers,  drill-bows,  drills,  etc.  The  women
have  lamps  and  stone-kettles,  lamp-moss,  pieces  of  iron-
pyrites,  bone  needles,  pieces  of  sinew,  scrapers  (figs.  76-78),
horn  spoons,  sealskin  vessels,  pointed  bones,  marrow-spoons,
and  knives.  They  have  generally  also,  according  to  Dr.  fiae,
a  small  piece  of  stone,  bone,  or  ivory,  about  six  inches  long
and  half  an  inch  thick ;  this  is  used  for  arranging  the  wicks
of  the  lamps.

Kane  gives  the  following  inventory  of  an  Esquimaux  hut
visited  by  him:  a  sealskin  cup,  for  gathering  and  holding
water ;  the  shoulder-blade  of  a  walrus,  to  serve  as  a  lamp  ;  a
large  flat  stone  to  support  it ;  another  large,  thin,  flat,  stone
to  support  the  melting  snow  ;  a  lance-head,  with  a  long  coil
of  walrus  line ;  a  stand  for  clothes ;  and  the  clothes  them-
selves completed  the  whole  worldly  goods  of  this  poor  family.*
On  their  travelling  expeditions  even  less  than  this  is  neces-
sary ;  raw  meat  and  a  fur  bag  are  all  that  they  require.

The  implements  of  the  Esquimaux  are  few  and  simple,  but
very  ingenious.  The  women  use  knives  of  a  semicircular
form,  and  very  similar  to  the  curious  semilunar  knives  (pi.  1,
fig.  3)  which  are  so  common  in  Denmark.  They  are,  how-
ever, now  made  of  metal,  which  the  Southern  Esquimaux  have
been  enabled  to  obtain,  though  in  small  quantities,  from  the

*  Kane's  Arctic  ExploratioiLB,  toI.  i.,  p.  881.

26


40^  WEAPona,     bows  and  abrowb.

Europeans.    Some  few  of  them  bIbo  break  off  bits  of  meteoric

iron,  whiclL  they  hammer  to  an  edge,  and  then  fix  in  a  handle

of  horn  or  bone.      The  arrow-heads  are  of  several  kinds

Wn.  iM.      and  shapes.     They  are  made  bot  by  blows,  but

~  by  pressure,  for  which  purpose  they  .use  the  point

of  a  reindeer's  horn,  set  in  bono  ;  ^a.  im.

bone  itself  would  not  be  tough

enoogh.    The  shafts  of  the  arrows

[are  short,  straightened  by  steam,
and  provided  with  feathers  at  the
butt  end.     These  are  fastened  on
by  deer  sinews.     The  bows  are
generally  of  wood,  either  made
of  one  piece  steamed  into  the
right  form,  or  of  three  parte  most  ingeni-
ously fattened   together,   and   strengthened
by  pieces  of  bone   or   sinew.     When  wood
oannot  be  obtained,  they  nse  bone  or  horn.
They  do  not  appear  to  be  particularly  good  i
shote ;  but  Captain  Parry  *  thinks  that  they  I
would   generally  hit   a   deer   from  forty  to  I
forty-five  yards,  if  the   animal  stood  still-f  I
The  spears  are  made   like  the  arrows,  but  I
are  larger ;   the  heads  also  are  frequently  '
barbed,  and  in  many  cases  fit  looaely  into
the   shaft,   but   are   securely  fastened  to  a
long  leathern  thong,  which  is  tied  to  the
butt  end  of  the  spear.     For  throwing  the
harpoon  they  use'  a  short  handle  or  throw-        Epor-bno.
ing-stick,  about  two  feet  long,  narrow  below,  four  inches

■  l.a  p.  fill.  Id  Dum;  other  respecti  iIm  their  ut-

t  TheEaquimauof  GreeoUndliBtB  cient  habits  hare  been  modified,  «iid

long  abandoDcd  the  bow  and  airaw,  their   coaditioii  greatlj  improred,  by

wing  gum  obtained  from  ths  Danea.


SFEARS.      HARPOONS.  40S

wide  above^  and  with  a  notch  on  eofh  side  for  the  thumb
and  forefinger.  With  these  weapons  they  attack  not  only
seals  and  walruses,  but  even  whales.  They  strike  the  whale,
if  jMssible,  at  the  same  time  with  many  harpoons,  ''  to  which
bladders  are  hung,  made  of  great  seal-skins,  several  of  which
so  encumber  and  stop  the  whale,  that  it  cannot  sink  deep.
When  he  is  tired  out,  they  dispatch  him  quite  with  their
little  lances."  Kane  gives  the  figure  of  a  lance,  the  blade  of
which  closely  resembles  one  of  the  longer  "  axes "  from  the
Danish  shell-mounds.*

The  Esquimaux  have  three  principal  ways  of  killing
seals.  The  commonest  is  with  the  harpoon  and  bladder.
When   an   Esquimaux    in    his   kayak   ''spies   a   seal,    he


Bone  Harpoon.

tries  to  surprise  it  unawares  with  the  wind  and  sun  in
his  back,  that  he  may  not  be  heard  or  seen  by  it.  He
tries  to  conceal  himself  behind  a  wave,  and  makes  hastily
but  softly  up  to  it  till  he  comes  within  four,  five,  or  six
fathoms  of  it ;  meanwhile  he  takes  the  utmost  care  that
the  harpoon,  line,  and  bladder  lie  in  proper  order.'^f  As
soon  as  the  seal  is  struck  the  point  of  the  spear  detaches
itself  from  the  shaft,  and  at  the  same  moment  the  Esquimaux
throws  the  large  air  bladder  on  to  the  water.  This  is  often
dragged  under  water  a  little  way,  but  it  is  so  great  an  im-
pediment, that  the  seal  is  soon  obliged  to  come  up.  **  The
Greenlander  hastens  to  the  spot  where  he  sees  the  bladder
rise  up,  and  smites  the  seal  as  soon  as  it  appears"  with  the
great  lance  or  "angovigak."     This  is  not  barbed,  and  does

*  Arctic  Explorations,  toI.  ii.,  p.  129.  f  Oraats,  p.  154.


404  MODES  OF   HUNTING  AND  FISHING.

not  therefore  remain  in  the  scaPs  body,  but  can  be  used
again  and  again  until  the  animal  is  exhausted.  The  second
way  is  the  "clapper-hunt."  If  the  Esquimaux  find,  or  can
drive  any  seals  into  the  creeks  or  inlets,  they  frighten  them
by  shouting,  clapping,  and  throwing  stones  every  time  they
come  up  to  breathe,  imtil  at  last  they  are  exhausted  and  easily
killed.  In  winter,  when  the  sea  is  frozen,  the  seals,  which
are  obliged  to  come  up  from  time  to  time  for  the  sake  of  air,
keep  open  certain  breathing  holes  for  this  purpose,  and  the
Esquimaux,  when  he  has  foimd  one  of  these,  waits  patiently
till  the  seal  makes  its  appearance,  when  he  kills  it  instantly
with  his  harpoon.

The  Esquimaux  are  excellent  deerstalkers,  and  are  much
assisted  by  the  skill  with  which  they  can  imitate  the  cry  of
the  reindeer.  Fish  are  caught  sometimes  with  the  hook
and  line,  sometimes  by  means  of  small  nets  when  they  come
to  the  shore  in  shoals  to  spawn,  or  finally  with  the  spear.
The  nets  are  made  of  "small  hoops  or  rings  of  whalebone,
firmly  lashed  together  with  rings  of  the  same  material."*
The  fishing-lines  also  are  made  of  whalebone,  t  Saknon  are
sometimes  so  abundant,  that  in  Boothia  Felix,  Captain  Hoss
bought  a  ton  weight  for  a  single  knife.  For  killing  birds  they
use  an  instrument  in  some  respects  like  the  "bolas"  of  South
America ;  a  number  of  stones  or  walrus  teeth  being  fastened
to  short  pieces  of  string,  and  all  the  strings  then  tied  together
at  the  other  end.j:  The  spears  which  are  intended  to  be
thrown  at  birds  or  other  small  animals  have  a  double  fork  at
the  extremity,  and  three  other  barbed  points  near  the  middle.
These  diverge  in  different  directions,  so  that  if  the  end  pair
should  miss,  one  of  the  central  trio  might  strike  the  victim.
Aquatic  birds  are  also  caught  in  whalebone  nooses ;  but  "the
moulting  season  is  the  great  bird  harvest,  as  a  few  persons,

•  Parry,  /.«•  p.  100.  f  Egede,  l.e,  p.  107.  {  Simpson,  /.«.  p.  156.


SLEDGES.      BOATS.  405

wading  into  the  shallow  lakes,  can  soon  tire  out  and  catch
the  hirds  by  hand."*

The  so-called  "Arctic  Highlanders/'  however,  are  said  to
have  no  means  of  killing  the  reindeer,  though  it  abounds  in
their  country ;  nor  have  they  the  art  of  fishing,  although,
curiously  enough,  they  catch  large  numbers  of  birds  in  small
hand  nets.  Seals,  bears,  walrus,  and  birds  constitute  almost
the  whole  of  their  diet,  f  None  of  the  American  or  Greenland
[Esquimaux  have  succeeded  in  taming  the  reindeer.  Dogs
are  their  only  domestic  animals,  and  are  sometimes  used  in
hunting,  but  principally  to  draw  the  sledges.

The  sledges  vary  much  both  in  materials  and  form :  ac-
cording to  Captain  Lyon  the  best  are  made  of  the  jawbones
of  the  whale,  sawn  to  about  two  inches  in  thickness,
and  from  six  inches  to  a  foot  in  depth.  These  are  the
runners,  and  are  shod  with  a  thin  plank  of  the  same  material.
The  sides  are  connected  by  pieces  of  bone,  horn,  or  wood,
firmly  lashed  together.  In  Boothia  Captain  Bross  saw  sledges
in  which  the  runners  were  made  of  salmon,  packed  into  a
cylinder,  rolled  up  in  skins,  and  frozen  together.  In  spring
the  skins  are  made  into  bags,  and-  the  fish  are  eaten,  j:
Altogether  these  sledges  ^re  wonderfully  constructed,  when
it  is^  considered  with  what  simple  tools  they  are  made.

Their  boats  also  are  very  ingeniously  built,  and  are  of  two
kinds,  the  kajak  or  men's  boat,  and  the  umiak  or  women's
boat.  The  kajak  is  firom  eighteen  to  twenty  feet  long,
eighteen  inches  broad  in  the  middle,  tapering  to  both  ends,
and  scarcely  a  foot  deep.  It  has  no  outriggers,  and  is  there-
fore very  difficult  to  sit.  It  is  quite  covered  over  at  the  top,
with  the  exception  of  a  hole  in  the  middle,  into  which  the

*  Lyon's  Jotimal,  p.  338.

t  Sane,  Arctic  Exploratioiu,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  208,  210.  See  also  Bichardson'B
Arctic  Expedition,  vol.  ii.,  p.  26 ;  Simpson's  DiscoTeries  in  North  Amerioa,  p.  347 ;
Boss,  Le.  p.  585.

{  i.e.  Appendix,  p.  24.


406  THE  KAJAK  AND  UMIAK.

Esquimaux  puts  his  legs.  The  boat  therefore  cannot  fill  with
water,  and  even  if  it  upsets,  they  can  right  it  again  by  a  sudden
jerk  of  the  oar,  or  rather  paddle.  Indeed,  a  skilful  Esquimaux
will  turn  somersets  in  the  water,  in  his  boat,  with  great  ease.
In  spite  of  this  they  are  frequently  drowned,  and  indeed  eo
dangerous  is  the  navigation  that  they  generally  go  in  pairs,
so  as  to  assist  one  another  on  an  emergency,  for  the  skin
sides  of  the  kajak  are  very  thin,  and  if  they  come  in  contact
with  any  of  the  floating  ice  or  drift-timber  which  abound  in
the  Gteeiiland  seas,  are  liable  to  be  torn  open,  in  which
case  the  imfortunate  Esquimaux  has  little  chance  of  saving
hfametf.  Tie  umiak  is  much  larger  and  has  a  flat  bottom.
It  is  made  of  slender  laths,  fastened  together  with  whale-
bone, and  covered  over  with  «ealflldns.  The  Esquimaux
observed  by  Ross;  at  the  northern  end  of  Baffin's  Bay,  were
entipsly  without  catibes,  and  were  **  ignorant,  even  tradi-
taouailyj'ofthotedstence  of  a  boat."*  It  is,  as  he  justly
obserres^afL' extraordinary  thing  to  find  ^'a  maritime  and  a
fishing  tribe  unacquainted  with  any  means  of  floating  on  the
wat^';^'  but  we  mtist  remember  that  they  had  no  wood,  and
that  l^ere  were  only  A  few  weeks  in  the  year  when  the  sea
WB8  ^unfrozen.  No  wonder  that  floss's  ships  were  mistakai
for  living  creatures,t  and  that  his  boats  excited  the  most
unbounded  astonishment  and  admiration.  Kane  also  X  con-
firms the  absence  of  boats,  but  he  adds ''  that  the  kayack  teas
known  to  them  traditionally.^'

In  the  preparation  of  skins  the  Esquimaux  use  certain
stone  instruments  (figs.  76-78),  which  have  frequently  been
GFver-looked  on  account  of  their  simplicity,  but  which  yet
are  particularly  interesting  because  they  are  exactly  similar
to  certain  ancient  implements  which  are  very  common  in
various  parts  of  Europe,  and  have  been  already  described

•  Ros8,  Baffin's  Bay,  p.  170.  f  l,e.  p.  118.

{  Kane,  Arctic  EzplorationB,  toI.  ii.,  pp.  13d,  210.


DRESS.  407

in  page  71.  The  magnificent  collection  of  Mr.  Christy  con-
tains three  of  these  skin-scrapers,  obtained  from  the  Esqui-
maux north  of  Behrings  Straits.  These  are  set  in  fossil
iTory.  He  has  another  which  was  found  in  a  Oreenland
grave,  probably  not  older  than  the  fifteenth  century,  and
belonging  to  the  Stone  period  which  supervened  when  the
intercourse  with  Noi^wai^  was-  sui^nded.  Some  archsBologists
had  considered  that^tlM  'l«osapers"  were  ''probably  knives,
the  piokai^ed.  thidc-  ends '  of  which  were  intended  for
haift^eSy  to  be  bald  between  the  finger  and  thumb,  or  pos-
sibly for  attaohment  Jto  a  short  wooden  shaft.''  *  The  true
nature  and  use  of  4lie.  ancient  skin-drapers  has,  however,
been  entirely  expltfined- 1^  these-  modem  specimens  with
which  they  are  absolutely  identical.  The  method  of  pre-
paring skins  is  curious  and .  ingenious,  but  very  dis-
guating.

The  clothes  of  the  Esquimaux  are  made  from  the  skins  of
reindeer^  seals^  and  birds,  sewn  together  with  sinews.  For
needles-  they  use  bones  either  of  birds  or  fishes ;  yet  with
^ese  simple  instruments  they  sew  very  strongly  and  welL
Hike  4mter  dress  of  the  men  resembles  a  short  great-coat,  with
a  hood,  that  can  be  pulled  over  the  head  if  necessary,  and
which  serves  as  a  substitute  for  a  hat  or  cap.  Their  under
garments  or  shirts  are  made  of  bird  skins,  with  the  feathers
inwaards,  or  of  skins  with  the  hair  inside ;  sometimes,  how-
ever, they  wear,  in  addition  another  shirt  made  of  seal's
entrails.  Their  breeches,  ''of  which  in  winter  they  also
wear  two  pair,  and  similarly  disposed  as  to  the  fur,"t  are
either  of  seal-skin  or  reindeer-skin,  and  their  stockings  of
skins  from  very  yoimg  animals.  The  boots  are  of  smooth
black  dressed  seal's  leather,  and  sometimes  when  at  sea  they
wear  a  great  overcoat  of  the  same  material.  Their  clothes
are  generally  very  greasy  and  dirty,  and  swarm  with  lice.

«  See  ArchsBologia,  toI.  zzzriii.,  p.  416.  f  Pairji  Lc.  p.  495.


408  ORNAMENTS.      MUSIC.      GAMES.

The  dress  of  the  women  does  not  differ  much  &om  that  of
the  men.

Their  principal  ornaments  are  "labrets,"  or  pieces  of
polished  stone  or  bone,  which  are  worn  in  the  lower  lip  or
cheeks.  The  hole  is  made  in  early  infancy,  and  gradually
enlarged  by  a  series  of  "guides."*  These  "labrets,"  how-
ever, are  not  worn  by  the  Eastern  tribes.  According  to
Richardson  they  are  in  use  from  Behrings  Straits  to  the
Mackenzie  River.f  The  other  ornaments  consist  of  strips
of  variously  colored  fur,  and  fringes  of  pierced  teeth,
generally  those  of  the  fox  or  wolf.  Among  the  Esquimaux
visited  by  Capt.  Lyon,  the  ornaments  were  all  appropriated^
by  the  men.  j:  Some  of  the  tribes  are  in  the  habit  of  tattoo-
ing themselves.

The  men  hunt  and  fish.  They  make  the  weapons  and
implements,  and  prepare  the  woodwork  of  the  boats.  The
women  §  are  the  cooks,  they  prepare  the  skins,  and  make
tiie  clothes.  They  also  repair  the  houses,  tents,  and  boats,
the  men  doing  only  carpenter's  work.  Though  they  do
not  appear  to  be  very  harshly  treated,  still  the  women
have  certainly  "a  hard  and  almost  slavish  life  of  it,**
although  perhaps  after  all  not  more  so  than  the  men.

The  Esquimaux  are  not  altogether  without  music.  They
have  a  kind  of  drum,  and  sing  both  alone  and  in  chorus.
They  are  acquainted  with  several  kinds  of  games,  ||  both  of
strength  and  skill,  and  are  fond  of  dances,  which  are  often
very  indecent.  One  of  their  games  resembled  our  cat's-
cradle,^  and  Kane  saw  the  children  in  Smith's  Soimd  play-
ing hockey  on  the  ice.  The  Esquimaux  have  also  a  great
natural  ability  for  drawing.     In  many  cases  they  have  made


•  Yanoouyer'a  Voyage,  vol.  ii.,  p.  280 ;  see  also  p.  408 ;  Belcher,  Le.  p.  141.
t  Arctic  Expedition,  yoI.  i.,  p.  355.  I  Lyon's  Journal,  p.  314.

{  Crantz,  p.  164.  ||  Egede,  /.e.  p.  162.

S  Hall,  l.c.  Tol.  ii.,  p.  316.


RELIGION.      BURIAL.  409

rude  maps  for  our  officers,  which  have  turned  out  to  be  sub-
stantially correct.

According  to  Crantz,  the  Greenland  Esquimaux  "^lave
neither  a  reUgion  nor  idolatrous  worship,  nor  so  much  as  any
ceremonies  to  be  perceived  tending  towards  it."*  This  state-
ment has  been  confirmed  by  many  other  observers.f  Their
burial  ceremonies  have,  however,  been  supposed  to  indicate  a
belief  in  the  resurrection.  They  generally  bend  the  body  into
a  sitting  posture,  bringing  the  knees  up  under  the  chin,  and
then  wrap  the  corpse  in  one  of  their  best  skins.  For  the  grave
they  choose  some  high  place,  and  over  the  corpse  they  make
a  heap  of  stones.  Near  the  body  some  of  them  place  the
implements  of  the  deceased,  and  even  sometimes,  if  he  was  a
man,  his  kajak ;  believing,  as  it  has  been  said,  that  they  will
be  of  use  to  him  in  the  new  world.  Egede,t  however,  ex-
pressly denies  that  it  is  done  with  any  such  idea.  This  view
is  also  confirmed  by  Hall,  according  to  whom,  the  Esquimaux
have  a  superstitious  objection  to  use,  or  even  touch,  anything
which  has  been  in  a  house  containing  a  dead  body.  §  When
therefore  any  person  is  dying,  they  place  by  them  everything
which  can  soothe  and  comfort  their  last  moments,  and  then
leave  the  igloo,  or  house,  which  they  close  up,  thus  con-
verting it  into  a  tomb.  Crantz  tells  us  that  they  "  lay  a  dog's
head  by  the  grave  of  a  child,  for  the  soul  of  a  dog  can  find
its  way  everywhere,  and  will  show  the  ignorant  babe  the
way  to  the  land  of  souls,"  and  this  is  admitted  by  Egede.
Captain  Cook  saw  burial  mounds  of  earth  or  stone  at
Oonalashka.  One  of  the  latter  was  near  the  viUage,  and  he
observed  that  every  one  who  passed  threw  a  stone  on  it.|f
Infants,  if  imfortimate  enough  to  lose  their  mothers,  are

•  /.<?.  p.  197.

t  Rom,  Baffin's  Bay,  toI.  i.,  p.  175;  Voyage  of  DisooTeFy,  p.  128j  Parry,
l.e,  p.  551 ;  Richardson's  Arctic  Expedition,  vol.  li.,  p.  44 ;  Egede,  Le.  p.  182.
X  I.e.  p.  151.  §  I.e.  Tol.  1.,  p.  201 ;  yoI.  ii.,  p  221.

II  Voyage  to  the  Facifio  Ocean,  vol.  ii.,  p.  521.


410  BURIAL.      CHABACTBR.

always  buried  with  them ;  and  sickly  aged  people  are  some-
times buried  aliye,  as  iit  is  considered  a  kindness  to  q>arc
them   the    pain    of   a  lingering  death.      The  Esquimftnx
observed  by  Captain  Parry  had  a  superstitious  idea  that  any
weight  pressing  upon  the  corpse  would  give  pain  to  the
deceased.  *    Such  a  beUef  would  naturally  give  rise,  in  a  more
favored  country,   to  vaulted  tumuli;   but  in  the  extreme
north,  the  only  result  is  that  the  dead  bodies  are  but  slightly
covered  up,  in  consequence  of  which  the  foxes  and  dogs
frequently  dig  them  up  and  eat  them.    This  the  natives  regard
with  ilie  utmost  indifference ;  they  leave  the  human  bones
lying  about  near  the  huts,  among  those  of  animals  which
have  served  for  food ;  another  reason  for  doubting  whether
their  burial  cust(Hns  can  be  regarded  as  satisfactory  evidence
of  any  very  definite  and  general  belief  in  a  resurrection,  or
whether  the  objects  which  they  bury  with  their  friends  are
really  supposed  to  be  of  actual  use  to  them.     On  the  whole,
the  burial  customs  of  the  Esquimaux  are  curiously  like  those
of  which  we  find  evidence  in  the  ancient  tumuli  of  northern
and  western  Europe.

In  character  the  Esquimaux  are  a  quiet,  peaceable  people.
Those  observed  by  Ross  in  Baffin's  Bay, '"could  not  be  made
to  understand  what  was  meant  by  war,  nor  had  they  any
warlike  weapon8."t  Like  other  savages  they  resemble  chil-
dren in  a  great  many  respects.  They  are  such  bad  arithme-
ticians that  the  "enumeration  of  ten  is  a  labour,  and  of  fifteen
an  impossibility  with  many  of  them."j:  Dr.  Bae,  whose
partiality  for  the  Esquimaux  is  well  known,  assures  us  that
if  a  man  is  asked  the  number  of  his  children,  he  is  generally
much  puzzled.  After  counting  some  time  on  his  fingers,
he  will  probably  consult  his  wife,  and  the  two  often  differ,
even  though  they  may  not  have  more  than  four  or  five.

•  U.  pp.  396,  417,  560.  f  /.<?.  p.  186.  J  Parry,  Le,  p.  251.


DIBT.      CHARACTER.  411

They  are  excesaivelj  dirty.  ConBidering  the  difficulty  in
obtaining  enough  water  even  to  drink  during  the  greater
part  of  the  year,  we  cannot^  perhaps,  wonder  that  they  never
dream  of  washing.  Their  word  for  dirt,  eberk,  conveys  no
idea  of  anything  disagreeable  or  offensive  ;*  but  in  justice  to
them  we  must  remember  that  the  extreme  cold,  by  preventing
putrefaction,  removes  one  of  our  principal  inducements  to
cleanliness,  and  at  the  same  time  induces  so  great  a  scarcity
of  water,  as  to  render  washing  almost  an  impossibility.  As
a  general  rule  it  is  impossible  to  put  any  dq)endence  on  their
promises,  not  so  much  that  they  are  intentionally  deceitful,
as  on  account  of  the  wavering  and  inconstant  disposition
which  they  possess  in  conmion  with  so  many  other  savages.
Among  themselves  a  successful  huntsman  or  fisherman  is
always  ready  to  share  his  seal  or  walrus  with  his  less  for-
tunate neighbours ;  but  he  expects,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that
a  sufiKcient  return  will  be  made  to  him,  when  an  opportunity
occurs.  Th^  give  away  nothing  themselves  without  ex-
pecting to  receive  as  much  again^  and  being  unable  to
imagine  any  oUier  line  of  condnict,  are  naturally  very  defi-
cient in  gratitude.  Captain  Boes,  however,  and  Dr.  Bae
consider  that  the  rEsquimaux  encountered  by  them  were
nether  ungrateful  nor  particularly  selfish.  In  other  respects
also  these  appear  to  have  been  very  favorable  specimens  of
the  race.  Though  not  cruel,  the  Esquimaux  seem  to  be  a  som^
whait  heartless  people.  They  do  not,  indeed,  feel  any  actual
pleasure  in  the  infliction  of  pain,  but  they  will  take  little
trouble  to  remove  or  relieve  suffering.  The  Esquimaux  are
also  great  thieves,  but,  as  Captain  Parry  truly  observes,!  we
must  "  make  due  allowance  for  the  degree  of  temptation  to
which  they  were  daily  exposed,  amidst  the  boundless  stores
of  wealth  which  our  ships  appeared  to  them  to  furnish."

*  Kane,  Arotie  Exploiatioiii,  toI.  ii.,  p.  116.  f  Lp.  p.  622.


412  NORTH  AMERICAN  INDIANS.

According  to  Hall,*  moreover,  they  are  strictly  honest  among
themselves,  kind,  generous,  and  trustworthy.  The  Esqui-
maux women  do  not  bear  a  high  character.  Both  polygamy
and  polyandry  appear  to  occur.  A  strong  or  skilful  man  has
more  than  one  wife,  a  beautiful  or  clever  woman  in  some
cases  more  than  one  husband,  f  Again,  the  temporary  loan
of  a  wife  is  considered  a  mark  of  peculiar  friendship ;  in
which,  however,  the  advantage  is  not  all  on  one  side,  as  a
large  family,  far  from  being  any  incumbrance,  is  among  the
Esquimaux  a  great  advantage,  j:

Tlie  North  American  Indians.

The  aboriginal,  or  at  least  the  Precolumbian,  inhabitants
of  North  America,  fall  naturally  into  three  divisions.  The
Esquimaux  in  the  extreme  north,  the  Indian  tribes  in  the
centre,  and  the  comparatively  civilized  Mexicans  in  the
south.  The  central  tribes,  which  occupied  by  far  the  greater
extent  of  the  continent,  were  again  divided  by  the  Rocky
Mountains  into  two  great  groups ;  that  on  the  western  side
being  in  much  the  most  abject  condition.  Though  no  doubt
there  was  and  is  an  immense  differenoe  between  different
tribes — ^and  particularly  between  the  semi-agricultural  na-
tions of  the  west  and  the  filthy  barbarians  of  North  Cali-
fomia — still  Mr.  Schoolcraft,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for
an  excellent  work  on  the  '^  History^  Condition,  and  Prospects
of  the  Indian  Tribes," §  points  out  that  ''their  manners  and
customs,  their  opinions  and  mental  habits,  had,  wherever  they
were  enquired  into,  at  the  earliest  dates,  much  in  common.
Their  modes  of  war  and  worship,  himting  and  amusements,
were  very  similar.  In  the  sacrifice  of  prisoners  taken  in
war ;  in  the  laws  of  retaliation ;   in  the  sacred  character

*  Ix.  Yol.  ii.,  p.  312.  t  Rom,  Ix.  p.  273.  %  Boes,  he,  p.  516.

{  Published  by  authority  of  Congress.    Philadelphia,  1853.


DRESS.      ORNAMENTS.  413

attached  to  public  transactions  solemnized  by  smoking  the
pipe ;  in  the  adoption  of  persons  taken  in  war,  in  families ;
in  the  exhibition  of  dances  on  aknost  eyery  occasion  that  can
enlist  human  sympathy  ;  in  the  meagre  and  inartificial  style
of  music  ;  in  the  totemic  tie  that  binds  relationships  together,
and  in  the  system  of  symbols  and  figures  cut  and  marked  on
their  graveposts,  on  trees,  and  sometimes  on  rocks,  there  is  a
perfect  identity  of  principles,  arts  and  opinions.  The  mere
act  of  wandering  and  petty  warfare  kept  them  in  a  savage
state,  though  they  had  the  element  of  civilization  with  them
in  the  Maize."  *

Many  of  the  Indian  chiefs  had  magnificent  dresses  of
skins  and  feathers.  Some  of  the  tribes,  indeed,  wore  no
clothes ;  but  this  was  rarely  the  case  with  the  women,  and
even  the  men  had  generally  at  least  a  loin  cloth.  The  amount
of  clothing,  however,  depended  very  much  on  the  temperature.
In  the  plains  and  forests  of  the  tropical  and  southern  lati-
tudes, "  the  Indian  wears  little  or  no  clothing  during  a  large
part  of  the  year ;"  but  it  is  very  different  on  the  moimtains
and  in  the  north,  where  the  common  dress  was  the  breech
cloth  and  mocassins,  with  a  buffiilo-skin  thrown  over  the
shoulders.  The  inhabitants  of  Vancouver's  Island  had  mats,
made  either  of  dog's-wool  alone,  of  dog's-wool  and  goose-
down  together,  or  of  threads  obtained  from  cedar  bark.  They
often  wore  "  necklaces  of  shells,  claws,  or  wampimi ;  feathers
on  the  head,  and  armlets,  as  well  as  ear-  and  nose-jewels."  f
Many  of  the  Indian  tribes  are  clean  in  their  persons,  and
frequently  use  both  the  sweat-house  and  cold  bath ;  others
are  described  as  repulsive  in  countenance  and  filthy  both  in
person  and  habits.

The  eastern  tribes  do  not  generally  disfigure  themselves
artificially,  except  indeed  by  the  use  of  paint ;  but  it  is  very

*  Le,  Tol.  ii.,  p.  47.  t  Schoolcraft,  toI.  iii.,  p.  65.


414  THE   PRACTICE  OF  HEAD-MOULDING.

different  in  the  west.  The  Sachet  Indians  of  De  Fuea'»
Straits  wear  pieces  of  bone  or  wood  passed  through  the
cartilage  of  the  nose ;  the  Classet  Indians  cut  their  nosea
when  they  capture  a  whale;  among  the  Babines,  who  lire
north  of  Columbia  River,  the  size  of  the  underlip  is  the
standard  of  female  beauty.*  A  hole  is  made  in  the  underlip
of  the  infant,  in  which  a  small  bone  is  inserted ;  from  time
to  tiine  the  bone  is  replaced  by  a  larger  one,  until  at  last  a
piece  of  wood,  three  inches  long  and  an  inch  and  a  half
wide,  is  inserted  in  the  orifice,  which  makes  the  lip  pro*
trude  to  a  frightful  extent.  The  process  appears  to  be  very
painful.

Owing  to  the  almost  universal  custom  of  fastening  babies
to  a  cradle-board,  the  American  skulls  are  characterised  by  a
flattened  occiput.  This  peculiarity  does  not  now  occur  in
European  heads,  but  it  is  found  in  many  ancient  skulls  firom
various  parts  of  the  old  continents,  and  indicates,  as  pointed
out  by  Vesalius,  Gosse,  and  Wilson,  that  the  cradle-board,
though  long  abandoned,  was  at  one  time  used  in  Western
Europe,  as  it  is  even  now  among  the  Indians  of  North
America.  The  extraordinary  practice  of  moulding  the  form
of  the  head  was  also  common  to  several  of  the  Indian  tribes.
It  prevailed  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  in  the  Carib  Islands,  and
among  the  savage  tribes  of  Oregon.  Among  the  Natchez  the
deformity  is  described  by  the  historian  of  De  Soto's  expedition
as  consisting  of  an  upward  elongation  of  the  cranium,  until
it  terminated  in  a  point  or  edge.  The  Ghoctaws,  though
enemies  of  the  Natchez,  "  improved  "  their  heads  in  the  same
way.  Their  children  were  placed  upon  a  board,  and  a  bag
of  sand  was  laid  upon  the  forehead,  "which,  by  continual
gentle  compressure,  gives  the  forehead  somewhat  the  form  of
a  brick  from  the  temples  upwards,  and  by  these  means  they

*  Kane's  Indians  of  North  America,  p.  242 ;  Vancouver,  Lc.  toI.  ii.,  pp.  2S0,
408.


THE  PRACTICE  OF  HEAD-MOI7LDIN6.  415

have  high  and  loflty  foreheads  sloping  o£P  backwards/'*    The
WaxsawB,  Muscogees  or  Greehs^  Catawbas,  and  Altacapas  are
described  as  having  had  a  similar  custom.     It  was,  however,
only  the  male  infants  which  were  treated  in  this  manner.
Among  the  Nootka-Colxmibians  the  practice  of  flattening  the
head  was  miiversal.    The  child  was  placed  in  a  box  or  cradle
lined  with  moss.    The  occiput  rested  on  a  board  at  the  upper
part  of  the  box  and  another  board  was  brought  over  the
forehead,  and  tied  firmly  down  on  the  head  of  the  infant.
The  process  continued  until  the  child  was  able  to  walk,  at
which  time  it  is  described  as  presenting  a  most  hideous
appearance.     The  eyes  "stand  a  prodigious  way  asunder,'*
the  eyeballs  project  very  much,  and  are  directed  upwards,
the  head  is  very  wide  and  has  almost  the  form  of  a  wedge.
The  Newatees,  a  tribe  residing  on  the  north  end  of  Van-
couver's Island,  forced  the  head  into  a  conical  shape,  by
means  of  a  cord  of  deer-skin  padded  with  the  inner  bark  of
the  cedar  tree.    This  cord,  which  is  about  as  thick  as  a  man's
thumb,  is  wound  round  the  infant's  head  and  gradually
forces  it  to  take  the  shape  of  a  tapering  cone.f    Among  the
Peruvians  the  forehead  was  pressed  downwards  and  back-
wards by  tight  bandages,  of  which  there  seem  to  have  been
generally  two,  leaving  a  space  between  them,  and  thus  pro-
ducing a  well-marked  ridge  running  transversely  across  the
skull.     Thus  while  the  forehead  was  prevented  from  rising,
and  the  sides  of  the  head  from  expanding,  the  occiputal
region  was  allowed  full  freedom  of  growth,  and  the  develop-
ment of  the  brain  was  forced  to  take  an  unnatural  direction.
So  great  was. the  change  produced,  so  extraordinary  is  the
shape  of  these  abnormal  skulls,  that  many  ethnologists  have
been  disposed  to  regard  them  as  belonging  to  a  peculiar  race.
This  theory,  however,  has  been  clearly  proved  to  be  erroneous

*  Schoolcraft,  I.e.  vol.  ii.,  p.  324.
t  Wilson  on  Physical  Ethnology,  Smithsonian  Report,  1862,  p.  288.


416  RELIGION.      MARRIAGE.

and  is  now  nniyersally  abandoned.  It  is  very  remarkable
that  this  unnatural  process  does  not  appear  to  have  any
prejudicial  effect  on  the  mind  of  the  sufferers.*

The  Indian  tribed  generally  believed  in  the  existence  of  a
Great  Spirit,  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  they  seem
to  have  had  scarcely  any  religious  observance,  stiU  less  any
edifices  for  sacred  purposes.  Burnet  f  never  found  any  sem-
blance of  worship  among  the  Comanches.  The  Dacotahs
never  pray  to  the  Creator;  if  they  wish  for  fine  weather
they  pray  to  the  weather  itself.  They  believe  that  the
Great  Spirit  made  all  things  except  thunder  and  rice,  but  we
are  not  told  the  reason  for  these  two  curious  exceptions.

The  social  position  of  the  women  seems  to  have  been  very
degraded  among  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  North  America.
"  Their  wives,  or  dogs,  as  some  of  the  Indians  term  them,"
are  indeed  well  treated  as  long  as  they  do  all  the  work,  and
there  is  plenty  to  eat;  but  throughout  the  continent,  as
indeed  among  all  savages,  the  drudgery  falls  to  their  lot,  and
the  men  do  nothing  but  hunt  and  make  war;  though  in
justice  to  them  we  must  remember  that  the  former  at  least
of  these  two  occupations  was  of  the  greatest  possible  im-
portance, and  that  upon  it  depended  their  principal  means
of  subsistence.  Polygamy  generally  prevailed;  the  hus-
band had  absolute  power  over  his  wives,  and  the  marriage
lasted  only  as  long  as  he  pleased.  Among  some  of  the
North  Califomian  Indians  it  is  not  thought  right  to  beat
the  wives,  but  the  men  "allow  themselves  the  privilege  of
shooting  such  as  they  are  tired  of.'*  J  Among  the  Dogribs
and  other  northern  tribes,  the  women  are  the  property  of  the
strongest.     Every  one  is  considered  to  have  both  a  legal  and

•  Beecher's  Voyage  Round  the  World,  vol.  i.,  p.  308 ;  Wilson,  Smithsonian
Report,  1862,  p.  287.
t  Schoolcraft,  toI.  L,  p.  237.    See  also  Richardson's  Arctic  Expedition,  toL  ii.,

p.  21.

I  Col.  M'Eee  in  Schoolcraft's  Indian  Tribes,  toI.  iii.,  p.  127.


CHARACTER.  417

moral  right  to  take  the  wife  of  any  man  weaker  than  he  is.
In  &Lct,  the  men  fight  for  the  possession  of  the  women^  just
like  stags  and  the  males  of  other  wild  beasts.

"  Imperturbability,*  in  all  situations,  is  one  of  the  most
striking  and  general  traits  of  the  Indian  character.  To  still
his  muscles  to  resist  the  expression  of  all  emotion,  seems  to
be  the  point  of  attainment ;  and  this  is  particularly  observed
on  public  occasions.  Neither  fear  nor  joy  are  permitted  to
break  this  trained  equanimity."  Even  among  relations  "it  is
not  customary  to  indulge  in  warm  greetings.  The  pride  and
stoicism  of  the  hunter  and  warrior  forbid  it.  The  pride  of
the  wife,  who  has  been  made  the  creature  of  rough  en-
durance, also  forbids  it."

But  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  evidence  of  this  is  the
fact  that  the  Algonquin  language,  although  one  of  the
richest,  contained  no  word  for  "to  love,"  and  when  Elliot
translated  the  Bible  for  them  in  1661,  he  was  obliged  to
coin  one.  He  introduced  the  word  "  women  "  to  supply  the
want.  Again,  the  Tinnd  language  f  contains  no  word  to
express  "  dear "  or  "  beloved."  It  is  only  feir  to  add  that
Kane  found  the  Cree  Indians  swearing  in  French,  having  no
oaths  in  their  own  language.:^  Mr.  Schoolcraft  records,
as  an  indication  that  they  are  in  reality  of  affectionate
disposition,  that  he  "once  saw  a  Fox  Indian  on  the  banks
of  the  Mississippi,  near  whose  wigwam  I  had,  unnoticed  to
him,  wandered,  take  up  his  male  infant  in  his  arms,  and
several  times  kiss  it."§  The  special  mention  of  this  £Eu;t
conveys  a  different  impression  from  that  which  was  intended.
Nevertheless^  among  the  better  tribes  many  no  doubt  are
capable  of  feeling  strong  affection,  and  there  are  even  cases
on  record  in  which  the  father  has  redeemed  his  son  from  the
stake,  and  actually  been  burnt  in  his  stead.

*  Schoolcraft,  ToL  iii.,  p.  68.       f  Bichardson's  Arctic  Expedition,  toI.  iL,  p.  24.
{  Le,  p.  839.  {  l.e.  toL  iii.,  p.  64.

27


418  CRUELTY.      INFANTICIDE.

Partly  no  doubt  from  the  hatred  produced  by  almost  in-
oessant  wars^  partly  perhaps  encouraged  by  the  stoical  dis-
regard of  pain  which  it  was  their  pride  to  affect>  the  North
American  Indians  were  very  cruel  to  captives  taken  in
war.  Scalping  seems  to  have  been  an  universal  practice,
and  it  is  even  said  that  the  Sioux  sometimes  ate  the  hearts
of  their  enemies,  every  one  of  the  war  party  getting  a
mouthful,  if  possible.

Infanticide  was  common  in  the  north,  but  does  not  seem  to
have  prevailed  among  the  southern  tribes  to  any  great  ex-
tent ;  and  xmtil  the  advent  of  Europeans  they  do  not  appear
to  have  had  any  fermented  liquors.  The  Sioux,  Assiniboines,
and  other  tribes  on  the  Missouri  are  said  to  have  habitually
abandoned  those  who  from  age  or  infirmities  were  unable  to
follow  the  hunting  camps.  The  same  was  frequently  the
case  among  the  northern  tribes.

As  a  race  the  North  Americans  are  rapidly  disappearing.
Left  to  themselves  they  would  perhaps  have  developed  an
indigenous  civilisation,  but  for  ours  they  are  unfit.  Unable
to  compete  with  Europeans  as  equals,  and  too  proud  to  work
as  inferiors,  they  have  profited  by  intercourse  with  the  supe-
rior race  only  where  the  paternal  government  of  the  Hudson^s
Bay  Company  has  protected  them  both  from  the  settlers  and
from  themselves,  has  encouraged  hunting,  put  an  end  to  war,
prevented  the  sale  of  spirits,  and,  in  times  of  scarcity,  pro-
vided food.  Ere  long  the  only  remains  of  the  Indian  blood
will,  perhaps,  be  found  in  the  territories  of  the  Hudson's
Bay  Company.

Copper  is  found  native  in  the  northern  districts,  and  even
before  the  advent  of  the  Europeans  was  used  for  hatchets,
bracelets,  etc.  Nevertheless,  it  was  used  rather  as  a  stone
than  as  a  metal ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Indians  did  not  heat  it  and
run  it  into  moidds,  or  work  it  when  hot,  but  simply  took
advantage  of  its  malleability  and  hammered  it  into  form,


IMPLEMENTS.      WEAPONS.  419

without  the  assistance  of  heat.     Metallic  yessels  were  quite
unknown  to  the  aborigines  of  North  America.

The  implements  of  the  Shoshotlees,  or  Snake  Indians,  are
described  by  Wyeth.  Their  possessions  were  confined  to
"  the  pot,  bow  and  arrow,  knives,  graining  tools,  awls,  root
digger,  fish-spears,  nets,  a  kind  of  boat  or  raft,  the  pipe,
mats  for  shelter,  and  implements  to  produce  fire."*

The  pot  was  made  of  "  long  tough  roots,  wound  in  plies
around  a  centre,  shortening  the  circimiference  of  the  outer
plies  so  as  to  form  a  vessel  in  the  shape  of  an  inverted  bee-
hive." They  were  so  well  made  as  to  be  quite  watertight,  and
though  of  course  they  could  not  be  put  on  the  fire,  still  they
were  used  for  boiling,  in  the  manner  already  described  as
practised  by  other  savages.  The  Dacotahs  are  said  to  have
sometimes  boiled  animals  in  their  own  skins,  taking  the  skin
off  whole,  suspending  it  at  the  four  comers,  and  making  use
of  boiling  stones  as  usual.  They  had  also  stone  vessels,  but
these  were  rare,  and  probably  used  only  as  mortars.

Their  bows  are  very  skilfully  made  of  the  horns  of  the
mountain  sheep  and  elk,  or  sometimes  of  wood.  "  The  string
is  of  twisted  sinew,  and  is  used  loose,  and  those  using  this
bow  require  a  guard  to  protect  the  hand  which  holds  it."
The  arrow  is  driven  with  such  force  that  it  will  pass  right
through  the  body  of  a  horse  or  buffalo,t  and  in  the  account  of
De  Soto's  expedition,  it  is  stated  that  on  one  occasion  an
arrow  went  through  the  saddle  and  housings  of  a  horse  and
penetrated  one-third  of  its  length  into  the  body.  Although
on  the  whole  far  inferior  to  the  rifle,  still  in  hunting  the  bow
has  the  one  great  advantage  of  silence.  Among  several  of  the
tribes,  arrow-making  was  a  distinct  profession.  The  arrow-
heads are  of  obsidian,  about  three-fourths  of  an  inch  long

•  Schoolcraft,  toI.  i.,  p.  212.  Catlin,  l.e,  toI.  i.,  p.  31 ;   toI.  ii.,  p.

t  Schoolcraft,  U.  toI.  iii.,  pp.  35, 46 ;      212;  McEean  and  Hall's  Indian  Tribes,
Kane's  North  American  Indians,  p.  Ul ;      toI.  ii.,  p.  4.


420  CANOES.

and  Kalf  an  inch  wide,  and  quite  thin.  The  base  is  expanded
and  is  inserted  into  the  split  end  of  the  shaft,  being  kept  in
its  place  by  sinews.  The  shaft  is  about  two  feet  and  a  half
long ;  when  intended  for  hunting  it  is  expanded  at  the  end,
so  that  when  it  is  drawn  out  of  the  wound  the  arrow-head  is
extracted  also ;  but  the  shafts  of  war-arrows  taper  to  the  end,
so  that  when  they  are  drawn  out  the  head  remains  behind.

The  knives  are  rudely  made  of  obsidian,  and  are  sometimes
fastened  in  handles  of  wood  or  horn.  The  graining  tools  for
preparing  skins  are  sometimes  of  bone,  sometimes  of  obsidian.
Mr.  Wyeth  does  not  describe  their  form.  Awls  were  made
of  bone ;  large  thorns  also  being  sometimes  used  for  the
purpose.  Root-diggers  are  either  made  of  horns,  or  of
crooked  sticks  pointed  and  hardened  by  fire.  "The  fish-
spear  is  a  very  simple  and  ingenious  implement.  The  head
is  of  bone,  to  which  a  small  strong  line  is  attached  near
the  middle,  connecting  it  with  the  shaft  about  two  feet  from
the  point.  "Near  the  forward  end  of  this  head  there  is  a
small  hole,  which  enters  it  ranging  acutely  towards  the  point
of  the  head ;  it  is  quite  shallow.  In  this  hole  the  &ont  end
of  the  shaft  is  placed."  The  shaft  is  of  light  willow,  and
about  ten  feet  long.  When  the  fish  is  struck  the  shaft  is
withdrawn,  and  the  string  at  once  pulls  the  bone  end  into  a
transverse  position.  The  fish-nets  are  made  of  bark,  which,
gives  a  very  strong  line,  and  are  of  two  kinds,  the  scoop  and
the  seine.  They  are,  however,  xmknown  among  the  northern
tribes  west  of  the  Mackenzie.*  The  boats  of  the  Shoshonees
hardly  deserve  the  name,  and  seem  to  be  used  only  for  cross-
ing rivers.  They  are  about  eight  feet  long,  and  made  of  reeds,
but  there  is  no  attempt  to  make  them  water-tight.  Other
tribes,  however,  have  much  better  canoes,  made  either  of
bark,  or  of  a  log  hollowed  out.  The  pipes  are  large,  and
the  bowl  is  generally  of  fuller's-earth,  or  of  soapstone.     The

*  BichardBon's  Arctie  Expedition,  toI.  ii.,  p.  25.


FIRE.      DWELLINGS.  421

mats  are  about  foxir  feet  long,  are  made  of  rashes,  and  are
used  either  as  beds,  or  in  the  construction  of  wigwams.

They  obtain  fire  by  rubbing  a  piece  of  wood  in  a  hole.
The  Chippeways  and  Natchez  tribes  are  said  to  have  had  an
institution  for  keeping  up  a  perpetual  fire,  certain  persons
being  set  aside  and  deyoted  to  this  occupation.

The  huts  or  wigwams  are  generally  of  two  kinds,  one  for
summer,  and  the  other  for  winter.  The  winter  wigwam
of  the  Dacotahs  is  thus  described  by  Schoolcraft :  "  To  erect
one  of  them  it  is  only  necessary  to  cut  a  few  saplings  about
fifteen  feet  in  length,  place  the  large  ends  on  the  ground  in
a  circle,  letting  the  tops  meet,  thus  forming  a  cone.  The
bufialo-skins,  sewed  together  in  the  form  of  a  cap,  are  then
thrown  over  them  and  fastened  together  with  a  few  splints.
The  fire  is  made  on  the  ground  in  the  centre  of  the  wigwam,
and  the  smoke  escapes  through  an  aperture  at  the  top.
These  wigwams  are  warm  and  comfortable.  The  other
kind  of  hut  is  made  of  bark,  usually  that  of  the  elm."*
The  huts  of  the  Mandans,t  Minatarees,  etc.,  were  circular  in
form  and  from  forty  to  sixty  feet  in  diameter.  The  earth  was
removed  to  a  depth  of  about  two  feet.  The  framework  was
of  timber,  covered  with  willow  boughs,  but  leaving  a  space
in  the  middle  to  serve  both  as  chimney  and  window.  Over
the  woodwork  was  placed  a  thick  layer  of  earth,  and  at
the  top  of  all  some  tough  clay,  which  was  impervious  to
water,  and  in  time  became  quite  hard,  as  in  fine  weather  the
tops  of  the  huts  were  the  common  lounging  place  for  the
whole  tribe.  Though  these  dwellings  were  sometimes  kept
very  clean  and  tidy,  J  this  was  not  always  the  case.  Speak-
ing of  the  Nootka  Sound  Indians,  Captain  Cook§  says  :  "The
nastiness  and  stench  of  their  houses  are,  however,  at  least

•  I.e.  vol.  ii.,  p.  191.  t  Catlin's  American   Indians,    vol.

t  This  tribe,  one  of  the  most  inte-  i.,  p.  82.

resting,  has  been  entirely  swept  away  }  Third  Voyage,  toI.  ii.,  p.  316.
by  the  small-pox.


422  DWEIJJNGS.      AGEICTTLTURE.

equal  to  the  confusion.  For,  as  they  dry  their  fish  within
doors,  they  also  gut  them  there,  which,  with  their  bones  and
fragments  thrown  down  at  meals,  and  the  addition  of  other
sorts  of  filth,  lie  everywhere  in  heaps,  and  are,  I  believe,
never  carried  away  tiU  it  becomes  troublesome,  from  their
size,  to  walk  over  them.  In  a  word,  their  houses  are  as
filthy  as  hog-sties :  everything  in  and  about  them  stinking
of  fish,  train-oil,  and  smoke.''

The  Wallawalla  Indians*  of  Columbia  dig  a  circular  hole
in  the  ground  about  ten  or  twelve  feet  deep  and  from  forty
to  fifty  feet  in  circumference,  and  cover  it  over  with  drift-
wood and  mud.  A  hole  is  left  on  one  side  for  a  door,  and  a
notched  pole  serves  as  a  ladder.  Here  twelve  or  fifteen
persons  burrow  through  the  winter,  requiring  very  little  fire,
as  they  generally  eat  their  sahnon  raw,  and  the  place  is  very
warm  from  the  numbers  collected  together  and  the  absence
of  ventilation.  In  summer  they  use  lodges  made  of  rushes
or  mats  spread  on  poles.  This  tribe  lives  principally  on
salmon,  preferring  it  putrid.

South  of  the  GuK  of  St.  Lawrence  and  west  of  the  Rocky
Mountains  abnost  all  the  tribes  seem  to  have  grown  more  or
less  maize.  Li  the  Carolina^  and  Virginia  the  Indians  raised
large  quantities,  and  ''  all  relied  on  it  as  one  of  their  fixed
means  of  sub8istence."t  The  Delawares  had  extensive  maize
fields  at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  America.  In  1527,
De  Yaca  saw  it  in  small  quantities  in  Florida,  and  De  Soto,
twelve  years  later,  found  it  abundant  among  the  Muscogees,
Ghactaws,  Chickasaws,  and  Cherokees.  On  one  occasion  his
army  marched  through  fields  of  it  for  a  distance  of  two
leagues.  It  is  known  to  have  been  cultivated  by  the  Iroquois
in  1610,  and  in  small  quantities  by  ^'  the  hunter  communities

*  Kane's  North  American  Indians,  f  Schoolcraft,  I.e.  vol.  i.,  p.  6.     See

p.  272 ;  United  States'  Exploring  £x-      also  Richardson's  Arctic   Expedition,
pedition,  toI.  iv.,  p.  452.  toI.  ii.,  p.  61.


FOOD.  423

of  the  Ohio,  the  Wabagh,  the  Miami,  and  the  niinois,*'  as
well  as  by  the  natives  along  both  banks  of  the  Mississippi.
The  evidences  of  ancient  agriculture  have  been  already
alluded  to  in  the  chapter  on  I^orth  American  ArchsBology ;
the  maize  appears  to  have  been  the  only  plant  actually
under  cultivation ;  but  some  of  the  tribes  depended  for  their
subsistence  very  much  on  roots,  etc.  Wild  rice  also  grew
abundantly  in  the  shallow  lakes  and  streams  of  Michigan,
Winconsin,  Iowa,  Minnesota,  as  well  as  in  the  upper  valleys
of  the  Mississippi  and  Missouri.  It  was  gathered  by  the
women,  and  formed  one  of  their  principal  articles  of  food.
They  went  into  the  rice-fields  in  canoes,  and  bending  the
stalks  in  handsful  over  the  sides  of  the  canoe,  beat  out  the
grain  with  paddles.

The  North  American  Indians,  however,  have  long  depended
mainly  on  the  animal  kingdom  for  their  subsistence.  They
are  essentially  hunters  and  fishermen,  the  buffalo,  the  deer
»d  ^  ^u  applying  «,«.  ^  their  pn^cipj  Ttidc.
of  food.  The  buffaloes  were  sometimes  driven  into  pounds,
sometimes  shot  on  the  open  prairie  with  bows  and  arrows.
Fish  were  speared,  caught  in  weirs,  etc.,  or  sometimes  shot.
The  Macaws  and  ClaUums  on  the  Pacific  coast  sometimes
even  killed  whales.    For  this  purpose  they  used  large  barbed

m

harpoons  of  bone,  with  a  string,  and  a  strong  seal-skin
bag  filled  with  air.  This  apparatus  was  used  in  the  same
manner  as  among  the  Esquimaux  (ante,  p.  403).  Like  all
carnivorous  animals,  the  Indians  alternate  between  seasons
of  great  plenty  and  extreme  want.  Generally  game  is
abundant,  and  Noka,  one  of  their  most  celebrated  hunters,
is  said  to  have  killed  in  one  day  sixteen  elks,  four  buffiiloes,
five  deer,  three  bears,  one  porcupine,  and  one  lynx.  This
of  course  was  a  very  exceptional  case.  Still  there  is  gene-
rally some  season  of  the  year  when  they  kill  more  game  than
is  required  for  immediate  consumption.     In  this  case  the


424  BI7RIAL.

surplus  IB  dried  and  made  into  pemmican.  In  winter,  how-
ever, they  are  often  very  short  of  provisions.  Back  gives  a
terrihle  picture  of  their  sufferings  in  fiEunine  times;*  and
Wyeth  tells  us  that  the  Shoshonees  "  nearly  starve  to  death
annually,  and  in  winter  and  spring  are  emaciated  to  the  last
degree ;  the  trappers  used  to  think  they  all  eventually  died
from  starvation,  as  they  became  old  and  feeble."  t

As  might  naturally  be  expected,  the  mode  of  burial  varies
much  in  different  parts  of  North  America.  In  Columbia
they  are  generally  "  placed  above  ground,  in  their  clothing,
and  then  sewed  up  in  a  skin  or  blanket ;  and  the  personal
property  of  each  deceased  individual  was  placed  near  the
body :  over  all  were  laid  a  few  boards,  placed  as  a  kind  of
shed  to  protect  them  from  the  weather."  J  Among  these
tribes  the  corpse  is  doubled  up.  Near  Point  Orchard  in  the
same  district,  the  bodies  were  placed  in  canoes,  and  deposited
among  the  branches  of  trees.  The  Mandans  also,  and  indeed
most  of  the  Prairie  Indians,  scaffolded  their  dead.  Among
the  Clear  Lake  Indians,  the  Carriers,  etc.,  it  was  usual  to  bum
them,  while  in  Florida  they  were  interred  in  a  sitting  pos-
ture. Among  other  tribes,  the  bones  of  the  dead  were  col-
lected every  eight  or  ten  years,  and  laid  in  one  common
burial  place.

They  are  not  altogether  deficient  in  art,  being  able  to
make  certain  rude  carvings,  and  to  trace  equally  rude  draw-
ings on  their  wigwams,  robes,  etc. ;  but  about  portraits  they
have  some  curious  ideas.  They  think  that  an  artist  acquires
some  mysterious  power  over  any  one  whose  likeness  he  may
have  taken;  and  on  one  occasion,  when  annoyed  by  some
Indians,  Mr.  Kane  got  rid  of  them  at  once  by  threatening  to
draw  any  one  who  remained.     Not  one  ventured  to  do  so.

*  Arctic  Land  Expedition,  p.  194  to  f  Schoolcraft,  toI.  i.,  p.  216.

326.      See  also   Richardson's   Arctic  %  United  States'  Exploring  Expe-

Expedition,  toI.  ii.,  p.  96.  dition,  toI.  iv.,  p.  889.


THE   PARAGUAS.  425

If  the  likeness  is  good,  so  much  the  worse — ^it  is,  they  fancy,
half  alive, — at  the  expense  of  the  sitter.  So  much  life,  they
argue,  could  only  be  put  in  the  picture  by  taking  it  away
£rom  the  original.  Again,  they  fancy  that  if  the  picture  were
injured,  by  some  mysterious  connection  the  original  would
suffer  also.  But  perhaps  the  oddest  notion  of  all  is  recorded
by  Catlin.  He  excited  great  commotion  among  the  Sioux  by
drawing  one  of  their  great  chiefs  in  profile.  "Why  was
half  his  face  left  out,'*  they  asked ;  "  Mahtocheega  was  never
ashamed  to  look  a  white  man  in  the  face."  Mahtocheega
himself  does  not  seem  to  have  taken  any  offence,  but  Shonka,
The  Dog,  took  advantage  of  the  idea  to  taunt  him.  "  The
Englishman  knows,"  he  said,  "  that  you  are  but  half  a  man ;
he  has  painted  but  one-half  of  your  face,  and  knows  that
the  rest  is  good  for  nothing."  This  view  of  the  case  led  to
a  fight,  in  which  poor  Mahtocheega  was  shot;  and  as  ill-
luck  would  have  it,  the  bullet  by  which  he  was  killed  tore
away  just  that  part  of  the  face,  which  had  been  omitted  in
the  drawing.  This  was  very  unfortunate  for  Mr.  Catlin,
who  had  great  difficulty  in  making  his  escape,  and  lived
some  months  after  in  fear  for  his  life ;  nor  was  the  matter
settled  until  both  Shonka  and  his  brother  had  been  killed,  in
revenge  for  the  death  of  Mahtocheega.

The  Paraguay  Indians.

The  Indians  of  Paraguay  have  been  described  by  Don  Fdlix
de  Azara,*  who  lived  a  long  time  among  them.  He  found
them  divided  into  several  different  nations  or  tribes,  with  at
least  forty  distinct  languages,  and  with  different  customs.
Some  of  them  lived  by  fishing,  but  the  greater  number
depended  for  their  subsistence  on  the  wild  horses  and  cattle,
and  must  therefore  have  had  different  habits  before  the  dis-

•  Yoyages  dans  TAm^que  Meridionale,  1800.


426  WEAPONS.      HUTS.      HABITS.

covery  of  America  by  the  Europeans.  Their  principal  arms
were  long  spears^  clubs,  and  bows  and  arrows.  Some  tribes,
however,  as,  for  instance,  those  of  the  Pampas,  do  not  use
bows  and  arrows,  but  prefer  the  bolas.  In  war  the  Indians
of  Paraguay  gave  no  quarter  to  men,  but  spared  only  the
women  and  children.

Their  houses,  if  we  can  call  them  so,  were  of  the  simplest
character ;  they  cut  three  or  four  boughs,  stuck  the  two  ends
into  the  groimd,  and  threw  over  them  a  cow-skin.  Their  bed
consisted  of  another  skin ;  they  had  no  chairs  or  tables,  or
any  kind  of  furniture.  The  men  seldom  wore  any  clothes ;
the  dress  of  the  women  consisted  usually  of  a  poncho,
although  among  some  of  the  tribes,  as  the  Nalicu^gas,  even
this  was  dispensed  with.  The  art  of  washing  seems  to  have
been  entirely  unknown,  though  Azara  admits  that  in  very
hot  weather  they  used  sometimes  to  bathe,  rather  however,
as  it  woidd  appear,  for  coolness,  than  for  cleanliness.  It  is
unnecessary  therefore  to  say  that  they  were  excessively  filthy,
and  troubled  much  with  lice  ;  if,  indeed,  they  can  be  said  to
have  been  troubled  by  that  which  supplied  them  with  one  of
their  greatest  enjoyments ;  for  though  many  of  the  tribes  had
no  dances,  no  games,  no  music,  they  all  took  a  pleasure  in
picking  out  and  eating  the  vermin  which  swarmed  on  their
skin  and  in  their  hair  and  clothes.

They  had  no  domestic  animals,  and  no  idea  of  agriculture.
Their  doctors  had  but  one  remedy,  which  they  applied  in  all
cases,  and  which  had  at  least  the  great  merit  of  being  harm-
less— since  it  consisted  "  k  sucer  avec  beaucoup  de  force  l*es-
tomac  du  patient,  pour  en  tirer  le  mal.***

Many  of  the  tribes  painted  their  bodies  in  various  ways,
and  it  was  usual  to  pierce  the  under  lip  and  insert  a  piece
of  wood,  about  four  or  five  inches  long,  which  they  never
removed.

*  Azara,  l.e.  p.  25.


RELIGION.      INFANTICIDE.  427

They  Iiad  no  established  form  of  goyemment,  nor  any
ideas  of  religion.  Azara  makes  this  latter  statement  gene-
rally for  all  the  Indians,  and  repeats  it  particularly  for  the
following  tribes — namely,  the  Charruas,  Minuanas,  Aucas,
Guaranys,  Guayanas,  Nalicu^gas,  Gxiasarapos,  Guatos,  Nina-
quiguilas.  Guanas,  Lenguas,  Aguilots,  Mocobys,  Abissons,
and  Paraguas.

Azara  describes  the  language  of  the  Guaranys  as  being  the
most  copious,  and  yet  it  was  in  many  respects  very  deficient ;
for  instance,  they  ooidd  only  count  up  to  four,  and  had  no
words  for  the  higher  numbers,  not  even  for  five  or  six.  It
is  quite  unnecessary  to  say  that  the  marriage  tie  was  little
regarded  among  them ;  they  married  when  they  liked,  and
separated  when  they  pleased.

Infanticide  was,  in  several  of  the  tribes,  the  rule  rather
than  the  exception ;  the  women  brought  up  but  one  child
each,  and  as  they  spared  only  the  one  which  they  thought
likely  to  be  the  last,  it  often  happened  that  they  were  left
without  any  at  all.

Patagonians.

The  inhabitants  of  the  southern  parts  of  South  America,
although  they  are  divided  into  numerous  different  tribes,
may  be  considered  as  falling  into  two  great  groups:  the
Patagonians,  or  Horse  Indians,  on  the  east,  who  have  horses
but  no  canoes ;  and  the  Chonos  and  Fuegians,  or  Canoe
Indians,  who  have  canoes,  but  no  horses,  and  who  inhabit
the  tempestuous  islands  on  the  south  and  west.

The  Yacana-kunny  who  inhabit  the  north-eastern  part  of
Tierra  del  Fuego  are,  properly  speaking,  not  Fuegians,  but
Patagonians,  and  resemble  them  in  color,  stature,  and
clothing,  except  the  peculiar  boots.  They  live  now  pretty
much  as  the  mainlanders  probably  did  before  the  introduc-
tion of  horses,  and  feed  principally  on  guanacoes,  ostriches,


428  PATAGONIANS.

birds  and  seals,  which  they  kill  with  dogs,  bows  and  arrows,
bolas,  slings,  lances  and  clubs.*  The  habits  of  the  Pata-
gonians  must  have  been  much  altered  by  the  introduction  of
the  horse,  but  we  can  only  deal  with  them  as  they  now  are.

The  Horse  and  Canoe  Indians  offer  a  great  contrast  in
point  of  size;  while  the  latter  are  short,  ill-looking,  and
badly  proportioned,  the  former  are  considerably  above  the
average  height,  and  are  described  by  early  travellers  as
being  truly  gigantic.  They  were  first  visited  in  1519  by
Magellan,  who  assures  us  that  many  of  them  were  above
seven  feet  (French)  in  height.  In  1525  they  were  seen  by
Garcia  de  Loaisa,  who  mentions  their  great  stature,  but  does
not  seem  to  have  measured  them.  Similar  statements  were
made  by  Cavendish,  Knevett,  Sibald  de  Veert,  Van  Noort,
Spilbergen,  and  Lemaire;  in  fact  out  of  the  fifteen  first
voyagers  who  passed  through  the  Magellanic  Straits,  not
fewer  than  nine  attest  the  fact  of  the  gigantic  size  of  the
Patagonians ;  in  which  they  are  confirmed  by  the  testimony
of  several  subsequent  travellers,  and  especially  of  Falkner,
who  assures  us  that  he  saw  many  men  who  were  over  seven
feet  in  height.

It  is  difficult  altogether  to  reject  these  statements,  and  as
they  are  certainly  not  applicable  to  the  present  race,  it  is
possible  that  there  may  have  been  a  change  of  size  owing  to
the  introduction  and  general  use  of  the  horse.

The  huts,  or  "toldos,''  of  the  Patagonians,  are  "rectan-
gular in  form,  about  ten  or  twelve  feet  long,  ten  deep,  seven
feet  high  in  front,  and  six  feet  in  the  rear.  The  frame  of
the  building  is  formed  by  poles  stuck  in  the  ground,  having
forked  tops  to  hold  cross  pieces,  on  which  are  laid  poles  for
rafters,  to  support  the  covering,  which  is  made  of  skins  of
animals  sewn  together,  so  as  to  be  almost  impervious  to
rain  or  wind.     The  posts  and  rafters,  which  are  not  easily

•  Fitzroy,  Le»  toI.  ii.,  p.  137.


HUTS.      DRESS.  429

procured,  are  carried  from  place  to  place  in  all  their
travelling  excursions.  Having  reached  their  bivouac,  and
marked  out  a  place  with  due  regard  to  shelter  from  the
wind,  they  dig  holes  with  a  piece  of  pointed  hard  wood,
to  receive  the  posts :  and  all  the  frame  and  cover  being  ready
it  takes  but  a  short  time  to  erect  a  dwelling."  *

They  have  no  pottery,  and  for  carrying  water  the  only
vessels  they  use  are  bladders.  Their  dress  consists  princi-
pally of  skins,  sewn  together  with  ostrich  sinews,  and
often  curiously  painted  on  one  side ;  but  according  to
Falkner,t  some  of  the  tribes  "make  or  weave  fine  man-
tles of  woollen  yam,  beautifully  dyed  with  many  colours.''
They  have  also  a  small  triangular  apron,  two  comers
of  which  are  tied  round  the  waist,  while  the  third  passes
between  the  legs  and  is  fastened  behind.  When  on
horseback  they  use  a  kind  of  poncho,  or  mantle,  with  a  slit
in  the  middle,  through  which  they  put  their  head.  For
boots  they  wear  the  "  skin  of  the  thighs  and  legs  of  mares
and  colts;"  they  clean  the  skins,  and  then,  after  drying,  soften
with  grease,  and  so  put  them  on  without  either  shaping  or
sewing.  J  They  make  brushes  of  grass,  twigs,  and  rushes,  and
use  the  jaw  of  a  porpoise  for  a  comb.  §  The  women  wear  a
mantle,  fastened  across  the  breast  by  a  wooden  skewer,  or
pin,  and  tied  round  the  waist  They  have  also  a  kind
of  apron  which  reaches  down  to  their  knees,  but  which  only
covers  them  in  front.  Their  boots  are  made  in  the  same  way
as  those  of  the  men.  Like  other  savages,  they  are  fond  of
beads,  feathers,  and  other  ornaments.  They  also  paint  them-
selves with  red,  black,  and  white,  which  however  to  European
eyes  is  anything  but  an  improvement.      Their  defensive


*  Fitzroy,  Le,  toI.  i.,  p.  93.  and  it  was  on  account  of  these  shoes

t  Falkner's  Patagonia,  p.  128.  that  MageUan  called  them  "Patago-

X  Whea  tint  yisited  they  nsed  the  nians."
skin  of  the  guanaoo  for  this  pnipose,  §  Fitzroy,  toI.  i.,  p.  75.


430  WEAPONS.      FOOD.

armour  consists  of  a  helmet  and  shield,  both  made  of  thick
hide,  and  strong  enough  to  resist  either  arrows  or  lances.

Their  bows  are  small,  and  the  arrows,  which  are  pointed
with  stone  or  bone,  are  said  to  be  sometimes  poisoned.  They
have  also  dubs  and  long  cane  lances,  most  of  which  are  now
tipped  with  iron.  But  the  weapons  which  are  most  charac-
teristic of  the  Patagonians,  and  which  are  indeed  almost
peculiar  to  them,  are  the  bolas,*  of  which  there  are  two  or
three  sorts.  That  used  in  war  is  a  single  rounded  stone  or
ball  of  hardened  clay,  weighing  about  a  pound,  and  fastened
to  a  short  rop^  of  sinew  or  skin.  This  they  sometimes  throw
at  their  adversary,  rope  and  all,  but  generally  they  prefer  to
strike  at  his  head  with  it.  For  hunting  they  use  two  similar
stones,  fastened  together  by  a  rope,  which  is  generally  three
or  four  yards  long.  One  of  the  stones  they  take  in  their
hand,  and  then  whirling  the  other  roimd  their  head,  throw
both  at  the  object  they  wish  to  entangle.  Sometimes  several
balls  are  used,  but  two  appears  to  be  the  usual  number.
They  do  not  try  to  strike  their  -victim  with  the  balls  them-
selves, but  with  the  rope,  ^'  and  then  of  course  the  balls  swing
round  in  different  directions  and  the  thongs  become  so  ^  laid
up,'  or  twisted,  that  struggling  only  makes  the  captive  more
8ecure.''t  It  is  said  that  a  man  on  horseback  can  use  the
^'bolas"  effectually  at  a  distance  of  eighty  yards.  $  They
also  use  the  lasso.

On  the  coast  their  food  consists  principally  of  fish,  which
they  kill  either  by  diving  or  striking  them  with  their  darts.
Ghianacoes  and  ostriches  they  catch  with  the  bolas,  and  they
also  eat  mare's-flesh,  as  well  as  various  sorts  of  small  game,
and  at  least  two  kinds  of  wild  roots.  They  have  no  fer-
mented liquor,  and  the  only  prepared  drink  which  they  use
is  a  decoction  of  chaUis,  and  the  juice  of  berberries  mixed
with  water.

•  Falkner,  U,  p.  130.     f  Fitnoy,  le,  toI.  ii.,  p.  148,    %  Dtrwin'i  Jonnal,  p.  129.


BURIAL.      KELIGION.  431

The  death  of  a  native  is  attended  with  pecidiar  ceremonies.
The  flesh  haying  been  as  much  as  possible  stripped  from  the
bones,  they  are  hung  "  on  high,  upon  canes  or  twigs  woven
together,  to  dry  and  whiten  with  the  sun  and  rain.''  One  of
the  most  distinguished  women  is  chosen  to  perform  the  dis-
gusting office  of  making  the  skeleton,  and  during  the  process
''the  Indians,  covered  with  long  mantles  of  skins,  and  their
faces  blackened  by  soot,  walk  roimd  the  tent,  with  long
poles  or  lances  in  their  hands,  singing  in  a  mournful  tone  of
voice  and  striking  the  groimd,  to  Mghten  away  the  Yalichus
or  evil  beings.  ....  The  horses  of  the  dead  are  killed  that
he  may  have  wherewithal  to  ride  upon  in  the  Alhue  Mapu,
or  Country  of  the  Dead.' "  In  about  a  year  the  bones  are
"packed  together  in  a  hide  and  placed  upon  one  of  the
deceased's  favorite  horses,  kept  alive  for  that  purpose,"  and
in  this  manner  the  natives  bear  the  relics,  sometimes  to  a  very
great  distance,  until  they  arrive  at  the  proper  burial  place,
where  the  ancestors  of  the  dead  man  are  lying.  The  bones
are  arranged  in  their  proper  positions,  and  fastened  by
string.  The  skeleton  is  then  placed,  with  others,  in  a  square
pit,  clothed  in  the  best  robes,  and  adorned  with  beads,  fea-
thers, etc.  The  arms  of  the  deceased  are  buried  with  him,
and  round  the  grave  are  ranged  several  dead  horses,  raised
on  their  feet,  and  supported  with  sticks.*  Sometimes  a
cairn  of  stones  is  raised  over  the  grave.f

Falkner  regarded  the  Patagonians  as  Polytheists,  but
we  do  not  know  much  about  their  religion.  According
to  the  missionaries,  neither  the  Patagonians  nor  the  Arau-
canians  had  any  ideas  of  prayer,  or  ''  any  vestige  of  religious
worship."}

•  Falkner'fl  Patagonia,  pp.  118, 119.  f  Fitzroy,  toI.  ii.,  p.  158.

t  The  Voice  of  Pity,  toI.  ii.,  pp.  87,  96.


432  FUEGIANS.


The  Fuegians.

The  inhabitants  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  are  even  more  de-
graded than  those  of  the  main  land :  in  fact,  they  have  been
regarded  by  many  travellers  as  being  the  lowest  of  mankind.*
Adolph  Decker,  who  visited  Polynesia  and  Australasia  under
Jaques  le  Hermite  in  1624,  describes  them  as  "rather  beasts
than  men  ;  for  they  tear  human  bodies  to  pieces,  and  eat  the
flesh,  raw  and  bloody  as  it  is.  There  is  not  tiie  least  spark
of  religion  or  policy  to  be  observed  among  them :  on  the
contrary,  they  are  in  every  respect  brutal'' — of  which  he
proceeds  to  give  evidence  so  convincing,  that  I  refrain
from  quoting  it.f     "  The  men  go  altogether  naked,  and  the

women  have  only  a  bit  of  skin  about  their  middles  ;

Their  huts  are  made  of  trees,  in  the  shape  of  tents,  with  a
hole  at  the  top  to  let  out  the  smoke.  Within  they  are  sunk
two  or  three  feet  under  the  earth ;  and  the  mould  is  thrown
upon  the  outside.  Their  fishing-tackle  is  very  curious,  and
their  stone  hooks  very  nearly  the  same  shape  as  ours.  They
are  differently  armed,  some  having  bows,  and  arrows  headed
with  stone ;  others  have  long  javelins,  pointed  with  bone ;
some  again  have  great  wooden  clubs ;  and  some  have  slings,
with  stone-knives,  which  are  very  sharp."  Their  arrows  are
of  hard  wood,  straight  and  well  polished.  They  are  about
two  feet  long,  and  are  tipped  with  a  piece  of  agate,  obsidian,
or  glass ;  the  head  not  being  fixed  to  the  shaft,  remains  in
the  wound,  even  when  the  arrow  is  drawn  out.  The  bows
are  from  three  to  four  feet  long,  and  quite  plain.  The  string
is  made  of  twisted  sinews.

Forster  J  found  them  "  remarkably  stupid,  being  incapable
of  understanding  any  of  our  signs,  which,  however,  were

•  Byron's  Voyage  Round  the  "World,  p.  80 ;  WallLs's  Voyage  Round  the
World,  p.  892 ;  Cook's  Voyage  to  the  South  Pole,  vol,  ii.,  p.  187 ;  Darwin's
Journal,  p.  235.  t  Callander's  Voyages,  yol.  ii.,  p.  307.  }  U.  p.  251.


APPEARANCE.  438

very  intelligible  to  the  nations  of  the  South  Sea."  WaUis,
in  hifl  "Voyage  Round  the  World/'*  describes  them  as
follows :  "  They  were  covered  with  seal-skins,  which  stunk
abominably,  and  some  of  them  were  eating  the  rotten  flesh
and  blubber  raw,  with  a  keen  appetite  and  great  seeming
satisfaction."  And  again  he  says:  "Some  of  our  people,
who  were  Ashing  with  a  hook  and  line,  gave  one  of  them  a
fish,  somewhat  bigger  than  a  herring,  alive,  just  as  it  came
out  of  the  water.  The  Indian  took  it  hastily,  as  a  dog  would
take  a  bone,  and  instantly  killed  it,  by  giving  it  a  bite  near
the  gills :  he  then  proceeded  to  eat  it,  beginning  with  the
head,  and  going  on  to  the  tail,  without  rejecting  either  the
bones,  fins,  scales,  or  entrails."t  Their  cookery  is,  if  possible,
still  more  disgusting.  Fitzroy  tells  us  that  it  was  "too
ofiensive"  for  description ;  and  the  account  given  by  Byron  J
entirely  confirms  this  statement.

The  men,  says  Fitzroy, §  "are  low  in  stature,  ill-looking,
and  badly  proportioned.  Their  colour  is  that,  of  very  old
mahogany — or  rather  between  dark  copper  and  bronze.  The
trunk  of  the  body  is  large,  in  proportion  to  their  cramped
and  rather  crooked  limbs.  Their  rough,  coarse  and  extremely
dirty  black  hair  half  hides,  yet  heightens,  a  villainous  expres-
sion of  the  worst  description  of  savage  features.  The  hair  of
the  women  is  longer,  less  coarse,  and  certainly  cleaner  than
that  of  the  men.  It  is  combed  with  the  jaw  of  a  porpoise,
but  neither  plaited  nor  tied ;  and  none  is  cut  away,  excepting
from  over  their  eyes.  They  are  short,  with  bodies  largely
out  of  proportion  to  their  height ;  their  features,  especially
those  of  the  old,  are  scarcely  less  disagreeable  than  the  re*-
pulsive  ones  of  the  men.  About  four  feet  and  some  inches  is
the  stature  of  these  she-Fuegians — ^by  courtesy  called  women*

*  Hawkeiworth*fl  Voyages,  l,c,  p.  403.  f  Lc,  p.  403.

t  Byron's  Loss  of  the  Wager,  p.  132.

{  Voyages  of  the  Adventure  and  Beagle,  toL  ii.,  p.  187.

28


434  FOOD  AND  HABITS.

They  never  walk  upright ;  a  stooping  posture,  and  awkward
movement  is  their  natural  gait.  They  may  be  fit  mates  for
such  imcouth  men,  but  to  civilized  people  their  appearance  is

disgusting

The  smoke  of  wood  fires,  confined  in  small  wigwams,  hurts
their  eyes  so  much,  that  they  are  red  and  watery  :  the  effects
of  their  oiling  or  greasing  themselves,  and  then  rubbing
ochre,  clay,  or  charcoal  over  their  bodies;  of  their  often
feeding  upon  the  most  offensive  substances,  sometimes  in  a
state  of  putridity  ;  and  of  other  vile  habits,  may  readily  be
imagined."*  Their  incisors  are  worn  flat,t  like  those  of
the  Esquimaux  and  of  many  ancient  races.

**  The  men  procure  food  of  the  larger  kind,  such  as  seal,
otter,  porpoises,  etc. ;  they  break  or  cut  wood  and  bark  for
iuel,  as  well  as  for  building  the  wigwams  and  canoes.  They
go  out  at  night  to  get  birds;  they  train  the  dogs,  and  o£
course  imdertake  all  hunting  or  warlike  excursions.  The
women  nurse  their  children,  attend  the  fire  (feeding  it  with
dead  wood,  rather  than  green,  on  accoimt  of  the  smoke),
make  baskets  and  water-buckets,  fishing-lines  and  necklaces,
go  out  to  catch  small  fish  in  their  canoes,  gather  shell-fish,
dive  for  sea-eggs,  take  care  of  their  canoes,  upon  ordinary
occasions  paddle  their  masters  about  while  they  sit  idle,  and
do  any  other  drudgery."  J

'^  Swimming  is  a  favorite  amusement  of  the  Fuegians
during  summer ;  but  the  unfortunate  women  are  obliged  to
go  out  into  rather  deep  water,  and  dive  for  sea-eggs  in  the
depth  of  winter  as  often  as  in  summer.  Men,  women,  and
children  are  excellent  swimmers,  but  they  all  swim  like
dogs.*'

"When  there  is  time,  the  natives  roast  their  shell-fish,
and  half-roast  any  other  food  that  is  of  a  solid  nature ;  but

♦  U,  p.  139.  t  Fitooy,  Appendix,  p.  144.

%  Fitzroy,  l,c,  p.  186.


FOOD   AND  HABITS.  435

when  in  haste,  they  eat  fish,  as  well  as  meat,  in  a  raw  state.

Both  seal  and  porpoises  are  speared

by  them  from  their  canoes.  When  struck,  the  fish  usually
run  into  the  kelp,  with  the  spear  floating  on  the  water,  being
attached  by  a  short  line  to  a  moveable  barb :  and  then  the
men  follow  with  their  canoe,  seize  the  spear  and  tow  by  it
till  the  fish  is  dead.  To  them,  the  taking  of  a  seal  or  a
porpoise  is  a  matter  of  as  much  consequence  as  the  capture
of  a  whale  is  to  our  countrymen.  On  moonlight  nights,
birds  are  caught  when  roosting,  not  only  by  the  men  but  by
their  dogs,  which  are  sent  out  to  seize  them  while  asleep  upon
the  rocks  or  beach :  and  so  well  are  these  dogs  trained  that
they  bring  all  they  catch  safely  to  their  masters,  without
making  any  noise,  and  then  return  for  another  mouthful.
Birds  are  also  frequently  killed  with  arrows  or  by  stones
slung  at  them  with  unerring  aim.  Eggs  are  largely  sought
for  by  the  natives ;  indeed,  I  may  say  that  they  eat  anything
and  everything  that  is  eatable,  without  being  particular  as  to
its  state  of  freshness,  or  as  to  its  having  been  near  the  fire."  *

According  to  Byron  the  dogs  of  the  Chonos  Indians  assist
in  killing  fish  as  well  as  birds.  They  are,  he  says,  "  cur-like
looking  animals,  but  very  sagacious,  and  easily  trained  to

this  business The  net  is  held  by  two  Indians,  who

get  into  the  water ;  then  the  do&^s,  taking  a  large  compass,
dive  after  the  fish,  and  drive  them  into  the  net ;  but  it  is
only  in  particular  places  that  the  fish  are  taken  in  this
manner."  He  adds,  that  the  dogs  "enjoy  it  much,  and
express  their  eagerness  by  barking  every  time  they  raise
their  heads  above  the  water  to  breathe."  t

"  In  the  winter,  when  snow  lies  deep,  the  Tekeenica
people  assemble  to  hunt  the   guanaco,  which  then  comes

•  Fitzroy,  Le,  p.  184.

t  Byron's  Loss  of  the  Wager.      In  Kerr's  Voyages  and  Trayels,  vol.  xvii.,
pp.  339,  368,  463.


FOOD   AND   HABITS.


down  from  the  high  lands  to  seek  for  posture  near  the  sea.

The  long  legs  of  the  animal  stick  deeply  into  the  eaow  and

Fie.  iM.    ™^   l^oggy   ground,   disabling    him    from    escape,

""    while  the  Fuegians   and  their  dogs  hem  h'T"    in

on  every  side   and  quickly  make  tiJTn  their  prey,

At  other  times  of  the

year  they  sometimes  get  them  by  lying  in  wait,  and
shooting  them  with  arrows,  or  by  getting  into  a
tree  near  their  track,  and  spearing  them  as  they
pass  beneath  the  branches.  An  arrow  was  shown  to
Low,  which  was  marked  with  blood  two-tMrds  of  its
length  in  wounding  a  guanaco,  afterwards  caught  by
dogs.  Low  held  out  his  jacket,  making  signs  that
the  arrow  would  not  penetrate  it ;  upon  which  the
native  pointed  to  his  eye."*  Fig.  156  represents
the  head  of  a  Fuegian  harpoon,  which  closely  resem-
bles the  ancient  Danish  specimen  figured  in  p.  80.

"  Of  vegetable  food  they  have  very  little  :  a  few
berries,  cranberries,  and  those  which  grow  on  the
arbutus,  and  a  kind  of  Aingus  which  is  found  on  the
beech,  being  the  only  sorts  used.  The  wretched
Fuegians  often  suffer  greatly  irom  &mine.  On  one
occasion  when  the  Chonos  were  in  great  distress  on
this  account,  a  sm^  party  went  away,  and  the
natives  said  that  in  four  sleeps  they  would  return
with  food.  On  the  fifth  day  they  come  book  almost
dead  with  &tigue,  and  "each  man  having  two  or
three  great  pieces  of  whale-blubber,  shaped  like  a
poncho  with  a  hole  in  the  middle,  on  his  shoulders.
The  blubber  was  half  putrid,  and  looked  as  if  it  had
g,^  been  buried  underground."  Notwithstanding  this,
°"'™'"  it  was  cut  into  slices,  broiled,  and  eat«n.    On  another

occasion  masses  of  blubber  were  found  in  sand,  doubtless
•  Fitiro;,  l.c.  p.  18T.


CANinBALISM.      ABSENCE  OF  RELIGION.  437

laid  in  store  for  a  season  of  want.      Their  principal  food,
however,  consists  of  limpets,  mussels,  and  other  shell-fish.

Admiral  Fitzroy  entertains  no  doubt  that  the  Fuegians
are  cannibals.  ''Almost*  always  at  war  with  adjoining
tribes,  they  seldom  meet  but  a  hostile  encounter  is  the  re-
sult ;  and  then  those  who  are  vanquished  and  taken,  if  not
already  dead,  are  killed  and  eaten  by  the  conquerors.  The
arms  and  breast  are  eaten  by  the  women ;  the  men  eat  the
legs,  and  the  trunk  is  thrown  into  the  sea."  Again,  in
severe  winters,  when  they  can  obtain  no  other  food,  they
take  "the  oldest  woman  of  their  party,  hold  her  head  over  a
thick  smoke,  made  by  burning  green  wood,  and  pinching  her
throat,  choke  her.  They  then  devour  every  particle  of  the
flesh,  not  excepting  the  trunk,  as  in  the  former  case."  When
asked  why  they  did  not  rather  kill  their  dogs,  they  said,
"  Dog  catch  iappo,"  ue.  otters.

Like  Decker,  Admiral  Fitzroy  "  never  witnessed  or  heard
of  any  act  of  a  decidedly  religious  nature,  "t  Still  some  of
the  natives  suppose  that  there  is  "  a  great  black  man"  in  the
woods  who  knows  everything,  "who  cannot  be  escaped,  and
who  influences  the  weather  according  to  men's  conduct."
When  a  person  dies,  they  carry  the  body  far  into  the
woods,}  "place  it  upon  some  broken  boughs,  or  pieces  of
solid  wood,  and  then  pile  a  great  quantity  of  branches  over
the  corpse."

They  make  canoes  of  large  pieces  of  bark  sewn  together.
In  the  bottom  they  make  a  fireplace  of  clay,  for  they  always
keep  fires  alight,  though  with  the  help  of  iron  pyrites  they
soon  obtain  sparks  if  any  accident  happens.  The  Chonos
Indians,  who  in  most  respects  resemble  the  Fuegians,  have
much  better  canoes.     These  are  formed  of  planks,  which  are

•  le.  p.  18S.

t  See  also  Weddell,  Voyage  to  South  Pole,  p.  179 ;  Tha  Voice  of  Pity,  toI.  vi.,
p.  92,  etc.
%  le,  p.  181,


438  IGNORANCE  OP  POTTERY.      DRESS.

generally  five  in  number,  two  on  eacli  side  and  one  at  the
bottom.  Along  tbe  edges  of  each  are  small  holes,  about  an
inch  apart.  The  planks  are  sewn  together  with  woodbine,
the  holes  being  filled  with  a  kind  of  bark  beaten  up  imtil  it
resembles  oakum.  Byron  truly  observes  that  in  the  absence
of  metal,  ''the  labour  must  be  great  of  hacking  a  single
plank  out  of  a  large  tree  with  shells  and  flints,  even  though
with  the  help  of  fire."

The  Fuegians  have  no  pottery,  but,  like  the  North  Ameri-
can  Indians,  use  vessels  made  of  birch,  or  rather  of  beech-
bark.  On  the  east  coast  many  of  the  natives  possess  guan-
aco-skins,  and  on  the  west  some  of  them  wear  seal-skins.
''Amongst  the  central  tribes  the  men  generally  possess  an
otter-skin,  or  some  small  scrap  about  as  large  as  a  pocket-
handkerchief,  which  is  barely  sufficient  to  cover  their  backs
as  low  down  as  their  loins.  It  is  laced  across  the  breast  by
strings,  and  according  as  the  wind  blows,  it  is  shifted  from
side  to  side."*  Many  however,  even  of  the  women,  go
absolutely  without  clothes.  Yet,  as  Captain  Cook  quaintly
egresses  it,  "  although  they  are  content  to  be  naked,  they
are  very  ambitious  to  be  fine ;"  for  which  purpose  they  adorn
themselves  with  streaks  of  red,  black,  and  white,  and  the
men  as  well  as  the  women  wear  bracelets  and  anklets  of
shell  and  bone.  Dr.  Hooker  informs  us  that  at  the  extreme
south  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  and  in  mid-winter,  he  has  often
seen  the  men  lying  asleep  in  their  wigwams,  without  a  scrap
of  clothing,  and  the  women  standing  naked,  and  some  with
children  at  their  breasts,  in  the  water  up  to  their  middles
gathering  limpets  and  other  shellfish,  while  the  snow  fell
thickly  on  them  and  on  their  equally  naked  babies.  In  fact,
fire  does  not  appear  to  be  a  necessary  with  them,  nor  do  they
use  it  to  warm  the  air  of  their  huts  as  we  do,  though  some-
times as  a  luxury  they  take  advantage  of  it  to  toast  their
*  Darwin's  Besearclies  in  Geology  and  Natural  History,  p.  234«


FIRE.  439

Iiands  or  feet.  Doubtless,  however,  if  deprived  of  tliis  source
of  warmtli  they  would  die  of  starvation  rather  oftener  than
is  now  the  case.  If  not  the  lowest,  the  Fuegians  certainly
appear  to  be  among  the  most  miserable  specimens  of  the
human  race,  and  the  habits  of  this  people  are  of  especial
interest  from  their  probable  similarity  to  those  of  the  ancient
Danish  shell-mound  builders,  who,  however,  were  in  some
respects  rather  more  advanced^  being  acquainted  with  the  art
of  making  pottery.  .


440


CHAPTER  XIII.

MODERN   SAVAGES — COHCluded.

r  reading  almost  any  account  of  savages,  it  is  impossible
not  to  admire  the  skill  with  which  they  use  their  rude
weapons  and  implements.  The  North  American  Indian  will
send  an  arrow  right  through  a  horse,  or  even  a  buffalo.  The
African  savage  will  kill  the  elephant,  and  the  Chinook  fears
not  to  attack  even  the  whale.  Captain  Grey  tells  us  that  he
has  often  seen  the  Australians  kill  a  pigeon  with  a  spear,  at
a  distance  of  thirty  paces.*  Speaking  of  the  same  people,
Mr.  Stanbridge  asserts  that  ''it  is  a  favourite  feat  on  the
Murray  to  dive  into  the  river,  spear  in  hand,  and  come  up
with  a  fish  upon  it."  f  Woodes  Rogers  says  that  the  Cali-
fomian  Indians  used  to  dive  and  strike  the  fish  under  water
with  wooden  spears,  |  and  Falkner  tells  us  that  some  of  the
Patagonian  tribes  live  chiefly  on  fish,  "which  they  catch
either  by  diving ,  or  striking  them  with  their  darts."  §  Wallace,
again,  says  the  same  of  the  Brazilian  Indians.  ||  The  South
Sea  Islanders  are  particularly  active  in  the  water.  They  dive
after  fish  which  "  take  refuge  under  the  coral  rock ;  thither
the  diver  pursues  him,  and  brings  him  up  with  a  finger  in
each  eye."5f    They  are  even  more  than  a  match  for  the

*  Grey,  /.«.  toI.  ii.,  p.  286.

t  On  the  Aborigines  of  Victoria.    Ethn.  Trans.,  New  Ser.,  toL  L,  p.  293.
%  Callancler's  Voyages,  yoI.  iiL,  p.  331.  §  Patagonia,  p.  111.

II  Trayels  on  the  Amazon,  p.  488.  IT  Wilson,  he.  p.  385.


THE  8KILFULNESS  OF  SAVAGES.  441

sliark,  which  they  attack  fearlessly  with  a  knife.  If  they
are  unarmed  '*  they  all  surround  him  and  force  him  ashore,
if  they  can  but  once  get  him  into  the  surf;''  but  eyen  if  he
escapes  they  continue  their  bathing  without  the  least  fear.*
£llis  more  cautiously  says  only  that  ''  when  armed  they  have
sometimes  been  known  to  attack  a  shark  in  the  water."  f
The  Andaman  Islanders  also  are  said  to  dive  and  catch  fish
ruider  water  ;j^  and  Hutherford  makes  a  similar  statement  as
regards  the  New  Zealanders.  The  Esquimaux  in  his  kayak
will  actually  turn  somersets  in  the  water.  Skyring§  saw  a
Fuegian  who  ^'  threw  stones  from  each  hand  with  astonishing
force  and  precision.  His  first  stone  struck  the  master  with
much  force,  broke  a  powder-horn  which  hung  round  his  neck,
and  nearly  knocked  him  backwards."  In  his  description  of
the  Hottentots,  Kolben  says,  ||  that  their  dexterity  in  throwing
the  ''hassagaye  and  rackum-stick,  strikes  every  witness  of

it  with  the  highest  admiration If  a  Hottentot,  in  the

chase  of  a  hare,  deer,  or  wild  goat,  comes  but  within  thirty
or  forty  yards  of  the  creature,  away  flies  the  rackum-stick
and  down  falls  the  creature,  generally  pierced  quite  through
the  body."  The  death  of  GK)liath  is  a  well-known  instance
of  skill  in  the  use  of  the  sling ;  and  we  are  told  also  that  in
the  tribe  of  Benjamin  there  was  a  corps  of  **  seven  himdred
chosen  men  lefthanded;  every  one  could  sling  stones  at  an
hair-breadth,  and  not  miss."^  The  Brazilian  Indians  kill
turtles  with  bows  and  arrows ;  but  if  they  shot  direct  at  the
animal,  the  arrow  would  glance  off  the  smooth  hard  shell,
therefore  they  shoot  up  into  the  air,  so  that  the  arrow  falls
nearly  vertically  on  the  shell,  which  it  is  thus  enabled  to
penetrate.**

What  an  amoimt  of  practice  must  be  reqtdred  to  obtain

*  Wilson,  l.c,  p.  368.  t  Polynesiaii  Besearches,  vol.  i.,  p.  178.

I  Monat,  I.e.  pp.  310,  333.  §  Fitzroy,  I.e.  toI.  i.,  p.  398.

II  Kolben,  U.  toL  i.,  p.  243.     %.  Judges  m,  16.     **  Wallace's  Amaion,  p.  466.


442  ARROWS.      HARPOONS.

sucIl  skill  as  tliis!  How  true  also  must  the  weapons  be  I
Indeed,  it  is  very  evident  that  eacli  distinct  type  of  Ain't
implement  must  have  been  designed  for  some  distinct  pur-
pose. Thus  the  different  forms  of  arrowhead,  of  harpoon,  or
of  stone  axe,  cannot  have  been  intended  to  be  used  in  the
same  maimer.  Among  the  North  American  Indians  the
arrows  used  in  hunting  were  so  made  that  when  the  shaft
was  drawn  out  of  the  woimd  the  head  came  out  also;  while
in  the  war  arrows  the  shaft  tapered  to  the  end,  so  that  even
when  it  was  withdrawn  the  head  of  the  arrow  remained  in
the  wound.  Again,  the  different  forms  of  harpoons  are
illustrated  by  the  barbed  and  unbarbed  lances  of  the  Esqui-
maux (ante,  p.  403).  Unfortunately,  however,  we  have  but
few  details  of  this  kind ;  travellers  have  generally  thought  it
unnecessary  to  observe  or  record  these  apparently  unimpor-
tant details ;  and  that  our  knowledge  of  flint  implements  is
most  rudimentary,  is  well  shown  by  the  discussion  between
Professors  Steenstrup  and  Worsaae,  whether  the  so-called
"axes"  of  the  shell-mounds  were  really  axes,  or  whether
they  were  not  rather  used  in  fishing.

We  may  hope,  however,  that  in  future  those  who  have  the
opportunity  of  observing  stone  implements  among  modem
savages  will  give  us  more  detailed  information  both  as  to
the  exact  manner  in  which  they  are  used,  and  also  about
the  way  in  which  they  are  made ;  that  they  will  collect  not
only  the  well-made  weapons,  but  also,  and  even  more  care-
fully, the  humble  implements  of  every-day  life.

Some  archsDologists  have  argued  that  the  shell-mound
builders  of  Denmark  must  have  possessed  more  formidable
weapons  than  any  that  have  yet  been  found,  because  it  was
considered  impossible  that  they  could  have  killed  large
game,  as  for  instance  the  bull  and  seal,  with  the  simple
weapons  of  bone  and  stone,  which  alone  have  hitherto  been
discovered.      Professor  Worsaae,  in  his  well-known  work


NEEDLES.


443


"On  the  PrimaBval  Antiquities  of  Denmark"*  even  goes  so
far  as  to  say :  ^'Against  birds  and  other  small  creatures  these
stone  arrows  might  prove  effectual,  but  against  larger  animals>
such  as  the  aurochs,  the  elk,  the  reindeer,  the  stag,  and  the
wild  boar,  they  were  evidently  insuj£cient ;  particularly  since
these  animalR  often  become  Airious  as  soon  as  they  are  struck/'
It  is  evident  that  Professor  Worsaae  is  quite  mistaken  in  this
supposition.

Mr.  Galton  informs  me  that  the  dexterity  with  which  the
savages  of  Southern  Africa  butcher  and  cut  up  large  beasts
with  the  poorest  of  knives  is  really  extraordinary.  The
Dammaras  had  usually  nothing  but  bits  of  flattened  iron
lashed  to  handles,  or  failing  these,  the  edges  of  their  flat
spears.  Yet  with  these  miserable  implements  they  would
cut  up  giraffes  and  rhinoceroses,  on  which,  even  with  ex-
cellent knives  of  European  manufacture,  Mr.  Galton  had
much  difficulty  in  making  any  impression.  Other  savage
tribes  readily  cut  flesh  with  pieces  of  shell  or  of  hard  wood.

The  neatness  with  which  the  Hottentots,  Esquimaux,  North
American  Indians,  etc.,  are  able  to  sew  is  very  remarkable,
although  awls  and  sinews  would  in  our  hands  be  but  poor
substitutes  for  needles  and  thread.  As  already  mentioned  in
p.  253,  some  cautious  archaeologists  hesitated  to  refer  the  rein-
deer caves  of  the  Dordogne  to  the  Stone  age,  on  account  of  the
bone  needles  and  the  works  of  art  which  are  found  in  them.
The  eyes  of  the  needles  especially,  they  thought,  could  only
be  made  with  metallic  implements.  Professor  Lartet  ingeni-
ously removed  these  doubts  by  making  a  similar  needle  for
himself  with  the  help  of  flint ;  but  he  might  have  referred  to
the  fact  stated  by  Cook  t  in  his  first  voyage,  that  the  New
Zealanders  succeeded  in  drilling  a  hole  through  a  piece  of
glass  which  he  had  given  them,  using  for  this  purpose,  as  he
supposed,  a  piece  of  jasper.

♦  Page  18.  t  Vol.  iii.,  p.  464.


444  ART.      STATUES.

The  Brazilians  also  use  oroaments  of  imperfectly  crystallised
quartz,  from  four  to  eight  inches  long  and  about  an  inch  in
diameter.  Hard  as  it  is,  they  contrive  to  driU  a  hole  at  eacli
end,  using  for  that  purpose  the  pointed  leaf-shoot  of  the  larg^
wild  plantain,  with  sand  and  water.  The  hole  is  generally
transyerse,  but  the  ornaments  of  the  chiefs  are  actually
pierced  lengthways.  This,  Mr.  Wallace  thinks,  must  be  a
work  of  years.*

The  works  of  art  found  in  the  Dordogne  caves  are  no
better  than  those  of  the  Esquimaux  or  the  North  American
Indians.     In  fact,  the  appreciation  of  art  is  to  be  regarded
rather  as  an  ethnological  characteristic  than  as  an  indication
of  any  particular  stage  in  civilisation.     We  see,  again,  that
in  many  cases  a  certain  knowledge  of  agriculture  has  pre-
ceded the  use  of  metals  ;  and  the  fortifications  of  New  Zea-
land, as  well  as  the  large  morals  of  the  South  Sea  Islands,
are  arguments  in  favor  of  the  theory  which  ascribes  some  of
our  camps,  our  great  tumuli,  and  other  Druidical  remains,  to
the  later  part  of  the  Stone  age.     The  great  moral  of  Oberea,
in  Tahiti,  has  been  already  described  (p.  386).     Again,  the
celebrated  statues  of  Easter  Island  are  really  colossal.     One
of  them,  which  has  fallen  down,  measures  twenty-seven  feet
long,  and  others  appear  to  be  even  larger.      The  houses
of  the  Ladrone  Islanders,  also,  are  very  remarkable.     The
larger  ones  were  supported  on  strong  pyramids  of  stone.
These  were,  according  to  Freycinet,t  in  one  piece,  made  of
chalky  sand,  or  large  stones,  imbedded  in  a  kind  of  cement.
They  were  found  in  large  numbers ;  in  one  case  they  formed
a  stone  row  four  hundred  yards  long.     They  were  first  de-
scribed by  Anson,  who  saw  many  which  were  thirteen  feet
in  height;  while  one  of  those  seen  by  Freycinet  measured
as  much  as  twenty  feet.     They  were  square  at  the  base,  and
rested  on  the  groimd.     On  each  pillar  was  a  hemisphere,

•  TrayelB  on  the  Amazon,  p.  278.  f  Vol.  iL,  p.  318.


DIFFERENCES   IN  THE  STONE   AGE.  445

-with  the  flat  side  upwards.     The  South  Sea  Islanders  afibrd,
indeed,  wonderful  instances  of  what  can  be  accomplished  with
stone  implements.     Their  houses  are  large  and  often  well  #
built,  and  their  canoes  have  excited  the  wonder  of  all  who
liave  seen  them.

Although,  then,  the  use  of  stone  aa  the  principal  material
of  implements  and  weapons  may  be  regarded  as  charac-
terising an  early  stage  in  the  development  of  civilisation,  still
it  is  evident  that  this  stage  is  itself  susceptible  of  much  sub*
division.  The  Mincopie  or  the  Australian,  for  instance,  is
not  to  be  compared  for  an  instant  with  the  semi-civilised
native  of  the  Society  Islands.  So  also  in  the  ancient  Stone
age  of  Europe,  we  find  evidences  of  great  difference.  The
savage  inhabitants  of  the  South  French  caves  had,  according
to  MM.  Christy  and  Lartet,  no  domestic  animals,  and  no  know-
ledge of  pottery  or  agriculture.  The  shell-mound  builders
of  Denmark  had  the  dog ;  the  Swiss  Lake-dwellers  also  pos-
sessed this  animal,  together  with  the  ox,  sheep,  and  pig,
perhaps  even  the  horse;  they  had  a  certain  knowledge  of
agriculture,  and  were  acquainted  with  the  art  of  weaving.
Thus,  then,  even  when  we  have  satisfied  ourselves  that  any
given  remains  belong  to  the  Stone  age,  we  are  still  but  on
the  threshold  of  our  enquiry.

Travellers  and  naturalists  have  varied  a  good  deal  in
opinion  as  to  the  race  of  savages  which  is  entitled  to  the
unenviable  reputation  of  being  the  lowest  in  the  scale  of
civilisation.  Cook,  Darwin,  Fitzroy,  and  Wallis  were  de-
cidedly in  favor,  if  I  may  so  say,  of  the  Fuegian ;  Burchell
maintained  that  the  Bushmen  are  the  lowest ;  D'Urville  voted
for  the  Australians  and  Tasmanians ;  Dampier  thought  the
Australians  "  the  miserablest  people  in  the  world ; "  Forster
said  that  the  people  of  Mallicollo  ^'  bordered  the  nearest  upon
the  tribe  of  monkeys;''  Owen  inclines  to  the  Andamaners;
others  have  supported  the  North  American  Boot-diggers;


446  DIFFERENT  LINES

and  one  French  writer  even  insinuates  tliat  monkeys  are
more  human  than  Laplanders.

The  civilisation,  moreover,  of  the  Stone  age  differs  not
only  in  degree,  but  also  in  kind,  varying  according  to  the
climate,  vegetation,  food,  etc;  from  which  it  becomes  evi-
dent— at  least  to  all  those  who  believe  in  the  unity  of  the
human  race — ^that  the  present  habits  of  savage  races  are  not
to  be  regarded  as  depending  directly  on  those  which  charac-
terised the  first  men,  but  on  the  contraiy  as  arising  from
external  conditions,  influenced  indeed  to  a  certain  extent  by
national  character,  which  however  is  after  all  but  the  result
of  external  conditions  acting  on  previous  generations.

If  we  take  a  few  of  the  things  which  are  most  generally
useful  in  savage  life,  and  at  the  same  time  most  easily  ob-
tainable, such  for  instance  as  bows  and  arrows,  slings,  throw-
ing sticks,  pottery,  domestic  animals,  or  a  knowledge  of
agriculture,  we  might  perhaps  have  expected  d  priori  that
the  acquisition  of  them  would  have  followed  some  regular
succession.  That  this,  however,  was  not  the  case  is  shown
by  the  annexed  table,  which  will,  I  think,  be  found  inte-
resting. It  gives  some  idea  of  the  progress  made  by  various
savage  tribes,  at  the  time  when  they  were  first  visited  by
Europeans.

Some  of  the  differences  exhibited  in  this  table  may  indeed
be  easily  accounted  for.  The  frozen  soil  and  arctic  climate
of  the  Esquimaux  would  not  encourage,  would  not  even
permit,  any  agriculture.  So,  again,  the  absence  of  hogs  in
New  Zealand,  of  dogs  in  the  Friendly  Isles,  and  of  all
mammalia  in  Easter  Island,  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that
the  original  colonists  did  not  possess  these  animals,  and  that
their  isolated  position  prevented  them  afterwards  from  ob-
taining any.  Moreover,  we  must  remember  that  as  a  general
rule,  the  lowest  savage  can  only  use  one  or  two  weapons.
He  is  limited  to  those  which  he  can   carry  about  with


OF  CIVILISATION.


447


1


•        •        •        •      M^o    S


S3
a>


s


-flvsaimfi
xxaioog


'I      s


•     t>  a  H


il  ^


.1


'simxoxxj


1   J


O


I


g


I


-snaKYTrxz
man


I


M
O


nwa


i»A.


1


►5        s


S


ca


S


1


►2


to


jS    ^


*iuaq)jK)ji


'iu»q)no8


S


s


g


it


5


•V3A.


k2


«9


Co
H        :        :        :        2        :        :        !      feg


*«HSjmrrairv


'SXOXKXXXOH


•a


5


-I:

^g       •


u

o


'JIXKHSaa


•a


fe  g     •


'SKTioxaj


•a


I

CQ


Il      ••
^  g      •


tnaNTisx
vaxsra


•s


O

a
cS


&


§

n     (I


J


I


I


I

<


■■g

a>

I


I


n    H


448  DIFFERENCES  IN  WEAPONS.

him,  and  naturally  prefers  those  which  are  of  most  general
utility.*  We  cannot,  however,  in  this  manner  accoimt  for
all  the  facts.  In  Columbia,  Australia,  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  and  elsewhere,  agriculture  was  unknown  before  the
advent  of  Europeans.  Easter  Island,  on  the  contrary,
contained  large  plantations  of  sweet  potatoes,  yams,  plan-
tains, sugar-canes,  etc.  Yet  the  Chinooks  of  Columbia  had
bows  and  arrows,  fish-hooks,  and  nets;  the  Australians
had  throwing  sticks,  boomerangs,  fish-hooks,  and  nets ;  the
Hottentots  had  bows  and  arrows,  nets,  fish-hooks,  pottery,
and  at  last  even  a  certain  knowledge  of  iron ;  all  of  which
seem  to  have  been  unknown  to  the  Easter  Islanders,  all  of
which  would  have  been  very  useful  to  them,  and,  excepting
the  iron,  might  have  been  invented  and  used  by  them.

If  the  case  of  Easter  Island  stood  alone,  the  absence  of
bows  and  arrows  might,  perhaps,  be  plausibly  accounted  for
by  the  absence  of  game,  the  scarcity  of  birds,  and  the
isolation  of  the  little  island,  which  rendered  war  almost
impossible.  But  such  an  argument  cannot  be  applied  to
other  cases  which  are  indicated  in  the  table.  Let  us  com-
pare, for  instance,  the  Atlantic  tribes  of  North  American
Indians,  the  Australians,  CaSres,  Bushmen,  New  Zealanders,
and  Society  Islanders.  All  these  were  constantly  at  war,
and  the  two  first  lived  very  much  on  the  produce  of  the
chase.  They  at  least  had  therefore  similar  wants.  Yet
spears  and  perhaps  clubs  were  the  only  weapons  which  they
had  in  conmion ;  the  North  Americans  had  good  bows  and
arrows,  the  Society  Islanders  and  Bushmen  had  bad  ones —
in  fact,  those  of  the  former  were  so  weak  as  to  be  use-
less in  war — the  Australians,  Caf&es,  and  New  Zealanders
had  none.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Australians  had  the
throwing  stick  and  the  boomerang;  the  Society  Islanders

*  Weapons  of  war,  depending  yery  mnch  on  the  caprice  of  chiefs,  are  prohably
more  liahle  to  change  than  those  nsed  in  hunting.


DIFFERE19CES   IN   WEAPONS.  449

used  slings;  and  the  New  Zealanders,  besides  very  effec-
tiye  clubs,  bad  numerous  and  extensive  fortifications.  It
is  certainly  most  remarkable  that  tribes  so  warlike,  and  in
n^any  respects  so  advanced,  as  the  New  Zealanders  and
Caffi*e8,  should  have  been  ignorant  of  bows  and  arrows,
which  were  used  by  many  very  low  races,  such  as  the
Fuegians,  the  Chinooks,  the  Andamaners,  and  Bushmen;
particularly  as  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  New
Zealanders  at  least  would  have  found  bows  of  great  use,
and  that  any  of  their  tribes,  having  invented  them,  would
have  had  an  immense  advantage  in  the  ''  struggle  for  exist-
ence." Other  similar  contrasts  will  strike  anv  one  who
examines  the  table ;  but  perhaps  it  may  be  said  that  some  of
these  cases  may  be  explained  by  the  influence  of  more  civi-
lised neighbours ;  that  the  comparison  above-made,  for
instance,  might  be  regarded  as  unfair,  because  the  New
Zealanders  were  an  isolated  race,  while  the  Chinooks  might
have  derived  their  knowledge  of  bows  and  arrows  from  the
eastern  tribes,  and  these  again  might  have  acquired  the  art
of  making  pottery  from  the  semi-civilised  nations  of  the
south.  No  one  can  deny  that  this  may  be  true  in  some
instances,  because  we  know  that  at  the  present  day  most
savages  possess  hatchets,  knives,  beads,  etc.,  which  they  have
received  from  traders,  and  which  they  cannot  yet  manufac-
ture for  themselves.

It  is  certainly  possible  that  the  Chinooks  may  have  derived
their  knowledge  of  the  bow  from  their  northern  neighbours ;
but  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  they  did  so  from  the  Red
Indian  tribes  to  the  east,  because  in  that  case  it  is  difficult  to
understand  why  they  should  not  also  have  learnt  from  these
the  much  simpler,  and  almost  equally  useful,  art  of  making
pottery.  Moreover  there  are  some  cases  in  which  any  such
idea  is  absolutely  out  of  the  question ;  thus,  the  throwing
stick  is  used  by  the  Esquimaux,  the  Australians,  and  some

29


450  THE   ISOLATION   OF   SAVAGES.

Brazilian  tribes,  the  bolas  by  the  Esquimaux  and  the  Pata-
gonians;  the  boomerang  is  peculiar  to  the  Australians..*
The  "sumpitan"  or  blow-pipe  of  the  Malays  occurs  again
in  the  valley  of  the  Amazons.  Again,  different  races  of
savages  have  but  little  peaceful  intercourse  with  one
another.  They  are  almost  always  at  war.  If  their  habits
are  similar,  they  are  deadly  rivals,  fighting  for  the  best
hxmting-groxmds  or  fisheries;  if  their  wants  are  different,
they  fight  for  slaves,  for  women,  for  oikaments ;  or  if  they
do  not  care  about  any  of  these,  for  the  mere  love  of  fighting,
for  scalps,  heads,  or  some  other  recognised  emblems  of  glory.
In  this  condition  of  society  each  tribe  lives  in  a  state  either
of  isolation  from,  or  enmity  with,  its  neighbours.  Delenda
est  Carthago  is  the  universal  motto,  and  savages  can  only
live  in  peace  when  they  have  a  little  world  of  their  own.
Sometimes  a  broad  sea,  or  a  high  range  of  mountains,  at
others  a  wide  "march"  or  neutral  territory  supply  tHe  neces-
sary conditions,  and  keep  them  apart.  They  meet  only  to
fight,  and  are  therefore  not  likely  to  learn  ;much  from  one
another.  Moreover,  there  are  cases  in  which  some  tribes
have  weapons  which  are  quite  unknown  to  their  neighbours.
Thus,  among  the  Brazilian  tribes  we  find  the  bow  and  arrow,
the  blow-pipe,  the  lasso,  and  the  throwing  stick.  The  first
is  the  most  general,  but  the  Barbados  use  only  the  blow-pipe,
the  Moxos  have  abandoned  the  bow  and  arrow  for  the  lasso,
and  the  Purupurus  are  distinguished  from  all  their  neigh-
bours by  using,  not  bows  and  arrows,  but  the  "  palheta,"  or
throwing  stick.  Again,  the  Cafires  have  not  generally
adopted  the  bows  and  arrows  of  the  Bushmen ;  the  Esqui-
maux have  not  acquired  the  art  of  making  pottery  from  the
North  American  Indians,  nor  the  southern  Columbian  tribes
from  the  northern  Mexicans.

*  The  negroes  of  Kiam  Niam,  howeyer,  have  iron  crescents  resembling  boom-
erangs, which  are  thrown  in  war.


INDEPENDENT   INVENTIONS.  451

Many,  &gam,  of  the  ruder  arts^  as  for  instance  the  manu-
facture of  pottery  and  of  bows,  are  so  useful,  and  at  the  same
time,  however  ingenious  in  idea,  so  simple  in  execution,  as  to
render  it  highly  improbable  that  they  would  ever  be  lost,
when  they  had  once  been  acquired.  Yet  we  have  seen  that
the  New  Zealanders  and  Caffires  had  no  bows,  and  that  none
of  the  Polynesians  had  any  knowledge  of  pottery ;  though
it  is  evident  from  their  skill  in  other  manufactures  and  their
general  state  of  civilisation,  that  they  would  have  found  no
difficulty  in  the  matter,  if  the  manner  had  once  occurred  to
them.  Again  "bolas"  are  a  most  effectual  weapon,  and  there
is  certainly  no  difficulty  in  making  them,  yet  the  knowledge
of  them  appears  to  be  confined  to  the  Fatagonians  and  the
Esquimaux.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  art  of  pottery
has  frequently  been  communicated  by  one  race  to  another.
Nevertheless,  there  are  cases,  even  among  existing  races,*  in
which  we  seem  to  find  indications  of  an  independent  dis-
covery; at  any  rate,  in  which  the  art  is  in  a  rudimentary  stage.

On  the  whole,  then,  from  a  review  of  all  these,  and  other
similar  facts  which  might  have  been  mentioned,  it  seems  to
me  most  probable  that  many  of  the  simpler  weapons,  imple-
ments,  etc.,  have  been  invented  independently  by  various
savage  tribes,  although  there  are  no  doubt  also  cases  in  which
they  have  been  borrowed  by  one  tribe  from  another.

The  contrary  opinion  has  been  adopted  by  many  writers  on
account  of  the  undeniable  similarity  existing  between  the
weapouB  used  by  savages  in  very  different  parts  of  the  world.
But  however  paradoxical  it  may  sound,  though  the  imple-
ments and  weapons  of  savages  are  remarkably  similar,  they
are  at  the  same  time  puriously  different.  No  doubt  the
necessaries  of  life  are  simple  and  similar  all  over  the  world.
The  materials  also  with  which  man  has  to  deal  are  very  much
alike ;  wood,  bone,  and  to  a  certain  extent  stone,  have  every-

*  See,  for  instance,  p.  394.


452  DIFFERENCES   IN   HABITS.

where  tlie  same  properties.  The  obsidian  flakes  of  the
Aztecs  resemble  the  flint  flakes  of  our  ancestors,  not  so  mucli
because  the  ancient  Briton  resembled  the  Aztec,  as  because
the  fracture  of  flint  is  like  that  of  obsidian.  So  also  the
pointed  bones  used  as  awls  are  necessarily  similar  all  over  the
world.  Similarity  exists,  in  fact,  rather  in  the  raw  material
than  in  the  manufactured  article,  and  some  even  of  the  simplest
implements  of  stone  are  very  different  among  different  races.
The  adze-like  hatchets  of  the  South  Sea  Islanders  are  unlike
those  of  the  Australians  or  ancient  Britons ;  the  latter  again
differ  very  much  from  the  type  which  is  characteristic  of  the
drift  or  archaoolithic  period.

If  or  are  the  habits  and  customs  of  savages  in  reality  very
similar.  Many,  indeed,  of  those  differences  which  must  have
struck  any  one  in  reading  the  preceding  part  of  the  chapter,
follow  evidently  and  directly  from  the  external  conditions  in
which  different  races  are  placed.  The  habits  of  an  Esqui-
maux and  a  Hottentot  could  not  possibly  be  similar.  But
let  us  take  some  act  which  is  common  to  many  races,  and  is
susceptible  of  being  accomplished  in  many  ways.  For  in-
stance, most  savages  live  in  part  on  the  flesh  of  birds  ;  how  is
this  obtained  P     Generally  with  bows  and  arrows ;  but  while

m

the  Australians  catch  birds  with  the  hand,  or  kill  them  with
the  simple  spear  or  the  boomerang,  the  Fuegians  have  both
the  sling  and  the  bow,  while  the  Esquimaux  use  a  complex
spear,  or  a  projectile  which  consists  of  a  niimber  of  walrus
teeth  fastened  together  by  short  pieces  of  string,  and  thus
forming  a  kind  of  bolas.  The  northern  tribes  visited  by
Kane  used  a  different  method.  They  caught  large  numbers
of  birds — especially  little  auks — in  small  nets,  resembling
landing  nets,  with  long  ivory  handles.  Yet  this  very  people
were  entirely  ignorant  of  fishing.*

Take,  again,  the  use  made  of  the  dog.     At  first,  probably,

*  Kane.    Arctic  Explorations,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  203,  243.


DIFFERENT  USES  OF   THE   DOG.  453

the  dog  and  the  man  hunted  together ;  the  cunning  of;  the
one  supplemented  the  speed  of  the  other,  and  they  shared
the  produce  of  their  joint  exertions.  Gradually  mind  as-
serted its  pre-eminence  over  matter,  and  the  man  became
master.  Then  the  dog  was  employed  in  other  ways,  less
congenial  to  his  nature.  The  Esquimaux  forced  him  to  draw
the  sledge ;  the  Chinook  kept  him  for  the  sake  of  his  wool ;
the  South  Sea  Islanders,  having  no  game,  bred  the  dog  for
food ;  the  Chonos  Indians  taught  him  to  fish ;  where  tribes
became  shepherds,  their  dogs  became  shepherds  also  ;  finally,
it  is  recorded  by  Pliny  that  in  ancient  times  troops  of  dogs
were  trained  to  serve  in  war.  Even  the  ox,  though  less
versatile  than  the  dog,  has  been  used  for  the  first  and  the
two  last  of  these  purposes.

Again,  in  obtaining  fire,  two  totally  different  methods  are
followed ;  some  savages,  as  for  instance  the  Fuegians,  using
percussion,  while  others,  as  the  South  Sea  Islanders,  rub  one
piece  of  wood  against  another.  Opinions  are  divided  whether
we  have  any  trustworthy  record  of  a  people  without  the
means  of  obtaining  fire.  It  has  been  already  mentioned
(p.  355)  that,  according  to  Mr.  Dove,  the  Tasmanians,
though  acquainted  with  fire,  did  not  know  how  to  obtain  it.
In  his  history  of  the  Ladrone  Islands,  Father  Gobien  asserts
that  fire,  "  an  element  of  such  universal  use,  was  utterly  un-
known to  them,  till  Magellan,  provoked  by  their  repeated
thefts,  burned  one  of  their  villages.  When  they  saw  their
wooden  houses  blazing,  they  first  thought  the  fire  a  beast
which  fed  upon  wood,  and  some  of  them,  who  came  too  near,
being  burnt,  the  rest  stood  afar  off,  lest  they  should  be  de-
voured, or  poisoned,  by  the  violent  breathings  of  this  terrible
animal."  This  fact  is  not  mentioned  in  the  original  account
of  Magellan's  Voyage.  Freycinet  believes  that  the  assertion  of
Father  Gobien  is  entirely  without  foundation.  The  language,
he  says,  of  the  inhabitants  contains  words  for  fire,  burning,


454  FIRE.

charcoal,  oven,  grilling,  boiling,  etc.;  and  even  before  tbe  ad-
vent of  the  Europeans,  pottery*  was  well  known.  It  is  difficult,
however,  to  get  over  the  distinct  assertion  made  by  Grobien,
which  moreover  derives  some  support  from  similar  statements
made  by  other  travellers.  Thus  Alvaro  de  Saavedra  states
that  the  inhabitants  of  certain  small  islands  in  the  Pacific
which  he  called  "  Los  Jardines,"  but  which  cannot  now  be
satisfactorily  determined,  stood  in  terror  of  fire  because  they
had  never  seen  it.f  Again,  Wilkes  tells  us  J  that  on  the
island  of  Fakaafo,  which  he  calls  "Bowditch,"  "there  was
no  sign  of  places  for  cooking,  nor  any  appearance  of  fire."
The  natives  also  were  very  much  alarmed  when  they  saw
sparks  struck  from  flint  and  steel.  Here,  at  least,  we  might
have  thought,  was  a  case  beyond  question  or  suspicion ;  the
presence  of  fire  could  hardly  have  escaped  observation ;  the
marks  it  leaves  are  very  conspicuous.  If  we  cannot  depend
on  such  a  statement  as  this,  made  by  an  officer  in  the  United
States'  Navy,  in  the  official  report  of  an  expedition  sent  out
especially  for  scientific  purposes,  we  may  well  be  disheartened,
and  lose  confidence  in  Ethnological  investigations.  Yet  the
assertions  of  Wilkes  are  questioned,  and  with  much  appearance
of  justice,  by  Mr.  Tylor.  §  In  the  "  Ethnography  of  the  United
States'  Exploring  Expedition,"  Hale  gives  a  list  of  Fakaafo
words,  in  which  we  find  afi  for  "  fire."  This  is  evidently  the
same  word  as  the  New  Zealand  aki ;  but  as  it  denotes  light
and  heat,  as  well  as  fire,  we  might  suppose  that  it  thus  found
its  way  into  the  Fakaafo  vocabulary.  I  should  not,  there-
fore, attribute  to  this  argument  quite  so  much  force  as  does
Mr.  Tylor.  It  is,  however,  evident  that  Captain  Wilkes  did
not  perceive  the  importance  of  the  observation,  or  he  would
certainly  have  taken  steps  to  determine  the  question ;  and  as
Hale,  in  his  special  work  on  the  Ethnology  of  the  ezpeditioni

•  le.  Yol.  ii.,  p.  166.  t  Hackluyt,  Soc.,  1862,  p.  178.

I  United  States'  £xpl.  Exped.  toL  t.,  p.  1 8.      {  Early  History  of  Mankind,  p.  230.


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF   BURIAL.  455

does  not  say  a  word  on  the  subject,  it  is  clear  he  had  no
idea  that  the  inhabitants  of  Fakaafo  exhibited  such  an  in-
teresting phenomenon.  The  fact,  if  established,  would  be
most  important ;  but  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  satisfactorily
proved  that  there  is  at  present,  or  has  been  within  historical
times,'  any  race  of  men  entirely  ignorant  of  fire.  It  is  at
least  certain  that  as  far  back  as  the  earliest  Swiss  lake-villages,
and  Danish  shell-mounds,  the  use  of  fire  was  well  known  in
Europe.  ^

There  is,  again,  scarcely  any  conceivable  way  in  which  the
dead  could  be  disposed  of,  which  has  not  been  adopted  in
some  part  of  the  world.  Among  many  the  corpse  is  simply
buried ;  by  others  it  is  burned.  Some  of  the  North  American
Indians  expose  their  dead  on  scafiblds  in  the  branches  of  trees.
Some  tribes  deposit  them  in  sacred  rivers,  others  in  the  sea.
Among  the  Sea  Dyaks  the  dead  chief  is  placed  in  his  war
canoe  with  hia  favorite  weapons  and  principal  property,  and
is  thus  turned  adrift.  Other  tribes  gave  their  dead  to  be
food  for  wild  beasts ;  and  others  preferred  to  eat  them  them-
selves. Some  Brazilian  tribes  drink  the  dead.*  "  The  Ta-
rianas  and  Tucanos,  and  some  other  tribes,  about  a  month
after  the  funeral,  disinter  the  corpse,  which  is  then  much
decomposed,  and  put  it  in  a  great  pan  or  oven,  over  the  fire,
till  all  the  volatile  parts  are  driven  ofi*  with  a  most  horrible
odour,  leaving  only  a  black  carbonaceous  mass,  which  is
pounded  into  a  fine  powder,  and  mixed  in  several  large
conches  of  caxiri  :  this  is  drunk  by  the  assembled  company"
under  the  fuU  belief  that  the  virtues  of  the  deceased  will  thus
be  transmitted  to  the  drinkers.  The  Cobeus  also  drink  the
ashes  of  the  dead  in  the  same  maimer.

Indeed,  if  there  are  two  possible  ways  of  doing  a  thing,  we
may  be  sure  that  some  tribes  will  prefer  one,  and  some  the
other.     It  seems  natural  to  us  that  descent  should  go  in  the

*  Wallace,  TrareU  on  the  Amazon,  p.  498.


456  CURIOUS  CUSTOMS.

male  line ;  but  there  are  very  many  tribes  in  whicli  it  is  traced
from  the  mother,  not  the  father.  The  husband  or  father
seems  to  us  to  be  the  natural  head  of  the  family ;  in  Tahiti
the  reverse  is  the  case,  and  the  son  enters  at  once  into  the
property  and  titles  of  his  father,  who  then  holds  them  only
as  a  guardian  or  trustee ;  so  that  among  this  extraordinary-
people,  not  the  father,  but  the  son,  is  in  reality -the  head  of
the  family.  Among  the  New  Zealanders  Mr.  Brown  assures
us  that  the  youngest  son  succeeded  to  the  property  of  the
father.*  There  are  many  races  in  which  those  holding  cer-
tain relationships  are  forbidden  to  talk  to  one  another,  an
extraordinary  superstition  which,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  364),
reaches  its  climax  among  the  Feegeeans.

It  seems  natural  to  us  that  after  childbirth,  the  woman,
should  keep  her  bed ;  and  that  as  far  as  possible  the  husband
should  relieve  her  for  a  time  from  the  labors  and  cares  of
life.  In  this,  at  least,  one  might  have  thought  that  all
nations  would  be  alike.  Yet  it  is  not  so.  Among  the
Caribs  the  father,  on  the  birth  of  a  child,  took  to  his
hammock,  and  placed  himself  in  the  hands  of  the  doctor,
the  mother  meanwhile  going  about  her  work  as  usual.  A
similar  custom  has  been  observed  on  the  mainland  of  South
America ;  among  the  Arawaks  of  Surinam ;  in  the  Chinese
province  of  West  Yunnan;  it  is  mentioned  by  Strabo  as
occurring  in  his  time  among  the  Iberians,  and  is  fotind  even
in  the  present  day  among  the  Basques,  among  whom  we  are
told  that  in  some  of  the  valleys,  the  "women  rise  immediately
after  childbirth,  and  attend  to  the  duties  of  the  household,
while  the  husband  goes  to  bed,  taking  the  baby  with  him,
and  thus  receives  the  neighbours'  compliments."  The  same
habit  has  been  noticed  also  in  the  South  of  France ;  accord-
ing to  Diodorus  Siculus  it  prevailed  at  his  time  in  Corsica ;
and  finally  it  "  is  said  still  to  exist  in  some  cantons  of  Beam,

*  New  Zealand  and  its  Aborigines,  p.  26.


DIFFERENCES  IN    PREVAXENT    SOUNDS.  457

where  it  is  called  faire  la  couvade."  A  full  accoimt  of  this
most  extraordinary  habit  will  be  found  in  Tylor's  Early
History  of  Mankind,  on  the  authority  of  which  I  make  the

above  'statements.*

«

Again,  the  love  of  life — the  dread  of  death — are  among
the  strongest  of  our  feelings.  '^Everything  that  a  man  hath,
he  will  give  in  exchange  for  his  life."  But  this  is  by  no
means  universally  the  case.  According  to  Azara,  the  Indians
of  Paraguay  have  a  great  indifference  to  death  ;  and  we  have
already  seen  that  this  is  the  case  with  the  Feegeeans.
Among  the  Chinese  it  is  said  that  a  man  condemned  to  death,
if  permitted  to  do  so,  may  always  secure  a  substitute  on  pay-
ment of  a  moderate  sum  of  money.

Again,  the  sounds  by  which  language  is  constituted  differ
extremely  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  The  clicks  of  the
Hottentots  are  a  striking  illustration  of  this.  The  Indians  of
Port  au  Francais  in  Columbia,  according  to  M.  de  Lamanon,t
make  no  use  of  the  consonants  b,  /,  x,  j\  d,  p,  or  v.  The
Australians  did  not  use  the  sound  conveyed  by  our  letter  «.  J
The  Feegeeans  do  not  use  the  letter  c,  the  Somo-Somo  dialect
has  no  k,  that  of  Rakiraki  and  other  parts  no  ^.§  The
Society  Islanders  exclude  both  8  and  c.  ||  In  representing
the  New  Zealand  language  the  missionaries  found  them-
selves able  to  discard  no  less  than  thirteen  letters,  namely,
*,  0,  rf,/,  ff,j,  /,  g,  8,  V,  X,  y,  and  z.  If

Even  the  symbols  by  which  the  feelings  are  expressed  are
very  different  in  different  races.  Kissing  appears  to  us  the
natural  expression  of  affection ;  yet  it  was  entirely  unknown
to  the  Tahitians,^the  New  Zealanders,**  the  Papouaiis,tt  and
the  aborigines  of  Australia,  nor  was  it  in  use  among  the

•  I.e.  p.  288.  t  Voyage  de  la  Perouse,  vol.  ii.,  p.  211.

.  t  Preycinet,  vol.  ii.,  p.  767;  D'Urville,  vol.  i.,  p.  188,  199,  481.
{  Pigi  and  the  Figians,  vol.  i.,  p.  v.,  967.     \\  Polynesian  Kesearches,  vol.  i.,  p.  77.
f  Brown.    New  Zealand  and  its  Aborigines,  p.  100.
••  D*Urville,  vol.  ii.,  p.  561.  tt  Freycinet,  vol.  ii.,  p.  66.


468  DIFFERENT  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE.

Esquimaux;*  the  Tongans  and  many  other  Polynesians
always  sit  down  when  speaking  to  a  superior;  the  in-
habitants of  Mallicollo  testify  "  admiration  by  hissing  like  a
goose ; "  t  at  Vatavulu  it  is  respectful  to  turn  one's  back  on  a
superior,  especially  in  addressing  him.  J  According  to  Frey-
cinet,  tears  were  recognised  in  the  Sandwich  Islands  as  a
sign  of  happiness  ;§  and  some  of  the  Esquimaux  pull  noses
as  a  token  of  respect.  ||  Spix  and  Martins  assure  us  that
blushing  was  imknown  among  the  Brazilian  Indians;  and
that  only  after  long  intercourse  with  Europeans,  does  a
change  of  color  become  in  them  any  indication  of  mental
emotion.  If

The  ideas  of  virtue  are  also  extremely  dissimilar.  Neither
faith,  hope,  nor  charity,  enter  into  the  virtues  of  a  savage.
The  Sichuana  language  contains  no  expression  for  thanks ;
the  Algonquin  had  no  word  for  love ;  the  TinnS  no  word
for  belovqj ;  mercy  was  with  the  North  American  Indians  a
mistake,  and  peace  an  evil;  thefb,  says  Catlin,  they  "call
capturing ;"  humility  is  an  idea  which  they  could  not  com-
prehend. Chastity  was  not  reckoned  as  a  virtue  by  the
New  Zealanders;**  it  was  disapproved  of,  though  for  very
different  reasons,  by  some  of  the  Brazilian  tribes,  by  the
inhabitants  of  the  Ladrones,  and  by  the  Andamaners.  On
the  other  hand,  the  Australians  would  have  been  shocked
at  a  man  marrying  a  woman  of  his  own  family  name;  the
Abipones  thought  it  a  sin  for  a  man  to  pronoimce  his  own
name ;  the  Tahitians  thought  it  very  wrong  to  eat  in  com-
pany, and  were  horrified  at  an  English  s^tilor,  who  carried
some  food  in  a  basket  on  his  head.  This  prejudice  was  alao
shared  by  the  New  Zealanders, ft  while  the  Feegeeaos,  who

*  Lyon's  Journal,  p.  363.  f  Cook's  Second  Voyage,  yol.  ii.,  p.  36.

i  Fig;!  and  the  Figions,  yoI.  L,  p.  164.  {  I.e.  yol.  ii.,  pp.  642,  689.

II  Boss.    Baffin's  Bay,  p.  118.  IT  VoL  i.,  p.  376.

**  Brown.    New  Zealand  and  its  Aborigines,  p.  86.
tt  D'Urrille,  yol.  ii.,  p.  633.


DIFFERENT  IDEAS  OF  VIRTUE.  459

were  habitual  cannibals,  who  regarded  piercy  as  a  weakness,
and  cruelty  as  a  yirtue,  fully  belieyecl  that  a  woman  who  was
not  tattooed  in  an  orthodox  manner  during  life,  could  not  pos-
sibly hope  for  happiness  after  death.  This  curious  idea  is  also
found  among  the  Esquimaux.  Hall  tells  us  that  they  tattoo
"  from  principle,  the  theory  being  that  the  lines  thus  made
will  be  regarded  in  the  next  world  as  a  sign  of  goodness."*
It  seems  to  the  Yeddahs  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world
that  a  man  should  marry  his  younger  sister,  but  marriage
with  an  elder  one  is  as  repugnant  to  them  as  to  us.  Among
the  Friendly  Islanders  the  chief  priest  was  considered  too
holy  to  be  married ;  but  he  had  the  right  to  take  as  many
concubines  as  he  pleased ;  and  even  the  chiefs  dared  not
refuse  their  daughters  to  him.  Among  the  natives  of  New
South  Wales,  though  the  women  wore  no  clothes,  it  was
thought  indecent  for  children  to  go  naked,  f

I  cannot  indeed  but  think  that  the  differences  observable  in
savage  tribes,  are  even  more  remarkable  than  the  similarities.

In  endeavouring  to  estimate  the  moral  character  of  savages,
we  must  remember  not  only  that  their  standard  of  right  and
wrong  was,  and  is,  in  many  cases,  very  different  from  ours :
but  also  that,  according  to  the  statements  of  travellers,  though
on  this  point  I  must  confess  that  I  feel  much  hesitation,  some
of  them  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  responsible  beings,  and
have  not  attained  to  any  notions,  however  faulty  and  un-
defined,^  of  moral  rectitude.:^  But  where  such  notions  do
exist,  they  differ  widely,  as  we  have  seen,  from  our  own;
and  it  would  open  up  too  large  a  question  to  enquire  whether,
in  all  cases,  our  standard  is  the  correct  one.

In  considering  the  character  of  women  belonging  to  savage
or  semi-savage  races,  we  must  remember  that  savages  re-
garded the  white  men  as  beings  of  a  superior  order  to  them-

*  life  with  the  Esquimaux,  toI.  ii.,  p.  315.        f  D'HniUe,  toL  i.  p.  471.
X  See,  for  instance,  Borchell,  vol.  i.,  p.  461


460  DEIFICATION   OF   WHITE   MEN   BY  SAVAGES.

selves.  Thus  M.  Du  Chaillu  tells  us,  that  some  of  the  African
savages  looked  upon  him  as  a  superior  being ;  and  the  South
Sea  Islanders  worshipped  Captain  Cook  as  a  deity.  Even
when  they  had  killed  him,  and  cut  him  into  small  pieces,
the  inhabitants  of  Owhyhee  ftdly  expected  him  to  re-appear,
and  frequently  asked  "what  he  would  do  to  them  on  his
return."*  However  absurd  and  extravagant  such  a  belief
may  at  first  sight  appear,  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  is  in
many  respects  very  natural.  Savages  can  only  raise  their
minds  to  the  conception  of  a  being  a  few  degrees  superior
to  themselves,  and  Captain  Cook  was  more  powerful,  wiser,
and  we  may  add  more  virtuous,  than  most  of  their  so-called
"  Deities."  Under  these  circumstances,  although  it  must  be
admitted  that  the  chastity  of  the  women  is  not,  as  a  general
rule,  much  regarded  among  savages,  we  must  not  too  severely
condemn  them  on  this  account.  It  is  not  surprising  that
any  connexion  with  white  men  is  regarded  rather  as  an
honor  than  as  a  disgrace :  Europeans  hold,  in  fact,  almost  the
same  position  in  public  estimation  as  did  the  amorous  deities
of  ancient  mythology.

Again,  with  savages,  as  with  children,  time  appears  longer
than  it  does  to  us,  and  a  temporary  marriage  as  natur&l  and
honorable  as  one  that  is  permanent.  Hospitality,  again,
is  frequently  carried  so  far  that  it  is  thought  wrong  to  with-
hold from  a  guest  anything  that  might  contribute  to  his
comfort,  and  he  is  accordingly  provided  with  a  tepiporary
wife  for  the  period  of  his  visit.f  Among  the  Esquimaux  it
is  considered  a  great  mark  of  friendship  for  two  men  to
exchange  wives  for  a  day  or  two.  It  has  been  already  men-
tioned that  a  Kandyan  chief,  described  by  Mr.  Bayley,  was
quite  scandalised  at  the  idea  of  having  only  one  wife.     It

*  Cook's  Voyage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean.   Bj  Capt.  King,  F.R.S.  VoLiii.,  p.  69.
t  See,  for  instance,  Wilson's  Missionary  Voyage,  pp.  61,  141,  160,  etc. ;  Frey-
einet,  yol.  ii.,  p.  119<


SOCIAL  POSITION   OF  WOMEN.  461

was,  he  said,  ''just  like  monkeys."  When  Captain  Cook  was
in  New  Zealand,  his  companions  contracted  many  temporary
marriages  with  the  Maori  women ;  these  were  arranged  in  a
formal  and  decent  manner,  and  were  regarded,  by  the  New
Zealanders  at  any  rate,  as  perfectly  regular  and  innocent.*
Regnardt  assures  us  that  the  Lapps  preferred  to  marry  a  girl
that  has  had  a  child  by  a  white  man,  thinking  ^'  that  because
a  man,  whom  they  believe  to  be  possessed  of  a  better  taste
than  themselves,  has  been  anxious  to  give  marks  of  his  love
for  a  girl  of  their  coimtry,  she  must  therefore  be  possessed  of
some  secret  merit."  Even  at  the  present  day,  Lady  Duff
Gordon  tells  us,  in  her  paper  on  the  Cape, J  that  "there
are  no  so-called  'morals'  among  the  coloured  people,  and
how  or  why  should  there  P  It  is  an  honor  to  one  of  these
girls  to  have  a  child  by  a  white  man."  Taking  all  these
facts  into  consideration,  the  intercourse  which  has  taken
place  between  Europeans  and  women  of  lower  tribes  must
not,  I  think,  be  too  severely  condemned,  or  rather  the  blame
ought  to  fall  on  us  and  not  on  them.  But  even  among
savages  themselves,  we  must  admit  that  female  virtue  id,  in
many  cases,  but  slightly  regarded  ;  as,  indeed,  is  but  natural
when  women  themselves  are  looked  upon  as  little  better  than
domestic  animals.  Among  many  tribes,  for  instance  the
South  Sea  Islanders  and  the  Esquimaux,  indecent  dances  are
not  only  common,  but  are  countenanced  by  women  of  the
highest  rank,  to  whom  it  does  not  appear  to  occur  that  there
is  any  harm  or  impropriety  in  them.  According  to  Ulloa,§  the
Brazilians  do  not  approve  of  chastity  in  an  unmarried  woman,
regarding  it  as  a  proof  that  she  can  have  nothing  attractive
about  her.  The  inhabitants  of  the  Ladrones,||  and  of  the
Andaman  Islands,^  come  to  the  same  conclusion ;    in  the

•  Cook's  First  Voyage,  vol.  iii.,  p.  450.

t  Pinkerton.    Journey  to  Lapland,  toI.  i.,  p.  166.

t  Vacation  Tourists,  1868,  p.  178.  }  Pinkerton,  vol.  xiv.,  p.  621.

I  Freycinet,  vol.  ii.,  p.  370.         H  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  New  Ser.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  35.


462  SOCIAL  POSITION  OF  WOMEN.

latter  case,  however,  for  a  different  reason,  regarding  it  as  a
proof  of  selfishness  and  pride.  Judged  by  our  standards
these  facts  are  very  dreadful ;  but  we  must  remember  that
they  did  not  entail  on  savages  the  same  fatal  consequences  as
with  us ;  and  before  we  condemn  them  too  severely,  let  us
remember  our  own  literature  and  our  own  morality,  even  in
the  last  century.

The  harsh,  not  to  say  cruel,  treatment  of  women,  which  is
ahnost  universal  among  savages,  is  one  of  the  deepest  stains
upon  their  character.  They  regard  the  weaker  sex  as  beings
of  an  inferior  order,  as  mere  domestic  drudges.  Hard  work
and  hard  fare  fall  to  their  lot.  Kor  are  their  labors  and
sufferings  sweetened  by  any  great  affection  on  the  part  of
those  for  whom  they  work.  We  have  already  seen  that  the
Algonquins  had  no  word  for  "love"  in  their  language,  and
that  the  Tinn^  Indians  had  no  equivalent  for  "dear"  or
"beloved."  Captain  Lefroy*  says,  "I  endeavoured  to  put
this  intelligibly  to  Nannette,  by  supposing  such  an  expression
as  ma  ch^re  femme;  ma  chdre  fille.  When  at  length  she
understood  it,  her  reply  was  (with  great  emphasis),  '  I'disent
jamais  9a ;  i'disent  ma  femme,  ina  fille. '  "  Spix  and  Mar-
tius  t  tell  us  that  among  the  Brazilian  tribes,  the  father  has
scarcely  any,  the  mother  only  an  instinctive  affection  for  the
child — "  iibrigens  wachst  das  Kind,  vom  Yater  gar  nicht,  von
der  Mutter  instinctartig  geliebt,  jedoch  wenig  gepflegt  auf."
There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  as  an  almost  universal  rule,
savages  are  cruel,  and  the  only  arguments  we  can  urge  in
their  favor  are  that  they  are  less  sensitive  to  pain  than  is
the  case  with  those  who  spend  much  of  their  time  in-doors,
and  that  in  many  cases  they  do  not  hesitate  to  inflict  upon
themselves  also  the  most  horrible  tortures.

Savages  have  often  been  likened  to  children,  but  so  far  as
intelligence  is   concerned,  a  child  of  four  years  old  is  far

*  Bichardson'B  Arctic  Expedition,  toI.  ii.,  p.  24.        f  Seise,  yol.  i.,  p.  381.


SAVAGES   AND    CHILDREN.  463

superior ;  although  if  we  take  for  comparison  a  child  belong-
ing to  a  civilized  race  at  a  suflSciently  early  age,  the  parallel
is  fair  enough.  Thus,  they  have  no  steadiness  of  purpose.
Speaking  of  the  Dogrib  Indians,  we  found,  says  Richardson,*
"  by  experience,  that  however  high  the  reward  they  expected
to  receive  on  reaching  their  destination,  they  could  not  be
depended  on  to  carry  letters.  A  slight  difficulty,  the  prospect
of  a  banquet  on  venison,  or  a  sudden  impulse  to  visit  some
firiend,  were  sufficient  to  turn  them  aside  for  an  indefinite
length  of  time."  Even  among  the  comparatively  civilised
South  Sea  Islanders  this  childishness  was  vei-y  apparent.
"Their  tears  indeed, f  like  those  of  children,  were  always
ready  to  express  any  passion  that  was  strongly  excited,  and
like  those  of  children  they  also  appeared  to  be  forgotten  as
soon  as  shed."  D'TJrville  also  mentions  that  Tai-wanga,  a
New  Zealand  chief,  cried  like  a  child,  because  the  sailors
spoilt  his  favorite  cloak,  by  powdering  it  with  flour.J  It  is
not,  says  Cook,  "indeed  strange  that  the  sorrows  of  these
artless  people  should  be  transient^  any  more  than  that  their
passions  should  be  suddenly  and  strongly* expressed;  what
they  feel,  they  have  never  been  taught  either  to  disguise  *or
suppress,  and  having  no  habits  of  thinking  which  perpetually
recal  the  past,  and  anticipate  the  future,  they  are  affected  by
all  the  changes  of  the  passing  hour,  and  reflect  the  color  of
the  time,  however  frequently  it  may  vary ;  they  have  no
project  which  is  to  be  pursued  from  day  to  day,  the  subject
of  unremitted  anxiety  and  solicitude,  that  first  rushes  into
the  mind  when  they  awake  in  the  morning,  and  is  last  dis-
missed when  they  sleep  at  night.  Yet  if  we  admit  that  they
are  upon  the  whole  happier  than  we,  we  must  admit  that  the
child  is  happier  than  the  man,  and  that  we  are  losers  by  the

•  Arctic  Expedition,  vol.  ii.,  p.  28.  t  Cook's  First  Voyage,  p.  103.

X  D'TTrville,  yoI.  ii.,  p.  898.     See  also  Burton's  Lake  Regions  of  Central
Africa,  p.  332.


464  SAVAGES   AND  CHILDUEN.

perfection  of  our  nature,  the  increase  of  our  knowledge,  and
the  enlargement  of  our  views."

We  know  the  difficulty  which  children  find  in  pronouncing
certain  sounds  :  r  and  /  for  instance,  they  constantly  confounds
This  is  the  case  also  among  the  Sandwich  Islanders  and  in  the
Ladrones  according  to  Freycinet;*  in  Vanikoro;t  among
the  Dammaras  ;  J  and  in  the  Tonga  Islands.  §  The  frequent
repetition  of  a  syllable  is  also  noticeable  in  the  languages
of  savages,  and  especially  in  names.  Mr.  Darwin  observed
that  the  Fuegians  had  great  difficulty  in  comprehending  an
alternative : "  and  every  one  must  have  noticed  the  tendency
among  savages  to  form  words  by  reduplication.  This  also
is  characteristic  of  childhood  among  civilised  races.

Again,  some  of  the  most  brutal  acts  which  have  been
recorded  against  them  are  to  be  regarded  less  as  instances  of
deliberate  cruelty,  than  of  a  childish  thoughtlessness  and  im-
pulsiveness. A  striking  instance  of  this  is  recorded  by  Byron
in  his  narrative  of  the  Loss  of  the  Wager.  A  cacique  of  the
Chonos,  who  was  nominally  a  Christian,  had  been  out  with
his  wife  to  fish  for  sea-eggs,  and  having  had  little  success,
reWmed  in  a  bad  humour.  "  A  little  boy  of  theirs,  about
three  years  old,  whom  they  appeared  to  be  doatingly  fond  of,
watching  for  his  father  and'  mother's  return,  ran  into  the
surf  to  meet  them :  the  father  handed  a  basket  of  eggs  to
the  child,  which  being  too  heavy  for  him  to  carry,  he  let  it
fall,  upon  which  the  father  jumped  out  of  the  canoe,  and
catching  the  boy  up  in  his  arms,  dashM  him  with  the
utmost  violence  against  the  stones.  The  poor  little  creature
lay  motionless  and  bleeding,  and  in  that  condition  was  taken
up  by  the  mother,  but  died  soon  after."  ||

•  Vol.  ii.,  pp.  260,  619.  f  Vol.  y.,  p.  218.

X  GaltoQ.    Tropical  South  Africa,  p.  181.

}  Mariner's  Tonga  Islands,  Yol.  i.,  p.  30.

1|  Byron's  Loss  of  the  Wager.    Kerr's  Voyages,  .vol.  xvii.,  p.  374.


MORAL   INFERIORITY  OF  SAVAGES.  465

In  fact,  we  may  almost  sum  up  this  part  of  the  question  in
a  few  words  by  saying,  as  the  most  general  conclusion  which
can  be  arrived  at,  that  savages  have  the  character  of  children
with  the  passions  and  strength  of  men.  No  doubt  different
races  of  savages  differ  very  much  in  character.  An  Esqui-
maux and  a  Feegeean,  for  instance,  have  little  in  common.
But  after  making  every  possible  allowance  for  savages,  it
must  I  think  be  admitted  that  they  are  inferior  morally  as
well  as  in  other  respects,  to  the  more  civilised  races.  There
is  indeed  no  atrocious  crime,  no  vice  recorded  by  any  tra-
veller, which  might  not  be  paralleled  in  Europe,  but  that
which  is  with  us  the  exception,  is  with  them  the  rule ;  that
which  with  us  is  condemned  by  the  general  verdict  of
society,  and  is  confined  to  the  imeducated  and  the  vicious,  is
among  savages  passed  over  almost  without  condemnation,  and
often  treated  as  a  matter  of  course.  Among  the  Feegeeans,
for  instance,  parricide  is  not  a  crime,  but  a  custom,  and  other
similar  cases  have  been  already  mentioned.

If  we  now  turn  to  the  mental  differences  between  civil-
ised and  uncivilised  races  we  shall  find  them  very  strongly
marked.  Speaking  of  a  Bushman  tribe,  Burchell  observes
that  "  whether  capable  of  reflection  or  not,  these  individuals
never  exerted  it."*  The  Rev.  T.  Dove  describes  the  Tas-
manians  as  distinguished  ''  by  the  absence  of  all  moral  views
and  impressions.  Every  idea  bearing  on  our  origin  and  des-
tination as  rational  beings  seems  to  have  been  erased  from
their  breasts."  f  I*  would  be  easy  to  fill  a  volume  with  the
evidence  of  excessive  stupidity  recorded  by  different  travellers^
It  might  be  perhaps  thought  that  these  were  rather  instances
of  individual  dulness,  than  any  indication  of  a  national. cha-
racteristic ;  but  in  the  nature  and  capacity  of  a  language  we
find  a  test  and  measure  of  the  higher  minds  in  a  nation.
Unfortunately,  however,  travellers  have  found  it  difficult

*  I.e.  Tol.  i.,  p.  461.        t  Tasmanian  Journal  of  Natural  Science,  toI.  i.,  p.  249.

30


466  INTELLECTUAL    INFERIORITY  OF   SAVAGES.

Qnougk  to  obtain  vocabularies  of  the  words  in  use;  and
we  seldom  get  any  information  as  to  words  for  which  savages
have  no  equivalent,  or  ideas  which  they  dp  not  possess.
I  have,  however,  already  mentioned  the  deficiency  of  some
North  American  languages  in  terms  of  endearment ;  this
fact  suggests  a  melancholy  condition  of  the  domestic  rela-
tions, but  it  may  here  be  referred  to  again  as  an  evidence  of
a  low  mental,  as  well  as  moral,  condition.  What  Spix  and
Martins  tell  us  about  the  Brazilian  tribes*  appears  also  to  be
true  of  many,  if  not  of  most,  savage  races.  Their  vocabulary
is  rich,  and  they  have  separate  names  for  the  different  parts
of  the  body,  for  all  the  different  animals  and  plants  with
which  they  are  acquainted,  for  everything,  in  fact,  which
they  can  see  and  handle.  Yet  they  are  entirely  deficient  in
words  for  abstract  ideas ;  they  have  no  expressions  for  color,
tone,  sex,  genus,  spirit,  etc.  So,  again,  the  Tasmanians  had
no  word  for  a  tree,  though  they  had  a  name  {or  each  species  ;
nor  could  they  express  *'  qualities  such  as  hard,  soft;,  warm,
cold,  long,  short,  roimd,  etc. :  for  'hard'  they  would  say
'like  a  stone;'  for  'tall'  they  would  say  'long  legs,'  etc.;
and  for  '  round  *  they  said  '  like  a  ball,'  '  like  the  moon,'  and
so  on."t  According  to  the  missionaries,:^  Fuegians  have
"  no  abstract  terms  for  expressing  the  truths  of  our  religion  ; "
and  among  the  North  American  languages  "a  term  sufficiently
general  to  denote  an  'oak  tree'  is  exceptional." §  Even  the
comparatively  civilised  inhabitants  of  Tahiti  had,  according
to  Forster,  "no  proper  words  for  expressing  abstract  ideas."||
The  names  for  numbers  are,  however,  among  the  lower  races,
the  best,  or  at  least  the  most  easily  applicable  test  of  mental
condition.

We  have  seen  that  the  Esquimaux  can  only  with  difficulty

*  Reise  in  Brazilien,  vol.  i.,  p,  385.  %  The  Voi«e  of  Pity,  toI.  x.,  p.  162.

t  Milligan.  Proc.  Roy.  Society.  Tas-  §  Latham.  Varieties  of  Man,  p.  375.

mania,  vol.  iii.,  p.  281.  ||  I.e.  p.  403.


DEFICIENCIES   IN   NUMEBATION.  467

count  up  to  ten,  and  that  some  individuals  cannot  go  beyqnd
five.  The  Daminaras  "in  practice,  whatever  they  may
possess  in  their  language,  certainly  use  no  numeral  greater
than  three.  When  they  wish  to  express  four,  they  take  to
their  fingers,  which  are  to  them  as  formidable  instruments  of
calculation  as  a  sliding  rule  is  to  an  English  schoolboy.
They  puzzle  very  much  after  five,  because  no  spare  hand
remains  to  grasp  and  secure  the  fingers  that  are  required
for  units."*  Mr.  Crawfurd,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  an
interesting  paper  on  this  subject,t  has  examined  no  less  than
thirty  Australian  languages,  and  it  appears  that  none  of  the
tribes  in  that  vast  continent  can  count  beyond  four.  Ac-
cording to  Mr.  Scott  Nind,  indeed,  the  numerals  used  by  the
natives  of  King  George's  Sound  reach  up  to  five ;  but  the
last  is  merely  the  word  "many."  The  Brazilian  Indians
count  only  up  to  three  ;  for  any  higher  number  they  use  the
word  "many." J  The  Cape  Yorkers  (Australia)  can  hardly
be  said  to  go  beyond  two ;  their  numerals  are  as  follows  :

One Netat

Two ; NaeB.

Three  NaeB-netat

Four Naes-naea.

Five     Naes-naes-netat.

Six Naes-nacs-naes.

Again,  in  the  state  of  their  religious  conceptions,  or  rather
in  the  absence  of  religious  conceptions,  we  get  another  proof
of  extreme  mental  inferiority.  It  has  been  asserted  over
and  over  again  that  there  is  no  race  of  men  so  degraded
as  to  be  entirely  without  a  religion — without  some  idea  of  a
deity.  So  far  from  this  being  true,  the  very  reverse  is  the
case.     Many,  we  might  almost  say  all,  of  the  most  savage

*  Galton's  Tropical  Africa,  p.  133.

t  Ethnological  Society's  Transactions,  New  Series,  vol.  ii.,  p.  84.

i  Spix  and  Martins,  vol.  i.,  p.  887.


468  ABSENCE   OF   A   RELIGION

races  are,  according  to  the  nearly  universal  testimony  of
travellers,  in  this  condition.    Much  evidence  of  this  has  been
already  given,  but  it  would  be  easy  to  collect  a  great  many
other  statements  to  the  same  effect.   .  Thus  Burton  states  that
some  of  the  tribes  in  the  Lake  districts  of  Central  Africa
"  admit  neither  God,  nor  angel,  nor  devil."*   The  Tasmanians
had  no  word  for  a  creator.f    The  South  American  Indians  of
the  Gran  Chaco  are  said  by  the  missionaries  to  have  "  no  reli-
gious or  idolatrous  belief  or  worship  whatever ;  neither  do  they
possess  any  idea  of  God,  or  of  a  supreme  being.     They  make
no  distinction  between  right  and  wrong,  and  have  therefore
neither  fear  nor  hope  of  any  present  or  future  punishment
or  reward,  nor  any  mysterious  terror  of  some  supernatural
power,  whom  they  might  seek  to  assuage  by  sacrifices  or
superstitious  rites.'' J    According  to  Burchell,§  the  Bachapins
(Caffires)  had  no  form  of  worship  or  religion.     They  thought
"that  everything  made  itself,  and  that  trees  and  herbage  grew
by  their  own  will."     They  had  no  belief  in  a  good  deity,  but
some  vague  idea  of  an  evil  Being.     Indeed  the  first  idea  of  a
God  is  almost  always  as  an  evil  spirit.    In  the  Fellew  Islands,
Wilson  found  no  religious  buildings,  nor  any  si^  of  religion.
According  to  Spix  and  Martins,  the  Brazilian  Indians  believed
in  the  existence  of  a  devil,  but  not  of  a  God.  ||     Some  of  the
tribes,  according  to  Bates  and  Wallace,  were  entirely  without
religion.     The  Yenadies  and  the  Villees  are,  according  to
Dr.  Short,  entirely  without  any  belief  in  a  future  state.  If
Captain  Grant  could  find  "no  distinct  form  of  religion"  in
some  of  the  comparatively  civilised  tribes  visited  by  him.**
And,  again.  Hooker  tells  us  that  the  Lepchas  of  Northern
India  have  no  religion.     The  Toupinambas  of  Brazil  had  no

*  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  §  Trayels  in  S.  Africa,  vol.  ii.,  p.  650.

Society,  New  Series,  toI.  i.,  p.  323.  ||  Beise  in  Brasilien,  vol.  i.,  p.  379.

t  Rev.  T.  Dove.  Tasmanian  Journal  IT  Proceedingsof  Madras Govemmeot,

of  Science,  vol.  i.,  p.  249.  Eevenue  Department,  May,  1864.

J  Voice  of  Pity,  vol.  ix.,  p.  220.  ••  A  Walk  across  Africa,  p.  146.


AMONG  SAVAGE   BACES.  469

religion,  though  if  the  name  is  applied  "k  des  notions  fantas-
tiques  d'^tres  snmaturels  et  puissans,  on  ne  sauroit  nier
qu'ils  n'eussent  une  croyance  r^ligieuse  et  m^me  line  sorte  de
culte  ext^rieur."  They  believed  in  the  existence  of  a  heaven
for  those  who  had  killed  and  eaten  many  of  their  enemies  ;
while  those  who  were  effeminate  wotdd  be  compelled  to  dwell
*'  avec  Aygnan  (le  diable),  auprds  duquel  elles  sont  perp^tu-
ellement  tonrment^es."*  Moreover,  we  must  remember  that
most  travellers  start  with  an  entirely  opposite  impression*
and  are  only  convinced  against  their  wilL  We  have  already
observed  a  case  of  this  kind  in  Kolben,  who,  in  spite  of  the
assertions  of  the  natives  themselves,  felt  quite  sure  that
certain  dances  must  be  of  a  religious  character,  ''let  the
Hottentots  say  what  they  will."  Again,  Mr.  Matthews,  who
went  out  to  act  as  missionary  among  the  Fuegians,  but  was
soon  obliged  to  abandon  the  hopeless  task,  observed  only  one
act,  "  which  coidd  be  supposed  devotional."  He  sometimes,
we  are  told,  ''heard  a  great  howling  or  lamentation,  about
sunrise  in  the  morning;  and  upon  asking  Jemmy  Button
what  occasioned  the  outcry,  he  could  obtain  no  satisfactory
answer;  the  boy  only  saying,  'people  very  sad,  cry  very
much.'  "  This  appears  so  natural  and  sufficient  an  explana-
tion, that  why  the  outcry  should  be  "  supposed  devotional,"
I  must  confess  myself  unable  to  see.  Once  more.  Dr.
Hooker  states  that  the  Khasias,  an  Indian  tribe,  had  no
religion.  CoL  Yule,*  on  the  contrary,  says  that  they  havet
but  he  admits  that  breaking  hen's  eggs  is  "the  principal
part  of  their  religious  practice."  But  if  most  travellers
have  expected  to  find  a  religion  everywhere,  and  have  been
convinced,  almost  against  their  will,  that  the  reverse  is  the
case ;  it  is  quite  possible  that  there  may  have  been  others
who  have  too  hastily  denied  the  existence  of  a  religion

*  Frejrcmet,  toI.  l.,  p.  158.      f  Tule.    On  the  Khaaia  HUIb  and  Peoplei  p.  18.


470  BELIEF   IN   WITCHCRAFT.

among  the  tribes  they  Tisited.  However  this  may  be,  those
who  assert  that  even  the  lowest  savages  believe  in  a  Deity,
affirm  that  which  is  entirely  contrary  to  the  evidence.  The
direct  testimony  of  travellers  on  this  point  is  indirectly  cor-
roborated by  their  other  statements.  How,  for  instance^  can
a  people  who  are  unable  to  count  their  own  fingers,  possibly
raise  their  mind  so  far  as  to  admit  even  the  rudiments  of  a
religion.*  The  fetish  worship,  which  is  so  widely  prevalent
in  Africa,  can  hardly  be  called  a  religion;  and  even  the
South  Sea  Islanders,  who  were  in  many  respects  so  highly
civilised,  are  said  to  have  been  seriously  offended  with  their
Deity  if  they  thought  that  he  treated  them  with  undue
severity,  or  without  proper  consideration.  According  to
Kotzebue,  the  Kamtschatkans  adored  their  deities  ''when
their  wishes  were  fulfilled,  and  insulted  them  when  their
affairs  went  amiss.''  f  When  the  missionaries  introduced  a
printing-press  into  Feegee  '^the  heathen  at  once  declared
it  to  be  a  God."  J

The  savage  almost  everywhere  is  a  believer  in  witchcraft.
Confusing  together  subjective  and  objective  relations,  he
is  a  prey  to  constant  fears.  Nor  is  the  belief  in  sorcery
altogether  shaken  off  even  by  the  most  civilised  nations.
James  the  First  was  under  the  impression  that  by  melting
little  images  of  wax  ''  the  persons  that  they  bear  the  name
of  may  be  continually  melted  or  dried  away  by  continual
sickness."  As  regards  pictures,  the  most  curious  fancies
exist  among  savage  races.  They  have  a  very  general  dislike  to
be  represented,  thinking  that  the  artist  thereby  acquires  some
mysterious  power  over  them.  If  the  picture  is  like,  so  much
the  worse.  So  much  life,  they  argue,  could  not  be  put  into
the  drawing  except  at  the  expense  of  the  original.     Kane  on

*  See,  for  instance,  Grey's  Creed  of  Christendom,  p.  212.

t  New  Voyage  Round  the  World,  tdI.  ii.,  p.  13.

X  Figi  and  the  Figianf,  toI.  ii.,  p.  222.


BELIEF   IW   WrrCHCRAFT.  471

one  occasion  freed  himaelf  from  some  importunate  Indians,
by  threatening  to  draw  them  if  they  did  not  go  away.  I
have  already  mentioned  (p.  425)  the  danger  in  which  Catlin
found  himself  from  sketching  a  chief  in  profile,  and  thereby
as  it  was  supposed  depriving  him  of  half  his  face.  So  again
a  mysterious  connexion  is  supposed  to  exist  between  a  cut
lock  of  hair  and  the  person  to  whom  it  belonged.  In  various
parts  of  the  world  the  sorcerer  gets  clippings  of  the  hair  of
his  enemy,  parings  of  his  nails  or  leavings  of  his  food,  con-
vinced that  whatever  evil  is  done  to  these,  will  react  on  their
former  owner.  Even  a  piece  of  clothing,  or  the  ground  on
which  a  person  has  trodden,  will  answer  the  purpose,  and
among  some  tribes  the  mere  knowledge  of  a  person's  name
is  supposed  to  give  a  mysterious  power.  The  Indians  of
British  Columbia  have  a  great  horror  of  telling  their  names.
Among  the  Algonquins  a  person's  real  name  is  communicated
only  to  his  nearest  relations  and  dearest  friends:  the  outer
world  address  him  by  a  kind  of  nickname.  Thus,  the  true
name  of  La  BeUe  Sauvage  was  not  Pocahontas,  but  Matokes,
which  they  were  afraid  to  communicate  to  the  English.  In
some  tribes  these  name-fancies  take  a  difierent  form.  Ac-
cording to  Ward,  it  is  an  unpardonable  sin  for  a  Hindoo
woman  to  mention  the  name  of  her  husband.  The  Kaffirs
have  a  similar  custom,  and  so  have  some  East  African  tribes.
In  many  parts  of  the  world  the  names  of  the  dead  are
avoided  with  superstitious  horror.  This  is  the  case  in  great
parts  of  North  and  South  America,  in  Siberia,  among  the
Papuans  and  Australians,  and  even  in  Shetland,  where  it  is
said  that  widows  are  very  reluctant  to  mention  their  departed
husbands.

Throughout  Australia,  among  some  of  the  Brazilian  tribes,
in  parts  of  Africa,  and  in  various  other  countries,  natural
death  is  regarded  as  an  impossibility.  In  the  New  Hebrides
^*  when  a  man  fell  ill,  he  knew  that  some  sorcerer  was  bum-


472  GENEEAL  INFEEIORITY  OF   SAVAGES.

ing  his  rubbish,  and  shell-trumpets,  which  could  be  heard
for  miles,  were  blown  to  signal  to  the  sorcerers  to  stop,  and
wait  for  the  presents  which  would  be  sent  next  morning.
Night  after  night,  Mr.  Turner  used  to  hear  the  melancholy
too-tooing  of  the  shells,  entreating  the  wizards  to  stop
plaguing  their  victims.'.'*  Savages  never  know  but  what
they  may  be  placing  themselves  in  the  power  of  these  terrible
enemies.t  The  sufferings  and  privations  which  they  thus
imdergo,  the  horrible  tortures  which  they  sometimes  inflict
on  themselves,  and  the  crimes  which  they  are  led  to  commit,
are  melancholy  in  the  extreme.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say
that  the  horrible  dread  of  unknown  evil  hangs  like  a  thick
cloud  over  savage  life,  and  embitters  every  pleasure.

Perhaps  it  will  be  thought  that  in  the  preceding  chapter  I
have  selected  from  various  works  all  the  passages  most  \m-
favorable  to  savages,  and  that  the  picture  I  have  drawn  of
them  is  unfair.  In  reality  the  very  reverse  is  the  case.
Their  real  condition  is  even  worse  and  more  abject  than  that
which  I  have  endeavoured  to  depict.  I  have  been  carefiil  to
quote  only  from  trustworthy  authorities,  but  there  are  many
things  stated  by  them  which  I  have  not  ventured  to  repeat ;
and  there  are  other  facts  which  even  the  travellers  themselves
were  ashamed  to  publish.

•  Tylor,  l.e,  p.  129;  Tumer'g  Polynesia,  pp.  18,  89,  424.
t  See  Brown.    New  Zealand  and  its  Aborigines,  p.  80.


473


CHAPTER  XIV.


CONCLUDING     REMARKS.


I  HAVE  already  expressed  my  belief  that  the  simpler  arts
and  implements  have  been  independently  invented  by
various  tribes,  and  in  very  different  parts  of  the  world.  Even
at  the  present  day  we  may,  I  think,  obtain  glimpses  of  tho
manner  in  which  they  were,  or  may  have  been,  invented.  Some
monkeys  are  said  to  use  clubs,  and  to  throw  sticks  and  stones
at  those  who  intrude  upon  them.  We  know  that  they  use
round  stones  for  cracking  nuts,  and  surely  a  very  small  step
would  lead  from  that  to  the  application  of  a  sharp  stone  for
cutting.  When  the  edge  became  blimt,  it  would  be  thrown
away,  and  another  chosen ;  but  after  awhile  accident,  if  not
reflection,  would  show,  that  a  round  stone  would  crack  other
stones,  as  well  as  nuts,  and  thus  the  savage  would  learn  to
make  sharp-edged  stones  for  himself.  At  first,  as  we  see  in
the  drift  specimens,  these  would  be  coarse  and  rough,  but
gradually  the  pieces  chipped  off  would  become  smaller,  the
blows  would  be  more  cautiously  and  thoughtfully  given,  and
at  length  it  would  be  found  that  better  work  might  be  done
by  pressure  than  by  blows.  From  pressure  to  polishing
woidd  again  be  but  a  small  step.  In  making  flint  imple-
ments sparks  would  be  produced  ;  in  polishing  them  it  would
not  fail  to  be  observed  that  they  became  hot,  and  in  this
way  it  is  easy  to  see  how  the  two  methods  of  obtaining  fire
may  have  originated.


474  THE   PRIMITIVE  CONDITION   OF   MAN.

The  chimpanzee  builds  himself  a  house  or  shelter  almost
equal  to  that  of  some  savages.  Our  earliest  ancestors  there-
fore may  have  had  this  art ;  but  even  if  not,  when  they
became  hunters,  and  as  we  find  to  be  the  case  with  aU
hunting  tribes,  supplemented  the  ineflBciency  of  their  wea-
pons by  a  wonderful  acquaintance  with  the  manners  and
customs  of  the  animals  on  which  they  preyed,  they  could  not
fail  to  observe,  and  perhaps  to  copy,  the  houses  which
various  species  of  animals  construct  for  themselves.

The  Esquimaux  have  no  pottery ;  .they  use  hollow  stones
as  a  substitute,  but  we  have  seen  how  they  sometimes  improve
upon  these  by  a  rim  of  clay.  To  extend  this  rim,  diminish,
and  at  last  replace  the  stone,  is  an  obvious  process.  In
hotter  countries,  vessels  of  wood,  or  the  shells  of  fruits  such
as  cocoa-nuts  and  gourds,  are  used  for  holding  liqudds.
These  of  course  will  not  stand  fire,  but  by  plastering  them
on  the  outside  with  clay  they  would  be  enabled  to  do  so.
There  is  some  evidence  that  this  obvious  improvement  has
been  made  by  several  separate  tribes  even  in  modem  times.*
Other  similar  cases  might  be  mentioned,  in  which  by  a  very
simple  and  apparently  obvious  process,  an  important  improve-
ment is  secured.  It  seems  very  improbable  that  any  such
advantage  should  ever  be  lost  again.  There  is  no  evidence,
says  Mr.  Tylor,t  "of  any  tribe  giving  up  the  use  of  the
spindle  to  twist  their  thread  by  hand,  or  having  been  in  the
habit  of  working  the  fire-drill  with  a  thong,  and  going  back
to  the  clumsier  practice  of  working  it  without,  and  it  is  even
hard  to  fancy  such  a  thing  happening.''  What  follows  from.
this  argument  ?  Evidently  that  the  lowest  races  of  existing
savages  must,  always  assuming  the  common  origin  of  the
human  race,  be  at  least  as  far  advanced  as  were  our  ancestors
when  they  spread  over  the  earth's  surface.

♦  See  Tylor,  Early  History  of  Mankind,  p.  269.  f  l,e,  p.  864,


THE  PRIMITIVE   CONDITION   OF   MAN.  475

What,  then,  must  have  been  their  condition  P  They  were
ignprant  of  pottery,  for  the  Esquimaux,  the  Polynesians,  the
Australians,  some  North  and  South  American  tribes,  and
many  other  savage  races,  have  none  even  now,  or  at  least
had  none  until  quite  lately.  They  had  no  bows  and  arrows^
for  these  weapons  were  unknown  to  the  Australians  and  New
Zealanders ;  their  boats  for  the  same  reason  must  have  been
of  the  rudest  possible  character ;  they  were  naked,  and  igno-
rant of  the  art  of  spinning;  they  had  no  knowledge  of
agriculture,  and  probably  no  domestic  animal  but  the  dog,
though  here  the  argument  is  weaker,  inasmuch  as  experience
is  more  portable  than  property.  It  is,  however,  in  my
opinion,  most  probable  that  the  dog  was  long  theonly  domes-
ticated animal.  Of  the  more  unusual  weapons,  such  as  the
boomerang,  blowpipe,  bolas,  etc.,  they  were  certainly  igno-
rant. The  sling  and  the  throwing-stick  were  doubtless
unknown,  and  even  the  shield  hd,d,  probably  not  been  in-
vented. The  spear,  which  is  but  a  development  of  the  knife-
point, and  the  club,  which  is  but  a  long  hammer,  are  the
only  things  left  by  this  line  of  argument.  They  seem  to  be
the  only  natural  and  universal  weapons  of  man.

We  might  be  disposed  to  wonder  how  man  was  at  first
able  to  kill  game ;  but  we  must  remember  that  if  man  was
unskilful,  animals  were  unsuspicious.  The  tameness  of  the
birds  on  uninhabited  islands  is  weU  known ;  the  wariness  of
animals  and  the  skill  of  man  must  have  increased  almost
pari  passu.

The  same  argument  may  be  applied  to  the  mental  con-
dition of  savages.  That  our  earliest  ancestors  could  have
counted  to  ten  is  very  improbable,  considering  that  so  many
races  now  in  existence  cannot  get  beyond  four.  On  the
other  hand  it  is  very  improbable  that  man  can  have  existed
in  a  lower  condition  than  that  thus  indicated.  So  long,
indeed,  as  he  was  confined  to  the  tropics,  he  may  have  found


476  THE   PRIMITIVE   CONDITION   OF  MAN.

a  succession  of  fruits,  and  have  lived  as  the  monkeys  do  now.
Indeed,  according  to  Bates,  this  is  the  case  with  some  of  the
Brazilian  Indians.  "The  monkeys"  he  says  *'lead  in  fact
a  life  similar  to  that  of  the  Par&rauate  Indians."  Directly,
however,  our  ancestors  spread  into  temperate  climates,  this
mode  of  life  would  become  impossible,  and  they  would  be
compelled  to  seek  their  nourishment,  in  part  at  least,  from
the  animal  kingdom.  Then,  if  not  before,  the  knife  and  the
hammer  would  develop  into  the  spear  and  the  club.

It  is  too  often  supposed  that  the  world  was  peopled  by  a
series  of  "  migrations."  But  migrations,  proi)erly  so  called,
are  compatible  only  with  a  comparatively  high  state  of  or-
ganisation. ■  Moreover,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  geo-
graphical distribution  of  the  various  races  of  man  curiously
coincides  with  that  of  other  races  of  animals :  and  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  man  originally  crept  over  the  earth's  sur-
face, little,  by  little,  year  by  year,  just  for  instance  as  the
weeds  of  Europe  are  now  gradually  but  surely  creeping
over  the  surface  of  Australia.

The  preceding  argument  assumes,  of  course,  the  unity  of
the  human  race.  It  would,  however,  be  impossible  for  me
to  end  this  volume  without  saying  a  few  words  on  this  great
question.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  principal  varieties
of  mankind  are  of  great  antiquity.  We  find  on  the  earliest
Egyptian  monuments,  some  of  which  are  certainly  as  ancient
as  2400  B.C.,  "  two  great  distinct  types,  the  Arab  on  the  east
and  west  of  Egypt,  and  the  Negro  on  the  south;  and  the
Egyptian  type  occupying  a  middle  place  between  the  two.
The  representations  of  the  monuments,  although  conven-
tional, are  so  extremely  characteristic  that  it  is  quite  impos-
ble  to  mistake  them."  These  distinct  types  still  predominate
in  Egypt  and  the  neighbouring  countries.  ThuB,  then,  says
Mr.  Poole,  in  this  immense  interval  we  do  not  find  "  the  least
change  in  the  Negro  or  the  Arab ;  and  even  the  type  which


UNITY  OF  THE  HUMAN   RACE.  477

seems  to  be  intermediate  between  them  is  virtually  as  un-
altered.    Those  who  consider  that  length  of  time  can  change
a  type  of  man^  will  do  well  to  consider  the  fact  that  three
thousand  years  give  no  ratio  on  which  a  calculation  could  be
founded.''  *     I  am,  however,  not  aware  that  it  is  supposed  by
any  school  of  Ethnologists  that  "  time "  alone,  without  a
change  of  external  conditions,  will  produce  an  altcotition  of
type.     Let  us  turn  now  to  the  instances  reUed  on  by  Mr.
Crawfurd.f     The  millions,  he  says,   "of  AMcan  Negroes
that  have  during  three  centuries  been  transported  to  the
New  World  and  its  islands,  are  the  same  in  color  as  the
present  inhabitants  of  the  parent  country  of  their  forefathers.
The  Creole  Spaniards,  who  have  for  at  least  as  long  a  time
been  settled  in  tropical  America,  are  as  fair  as  the  people  of
Arragon  and  Andalusia,  with  the  same  variety  of  color  in
the  hair  and  eye   as  their  progenitors.      The  pure  Dutch
Creole  colonists  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  after  dwelling
two  centuries  among  black  Cafires  and  yellow  Hottentots,  do
not  differ  in  color  from  the  people  of  Holland."     Here,  on
the  contrary,  we  have  great  change  of  circumstances,  but
a  very  insufficient  lapse  of  time,  and  in  fact  there  is  no
well-authenticated   case  in  which  these  two  requisites  are
united.      But  Mr.  Crawfurd   goes  too  far  when  he  denies
altogether  any  change  of  type.     In  spite  of  the  compara-
tively short  time  which  has  elapsed,  and  of  the  immense
immigration  which   has  been  kept  up,  there  is  already  a
marked  difference  between  the  English  of  Europe  and  those
of  America,  and  it  would  be  desirable  to  enquire,  whether
in  their  own  eyes,  the  Negroes  of  the  New  World  exactly
resemble  those  of  Africa.

But  there  are  some  reasons  which  make  it  probable  that
changes  of  external  condition,  or  rather  of  country,  produce

•  Poole.    Trans.  Etbn.  Soc.  New  Ser.  vol.  ii.,  p.  261.
t  Crawfurd.    Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.  New  Ser.  toI.  ii.,  p.  252.


478  NATUEAL   SELECnON

less  effect  now  than  was  formerly  the  case.  At  present,
when  men  migrate  they  carry  with  them  the  manners  and
appliances  of  civilised  Ufe.  They  build  houses  more  or  less
like  those  to  which  they  have  been  accustomed,  carry  with
them  flocks  and  herds,  and  introduce  into  their  new  country
the  principal  plants  which  served  them  for  food  in  the  old.
K  their,  new  abode  is  cold  they  increase  their  clothing,  if
warm  they  diminish  it.  In  these  and  a  thousand  other  ways
the  effect  which  would  otherwise  be  produced  is  greatly
retarded.

But,  as  we  have  seen,  this  has  not  always  been  the  case.
When  man  first  spread  over  the  earth,  he  had  no  domestic
animals,  perhaps  not  even  the  dog ;  no  knowledge  of  agricul-
ture ;  his  weapons  were  of  the  rudest  character,  and  his
houses  scarcely  worthy  of  the  name.  His  food,  habits,  and
whole  manner  of  life  must  then  have  varied  as  he  passed
from  one  country  to  another,  he  must  have  been  far  moi'e
subject  to  the  influence  of  external  circumstances,  and  in  all
probability  more  susceptible  of  change.  Moreover,  his  form,
which  is  now  stereotyped  by  long  ages  of  repetition,  may
reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  been  itself  more  plastic  than
is  now  the  case.

If  there  is  any  truth  in  this  view  of  the  subject,  it  will
necessarily  follow  that  the  principal  varieties  of  man  are  of
great  antiquity,  and  in  fact  go  back  almost  to  the  very  origin
of  the  human  race.  We  may  then  cease  to  wonder  that  the
earliest  paintings  on  Egyptian  tombs  represent  so  accurately
several  varieties  still  existing  in  those  regions,  and  that  the
Engis  skull,  probably  the  most  ancient  yet  found  in  Europe,
so  closely  resembles  many  that  may  be  seen  even  at  the
present  day.

This  argument  has  been  carried  still  farther  by  Mr.  Wal-
lace in  an  admirable  memoir  on  ''The  Origin  of  Human
Baces  and  the  Antiquity  of  Man  deduced  from  the  theory  of


APPLIED  TO  MAN.  479

Natural  Selection."  •  He  has  attempted  to  reconcile  the  two
g^reat  schools  of  ethnologists  who  hold  opinions  '^so  dia-
metrically opposed  to  each  other ;  the  one  party  positively
maintaining  that  man  is  a  species,  and  is  essentially  one —
that  all  differences  are  but  local  and  temporary  variations,
produced  by  the  different  physical  and  moral  conditions  by
which  he  is  surrounded;  the  other  party  maintaining  with
equal  confidence  that  man  is  a  genus  of  many  species,  each  of
which  is  practically  tmchangeable,  and  has  ever  been  as
distinct,  or  even  more  distinct,  than  we  now  behold  them.'*
Mr.  Wallace  himself  holds  the  former  of  these  theories,
although  admitting  that  at  present  apparently  "  the  best  of
the  argument  is  on  the  side  of  those  who  maintain  the
primitive  diversity  of  man,"  and  he  shows  that  the  true
solution  of  this  difficulty  lies  in  the  theory  of  Natural  Selec-
tion, which  wit]}  characteristic  imselfishness  he  ascribes  un-
reservedly to  Mr.  Darwin,  although,  as  is  well  known,  he
struck  out  the  idea  independently  and  published  it,  though
not  with  the  same  elaboration,  at  the  same  time.

After  explaining  the  true  nature  of  the  theory,  which  it
must  be  confessed,  is  even  yet  very  much  misunderstood,  he
points  out  that  as  long  as  man  led  what  may  be  called  an
animal  existence,  he  would  be  subject  to  the  same  laws,  and
would  vary  in  the  same  manner  as  the  rest  of  his  fellow-
.creatures,  but  that  at  length  "by  the  capacity  of  clothing
himself,  and  making  weapons  and  tools  (he)  has  taken  away
from  nature  that  power  of  changing  the  external  form  and

structure  which  she  exercises  over  all  other  animals

From  the  time,  then,  when  the  social  and  sympathetic  feel-
ings •came  into  active  operation,  and  the  intellectual  and
moral  faculties  became  fairly  developed,  man  would  cease  to
be  influ^iced  by  natural  selection  in  his  physical  form  and


*  Anthropological  Beyiew,  May,  IsWl.

b


480  THE  INFLUENCE   OF   MIND.

structure ;  as  an  animal  he  would  remain  almost  stationary ;
the  changes  of  the  surrounding  universe  would  cease  to  have
upon  him  that  powerful  modifying  effect  which  it  exercises
over  other  parts  of  the  organic  world.  But  from  the
moment  that  his  body  became  stationary,  his  mind  would
become  subject  to  those  very  influences  from  which  his  body
had  escaped ;  every  slight  variation  in  his  mental  and  moral
nature  which  should  enable  him  better  to  guard  against
adverse  circumstances,  and  combine  for  mutual  comfort  and
protection,  would  be  preserved  and  accumulated ;  the  better
and  higher  specimens  of  our  race  would  therefore  increase  and
spread,  the  lower  and  more  brutal  would  give  way  and  suc-
cessively die  out,  and  that  rapid  advancement  of  mental
organisation  would  occur,  which  has  raised  the  very  lowest
races  of  men  so  far  above  the  brutes,  (although  differing  so
little  from  some  of  them  in  physical  structure),  and,  in
conjunction  with  scarcely  perceptible  modifications  of  form,
has  developed  the  wonderful  intellect  of  the  Germanic
races."

Mr.  Wallace  appears  to  me,  however,  to  press  his  argu-
ment a  little  too  far  when  he  says  that  man  is  no  longer
"influenced  by  natural  selection,"  and  that  his  body  has
"become  stationary."  Slow  and  gradual  changes  still
take  place,  although  his  "mere  bodily  structure"  long
ago  became  of  less  importance  to  man  than  "that  subtle
force  we  term  mind."  This,  as  Mr.  Wallace  eloquently
says,  "with  a  naked  and  unprotected  body,  this  gave  him
clothing  against  the  varying  inclemencies  of  the  seasons.
Though  unable  to  compete  with  the  deer  in  swiftness,  or
with  the  wild  bull  in  strength,  this  gave  him  weapons  where-
with to  capture  or  overcome  both.  Though  less  capable  than
most  other  animals  of  living  on  the  herbs  and  the  fruits  that
unaided  nature  supplies,  this  wonderful  faculty  taught  him
to  govern  and  direct  nature  to  his  own  benefit,  and  make  her


THE   INFLUENCE   OF  MINy.  481

produce  food  for  him  when  and  where  he  pleased.  From  the
moment  when  the  first  skin  was  used  as  a  covering,  when
the  first  rude  spear  was  formed  to  assist  in  the  chase,  the
first  seed  sown'  or  shoot  planted,  a  grand  revolution  was
effected  in  nature,  a  revolution  which  in  all  the  previous  ages
of  the  world's  history  had  had  no  parallel,  for  a  being  had
arisen  who  was  no  longer  necessarily  subject  to  change  with
the  changing  universe, — a  being  who  was  in  some  degree
superior  to  nature,  inasmuch  as  he  knew  how  to  control
and  regulate  her  action,  and  could  keep  himself  in  harmony
with  her,  not  by  a  change  in  body,  but  by  an  advance  in
mind.

"  Here,  then,  we  see  the  true  grandeur  and  dignity  of  man.
On  this  view  of  his  special  attributes,  we  may  admit  that
even  those  who  claim  for  him  a  position  and  an  order,  a
class,  or  a  sub-kingdom  by  himself,  have  some  reason  on
their  side.  He  is,  indeed,  a  being  apart,  since  he  is  not
influenced  by  the  great  laws  which  irresistibly  modify  aU
other  organic  beings.  Nay,  more :  this  victory  which  he
has  gained  for  himself  gives  him  a  directing  influence  over
other  existences.  Man  has  not  only  escaped  '  natural  selec-
tion' himself,  but  he  is  actually  able  to  take  away  some  of
that  power  from  nature  which,  before  his  appearance,  she
universally  exercised.  We  can  anticipate  the  time  when  the
earth  will  produce  only  cultivated  plants  €uid  domestic  ani-
mals ;  when  man's  selection  shall  have  supplanted  '  natural
selection ; '  and  when  the  ocean  will  be  the  only  domain  in
which  that  power  can  be  exerted,  which  for  counties^  cycles
of  ages  ruled  supreme  over  the  earth."

Thus,  then,  the  great  principle  of  Natural  Selection,  which
is  to  biology  what  the  law  of  gravitation  is  for  astronomy,  not
only  throws  an  unexpected  light  on  the  past,  but  illuminates
the  future  with  hope ;  nor  can  I  but  feel  surprised  that  a
theory  which  thus  teaches  us  humility  for  the  past,  faith  in

31


482  J^CBEASE  OF   HAFFIKS8B,

the  present,  and  hope  for  the  future,  should  have  been  re-
garded as  opposed  to  the  principles  of  Christianity  or  the
interests  of  true  religion.

But  even  if  the  theory  of  "natural  selection"  should  event-
ually prove  to  be  untenable,  and  if  those  are  right  who  believe
that  neither  our  minds  nor  our  bodies  are  susceptible  of  any
important  change,  any  great  improvement,  still  I  think  we  are
justified  in  believing  that  the  happiness  of  man  is  greatly  on
the  increase.     It  is  generally  admitted  that  if  any  animal
increases  in  numbers  it  must  be  because  the  conditions  are
becoming  more  favorable  to  it,  in  other  words,  because  it  is
happier  and  more  comfortable.     Now,  how  will  this  test
apply  to  man  ?    Schoolcraft  estimates*  that  in  a  population
which  lives  on  the  produce  of  the  chase,  each  hunter  requires
on  an  average  50,000  acres,  or  78  square  miles,  for  his  sup-
port.   Again,  he  tells  usf  that,  excluding  Michigan  territory,
west  of  Lake  Michigan,  and  north  of  Illinois,  there  were  in
the  United  States,  in  1825,  about  97,000  Indians,  occupying
77,000,000  of  acres,  or  120,312  square  miles.    This  gives  one
inhabitant  to  every  1^  square  nules.     In  this  case,  however,
the  Indians  lived  partly  on  the  subsidies  granted  them  by
Government  in  exchange  for  land,  and  the  population  was
therefore  greater  than  would  have  been  the  case  if  they  had
lived  entirely  on  the  produce  of  the  chase.     The  same  reason
affects,  though  to  a  smaller  extent,  the  Indians  in  the  Hud-
son's Bay  territory.      These  tribes  were  estimated  by  Sir
George  Simpson,  late  Governor  of  the  territories  belonging
to  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  in  his  evidence  given  before
the  Conunittee  of   the  House  of  Commons,   in  1867,   at
139,000,   and    the  extent    is    supposed    to  be  more  than
1,400,000  square  miles,  to  which  we  must  add  13,000  more
for  Vancouver's    Island,  making    a    total    of  more   than

«  Indian  Txibei,  vol.  L,  p.  433.  f  I.e.  toI.  iii.,  p.  675.


SHOWN   BT   IKCBSASS   OF  lOTMBEBS.  483

GOOyOOOyOOO  of  acres ;  about  6,500  acres,  or  10  square  miles,
to  each  individual.  Again,  the  inhabitants  of  Patagonia,
south  of  40^,  and  exclusive  of  Ghiloe  and  Tierra  del  Fuego,
are  estimated  by  Admiral  Fitzroj  at  less  than  4,000,  and  the
number  of  acres  is  176,640,000,  giving  more  than  44,000
acres,  or  68  square  miles  for  each  person.  A  writer  in  the
"  Voice  of  Pity,"  however,  thinks  that  their  numbers  may,
perhaps,  amount  to  14,000  or  15,000.*  It  would  be  difficult
to  form  any  census  of  the  aborigines  in  Australia ;  Mr.  Old-
field  estimates  that  there  is  one  native  to  every  60  square
miles ;  f  and  it  is,  at  least,  evident  that,  since  the  introduc-
tion of  civilisation,  the  total  population  of  that  continent  has
greatly  increased.

Indeed,  population  invariably  increases  with  civilisation.
Paraguay,  with  100,000  square  miles,  has  from  300,000  to
500,000  inhabitants,  or  about  four  to  a  square  mile.  The
uncivilised  parts  of  Mexico  contained  374,000  inhabitants  in
675,000  square  miles;  while  Mexico  proper,  with  833,600
square  miles,  had  6,691,000  inhabitants.  Naples  had  more
than  183  inhabitants  to  each  square  mile ;  Yenetia  more
than  200,  Lombardy  280,  England  280,  Belgium  as  many
as  320.

Finally,  we  cannot  but  observe  that,  under  civilisation,
the  means  of  subsistence  have  increased,  even  more  rapidly
than  the  population.  Far  from  suffering  for  want  of  food,
the  more  densely  peopled  countries  are  exactly  those  in
which  it  is,  not  only  absolutely,  but  even  relatively  most
abundant.  It  is  said  that  any  one  who  makes  two  blades  of
grass  grow  where  one  grew  before,  is  a  benefactor  to  the
human  race ;  what,  then,  shall  we  say  of  that  which  enables
a  thousand  men  to  live  in  plenty,  where  one  savage  could
scarcely  find  a  Scanty  and  precarious  subsistence  P

*  le,  vol.  ii.,  p.  98.  t  Ttodb.  £Um.  Soc,  New  8er.,  toI.  lii.,  p.  220.


484  8UFFB&INOS  OF  SAVAGES.

There  are,  indeed,  many  who  doubt  whether  happiness
is  increased  by  civilisation,  and  who  talk  of  the  free  and
noble  savage.  But  the  true  savage  is  neither  free  nor
noble;  he  is  a  slave  to  his  own  wants,  his  own  passions;
imperfectly  protected  from  the  weather,  he  suffers  from  the
cold  by  night  and  the  heat  of  the  sun  by  day ;  ignorant  of
agriculture,  living  by  the  chase,  and  improvident  in  success,
hunger  always  stares  him  in  the  face,  and  often  drives  him
to  the  dreadful  alternative  of  cannibalism  or  death.

Wild  animalfl  are  always  in  danger.  Mr.  Galton,  who  is
so  well  qualified  to  form  an  opinion,  believes  that  the  life  of
aU  beasts  in  their  wild  state  is  an  exceedingly  anxious  one ;
that  ''every  antelope  in  South  Africa  has  literally  to  run
for  its  life  once  in  every  one  or  two  days  upon  an  average,
and  that  he  starts  or  gallops  under  the  influence  of  a  false
alarm  many  times  in  a  day.'^*  So  it  is  with  the  savage ;  he
is  always  suspicious,  always  in  danger,  always  on  the  watch.
He  can  depend  on  no  one,  and  no  one  can  depend  upon  him.
He  expects  nothing  from  his  neighbour,  and  does  unto  others
as  he  believes  that  they  would  do  unto  him.  Thus  his  life
is  one  prolonged  scene  of  selfishness  and  fear.  Even  in  his
religion,  if  he  has  any,  he  creates  for  himself  a  new  source  of
terror,  and  peoples  the  world  with  invisible  enemies.  The
position  of  the  female  savage  is  even  more  wretched  than
that  of  her  master.  She  not  only  shares  his  sufferings,  but
has  to  bear  his  iU-humour  and  ill-usage.  She  may  truly  be
said  to  be  little  better  than  his  dog,  a  little  dearer  than  his
horse.  In  Australia,  Mr.  Oldfield  never  saw  a  woman's
grave,  and  does  not  think  that  the  natives  took  the  trouble
to  bury  them.  But,  indeed,  he  believes  that  few  of  them
are  so  fortunate  as  to  die  a  natural  death,  ''they  being
generally  despatched  ere  they  become   old  and  emaciated,

*  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  New  Ser.,  yol.  iii.,  p.  183.


SBLF-INFLICTED  BUFFERIN08.  485

that  so  mucli  good  food  may  not  be  lost In  fine,  so

little  importance  is  attached  to  them,  either  before  or  after
death,  that  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  man  does  not
Talue  his  dog,  when  aliye,  quite  as  much  as  he  does  his
woman,  and  think  of  both  quite  as  often  and  lovingly  after
he  has  eaten  them."*

Not  content,  however,  with  those  incident  to  their  mode  of
life,  savages  appear  to  take  a  melancholy  pleasure  in  self-
inflicted  sufferings.  Besides  the  very  general  practice  of
tattooing,  the  most  extraordinary  methods  of  disfigurement
and  self-torture  are  adopted ;  some  cut  off  the  Httle  finger,
some  make  an  immense  hole  in  the  under  lip,  or  pierce  the
cartilage  of  the  nose.  The  Easter  Islanders  enlarge  their
ears  till  they  come  down  to  their  shoulders ;  the  Chinooks,
and  many  other  American  tribes,  alter  the  shape  of  their
heads ;  the  Chinese  that  of  their  feet.  Some  of  the  African
tribes  chip  their  teeth  in  various  manners,  each  community
having  a  fashion  of  its  own.  The  Nyambanas,  a  division  of
the  Caffres,  are  characterised  by  a  row  of  artificial  pimples  or
warts,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  and  extending  from  the  upper
part  of  the  forehead  to  the  tip  of  the  nose.  "  Of  these  they
are  proud."t  Some  of  the  Bachapins,  who  have  distinguished
themselves  in  battle,  are  allowed  the  privilege  of  marking
''  their  thigh  with  a  long  scar,  which  is  rendered  indelible
and  of  a  bluish  color,  by  means  of  wood  ashes  rubbed  into
the  fresh  wound."  i  In  Australia,  Captain  Eong  saw  a  native
ornamented  with  horizontal  scars  which  extended  across  the
upper  part  of  the  chest.  They  were  at  least  an  inch  in
diameter  and  protruded  half  an  inch  from  the  body.§  In
some  parts  of  Australia,  and  in  Tasmania,  all  the  men  have


♦  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  New  Ser.,  toL  J  Bnrcbell,  Id,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  478, 535.

iii,  p.  248.  {  Narratiye  of  a  Surrey  of  the  Inter-

t  United  States'  Exploring  Expe-  tropical  and  Western  Coasts  of  Anstra-

dition,  Yol.  i.,  p.  63.  lia,  p.  42.


486  SELF-INFLICTED  SUFFERINGS.

a  tooth  knocked  out  in  a  very  clumsy  and  painful  manner.*
''  The  inhabitants  of  Tanna  have  on  their  arms  and  bdlies
eleyated  scars,  representing  plants,  flowers,  stars,  and  yarious
other  figures.  They  are  made  by  first  cutting  the  skin  with
a  sharp  bamboo  reed,  and  then  applying  a  certain  plant  to
the  wound  which  raises  the  scar  above  the  rest  of  the  skin.
The  i^ihabitants  of  Tazavan,  or  Formosa,  by  a  Tery  painful
operation  impress  on  their  naked  skins  various  figures  of
trees,  flowers,  and  animeds.  The  great  men  in  Guinea  have
their  skin  flowered  like  damask ;  and  in  Decan  the  w6men
likewise  have  flowers  cut  into  their  flesh  on  the  forehead,  the
arms,  and  the  breast,  and  the  elevated  scars  are  painted  in
colors,  and  exhibit  the  appearance  of  flowered  damask.''t
The  native  women  in  New  South  Wales  used  to  tie  a  string
tightly  round  the  little  finger  and  wear  it  until  the  finger
rotted  off.  Few  of  these  escaped  the  painful  experience.  X
The  North  American  Indians  also  inflicted  the  most  horrible
tortures  upon  themselves.  These,  and  many  other  curious
practices,  are  none  the  less  painful  because  they  are
voluntary.

If  we  turn  to  the  bright  side  of  the  question,  the  whole
analogy  of  nature  justifies  us  in  concluding  that  the  pleasures
of  civilised  man  are  greater  than  those  of  the  savage.  As
we  descend  in  the  scale  of  organisation,  we  find  that  animals
become  more  and  more  vegetative  in  their  characteristics;
with  less  susceptibility  to  pain,  and  consequently  less  capacity
for  happiness.  It  may,  indeed,  well  be  doubted  whether
some  of  those  beings,  which  from  their  anatomy  we  are  com-
pelled to  class  as  animals,  have  much  more  consciousness  of
enjoyment,  or  even  of  existence,  than  a  tree  or  a  seaweed.
But  even  to  animals  which  possess  a  clearly  defined  nervous
system,  we  must  ascribe  very  different  degrees  of  sensibility.

*  Freyoinet,  toI.  ii.,  p.  705.     f  Fonter,  Ic,  p.  688.      %  D'Urrille,  roL  i.,  p.  406.


THB   BLESSINGS   OP  CIVILISATION.  487

The  stadj  of  the  sensory  organs  in  the  lower  animals  offers
great  difficulties;  but  at  least  we  know  that  thej  are,  in
many  cases,  few  in  number,  and  capable  of  conveying  only
general  impressions.  Every  one  will  admit  that  the  posses-
sion of  a  new  sense,  or  the  improvement  of  an  old  one,  is  a
fresh  source  of  possible  happiness ;  but  how,  it  may  be  asked,
does  this  affect  the  present  question?  There  are  no  just
grounds  for  expecting  man  to  be  ever  endued  with  a  sixth
sense ;  so  far  from  being  able  to  improve  the  organisation  of
the  eye  or  the  ear,  we  cannot  make  one  hair  black  or  white,
nor  add  one  cubit  to  our  stature.  The  invention  of  the  tele-
scope and  microscope  is,  however,  equivalent  in  its  results  to
an  immense  improvement  of  the  eye,  and  opens  up  to  us  new
worlds ;  fresh  sources  of  interest  and  happiness.  Again,
we  cannot  alter  the  physical  structure  of  the  ear,  but  we  can
train  it,  we  can  invent  new  musical  instruments,  compose
new  melodies.  The  music  of  savages  is  rude  and  melancholy ;
and  thus,  though  the  ear  of  man  may  not  have  appreciably
altered,  the  pleasure  which  we  may  derive  from  it  has  been
immensely  increased.  Moreover,  the  savage  is  like  a  child
who  sees  and  hears  only  that  which  is  brought  directly  before
him,  but  the  civilised  man  questions  nature,  and  by  the
various  processes  of  chemistry,  by  electricity,  and  magnetism,
by  a  thousand  ingenious  contrivances,  he  forces  nature  to
throw  Kght  upon  herself,  discovers  hidden  uses  and  unsus-
pected beauties,  almost  as  if  he  were  endowed  with  some
entirely  new  organ  of  sense.

The  love  of  travel  is  deeply  implanted  in  the  human
breast;  it  is  an  immense  pleasure  to  visit  other  countries,
and  see  new  races  of  men.  Again,  the  discovery  of  printing
brings  all  who  choose  into  communion  with  the  greatest
minds.  The  thoughts  of  a  Shakespeare  or  a  Tennyson,  tiie
discoveries  of  a  Newton  or  a  Darwin,  become  at  once  the
common  property  of  mankind.     Already  the  results  of  this


488  THE   DIMINXrriON  OF  SUFFERING.

all-important,  though  simple,  process  have  been  equivalent
to  an  immense  improyement  of  our  mental  faculties,  and  day
by  day  as  books  become  cheaper,  schools  are  established,  and
education  is  improved,  a  greater  and  greater  effect  will  be
produced.

The  well-known  proverb  against  looking  a  gift  horse  in
the  mouth  does  not  apply  to  the  gifts  of  nature ;  they  will
bear  the  closest  inspection,  and  the  more  we  examine,  the
more  we  shall  find  to  admire.  Nor  are  these  new  sources  of
happiness  accompanied  by  any  new  liability  to  suffering ;  on
the  contrary,  while  our  pleasures  are  increased,  our  pains  are
lessened ;  in  a  thousand  ways  we  can  avoid  or  diminish  evils
which  to  our  ancestors  were  great  and  inevitable.  How
much  misery,  for  instance,  has  been  spared  to  the  human
race  by  the  single  discovery  of  chloroform  ?  The  capacity
for  pain,  so  far  as  it  can  serve  as  a  warning,  remains  in  full
force,  but  the  necessity  for  endurance  has  been  greatly
diminished.  With  increased  knowledge  of,  and  attention
to,  the  laws  of  health,  disease  will  become  less  and  less  fre-
quent. Those  tendencies  thereto  which  we  have  derived
from  our  ancestors,  will  gradually  die  out;  and  if  fresh
seeds  are  not  sown,  our  race  may  one  day  realise  the
advantages  of  health.

Thus,  then,  with  the  increasing  influence  of  science,  we
may  confidently  look  to  a  great  improvement  in  the  condition
of  man.  But  it  may  be  said  that  our  present  sufferings  and
sorrows  arise  principally  from  sin,  and  that  any  moral  im-
provement must  be  due  to  religion,  not  to  science.  This
separation  of  the  two  mighty  agents  of  improvement  is  the
great  misfortune  of  humanity,  and  has  done  more  than  any-
thing else  to  retard  the  progress  of  civilisation.  But  even  if
for  the  moment  we  admit  that  science  will  not  render  us
more  virtuous,  it  must  certainly  make  us  more  innocent.
Out  of  129,000  persons  committed  to  prison  in  England  and


THE   DIMINUTION   OF  SIN.  489

Wales  during  the  year  1863,  only  4829  could  read  and
write  well.  In  fact,  our  criminal  population  are  mere
savages,  and  most  of  their  crimes  are  but  injudicious  and
desperate  attempts  to  act  as  savages  in  the  midst,  and  at  the
expense,  of  a  civilised  community.

Men  do  not  sin  for  the  sake  of  sinning ;  they  yield  to
temptation.  Most  of  our  unhappiness  arises  from  a  mis-
taken pursuit  of  pleasure ;  from  a  misapprehension  of  that
which  constitutes  true  happiness.  Men  do  wrong,  either
fix>m  ignorance,  or  in  the  unexpressed  hope  that  they  may
enjoy  the  pleasure,  and  yet  avoid  the  penalty  of  sin.  In
this  respect  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  reUgious  teaching
is  widely  mistaken.  Repentance  is  too  often  regarded  as  a
substitute  for  punishment.  Sin  it  is  thought  is  followed
either  by  the  one  or  the  other.  So  far,  however,  as  our
world  is  concerned,  this  is  not  the  case ;  repentance  may
enable  a  man  to  avoid  punishment  in  future,  but  has  no
effect  on  the  consequences  of  the  past.  The  laws  of  nature
are  just,  and  they  are  salutary,  but  they  are  also  inexorable.
All  men  admit  that  ''the  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  but  they
seem  to  think  that  this  is  a  general  rule  to  which  there
may  be  many  exceptions,  that  some  sins  may  possibly  tend
to  happiness;  as  if  there  could  be  any  thorns  that  would
grow  grapes,  any  thistles  which  could  produce  figs.  That
suffering  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  sin,  as  surely  as
night  follows  day,  is,  however,  the  stem  yet  salutary  teach-
ing of  Science.  And  surely  if  this  lesson  were  thoroughly
impressed  upon  our  minds,  if  we  really  believed  in  the  cer-
tainty of  punishment;  that  sin  could  not  conduce  to  hap-
piness, temptation,  which  is  at  the  very  root  of  crime,  would
be  cut  away,  and  mankind  must  necessarily  become  more
innocent.

May  we  not,  however,  go  even  farther  than  this,  and  say
that  science  will  also  render  man  more  virtuous.     ''  To  pass


490  THE   ADVANTAGBS  OP  SCIENCE.

our  time,"  says  Lord  Brougham,*  "in  the  study  of  the
sciences,  in  learning  what  others  have  discovered,  and  in
extending  the  bounds  of  human  knowledge  has,  in  all  ages,
been  reckoned  the  most  dignified  and  happy  of  human  occu-
pations  No  man  until  he  has  studied  philosophy,

can  have  a  just  idea  of  the  great  things  for  which  Providence
has  fitted  his  imderstanding ;  the  extraordinary  dispropor-
tion which  there  is  between  his  natural  strength,  and  the
powers  of  his  mind,  and  the  force  he  derives  from  them."
Finally,  he  concludes  that  science  would  not  only  "make  our
lives  more  agreeable,  but  better :  and  that  a  rational  being  is
bound  by  every  motive  of  interest  and  duty,  to  direct  his
mind  towards  pursuits  which  are  found  to  be  the  sure  path
of  virtue  as  well  as  of  happiness."

In  reality  we  are  but  on  the  threshold  of  civilisation.  Far
from  showing  any  indications  of  having  come  to  an  end,  the
tendency  to  improvement  seems  latterly  to  have  proceeded
with  augmented  impetus  and  accelerated  rapidity.  Why,
then,  should  we  suppose  that  it  must  now  cease  P  Man  has
surely  not  reached  the  Umits  of  his  intellectual  development,
and  it  is  certain  that  he  has  not  exhausted  the  infinite  capa-
bilities of  nature.  There  are  many  things  which  are  not  as
yet  dreamt  of  in  our  philosophy ;  many  discoveries  which
will  immortalise  those  who  make  them,  and  confer  upon  the
human  race  advantages  which  as  yet,  perhaps,  we  are  not  in
a  condition  to  appreciate.  We  may  still  say  with  our  great
countryman.  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  that  we  have  been  but  like
children,  playing  on  the  seashore,  and  picking  up  here  and
there  a  smoother  pebble  or  a  prettier  shell  than  ordinary,
while  the  great  ocean  of  truth  lies  all  undiscovered  before  us.

Thus,  then,  the  most  sanguine  hopes  for  the  future  are
justified  by  the  whole  experience  of  the  past.  It  is  surely
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  a  process. which  has  been  going
*  Objecti,  AdyantagOB,  and  Pleasurea  of  Science,  p.  89.


THE  FtrruRB.  491

on  for  so  many  thousand  years,  should  have  now  suddenly
ceased ;  and  he  must  be  blind  indeed  who  imagines  that  our
civilisation  is  unsusceptible  of  improvement,  or  that  we  our-
selves are  in  the  highest  state  attainable  by  man.  If  we
turn  from  e3:perience  to  theory,  the  same  conclusion  forces
itself  upon  us.

The  great  principle  of  natural  selection,  which  in  animals
affects  the  body  and  seems  to  have  little  influence  on  the
mind;  in  man  affects  the  mind  and  has  little  influence  on
the  body.  In  the  first  it  tends  mainly  to  the  preservation  of
Ufe;  in  the  second  to  the  improvement  of  the  mind  and
consequently  to  the  increase  of  happiness.  It  ensures,  in  the
words  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  "a  constant  progress  towards
a  higher  degree  of  skill,  intelligence,  and  self-regulation — a
better  co-ordination  of  actions — a  more  complete  life."*  Even
those,  however,  who  are  dissatisfied  with  the  reasoning  of
Mr.  Darwin,  who  believe  that  neither  our  mental  and  material
organisation  are  susceptible  of  any  considerable  change,  may
still  look  forward  to  the  future  with  hope.  The  tendency  of
recent  improvements  and  discoveries  is  less  to  effect  any
rapid  change  in  man  himself,  than  to  bring  him  into  har-
mony with  nature;  less  to  confer  upon  him  new  powers,
than  to  teach  him  how  to  apply  the  old.

It  will,  I  think,  be  admitted  that  of  the  evils  under  which
we  suffer  nearly  all  may  be  attributed  to  ignorance  or  sin.
That  ignorance  will  be  diminished  by  the  progress  of  science
is  of  course  self-evident,  that  the  same  will  be  the  case  with
sin,  seems  little  less  so.  Thus,  then,  both  theory  and  ex-
perience point  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  future  happiness
of  our  race,  which  poets  hardly  ventured  to  hope  for,  science
boldly  predicts.  Utopia,  which  we  have  long  looked  upon  as
synonymous  with  an  evident  impossibility,  which  we  have

*  Herbert  Spencer.    A  Theorj  of  Population  deduced  from  the  General  Law
of  Animal  Fertility,  p.  34.


492  THB   FI7TUEE.

ungratefully  regarded  as  '^  too  good  to  be  true/'  turns  out  on
the  contrary  to  be  the  necessary  consequence  of  natural
laws^  and  once  more  we  find  that  the  simple  truth  exceeds
the  most  brilliant  flights  of  the  imagination.

Even  in  our  own  time  we  may  hope  to  see  some  improye-
ment,  but  the  imselfish  mind  will  find  its  highest  gratifica-
tion in  the  belief  that,  whatever  may  be  the  case  with
ourselves,  our  descendants  will  understand  many  things
which  are  hidden  from  us  now,  will  better  appreciate  the
beautiful  world  in  which  we  live,  avoid  much  of  that  suffer-
ing to  which  we  are  subject,  enjoy  many  blessings  of  which
we  are  not  yet  worthy,  and  escape  many  of  those  temptations
which  we  deplore,  but  cannot  whoUy  resist.


493


APPENDIX.


Page  38.


The  passage  from  Ayienus  is  as  follows : —

Quse  Himilco  Poenus  mensibus  vix  quatuor,
lit  ipse  semet  re  probasse  retulit
Enayigantem,  posse  transmitti  adserit :
8ic  nulla  late  flabra  propellunt  ratem.
Sic  segnis  humor  sequoris  pigri  stupet.
Adjicit  et  illud,  plurimum  inter  gorgites
Extare  fucum,  et  ssBpe  yirgolti  vice
Eetinere  puppim  dicit  hie  nihilominus
Non  in  profimdum  terga  demitti  maris,
Parvoque  aqnarom  yix  supertexi  solum  :
Obire  semper  hue  et  hue  ponti  feras,
Kayigia  lenta  et  languide  repentia
Intematare  belluas.


Page  50.


Staigue  Fort,  in  the  County  of  Kerry,  is  "an  enclosure,  nearly
circular,  114  feet  in  diameter  from  out  to  out,  and  in  the  clear
88  feet  from  east  to  west,  and  87  from  north  to  south.  The  stones
are  put  together  without  any  description  of  mortar  or  cement ;  the
wall  is  13  feet  thick  at  the  bottom,  and  5  feet  2  inches  broad  at  top
at  the  highest  part,  where  some  of  the  old  coping  stones  still  remain,
and  which  is  there  1 7  feet  6  inches  high  upon  the  inside.  It  has
one  square  doorway  in  the  S.S.W.  side,  5  feet  9  inches  high,  with
sloping  sides,  4  feet  2  inches  wide  at  top,  and  5  feet  at  bottom.  In
the  substance  of  this  massive  wall,  and  opening  inwards,  are  two
small  chambers;  the  one  on  the  west  side  is  12  feet  long,  4  feet


494  APPBNDIX.

7  inches  wide,  and  6  feet  6  inches  high ;  the  northern  chamber  is
7  feet  4  inches  long,  4  feet  9  inches  wide,  and  7  feet  high.  They
formed  a  part  of  the  original  plan,  and  were  not,  like  other  apertures
in  some  similar  structures,  fiUed-up  gateways.  Around  the  interior
of  the  wall  are  arranged  ten  sets  of  stairs,  ....  the  highest  reaching
very  nearly  to  the  full  height  of  the  wall,  and  the  secondary  flights
being  about  half  that  much;  each  step  is  2  feet  wide;  and  the
lower  flights  project  within  the  circle  of  the  higher.  They  lead  to
narrow  platforms,  from  8  to  43  feet  in  length,  on  which  its  wardens
or  defenders  stood."  (Catalogue  of  the  Eoyal  Irish  Academy,  p.  120.)


Page  489.


Degree  of  instruction  of  persons  conunitted  to  the  different  County,
Borough,  and  Liberty  Prisons  in  England  and  Wales.

Judicial  Statistics — 1863.

Males.  Females.

Neither  read  nor  write    31,717      13,492  )  ,^„  „,^

f  123  818

Eead  or  write  and  read  imperfectly   ...    68,447      20,162/        '

Bead  and  write  well   4,027  6541  '    ,  ^^^

f     4  829
Superior  Instruction    226  22  J        '

Instruction  not  ascertained 623  257  880

Total 95,040      34,487     129,627


INDEX.


it
It


Aarhnos,  coastfind  at,  81.
Abbeville,  marine  shells  found  at,  310.
Prestwicb  on  deposits  at,286.
Tesearcbes    at,    by    various
authors,  268.
Abury,  60,  53.
Acheul,  St,  burials  at,  288.

mammalian  remains  found

at,  289.
mollusca  found  at,  289.
section  at,  303.
„  strata  at,  287.

Adzes  of  New  Zealanders,  73.
Africa,  pounded  bones  eaten  by  savage

tribes  of,  248.
African  elephant,  bones  of,  from  cave

near  Madrid,  262.
Agricultural  implements  of  Feegeeans,

358.
Agriculture  of  North  American  Indians,

233,  423.
Alca    impcnnis,    bones   of,    in   shell-
mounds,  181.
Alo^cria,  stouc  monuments  in,  59.
Algonquin  language,  absence  of  cer-
tain words  in,  417.
Amber  found  in  lake-habitations,  134.
American  mound  builders,  228.

mounds,  skulls  from,  228.
mounds,  etc.,  classification  of,

200.
remains,   four  periods  indi-
cated by,  234.
Ancient  remains,  preservation  of^  55,

note.
Andaman  Islanders,  345.

huts  of,  345.
implements  of,  345.
manners  and  cus-
toms of,  345.
no  idea  of  Deity,
346.

Anholt,  coastfind  at,  80.
Animals,  bones  of,  more  abundant  than
those  of  man,  282.


I)


II


»»


»»
II

w


n


i»


Animals,  excavations  in  form  of,  224.
Animal  mounds,  222.

authorities  on,  222.
ignorance  of  Indians
concerning,  225.
,,  „        no  remains  m,  225.

Antilope  Sai'go  of  Pallas,  256.
Antiquity  of  man,  268,  311.

„      Bunsen  on,  314.
„      questions    at    issue,
276.

Arbor  Low,  pottery  from,  113.
Archoeolithic  period,  60.
Arrow-heads,  classification  of,  77.

„         of  North  American  In-
dians, 419.
Arreoy,  association  of  in  Tahiti,  388.
Art,  knowledge  of,  by  North  American

Indians,  424.
Ass,  the,  145.

Aube  valley,  geological  formation  of,  290
Aurelius  Ambrosius,  50.
Aurignac,  cave  at,  262.

„        mammalian  remains  from  cave
at,  263.
Aurochs,  distribution  of,  150,  242.

mentioned  by  Pliny  and  Se-
neca, 242.
mentioned  in  Niebelungen  Lied,

150,  242.
remains  of  in  Norwich  Crag,  242
remains  of  in  Switzerland,  242.
still  living  in  Lithuania,  242.
,,  Western  Asia,242.

Austen  Godwin,  on  Kent's  Hole,  258.
Australian  funeral,  353.
Australians,  food  of,  347.

habitations  of,  346.
implements  of,  349.
ignorance  of  religion  by,

353.
limited  knowledge  of  num-
bers by,  854,  467.
method  of  obtaining  fire
by,  358.


»


I)


II


»»


II


II


11

71
If


496


INDEX.


»


»>


Aiistralians,notliabitaalljcai]iubalB|854
ornaments  of^  348.
polygamy,  notions  of,  353.
pounded  bones  used  by  as

food,  347.
shell-mounds  of,  846.
p         use  of  boomerang  by,  351.
Aya,  intoxicating  drink  of  Tahiti,  381.
Avienus  **  ora  maritima,"  37,  493.
Azara,  Don  FeUx  de,  Indians  of  Para-
guay, 425.
Aj^alan,  rains  of,  211.


B.


Baal  worship  in  Norway,  47.
Baillon,    rhinoceros   bones   found   at

Menchecourt,  284.
Bark  doth,  manufacture  of  in  Tahiti,  375
Barrows,  desiderata  concerning  con-
tents, 116.
„         of  Stone  and   Bronze  age
distinctions,  99.
Bateman,  association    of    stone    and
bronze  implements  in  tu-
muli, 62,  100.
desifi^i  of  British  tumuli,  91.
driiuine  cups  from  British

tumuli,  113.
pottery,  arrangement  of^  from

British  tumuli.  111.
primary  interments,  table  of,

94.
rude  flint  implements  in  tu-
muli, 196.
Suttee   and   infanticide    in
pagan  Britain,  115.
Bear,  the,  extermination  of,  151.
Belcher,  Sir  E.,  flint  implements,  manu-
facture of,  by  Esquimaux,  79.
Birch,  cups  found  in  ancient  British
tumuli,  probably  used  for  lamps,  112.
Birds,  remains  of,  found  in  Swiss  pile-
dwellings,  144.
„  „         in  shell-mounds,  181.

Blackwood's  Magazine,  October,  1860,

cited,  276,  288.
«*  Blancfond,"  130,  138.
Boar,  distinct  species  o^  in  pile-dwel-
lings, 145
Bolas,  404,  426,  430,  451.
„      use  of  by  Esquimaux,  404.
„  „         Paraguay  Indians,426.

„  „         Patagonians,  430.

Bone  caves,  nature  of  cyidence  derived
from,  244.
implements,  79.

in  caves  of  the  Dor-
dogne,  253.


)i


)}


II


II


II
II


II


II


II


II


II


Bone  implements  of  lake-dwellers,  135.
„     pits  in  North  America,  216.
„     sculptured  in  caves,  254.
Bones  broken  and  eaten  by  some  savage
tribes,  248.
of  mammalia  in  river-drift  gra-
vels, 283.
parts  of,  absent  in  shell-mounds,
183.

Boomerang,  351.

Boucher  &  Perthes,  deposits  in  vaUej

of  Somme,  306.
researches  at  Ab-
beville, 268.
upper-levd  gravels,
300.

Boumeville  enclosure,  Ohio,  207.
Boye,   M.,    contents  of  tumidus   on

Island  of  M  Sen,  104.
Brachycephalic  skulls  from  American

mounds,  228.
„  „      in     Stone     age,

116.
Brass  mentioned  in  Scripture,  44.
Brazilian  tribes,  curious  funeral  cus-
tom of,  455.
Bread  found  in  pile-dwellings,  154.
Brixham  Cave,  259.

„  „      deposits  in,  259.

Briczes,  shell-mound  at,  177.
Briolington,  flint  finds  at,  82.
Bronze  abundant  amongst  Eastern  na-
tions, 44.
Bronze  age,  3.

architecture  of,  unknown,

49.
burial  places,  99.
burials  of,  100.
dress  of,  26.
Dr.  Keller  on,  31.
in  Denmark,  99.
lake-habitations  of,  157.
linen    fabric   in  English

tumuli  of,  26.
methods  of  sepulture,  30.
Nilsson  on,  36.

„  ornamentation

of,  48.

gersonal  ornaments  of,  21.
ir  W.  R.  Wilde  on,  81.
stone  implements  used  in,

100.
theories  of,  31.
tumulus  of  Treenhoi,  26.
articles  and  coins  found  at  Tiefe-
nau,  7.
ornamentation  of,  25.
fish-hooks  in  different  museums,
19.


II


19


II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

I*

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

l»

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

II

arti

II

1

II

nsb

ISDBX.


497


»

>»

99

}|

>}

»

»

»

1>


»)


»?


Branxe  implementii  character  of  in  dif-
ferent countries,
33.
in  Dublin  Museum, 32
lake-habitations,  167.
Dr.  KeUer's  list,  158.
nerer  associated  with
remains  of  Irish
elk,  240.
not  of  Boman  origin,

34.
various,  17,  19,  23.
knives  rare  in  Ireland,  19.
period,  pottery  of,  160.
Bfougham,  Lord,  advantages  and  plea-
sures of  science  cited,  489.
Buddhist  architecture  in  India,  56.
Buffalo  used  in  huntinfff  340,  344.
Bunsen,  antiquity  of  tne  human  race,

314.
Burchell,  travels  in  Southern  Africa,

cited,  384,  not0.
Burial  customs  of  Andaman  Islanders,

346.
Australians,  353.
Esquimaux,  409.
Feegeeans,  360.
Fuegians,  437.
New  Zealanders,368
North  American  In-
dians, 87,  424.
„  „  Patagonians,  431.

„  „  Tahitians,  884.

„      different  methods  of,  455.
„     mounds  of  Esquimanx,  409.
Burials  at  St.  Acheul,  287.
„       difficulty    of    defining    epoch

from,  100.
„      in  Bronze  age,  99.
„      in  old  tumuQ,  110.
„      near  Stonehenge,  character  of,

102.
„     reg^ulation  of  Charlemagne  con-
cerning, 111,  note.
Burning  the  d«ad,  Australian  custom

of,  354.
Bushmen,  343.

„        Burchell  on  mental  condition
of,  465.
Busk  on  Neanderthal  skull,  332,
„    on  Gibraltar  caves,  262.


C.


Cairn  in  Kirkcudbrightshire,  69.
Cannibalism  of  Australians,  854.

Feegeeans,  362.

Fuegians,  437.

New  Zealanders,  870,


19

99

>9

19

)9

19

99

l>


»


9>


»


9*


Canoes  of  Andaman  Islanders,  845.
„         Australians,  848.
„         Feegeeans,  857.
„         Fuegians,  437.
„         New  Zealanders,  368.
„         Tahitians,  878.
Carthage,  foundation  of,  43.
Cave  bear,  geographical  distribution  of,
237.
„      „    remains   of    in    valley   of

Somme,  238.
„    evidence,  value  ot.  244.
Caves  of  the  Dordogne,  flint  implements

found  in,  248.
no   pottery  in,

254.
no   remains   of
domestic  ani-
mals, 247.
Cave  hyiena,  238.
„    mammalia,  palsBontological  chro-
nology from,  243.
„    men,  23/.

„       „    change  of  climate  sLuce  pe-
riod of,  255.
„       „    civilisation  of,  255.
„       „    skulls  of,  rare,  266.
„    tiger,  238.
Caves  in  Sicily,  260.
Cffisar,  reference  to  elk  by,  150.
„  „  reindeer  by,  242.

„  „  urus  by,  150,  243.

Cereals  found  in  pile  dwellings,  153.
Celts,  68.

forms  of,  13,  68,  131.

mode  of  fixine ,  69.

not   the   earnest   colonisers  of

Northern  Europe,  116.
weapons  of  war,  69.
Ceylon,  wild  tribes  of  interior,  843.
Chambered  tumuli,  88.

„  „      of  Great  Britain,  90.

Charlemagne,  regulation  of  with  respect

to  burials.  111,  note,
Chillingham,  wild  cattle  of,  243.
Chisels,  flint,  74.
Christy  and  Feraud,  cromlechs,  etc.,  in

Algeria,  59.
Christy  and  Lartet  on  caves  in  the

Dordogne,  245.
Cirdeville,  earthworks  near,  211.
Civilisation,  advantages  of,  486.

„         different  stages  of  in  Stone
affe,  445.
Clark's  work,  Ohio,  2u8.
Climate  of  Europe  during  period  of
river  deposits,  294.
„        mammalian  remains  indica-
tions of^  294.


19

99
99

99


82


498


INDEX.


CoastfindB,  80.

,f       implements  from,  81.
Commerce  of  pile  dwellers,  evidence  of,
•    168.
Cook,  Captain,    habits   of   Sandwich

Islanders,  382.
Copenhagen,  stone  implements  ill  mn«

seam  of,  60.
Copper  age  in  North  America,  201.
,1        ,,  noeTidenceofinIreland,32.
„      mining  operations  near  Lake

Superior,  202.
„      use  of  by  North  American  In-
dians, 4,  201,  418.
ComhiUs,  Indian,  230.
Corpse,  disposal  of  in  Bronze  age,  100.
y,  „  Neolithic   Stone

age,  103.
„  „  Stone  age,  100.

Cornwall,  shell-monnds  of,  178.
Cradle-board,  nse  of  by  North  American

Indians,  414.
Cranoges  of  Ireland,  120.
Crantz,  burial  customs  of  Esquimaox,
409.
„      description  of  an  Esquimaux

feast,  398.
„      ignorance  of  Esquimaux  of  re-
li^on,  409.
Crawfurd,  hmited  knowledge  of  num-
bers amongst  Australian  tribes,  467.
Cremation,  100,  103.
Criminals,  ignorance  of,  488.
Crofts,  hardening  of  copper  implements,

204.
Cromlech,  69,  86.

„         erection  of  at  the  present  day
in  India,  58.
^  Crustacea  found  in  shell-mounds,  180.
Curious  customs,  456.
Cyrena  fluminalis,  306.


D.


Daggers  of  flint,  76.

Dampier,    absence   of   huts   amongst

Australians  of  north-west  coast,  346.
Dana,  use  of  copper  by  North  American

Indians,  202.
Danish  Celts,  forms  of,  68.

„     museums,  stone  implements  in,
60.

.,     shell-mounds,  171.
D'Axchiac,  deposits  in  riyer-Yalleys  of

France,  290.
Darwin,  habits  and  customs  of  Tierra

del  Fuegians,  189.
Dawkins,  B.,  peculiar  flints  from  .Wo-

key  Hole,  251.


n

99

99

»>

»>.

1)

»


}»


99


)»


Dawkins,  B.,  Wokey  Hole  explored

by,  266.
Defensive  enclosures  in  North  America,

207.
Degradation  of  human  species,  no  evi-
dence of,  amonffst  savage  tribes,  337.
Deification- of  white  men  by  savages,

459.
Deity,  belief  in,  by  Andaman  Islanders,

346.
Feegeeans,  367.
Fuegians,  437.
New      Zealanders,

370.
North  American  In-
dians, 416.
Tahitians,  386.
Denmark,  numerous  tumuli  in,  171.

„        vegetation  of,  316.
Denudation,  river-gravels  a  proof  o^

801.
Desnoyers,  M.,  on  bone-caves,  244.

„  marks  on  bones  from

upper  pliocene  beds,

332.

Desor,  piles  of  Stone  and  Bronze  age,

138.

„     pile-buildings  as  magazines,  1 69.

Dickeson,  bones  of  man  and  mastodon

ohioticus,  236.
Difficulties  of  river-action  theory,  292.
Dighton  Rook,  226.
DiUe,  tumuli  in  Missouri  examined  by,

216.
Diodorus,  burial  of  Semiramis,  86.  ^
Ditch,  piosition   of^  a   distuiguishing

character  of  enclosure,  209.
Dog  an  article  of  food,  183,  noU,
„    uses  of  by  savage  tribes,  462.
„    use  of  in  war,  Fliny,  463.
Dogs,  bones  in  Ejokkenmoddings  pro-
bably gnawed  by,  183.
„      of  FuejG^ians  used  in  fishing,  436.
„     uses  of  among  the  Esquimaux,
406.
Domestic  animals  of  .Tahiti,  379.
Donnas,  northernmost  point  of  voyage

of  Pythias,  42'.
D'Orbigny  on  quaternary  deposits,  300.
Dordogne,  caves  in  valleys  of,  246.
„        character  of  strata  in  the,
246.
Douler,  human  remains  fit>m  New  Or-
leans, 236.
Dove,  Rev.  T.,  moral  inferiority  of

Tasmanians,  465.
Drawing  practised  by  Esquimaux,  408.
Dress,  absence  of,  amongst  Andaman
Islanders,  846.


499


»»
ft
It
It
It
I)
»


1}


II
II


DreM  of  AnstraliaiiA,  348.
Esquimaux,  407.
FeegeeauB,  359,  438.
New  Zealanden,  366.
North  American  IiidianB,413.
Patagonians,  429.
Tahitians,  376.
Yeddahs,  844.
Drift  -  grayels,    mammalian     remains

found  in,  283.
„  peculiarities  of  imple-

ments from,  279.
„     period,  ethnology  of,  329.
Dnhlin    Museum,  mineralogical   cha-
racter of  stone  implements  in,  63.
lyUrriUe,  cremation  by  Australians,
364.
dress,  notions  of,  bj  Aus-
tralians, 348.
cannibalism  of  Maorie8,371
method  of  obtaining  fire  by
Australians,  363.


E.


Eaiih's  axis,  alteration  of,  298.
Earthworks  in  North  America,  207.
Easter  bbuid,  statues  in,  444.
Effypt,  Homer's  researches  in,  320.
Ele^as  antiquus,  289.
Elk,  the,  160.

Ellis,  inhabitants  of  Tahiti,  890.
,,    Polynesian  researches  cited,  337,
372.
Eiu;elhardt,  researches  in  peat  bogs  of

SlesTick,  8.
Engis  skull,  cotemporaneous  with  the
mammoth,  332.
„  Huxley  on,  330.

Erskine,  Capt.,  gods  of  the  Feegeeans,

367.
Esquimaux,  392.

boats  ot^  406.
burial  costoms  of,  409.
„     of  infants  with  mo-
ther, 116,  409.
'  belief  in  a  future  state  by,

409.
character  of,  410.
clothing  of,  407.
derivation  of  name,  396.
flint  implements  of,  71,

402,  406.
food  of,  397.
games  of,  408.
geog^phical  distribution

of,  392.
habitations  of,  392.
„  ignoranceof  numbers,  410.


11
II
II


II


II
II
II
II


II

II
II


II


II

>f

II

II

>»
II

II

II

If

II

It

II

II
II
II


91


II


Esquimaux,  implements  used  by,  401.
knowledge  of  music  and

drawing,  408.
language,  392.
marital  customs  of,  412.
manufacture  of  flint  im-
plements by,  79.
meals,  description  of,  397.
method  of  catching  fiah,
404.
killing     seals,

403.
obtaining  flre,
400.
no  notions  of  religion,409.
of  Baffin's  Bay,  ignorant

of  boats,  406.
ornaments  of,  408.
simple  pottery  monnfae-

tured  by,  394.
sledges  used  by,  406.
snow  huts  of,  394.
stone  implements  used  by,
406.

„  tattooing  practised  by,408

Estayayer,  bronze  implements  from,  19.
Ethnology  of  Drift  period,  329.
Evans  on  flint  implements  from  Hoxne,

271.
„  „  in  the  drift,  269.

„     virit  to  St.  Valery,  178.
Extinct  mammalia  associated  with  man
in  Europe,  237.


P.


Fabrics  of  Bronze  age,  27.
„  Stone  age,  137.

Falconer,  on  cave  at  Brixham,  269.

on  Felit  of  Northern  China,

238.
on  Stonesfleld  fossils,  184.
researches   by  in  grotto  of
Maccagnone,  in  Sicily,  260.
Fauna  and  flora  of  river-drift  travels  an
indication  of  the  cumate  of
the  period,  294.
„      of  Swiss  Lake-dwellings,  140.
„     .of  Swiss  Lake-dwellings,  general
character  of,  161.
Feegee  Islanders,  366.

agricultural    imple-
ments of^  368.
belief    in  a   Aitnra

state,  361.
burials  of,  360.
cannibalism  of,  363.
canoes  of,  367.
I,  „       dothing  0^  869.


II

II
II


II


II


II
II
II


II


II


II
II
II


600


INDEX.


>»

ti

»»

n

n

11

M

»»

»>

w

»»

♦»

»>

>»

j»

w

>i

»

»>

M

»>

»»

>»

M

»r


>i


Feegee  lalanden,  food  of^  366.

fortifications  of,  856.
funeral   customs  of^

115.
eamei  of,  358.
nouses  o^  356.
human  sacrifices  by,

362.
language  of,  355.
offerings     to     their

gods,  363.
parricide  custom  of,

360.
religion  of,  857.
tattooing     practised

by,  360.
temples  of,  357.
tools  used  by,  358.
treatment  of  women

by,  359.
weajrans  used  by,  356.
Fedings  and  ceremonial  customs  dif-
ferently expressed  by  different  races,
457.
Felis  tigris  of  Northern  China  possibly

a  descendant  of  F.  spelsea,  238.
Fergu88on,on  Abury  and  Stonehenge,5  3.
„  on  Buddhist  architecture  in

India,  56.
Festivals  of  the  dead,  216.
Fire,  different  methods  of  obtaining  by
savaffes,  453.
method  of  obtaining  by  Australi-
ans, 353.
method  of  obtaining  by  Esqui-
maux, 400.
method  of  obtaining  by  North

American  Indians,  421.
method  of  obtaining  by  Tahitians,
380.
„     use  of  by  Fuegians,  438.
Fish-hooks  used  in  Tahiti,  374.
„     remains  of  in  shell-mounds,  181.
Flint  arrow-heads,  77.
„    awls,  75.
„    axes,  72.

„      „     Steenstrup  on,  72.
„   chisels,  74.


>»


M


if


»>


»»


„   daggers,  75.
„   final


is,  80.

„      „    in  England,  82.

„   flakes,  65.

„       „     work  of  man,  67.

„    firacture  of^  64.

„   implements  cotemporaneous  with

beds  in  which  they
are  found,  278.
„         distinct  use  for  each
form,  442.


»


}>


n


if


if


>f


fi


if


)t


n


if


)9


»l


if


>»


»>


1)


n


Flint  implements,  foiged,  characters  of,

277.
from   caves   in'  the

Dordogne,  248.
from  Gray's  Inn  Lane
in  British  Museum,
271.
from  Godalming,272.
from  Heme  Bay,274.
from  Hoxne,  271.
from   Kent*  s    Hole,

258.
from  lake-dwellings,

131.
from  shell -mounds,

193.
fix>m  yarious  locali-
ties, 274.
manufacture    of   by

Esquimaux,  79.
manufacture   of   by

Mexicans,  78.
of  human  manufac-
ture, 276.
„  „         uses  0^  280.

„    scrapers,  70.
„   spear-heads,  75.
Flints  from  Ferie ueux,  253.

„      perforated,  70,  200.
Flora  of  File-dwellings,  153.
Food,  Esquimaux  method  of  cooking,
396.
method  of  cooking  in  Tahiti,  380.
of  Australians,  347.
Esquimaux,  897.
Feegeeans,  356.
Fuegians,  434.
New  Zealanders,  365.
North  American  Indians,  423.
Patagonians,  430.
Tahitians,  380.
stored  by  Esauimanx,  395.
Forest  growths  in  North  America,  232.
Fox,  the,  eaten  by  I^uimaux,  141.
„  remains  of  in  Pileworks  of  the

Stone  age,  141.
Franks,  character  ofjeweHery  in  Etrus-
can tombs,  98.  •
„      BuppoeedPhcenician  antiquities
m  America,  46.
Frere,  flintimplements  from  Hoxne,  271 .
Friendly  and  Sandwich  islands,  inhabi-
tants of,  390.
Froelund,  flint  finds  at,  81.
Fuegians,  the,  189,  432.

absence  of  religion  amongst,

437.
cannibalism  of,  437.
canoes  of,  437«


>9
»
>»
»>
»»
it
»l
t»
»»
1i


yy


IKSEX.


601


9>
99


»


l»

»

91

n

»

99


ft


•I


Fn^^ians,  don  used  in  himtiiig  and
fishing  hjy  435.
dress  of,  438.
food  of,  434.
,,        fortified  towns  of,  356.
,,        ignorance  of  pottery,  438.
ff        saell-moands  of^  189.
„        use  of  fire  by,  438.
Fnnexal  costoms  indicated  by  remains

in  ancient  tumuli,
115.
„      of  Andaman  Islanders,
346.
Australiaiis,  354.
Esquimaux,  409.
Feegeeans,  1 1 5, 86 1 .
Fuegians,  437.
New    Zealanders,

869.
North  American  In-
dians, 424.
„  Patag^onians,  431.

„  Tahitians,  385.

Future,  the,  491.

„      state,  belief  in  by  ancient  Bri-
tons, 92, 98.
„  „    belief  in  by  Esquimaux,

409.
„  „    belief    in    by    Feegee

Islanders,  361.
„  „    belief  in  by  Maories,  370.

„  „    beUef  in  by  North  Ameri-

can Indians,  416.
„  „    belief  in  by  Tahitians,

386.


G.


Gadea,  foundation  of,  43.

Galton,  pounded  bones  eaten  by  African
tribes,  248.

Games  of  Esquimaux,  408.
„     „  Feegeeans,  358.

Ganggraben,  88.

„  Nilsson  on,  89.

Garcilego  de  la  Vega,  History  of  Flo-
rida cited,  221.

Garden  beds,  ancient  North  American

Indian,  230.
„         „     Lapham  on,  230,  233.

Gaids,  dwellings  of,  125.

Geminus,  voyages  of  Pytheas,  42.

Gibraltar,  caves  at,  262.

Giraldus  Cambrensis  on  stoneworks  in
Ireland,  50.

Gim6ron,deposit8atFontdeThiMe,  319.

Glacial  epoch,  duration  of,  325.

Glass,  holes  drilled  in  with  stone  tools,
253.


»>


99


I)


>»


»


»


I)


Godabning,  flint  implements  from,  272.
Goldhavn,  tumulus  at,  88.
Gold  ornaments  from  IreUnd,  23.
Grave  Cre^  mound,  216,  220,  226.

inscribed   stone

from,  226.
inscribed  stone
from,  doubtful
character    of,
227.
Gravel  of  valler  of  the  Somme,  290.
Grey,  Capt.,  habits  of  Australians,  847.
Gulf  stream,  alteration  of  course  of,
298.


H.


Habitations  of  Andaman  Islanders,  345.
Australians,  346.
Esquimaux,  392.
Feegee  LJanders,  356.
Fuegians,  432.
Hottentots,  339.
Maories,  367.
North  American  Indians,

421.
Fatagonians,  428.
„  Tahitians,  377.

Happiness  in  relation  to  numbers  of

population,  482.
Hare,   prejudice   against   eating,    by
different  races,  143.
„       scarcity  of  remains  of,  in  pile-
dwellings,  148.
Harpoon  used  by  Esquimaux,  403.

„  „      Fuegians,  436.

Harrison  on  forest  growth,  232.
Haughton,  Bev.  S.,  mineralo^cal  cha-
racter of  stone  implements  in  Dublin
Museum,  63.
Haven,  North  American  remains,  199.
Hazlewood,  gods  of  Feegee  Islanders,

857.
Head- moulding  practised  by  North

American  Indians,  414.
Herberstein,  urus  in  Germany,  243.
Heme  bay,  flint  implements  from,  274.
Herodotus,  pUe-dwellings  of  PsBonians,

120,  129.
Hesiod,  nations  on  eastern  shores  of

Mediterranean,  44.
Himilco,  voyages  of,  87.
Hippopotamus  major,  bones  of,  in  drift,

305.
Hoare,  Sir  R.  C,  barrows  about  Stone*

henge,  52.
„  burials  in  Wiltshire,

92,  101.
incense  cups,  112.


>»


602


INDEX.


if
It

it
it


it

it

It
it
it


Hog  of  ancient  Europe,  Steenstrup  on,

182.
Homer,  nations  ofi  the  eastern  shores

of  the  Mediterranean,  44.
Hopkins,  climate  of  riyer-drifl;  period,
296.
„         on  the  Gulf  stream,  298.
Homer,  researches  in  Egypt,  320.
„  „  deposits    of    the

NUe,  321.
Horse,  remains  of,  in  pUeworks,  145.

„  „  tumuli,  114.

Hottentots,  the,  338.

domestic  animals  of,  340.
„  special  uses

of,  340.
dress,  339.

exposure  of  sick  and  aged
by,  342.
„  houses  of,  339.

implements  and   cookery,

339.
metallurgy  of,  341.
methodBorkillinggame,340
religion  of,  341.
use  of  oxen  by,  to  guard
flocks,  340.
„  use  of  oxen  in  war,  340.

Houses  of  Mandans,  216.
Hoxne,  flint  implements  iirom,  271.
Human  bones  aosent  in  drift-beds,  281.
„      scarcity  of,  in  pile  works,

156.
race,  unity  of,  476.
„     change  of  type  in,  477.
„        sacrifices  by  Feegeeans,  862.
Hunting  buffaloes,  340,  344.
Huxley  on  Engis  skull,  330.
„  Neanderthal  skull,  830.

I.

Ibex,  150.

Ice,  action  on  rirer-drift  grayels,  294.

Implements  found  at  Wauwyl,  133.

from  drift,  peculiarities  of,
279.
„  and  later  Stone

a^,  compa-
rison of,  280.
of   North  American    In-
dians, 200,  419.
Lake-dwellers,  131.
stone,  Australian,  850.
wood  in  North  Ame-
rican copper  mines,
204.
similarity  of  those  used  by
savage  tribes,  451.
„  used  by  Esquimaux,  401.


a


II

it

a

»i
II
II

II


II
II

II


II
If

II


II
II

II


Implements  used  by  modem  sarages,

comparison  of,  447.
Incense  cups,  112.

Indians  of  the  Amazons,  burial  custom
of,  89.
„      festivals  of  the  dead,  216.
„      of  southern  America,  214.
Indian  tribes,  none  since  16th  century
able   to  construct  extensive  earth-
works, 229.
Infants,  burial  of  with  mother,  1 16.
„      burial  of  with  mother  by  Es-
quimaux tribes,  116,  409.
Infanticide  practised  byFeegeans,  862.

Hottentots,  842.
North  American
Indians,  418.
Paraguay      In-
dians, 427.
„  „         Tahitians,  389.

Inscriptions,  North  American,  226.
Interments,  distinction  between  those
of  Stone  and  Bronze  age,
99.
pre-historic,  90.
primary,  Bateman's  table

of;  94.
secondary,  93.
„  statistical  tables,  101.

Ireland,  crannoges  of,  120.
Irish  elk,  239.

contemporary  with  man,  240.
no  mention  of  by  Caesar  or

Tacitus,  240.
no  remains  of;  associated  with

bronze  implements,  240.
no  remains  of  in  Neolithic
age,  240.
Iron  age,  3.

„        decline  of  pile-habitations  in,

169.
„        pile-habitations  of,  168.
Iron  and  bronze,  knowledge   of  by
ancients,  6.
„    implements  found  at  Tiefenau,

4,7.
„  „  from   peat-bogs   of

Slesvick,  8.
„    introduction  of,  into  Europe,  7.
„    method  of  smelting,  by  Hotten-
tots, 341.
„    unknown  in  America  at  the  time
of  its  discovery,  201.
Iroquois,  remains  of,  in  state  of  New
York,  199.

J-

Jamieson,  T.  F.,  flint- finds  on  the
banks  of  the  Ythan,  82.


II
II

II

II


INDEX.


603


JeffreyB,  J.  G.,  moUusoa  in  drift  at  St.

Achenl,  289.
JoiayiUe,  section  at,  293.
Judicial  statistics,  1863,  cited,  488, 494.

E.

Eaiak,  405.

Eelleir,  Dr.,  bromse  implements  in  lake-
dwellings,  table  of,  158.
„  inhabitants   of  pile-dwel-

lings, 162.
„  on  lake-dwelling,  123, 127.

„  on  moon  worship,  168.

„  researches  at  Meilen,  119.

Kent's  Hole,  258.

King,  decorations  of  Australians,  848.
Eirkcudbrightshire,  cairn  in,  69.
Eissing  unknown  to  some  savages,  457.
Eiyik,  ornamented  monument  at,  47.
Ejokkenmoddings,  171.

„  flint       implements

found  in,  185.
high    antiquity  of,

196.
massing    bones   in,

183.
mutilated  bones  in,

183.
no  trace  of  grain  in,

179.
relation  of  to  tu-

muU,  191.
works  of  art  from,
187.
Eoch,  mastodon  found   in   Missouri,

killed  by  man,  234.
Eolben,  Hottentots,  338,  342.
Eorsoer,  coast-find  at,  80.
Eumbecephalic  skulls,  90,  116.
Eystfunden,  80.

L.

Ladrone  islanders,  houses  of,  444.
Lake-habitations,  abandonment  of,  168.
„  „  at  Wauwyl,  129.

„  „  comparison  of  bones

belonging  to  wild
and  domestic  ani-
mals, 146.
„  „  construction  of,  128.

„  „         erected    by   existing

savage  tribes,  122.
„  „  fauna  of,  140,  144.

„  „         feuna  of,  general  cha-

racter of,  151.
flora  of,  153.
found  in  Switserland,
119, 128.


»


»


w


»>


»


If


V


})
>»


yy


If


ff


)*


ff


»»


ff


ff


ff


ff


f»
ff


ff
ff


ff


ff


ff


ff


Lake-halntations  found  in  Switzerland,

authorities,  122.
indications    of    pro-
gress, 162.
objects  found  in  diffe-
rent dwellings,  163.
objects  found  in  diffe-
rent dwellings,  ta-
ble of,  164.
of  Bronze  age,  157.
of  Bronze  and  Stone
age,  comparison  of
objects  from,  168.
remamsofboarin,145.
remains  of  horse  in,

145.
remains  of  sus  scrofii

palustris  in,  145.
mutilated  bones   in,
140.
scarcity     of     human
bones  in,  156.
weapons  and  imple-
ments from,  131.
Lake  worship,  159.
Lakes,  sacrea,  159.

„  „      classic  authorities,  160.

Lake  Superior,  copper  mining  near,  by

aborigines,  202.
Land,  elevation  of  on  coasts  of  England

and  France,  310.
Luiguage  a  testof  mental  condition,465.
of  savage  tribes,  417,  427,

457,  465.
of  savage  tribes,  absence  of
terms  of  endearment,  417,
466.
of  savage  tribes,  absence  of
wordS;  387.
„        of  Feegee  Islanders,  855.
Lapham  on  animal  mounds,  222.
early  cultivation,  230.
forests  of  Wisconsin,  229.
garden  beds  in  America,  233.
„  ruins  of  Aztalan,  211.

Lartet  and  Christy,  caves  in  the  Dor-

doffne,  245.
peciuiarity  of  flints
fromLe  Monstier,
251.
four  divisions  of  the
primitive  human
period,  243.
mammoth  in  Sibe-
ria, 239.
sketches  and  sculp-
ture  on  bone  and
stone  from  caves,
254.


ff


ff


ff


ff
ff
ff


ff


ff


ff


ff


ff


ff


ff


ff


504


iin)EX.


Lartet,  bone  implementB  from  caves  of
the  Dordogne,  253.
ff     bones  of  rhinoceros  marked  by

flint  implements,  284.
f,     caye  at  Aurignac,  262.
„     caye-bear  near  Abbeville,  238.
Lastic,  M.,  sculpture  from  cave  at  Bru-

niqueli  254.
Laugerie,  sculptures  from,  254.
Law,  absence  of  in  Tahiti,  387.
Lead,  used  by  North  American  Indians,

201.
L'Echelle,  bones  of  reindeer  from  cave

at,  241.
Xa  ICoustier,  peculiar  character  of  flint

from,  251.
Xiewis,  Sir  O.  C,  Phoenician  sources  of

tin,  36.
„  voyages  of  Himilco,  37.

„  voyages  of  Pytheas,  39.

Li^^  caves  near,  257.
Lions  of  Thessaly,  238.
Lipari  islands,  39,  40.
Loess  and  gravel,  relations  of,  309.
Lohle,  on  pile-habitations  at  Wangen,

129.
Lyell,  Sir  C,  age  of  delta  of  the  Missis-
sippi, 324.
„        association  of   bones    of
man  and  mastodon,  235.
duration  of  glacial  epoch,

325.
indications  of  ice  action  in

river  deposits,  294.
Nile  deposits,  322.
on  long  periods  of  time,

829.
remains  of  man  in  pliocene
strata,  possible,  333.
Lyon,  Gapt.,  fox  eaten  by  Esquimaux,
141.
on  young  ice,  41.


99

n

91


11


M.


Haocagnone,  grotto  of,  260.
Mammalia,  causes  of  extinction,  328.
domesticated  during  Stone

age,  114.
extinct  since  the  advent  of

man,  237.
remains  of,    found  at  St.

Acheul,  289.
remains  of,  found  in  cave  at

Brixham,  259.
remains  of,  found  in  cave  at

Aurig^nao,  263.
i^mains  of,  found  in  caves

of  the  Dordogne,  246.


»


99


>i


II


II


}»


II


II


II


II


II


II


II


If


II


Mammalia,  xemains  o^  found  in  sheU-
mounds,  180.
remains   of,    from   Kest^a

Hole,  258.
remains  of,  from  lower-level

gravels,  805.
remains  of,  from  river-drift

gravels,  283.
of  river-drift   gravels  oo-
temporaneous  with   de-
posits, 284.
Mammoth,  geographical  range  of,  239.
„         no  remains  of,  in  Ejokken-

mdddings,  239.
„         no  traditions  of^  in  Europe^
239.
Man  and  reindeer,  relative  proportion
of,  in  Lapland,  282.
bones  of,  absent  in  drift  strata,
281.
associated   with    mas-
todon, 235.
rare  in  pile-dwellings,
281.
„    migration  of,  476.
„    'power  of  controlling  force  of  na-
tural selection,  481.
„    primitive  arts  of,  473.
I,    probably  representatives   of,  in
miocene  strata,  334.
scarcity  of  bones  oT,  reasons  why,

281.
works  of,  associated  with  bones
of  mastodon,  234.
Manatee,  figures  of,  on  North  American

pottery,  206.
Mandans,  huts  o^  216.
Maories,  365.

burial  customs  of,  368.
cannibalism  of,  370.
canoes  of,  368.
character  of,  369.
dress  of,  366.
food  o^  365.
fortified  villagei  of,  367.
houses  of,  367.
musical  instruments  of,  369.
superstitions  of,  369.
treatment  of  women  by,  369.
weapons  of,  368.
"  Mare  di  Sargasso,"  38.
Marine  shells  at  Abbeville,  310.
Marseilles,  foundation  of,  43.
Mastodon  ohioticus,  235.
Mather,    W.   W.,    implements    from
ancient  copper  mines  of  North  Ame-
rica, 204.
Mauls,  or  stone  hammers,  203.
Maurice,  stone  monuments  in  India,  56


II


II


II
II
II
II
II
II
ft
II
II
II
II
II


na)Ex.


505


Meals,  solitary  in  Tahiti,  883.
Measaremeiit,  standard  of,  known  to
earthwork-builden  of  North  Ame-
rica, 210.
Megaoeros     hibernicua,    geographical

range  of,  239.
Meilgaard,  shell-monnd  at,  175.
Mendiecourt,  ^Tel  pits  at,  304.
Mental  condition,  language  a  test  of,

465.
„  „  of    sayage    tribes,

462,  475.
Merry  on  the  use  of  the  boomerang,

362.
Metal,  knowledge  of  in  Europe,  Asia,

and  Africa,  338.
Mexican  paintings,  201.

„        simultaneous  use  of  metal  and
stone  implementB  by,  62.
Migration  of  man,  476.
Minatarees,  huts  of,  216.
Mincopies,  346.

Mississippi  Talley,  date  of  monuments

in,  231.
„  „        delta  of,  324.

Missouri,  mastodon  found   kill^  by

human  agency  in,  234.
Mistletoe,  reference  by  Pliny  to,  168.
Moa,  egg  of,  in  Maori  grave,  369.
Modem  savages,  336.

comparative  table  of
implements,  etc.,
used  by,  447.
different  degrees  of
civilisation  amongst,
446.

MoUusca  found  at  St.  Acheul,  289.
of  drift  gravels,  306.
„  „       evidence     of

Arctic  cli-
mate, 294.
Moon  worship,  168.
Morai  or  bunal  place  in  Tahiti,  386.
Moral  inferiority  of  savages,  466.
Merges,  bronze  implements  from,  19.
Morlot,  chronoloeical  indications  of  the
cone  of  the  Tini^re,  318.
cone  de  la  Tini^re,  316,  323.
Phoenicians,  traces  of  in  Ame>

rica,  46.
on  chronolo^cal   calculations
from  deposits,  328.
Mouatt,  Andaman  Islanders,  346.
Mound-builders  of  America,  228.

„  of  America,  standard

of        measurement
known  to,  210.
Mound  burial,  86.

historical  references,  86.


»»


n


i»


w


tt

»9


»»


9i


»»


M


Mound  burial,  Scriptvre  references,  86.

Music  of  Esquimaux,  408.

Musical  instruments  of  Maories,  369.

,,  „  Tahitians,  378.

Mutilated  bones  in  pile-dwellings,  140.
*    ,,  „         shell-mounds,  183.

Myodes  torquatus,  306.


N.


Natchez  Indians,  dwellings  of,  221.
Natural  selection,  applied  to  the  human

race,  478.
„  „      force  of,    influenced

by  man,  481.
Neanderthal  skull,  330.
Negrito,  366.
Neolithic  period,  8,  00.
Nephrite,  implements  in  lake-habita^

tions  formed  of,  134.
Newark,  North  America,   earthworks

near,  210.
New  York,  State  of,  ancient  monu-
ments in,  199.
New  Zealand,  quadrupeds  in,  366.
New  Zealanders.    See  Maories.
Nidau,  bronze  implements  from,  19.

„      metal  objects  from,  4.
Niebelungen  Lied,  aurochs  mentioned

in,  160,  242.
supposed    allusion
to  Irish  elk,  240.
urns  mentioned  in,
243.

Nigaard  glacier,  the,  316.
Nile  valley,  320.

Homer's  researches,  321.
probable  age  of  deposits,

321
Sir  C.  Lyell  on,  322.
Nilsson,  on  Baal  worship  in  Norway,  47.
Bronze  age,  36.
omamentauon   of    Bronze

age,  48.
passage  graves,  89.
Phoenicians  in  Norway,  46.
Semitic  character  of  Bronze

age  ornamentation,  48.
voyages  of  Pytheas,  43.
„  young  ice,  41.

North  America,  ancient  pottery  of,  204.
American  archieoiogy,  198.

„        authorities,
198.
Indians,  412.
„    agriculture    of,

422.
„    beliefin  a  future
state  by,  416.


tf


)i


»»


91
ft

If


it

9f


If


t9

n


»>


506


nn)EX.


North  American  Indians,  boats  of,  420.

»           »

»

burial  customs
of,  424.

>»           >i

>»

character  of,4l7.

>»           »

>»

community  of
character  of
different  tribes
412.

»               if

fl

drefls  of,  413.

99                   99

»>

dwellings     of,
421.

»»                    }>

»

food  of,  423.

»                    >»

»l

geographical

»


»


»}


>l


»


}>


»


»)


>•


>l


»>


>»


w


}r


»


»


of,  412.
„    head  -  moulding
practised    by,
414.
„    implements    of,

419.
„    ornaments     of,

413.
„    rapid  disappear-
ance, of,  418.
„    scalpingfUniver-
sal  custom  of,
418.
„    treatment     of
womenby,416
„    use    of   cradle-
board  by,  414.
river  valleys,  popula-
tion of,  228.
Norway,  Phcenicians  in,  46.

„       reindeer  in,  241.
Norwich  Crag,remaiD8of  aurochsin,242.
„  remains  of  Irish  elk  in,

240.
Numbers,  limited  knowledge  of  by  Aus-
tralians, 354.
„       limited  knowledge  of  by  Es-
quimaux, 410.
Numeration,  defective  power  of  amongst
savage  tribes,  466.


0.


Objects  buried  with  the  dead,  92.
Oise,  valley  of,  geological  fonnation,290.
Oldfield,   **  Aborigines  of  Australia,"
cited,  348.
„        on  the  use  of  boomerang,  362.
Ooloos,  a  flint  implement  of  Esqui-
maux, 74.

"  Ora  maritima,"  87.
Orkney  stone  circles,  modem  uses  of,  66,
Ornaments  found  in  North  American
mounds,  206.
„  of  Australians,  348.


Ornaments  of  Esquimaux,  408.

New  ZealanderB,  367.
North  American  Indians,

413.
Paraguay  Indiana,  426.
Tahitians,  377.
perforated,  444.
Outrigger,  use  of  by  Andaman  islanders,

846.
„       Australians,  349.
„       Fee^eans,  367.
„  „       Tahitians,  378.

Owen,  Andaman  Islanders,  346.

cave-bear  in  pliocene  deposits  of

Norfolk,  238.
reported  remains  of  Irish  elk  in
peat  bogs,  240.
Ox,  uses  of  by  savage  tribes,  463.
Oxen,  races  of,  in  pile-dwellings,  148.
teeth  of,  in  tumuli,  116.


19


>^


99


»i


P.


Packwerkbauten,  127.
Palseqlithic  period,  2.

„  „     no  known  interment

of,  98.
Pallas,  geographical  distribution  of  rein-
deer, 240.
Paraguay  Indians,  426.

food  of,  426.
habits  of,  426.
houses  of,  126.
infanticide,  practice

of,  427.
language  of^  427.
no     agriculture
amongst,  426.
no    domestic    ani-
mals, 426.
religious  notions  of,
427.
Parricide,  custom  of  amongst  Fe^geeaoa,

360.
Parry,  habits  of  Esquimaux,  392,  896,

404,  407,  410.
Passage  ^ves,  88.
Patagonians,  427.

bolas  used  by,  430.
burial  customs  of,  431.
dress  of,  429.
food  of,  430.
eigantic  size  of,  428.
huts  of,  428.

ignorance  of  pottery,  429*
religious  notions  o{  431.
,,  weapons  of,  430.

Peat  deposits  of  Somme  valley,  remaiiiB
irom,  306.


fl


INDEX.


507


»

»

»»   ,

,'?

»  ^

well

l>

>»

99

t9

»>

if

»>

99

)l

99

)»

»

»

»»

}l

1»

»

y»

Peck,  Capt.,  North  American  antiqui-
ties, age  of,  232.
Periffneux,  stone  implements  from,  253.
P&hibauten,  127.

„  flora  of,  153*

„  ^         reference  to  authors,  123.
Phoenicians,  commerce  in  tin,  36,  46.
„        in  America,suppo6ed  traces

of,  46.
„        in  Norway,  46,  48.
Piots'  houses,  91.
Pile  buildings,  as  magazines,  159.
„    dwellers,  commerce  of,  158.
diet  of,  155.
lake-worship  by,  159.
dwellings,  bread  found  in,  154.
cereals  found  in,  153.
character  of  fauna  of,  152
construction  of,  128.
fauna  of,  140.
flora  of,  153,  155.
implements  of  nephrite

from,  134.
list  of  remains  of  birds

from,  144.
population  of,  281.
scarcity  of  human  bones

in,  156,  281.
table  of  animal  remains

from,  143.
weapons     and     imple-
ments found  in,  131.
Piles  of  Stone  and  Bronze  age,  com-
parison of,  138.
Pileworks,  remains  of  horse  found  in,

145.
Pipes  in  North  American  tumuli,  206.
Plants  found  in  pileworks,  list  of,  155.
Pliny,  the  mistletoe  mentioned  by,  168.

„      dogs  used  in  war,  453.
Peonians,  habitations  of,  120.
Polybius,  voyage  of  Pytheas,  39.
Polynesians,  355.

Pont  de  ThiMe,  lake-habitation  of,  319.
Population,  increase  of  with  ciyilisation,
482.
„  of  North  American  river

valleys,  228.
„  of  pile-habitations,  126.

Pottery  found  in  ancient  tumuli,  Bate-
man's  arrangement  of,  111.
from  tumulus  at  Moen,  106.

„  West  Kennet,

109.
North  American,  204.
of  Bronze  period,  160.
of  Stone  age,  135.
of  Stone  and  Bronze  age  com-
parison of,  166.


M


»


If


I)


99
)f

»>

99
19


}}


Pottery,  ornamentation  of,   113,   136,
205.
„       simple  form  of,  used  by  Esqui-
maux, 394.
Potter's  wheel,  no  evidence  of  use  of

in  Stone  age,  135.  ^
no  evidence  of  use  of  in
ancient  American  pot-
tery, 205.
Prehistoric  archaeology,  epochs  of,  2.
„  method  of  en-

quiry, 336.
remains,  83.

„      wide    distribution
of,  86.

Prestwich,  analogous  conditions  of  river
valleys    in    France    and
England,  291.
condition  of  bones  found  in

river  drift,  284.
deposits  at  Abbeville,  286.
difference  of  level  of  upper

gravel  and  loess,  309.
flint  implements,  277*
ice  action  on  river  gravels,  295
probable     tem^rature     of

river  drift  period,  295.
river  deposits,  286.
table  of  mammalian  remains
from  lower  level  gravels,
305.

Prichard,  insufficiency  of  popular  chro-
nology, 313.
Primary  interments,  Bateman's  table  of

contents  of  102,  94.
Primitive  condition  of  man,  473.
Pytheas,  voyages  of,  39,  42.

GeminuB  on,  42.


))


»>
)»


f)


99


))
)»

}>


B.


Rae,  Dr.,  character  of  Esquimaux,  410.
Reindeer,  240.

Cesar's  mention  of,  242.
horns  of,  with  marks  of  hu-
man implements,  247.
horns  of,  in  caves   of  the
Bordogne,  247,  254.
„         first  appearance  of  in  Eu-
rope, 241.
„         in  Europe  at   the   present
time,  240,  241.
Religious  notions  of  Andaman  Islanders,

346.
„        Australians,  353.
„        Esquimaux,  409.
ff        Feegeeans,  357.
Fuegians,  437.


»i


>f


9»

it


Hottentots,  341.


508


INDEX.


ft


it


i»


19


>»

99

»

t1

tf

9>

t>

»>

Religioofi  notions  of  Maories,  369.

North  American  In-

diauB,  416.
Paraguay   Indians,

Patagonians,  431.
Savage  tribes,  467.
Tahitians,  386.
Veddahs,  345.
BbinoceroB,  bones  of,  marked  by  flint
implements,  284.
remains  of,  found  near  Ab-
beville, 284.
tiohorinus,  239.
tichorinus,  or  elephas  pri-
mieenios,  not  founa  in
shell-mounds,  239.
tichorinus,  or  elephas  pri-
mi^enius,  no  traditions
of  in  Europe,  239.
tichorinus   in  caves  near
Li^ge,  257.
Bibe,  tumuli  near,  26.
Richardson  on  young  ice,  41.
Biver  gpravels,  proof  of  denudation,  301.
„        „        Frestwich  on,  286.
„        „       sandstone  blocks  in,  292.
Roman  period,  battle  field  of  Tiefenan,

169.
Boss,  Esquimaux  of  Baffin's  Bay,  406.
Bojal  Irish  Academy,  flint  implements

m  museum  of,  61.
Bude  flint  implements  in  tumuli  and

shell-mounds,  191,  196.
Biitimeyer,  comparison  of  animal  re-
mains in  different  lake-
dwellings  by,  166,  167.
fauna  of  Swiss  lake-dwell-
ings, 140.
races  of  oxen  in  Swiss  lake-
dwellings,  148.
remains  of  an  early  species
of  boar  in  pile-dwellings,
145.
Sos  scrofa  palustris,   145,

147.
table   of   animal   remains
from  lake-dwellings,  143.


S.


Sacred  enclosures,  209.
Sacrificial  mounds,  217.

contents  of,  218.
position  of  altar  in,

217.
possibly  sepulchral,
219.
Salt,  use  of  by  Sandwich  Ldanders,  381.


♦f


19


>t


It


91


II


19
l»

>l


>l
19


99

fl

»l
99

II

II


Sanchee,  stone  circle  at,  57.
Sandstone,  blocks  of  in  river  gravels,

292.
Sandwich  Islands,  inhabitants  o(  890.
Savages  compared  with  children,  462.
„      deification  of  white  men  by,

459.
„      methods  of  obtaining  fire,  453.
„      mental  inferiority  o^  465.
„      moral  inferiority  of,  465.
„      self-inflicted  sunerings  of,  485.
„      skilftilness  of,  440.
sufferings  of^  484.
works  of  art  by,  444.
Savage  tribes,    absence    of    religion

amongst,  467.
„  „      belief  in  witchcraft  by,

470.
deficient   in   power  of

numeration,  466.
different     methods    of

burial,  455.
different  habits  of,  452.
different  ideas  of  virtue,

458.
difference  in  weapons,

448.
erection  of  lake-habitap
tionsby,  122.
„  „      habits  of,  aue  to  external

conditions,  446.
„  I,      independent  inventions

by,  451.
„  „      isolation  of,  450.

mental    condition     of,

462.
no  evidence  of  degrada-
tion, 337.
„  „      social  position  of  women

in,  460.
„  „      sounds  used  by,  457.

„  „      religious  conceptions  of,

467.
„         „      use  of  the  dog  by,  452.
„  „      various  articles  used  by,

447.
Scandinavia,  tumuli  in,  88.
Scandinavian  tumuli,  skulls  from,  90.
SchmerUng,  contemporaneity  of  man
and  extinct   »iiininT»^
257.
researches  in  caves  near
lidge,  257.
Schoolcraft^  history  of  Indian  tribes
cited,  335,  412.
„  inscribed  stone  from  Grave

Creek,  226.
,y  North  American  Indians,

87.


II

II

II
ti

•I

If


II


I)


If


II


II


nrDEX.


509


Schoolcraft,  Korth  American  Indians,

burial  customs  of,  87.

„  traces   of  fire  in  North

American  tumuli,  202.

Schwab,  Colonel,  earthen¥rare  crescents

discoTered  by,  167.
„  lake-dwellings,  159.

„  implements  m>m  pile-

dwellings,  165.
Scioto  YaUey,  mounds  in,  210,  218.
Scotland,  shell-mounds  in,  177.
Scrapers,  flint,  71.

„         „     used  by  Esquimaux,  71.
Sculptured  bones,  horns,  stones,  etc.,

254.
Seals,  Esquimaux  method  of  killing,

403.
Section  of  Somme  TaUey,  at  Abberille,

286.
Segoria,  remains  of  cate-bear  in  caye

near,  238.
Seine,  flint  implements  found  in  yalley

of,  271.
Semitic  character  of  Bronze  age  orna-
mentation, 48.
Sepulchral  mounds,  211^.
„         pottery,  111.
Sewing  by  savages,  443.
Shell-mounds,  171.

absence  of  human  bones

in,  188.
at  Brifzes,  177.
at  Meugaard,  177.
bones  m  alca  impennis

in,  181.
builders  not  mere  sum-
mer Tisitors,  184.
character  of.  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  period,  1 88
£stribution  of  in  Den-
mark, 174.
in  Australia,  178.
in  Cornwall  and  DeTon-

shire,  178.
in  Malay  peninsula,  178.
in  Scotland,  177.
in  Tierra  del  Fuego,l78.
remains  of  birds  in,  181.
fish  in,  181.
mammalia  in,

181.

moUusca    in,

179.

ihinoceroe  tichorinusand

elephas   primigenius.

remains  of,  not  found

in,  239.

Steenstrup  on  skulls  in,

172.


>i
)}
»>

»>

II

It
)>

»»

II
i»
II
II
II

II

If


II
II

If


II
II


II


II


Shell-mounds,  zostera  marina  in,  179.
Shelley,  Mr.,  flint-finds  near  Beigate,  82
Shells  found  in  shell-mounds,  179.
Shirley  on  crannoges  in  Ireland,  120.
Sicilian  caves,  260.

,,        „       animal  remains  in,  260.
Sflbur^  Hill,  53.

SUver  m  ancient  American  tumuli,  201.
Sin,  489.

Skeletons,  position  of,  in  tumulus  on

the  island  of  Moen,  106.

„         position  of,  in  tumulus  at

"West  Kennet,  108.

Skull,  distortion  of,  by  North  American

Indians,  414.
„  „  Tahitians,  384.

Skulls,  American  forms  of,  414.

from  American  mounds,  228.
from  chambered  tumuli  of  Great

Britain,  90.
from  chambered  tumuli  of  Scan-
dinavia, 90.
Sledges  used  by  Esquimaux,  405.
Slesvick,  iron  implements  found  in  peat

bogs  of,  8.
Slinestones,  76.

Smitn,  Dr.,  on  tin  in  Spain,  45.
Solitary  meals,  382,  458.
Somme,  alteration  of  course  of,  310.

valley,  geological  formation  of,
290.
„      section  of  at  Abbeville,
286.

Sounds,  used  by  savage  tribes  in  lan-
guage, 457.
Spear-heads,  flint,  75.
Spear,  use  of  by  Australians,  350.
Spiennes,  flint-nnds  at,  82.
Spindle-whorls,  133.
Squier  and  Davis,  contents  of  tumuli  of

the  Mississippi  val-
ley, 134.
contents  of  sacriflcial

mounds,  217.
date  of  ancient  monu-
ments in  valley  of
the  Mi8si6sipi,231.
defensive    enclosures

in  Ohio,  207.
inability  of  modem
Indian   tribes    to
erect   earthworks,
229.
pipes  in  North  Ame-
rican tumuli,  206.
on  Boumeville    en-
closm«,  Ohio,  207.
on  North  American
pottery,  204.


II


19


II


II


II


II


9t


II


l>


610


nn)EX.


It


Squier  and  Dayis  on  sacred  enclosures,

209.
on  sacrificial  mounds
in  North  America,
217.
I  use  of  lead  by  North

American    tribes,
201.
Sqnier,  building  of  Floridians  and  the
southern  tribes  of  North  America,
214.
Stag,  bones  of  in  pile-dwellings,  and

quaternary  deposits,  282,  note.
Staigue  fort,  Kerry,  dO,  493.
Steenstrup,  animal  remains  in  Danish
shell-mounds,  180.
contemporaneity  of  Ejok-
kenmoddings  and  Stone
age  tumuli,  193.
domestic    hog    of   ancient

Europe,  182.
flint  axes,  probable  use  of,

72.
flint  implements  from  Kjok-
kenmoddings  and  tumuli,
193.
fracture  of  skulls  of  rumi-
nants found  in  ancient
deposits,  333.
mammalian     remains     in

shell-mounds,  181.
mutilated  bones  in  shell-
mounds,  183.
„         shell-mounds,  172.
Stone  age,  60.

„        brachycephalic     forms     of
skulls  of,  116.
different  stages  of  ciyiliza-

tion  in,  60,  445.
domestic  animals  of,  114.
fabrics  of,  137.
interments,  99.
pottery  of,  135.
„        ornamentation    of,
136.
sources  of  our   knowledge

of,  63.
Bubdiyisions  of  by  Worsaae,
191.

„        "Wright  on,  61.
Stone  circles,  85.
„    glass  drilled  by,  253.

hammers,  use  of  by  Australians,

350.
implements  in  Banish  museums,
60,61.
in  Dublin,  mineral-
ogical    character
'  of,  63.


tf


tf


>i


if


tt


t7


»


w
If

V
ft

I)

ff


9t


tf


ft


»>


>»


}}


>l


»l


Stone  implements  in  museam  of  Royal

Irish     Academy,
61.
Wright  on  localitiefl
where  found,  35.
use   of  by  Esqui-
maux, 406.
„    monuments.  Scripture  leferaiiee
to,  58.
Stonehenge,  50.

„  character  of  tumuli  near,

102.
Strabo,  yoyages  of  Pytheas,  89.
Stukely,  Abury  and  Stonehenge,  53,55.
Sufferings  incident  to  sayage  Ufe,  484.
Sus  scrota  palustris,  145,  147.
Swiss  lake-dwellings,  fauna  of,  140.

,,  „  flora  of,  155.

Switzerland^  lake-habitations  of,  119.
„  lake -habitations    of,    au-

thorities, 124.


T.


Tahiti,  372.
„      character  of  inhabitants,  887.
„      tumulus  in,  110,  385.
Tahitians,  burial  customs  of,  384.
„        canoes  of,  378.
„        clothing  of,  376.
„        distortion  of  skull  by,  384.
domestic  animals  of,  379.
fish-hooks  of,  874.
food  of,  380.
houses  of,  377.
ignorance  of  pottery,  878.
manufacture  of  bark  cloth,
^  375.

musical  instruments  of,  378.
peculiar  custom  o^  388.
„        practice  of  infiinticide  by,889
„        religious  notions  of,  386.
„        social  customs  of,  887.
„        tattooing  by,  377.
„        tools  of,  372.
„        weapons  of,  379.
Tasmanians,  354.

manners  andcustomso^  354
Bey.  T.  Doye  on  moral  con-
dition of,  465.
Tattooing  practised  by  Andaman  Island-
en,  845.^
„  „  Esquimaux,  408.

„  „  Feegeeans,  360.

„  „  Maories,  367.

„  „  Tahitians,  877.

Taylor  on  animal  mounds,  222.
Teeth  used  as  amulets,  80.
Temple  mounds,  220.


ft
tt
ft
ft
tf
ft


tf
ft


ft
ft


IDDEX.


511


n


€1


Temples  of  Feegeeans,  357.
Thonbjeig,  meUd  impleinents  and  cobu

from,  10.
Thule,  island  of,  41.
Thunberg,  customs  of  Hottentots,  339.
Thumam,  long  barrow  in  Wiltshire,  107
Tiefenaa,  meUl  instruments  from,  4,  7,

169.
Tierradel  Foego,  Barwin  on  inhabitants

of,  189.
inhabitants  of,  432.
manners  and  customs
of;  432,  434.
„  women  of,  433.

Tilhngeersteens,"  76.
Tini^re,  deposits  o^  316.

„  „  antiquities     from,

316.
Tin,  in  Spain,  45.
„    PhGBnician  commerce  in,  36,  46.
„    where  found,  36,  45.
Toumal  and   Christol,  association  of

man  and  extinct  animals,  257.
Torquemada,  manufacture  of  flint  im-
plements in  Mexico,  78.
Tradition,  small  yalue  of,  335.
Traffic,  ignorance  of,  by  Australians,353
Trogontherium  palseospalax,  remains  of,

associated  with  cave-bear,  238.
Trojon,  M.,  incineration  of    dead  in
Switzerland       during
Bronze  age,  161,
inhabitants  of  Switzerland

in  Bronze  age,  161.
manufacture  of  stone  axes,

132.
ornamentation  of  pottery

in  Bronze  age,  160.
on   piles   of   Stone   and

Bronze  age,  138.
population  of  pile-dwell-
inn,  125,  281.
Tschutski,  winter  nabitations  of,  88.
Tumuli,  83.

association  of  implements  of

bronze  and  stone  in,  62.
abundant  in  Denmark,  171.
Bateman,  scripture  reference
to,  86.
„  on  British,  91.

chambered,rarity  of  in  Western

Europe,  91.
classical  references  to,  86.
in  Otaheite,  110,  385.
in  Southern  States  of  America,

contents  of,  215.
models  of  implements  in,  98.
remains  of  horse  in,  114.
rude  flint  implements  in,  195.


It


i>


»


»»


99


99


»9


»»
»
»»


»


»»


>l


99


Tumuli,  teeth  of  oxen  in,  115.
Tumulus  at  Goldharn,  88.

„        in  the  island  of  Moen,  104.

„  pottery     in,

106.
„         skeletons  in,

106.
„  yarious   im-

plements
in,  104.
Turanian  race  in  Europe,  116.
Tylor,  Anahuac  cited,  78.
„     Early  History  of  Mankind  dted,
456.
Tyndall  on  Glaciers,  297.


U.


Umiak,  405.

Unity  of  human  race,  476.
Upper-leyel  gravels,  Boucher  de  Per-
thes on,  300.
„  „        M.  C.  D'Orbigny

on,  800.
Upper  pliocene   beds,  marked  bones

from,  332.
Ursus  spelsBus,  237.
Urns,  242.
»i    geographical  distribution  of,  242.
„    mentioned  by  Cesar,  243.
„    mentioned  in  Niebelungen  lied,
243.
Utica,  foundation  o^  43.


V.


Valand,  myth  of,  39.
Yeddahs,  40,  343.

„       absence  of  religion  amongst,
845.

„        domestic  customs  of,  844.

„        houses  of,  343.

„        hunting  buffalos  of,  340, 344.

„        weapons  of,  343.
Virtue,  ideas  of  different,  458.

W.

Wace,  cited,  51.

Wallace,  burial  customs  of  some  Bra-
zilian tribes,  455.
„      the  theory  of  natural  selection
applied  to  man,  478.
Wampum,  227.

Wangen,  flint  implements  from,  131.
„        ornamented  pottery  from,  136.
„        pile-dwelling  at,  125,   129,

135.
„       mde  fftbrics  from,  137.


612


nn)EX.


It


tt


99
»
99

»l

it
>»
>J
f(


Wangen,  yarious  articles  from,  163.
Water,  transporting  power  of,  302.
WauwyU  lake-habitations  at,  127, 129,
152.
lake-habitations,  animal  re*
mains  from,  141,  143, 166.
lake-habitations,  implements
found  at,  131, 133, 135,163.
TVayland  Smith,  myth  of,  39.
Weald,  denudation  of,  328.
Weapons  of  Andaman  Islanders,  S45.
Australians,  350.
Esquimaux,  402.
*«egeeans,  356.
Fueg:ians,  432.
Hottentots,  840.
Maories,  368.
North  American  Indians,

419.
Patagonians,  430.
Paraguay  Indians,  426.
Tahitians,  379.
Veddahs,  343.
"Weissgrund,"  130.
West  Kennet,  tumulus  near,  107.
Wheat  found  in  pile-dwellings,  153.
Whitburn,  on  mnt  implements  from

Godalming,  272.
Wilde,  Sir  W.  E.,    classification   of

arrow-heads,  77.

scarcity  of  copper

implements      in

Ireland,  32.

stone    implements

in    museum    of

Hoyal         Irish

Academy,  63.

Wilkes,  Capt,  account  of  an  Australian

funeral,  853.
„  practices   of  the   Fee-

geeans,  361.
Wiltshire,  ancient  burials  in,  Sir  R.  G.
Hoare  on,  92,  101.
„        tumulus   in,    described   by
Thumam,  107.
Williams,  agriculture  of  Feegeeans,358.
„        on    Feegee    Islanders,  356,
857,  359,  361,  363.
Wilson,  antiquity  of  Mississippi  yalley
remains,  231.
belief  in  a  future  state  by  an-
cient Britons,  92.


99


91


»l


»


Wilson  on  chambered  tumuli,  90.
„       on  Dighton  rock,  226.
„       on  Eumbecephalic  skulls,  90.
„      on  Modem  use  of  Orkney  cir-
cles, 56.
on  Ornamentation  of    North
American  pottery,  205.
„       position  of  ditch  a  distinguish-
ing characteristic  of  enclo-
sures, 209.
„      sacrificial  mounds   in  North
America,  217.
Wisconsin,  Lapham  on  ancient  remains

in,  198.
,,  „  forests  in,  229.

Witchcraft,  belief  in  by  savages,  470.
Wokey  Hole,  265.

„  „     remains  found  in,  265.

Women  of  Tierra  del  Fueso,  433.
„       social  position  of  in   savage
tribes,  460.
Worsaae,  characters   of  Bronze   and
Stone  age  tumuli,  99.
early  inhabitants  of  Den-
mark, 117.
flint  implements  in   shell-
mounds,  193.
limited  use  of  early  imple-
ments, 442.
subdivisions  of  Stone  age,
191.

Wright  on  localities  in  which  stone  and
bronze  implements  have  been
found,  as  evidence  of  their
antiquity,  35.
on  Roman  and  Saxon  remains,

11.
on  Stone  aee,  61.
„      similarity  oi  bronze  implements
from    different    countries,
33.
Wummera,  use  of  by  Australians,  851  •


Y.


»


»>


»i


9>


f>


M


Toung  ice,  41.
Turt,  Siberian,  88.


Z.


Zostera  marina  in  shell-mounds,  179.


8TXPKSX  AUSTIN,  PaiMTSB,  SEBXTORD,


do


RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any

University  of  California  Library

or  to  the

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

BIdg.  400,  Richmond  Field  Station

University  of  Caiifornia

Richmond,  CA  94804-4698

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS

•  2-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling
{510)642-6753

•  1-year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing
books  to  NRLF

•  Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made
4  days  prior  to  due  date

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW


APR  1  1  2007
