Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


6000236070 


t^■^b       i      'O^, 


MENTAL   AND   SOCIAL  CONDITION   OF   SAVAGES. 


iiiiiiniiii 

6000236070 


7'Jti 


^ 


MENTAL  AND   SOCIAL  CONDITION   OF   SAYAGES. 


LOXDO!!  t    PaUTRD    DT 

■PorriiwooDB  aud  oo..  inir-ttTRrrr  kqcak* 

AXD    rARLIAMKXT    HTKKKT 


T^I^tt^.iSt! 


•j* 


I 


-^ 


VKV 


.!i      ■■    - 


3%- 


V  r-. 


i      • 


THE 


ORmiN    OF    CIVILISATION 


AND    THK 


PRIMITIVE  CONDITION  OF  MAN. 


MENTAL  AND  SOCIAL  CONDITION  OF  SAVAGES. 


BY 


Sm  JOHN  LUBBOCK,  Babt.,  M.P.,  F.E.S. 

▼US-OHAVGILLOR  OF  TKK   UKiyKBOITT   Of  LOITXWV : 
AUTBOB  OF  *  PRKHmomO  TUCBB'   BTO. :  BOVOBAKT  BIOBSrAlIT  OF  TBI  LOIOWir  K 
WMUOW  OF  THl  UnnAV,  OlOLOOICAL,  SNTOMOLOOICAL,  AKD  OTHXR  BOCIKnZS. 


THIRD     EDITION,     WITH     NUMEROUS     ADDITIONS. 


LONDON : 

LONGMANS,    GKEEN,    AND    CO. 

1875. 


225 


/as-. 


PBEFAOE. 


TN  my  work  on  *  Prehistoric  Times '  I  have  devoted 
-■-  several  chapters  to  the  description  of  modem 
savages^  because  the  weapons  and  implements  now  used 
by  the  lower  races  of  men  throw  much  light  on  the  sig- 
nification and  use  of  those  discovered  in  ancient  tumuli, 
or  in  the  drift  gravels;  and  because  a  knowledge  of 
modern  savages  and  their  modes  of  life  enables  us  more 
accurately  to  picture,  and  more  vividly  to  conceive, 
the  manners  and  customs  of  our  ancestors  in  bygone 
ages. 

In  the  present  volume,  which  is  founded  on  a  course 
of  lectures  delivered  at  the  Koyal  Institution  in  the 
spring  of  1868,  I  propose  more  particularly  to  describe 
the  social  and  mental  condition  of  savages,  their  art, 
their  systems  of  marriage  and  of  relationship,  their  re- 
ligions, language,  moral  character,  and  laws.  Subse- 
quently I  shall  hope  to  publish  those  portions  of  my 
lectures  which  have  reference  to  their  houses,  dress, 
boats,  arms,  implements,  &c.  From  the  very  nature  of 
the  subjects  dealt  with  in  the  present  volume,  I  shall 
have  to  record  many  actions  and  ideas  very  abhorrent  to 


Ti  PBEFAOE. 

US ;  so  many,  in  &ct,  that  if  I  pass  them  without  com- 
ment or  condemnation,  it  is  because  I  am  reluctant  to 
fatigue  the  reader  by  a  wearisome  iteration  of  disap- 
proval. In  the  chapters  on  Marriage  and  Religion 
more  especially,  though  I  have  endeavoured  to  avoid 
everything  that  was  needlessly  offensive,  still  it  was 
impossible  not  to  mention  some  facts  which  are  very 
repugnant  to  our  feelings.  Yet  were  I  to  express  my 
sentiments  in  some  cases,  silence  in  others  might  be 
held  to  imply  indifference,  if  not  approval. 

Montesquieu  ^  commences  with  an  apology  that 
portion  of  his  great  work  which  is  devoted  to  Religion. 
As,  he  says,  *on  pent  juger  parmi  les  t^n^bres  celles 
qui  sont  les  moins  ^paisses,  et  parmi  les  abimes  ceux 
qui.sont  les  moins  profonds,  ainsi  Ton  pent  chercher 
entre  les  religions  fausses  celles  qui  sont  les  plus  con- 
formes  au  bien  de  la  socidt^;  celles  qui,  quoiqu'elles 
n'aient  pas  Teffet  de  mener  les  hommes  aux  f^licit^  de 
I'autre  vie,  peuvent  le  plus  contribuer  k  leur  bonheur 
dans  celle-ci.  Je  n'examinerai  done  les  diverses 
religions  du  monde  que  par  rapport  au  bien  que  Ton  en 
tire  dans  I'^tat  civil,  soit  que  je  parle  de  celle  qui  a  sa 
racine  dans  le  ciel,  ou  bien  de  celles  qui  ont  la  leur  sur 
la  terre.'  The  diflSculty  which  I  have  felt  has  taken  a 
different  form,  but  I  deem  it  necessary  to  say  these 
few  words  of  explanation,  lest  I  should  be  supposed  to 
approve  that  which  I  do  not  expressly  condemn. 

Elemm,  in  his   *Allgemeine  Culturgeschichte  der 

'  *  l'>prit  do6  Loin/  lir.  xxiv.  ch.  1. 


PBEFAOE.  TO 

Mensclien,'  and  recently  Mr.  Wood,  in  a  more  popular 
manner  (*  Natural  History  of  Man'),  have  described  the 

various  races  of  man  consecutively ;  a  system  which  has 

its  advantages,  but  which  does  not  well  bring  out  the 

general  stages  of  progress  in  civilisation. 

Various  other  works,  amongst  which  I  must 
specially  mention  Mttller's  *Geschichte  der  American- 
ischen  Urreligionen,'  M^Lennan's  *  Primitive  Marriage,' 
and  Bachofen's  '  Das  Mutterrecht,'  deaj  with  particular 
portions  of  the  subject.  Maine's  interesting  work  on 
^Ancient  Law,'  again,  considers  man  in  a  more 
advanced  stage  than  that  which  is  the  special  subject  of 
my  work. 

The  plan  pursued  by  Tylor  in  his  remarkable  work 
on  the  *  Early  History  of  Mankind '  more  nearly  re- 
sembles that  which  I  have  sketched  out  for  myself,  but 
the  subject  is  one  which  no  two  minds  would  view  in 
the  same  manner,  and  is  so  vast  that  I  am  sure  my 
friend  will  not  regard  me  as  intruding  upon  a  field  which 
he  has  done  so  much  to  make  his  own. 

Nor  must  I  omit  to  mention  Lord  Eames'  *  History 
of  Man,'  and  Montesquieu's  *  Esprit  des  Lois,'  both  of 
them  works  of  great  interest,  although  written  at  a  time 
when  our  knowledge  of  savage  races  was  even  more 
imperfect  than  it  is  now. 

Yet  the  materials  for  such  a  work  as  the  present 
are  immense,  and  are  daily  increasing.  Those  who  take 
an  interest  in  the  subject  become  every  year  more  and 
more  numerous ;  and  while  none  of  my  readers  can  be 


viii  FEEFAOE. 

more  sensible  of  my  deficiencies  than  I  am  myself,  yet 
after  ten  years  of  study,  I  have  been  anxious  to  publish 
this  portion  of  my  work,  in  the  hope  that  it  may  con- 
tribute something  towards  the  progress  of  a  science 
which  is  in  itself  of  the  deepest  interest,  and  which  has 
a  peculiar  importance  to  an  Empire  such  as  ours,  com- 
prising races  in  every  stage  of  civilisation  yet  attained 
by  man. 

i 

Ilion  Elms,  Down,  Kbnt  : 
February^  1870. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTOBY    CHAPTER. 

TAOH 

ImpoHance  of  the  Subject — Difficulty  of  the  Subject — Inactivity  of 
the  Savage  Intellect — Condition  of  the  Lowest  Ilaces  of  Men 
— Curious  Customs  with  reference  to  Mothers-in-Law — La  Couvade 
— Reasons  for  La  Couvade — Savage  Ideas  on  the  Influence  of  Food 
— Curious  Ideas  with  reference  to  Portraits — Use  of  Prayers  as 
Medicine— Savage  Ideas  of  Disease — Medical  Treatment  among 
Savages — Fancies  about  Twins — Life  attributed  to  Inanimate  Ob- 
jects— Salutations .        .      1 

CHAPTER  IL 

ART   AND   ORNAMENTS. 

Art  as  an  Ethnological  Character — ^Ancient  Art — Art  in  Africa — Esqui- 
maux Drawings — The  Quippu  —  Picture-writing  —  Indian  Census 
Roll — Indian  Tombstones — lecture- writing  in  North  America — Indian 
Biography — Indian  Petition — Rock  Sculptures — Savage  Ornaments 
— Cheek  Studs — Labrets — Ornamentation  of  the  Skin — Tribe  Marks 
— Tattooing — Artificial  Alteration  of  Form — Ilairdressing — Feejee 
Ilead-Dresses 87 

CHAPTER  III. 
MARRIAGE  AND  RELATIONSHIP. 

The  Position  of  Women  among  Savages — Absence  of  Affection  in 
Marriage — Abi^ence  of  Marriage  —  Relationship  among  Savages  — 
Different  kinds  of  Marriage — Polyandry — Separation  of  Husband 
and  Wife — Absence  of  Marriage  Ceremony — Marriage  Ceremonies 
— Relationships  Independent  of  Marriage — South  Sea  System  of 
Relationship — Toda  System  of  Relationship— Prevalence  of  Adoption 
— The  Milk-tie — Original   or  Communal  Marriajze — Origin  of  Mar- 


CONTENTS. 


ziage— Bachofen's  Yiew»— Wrestling  for  Wiyee— Mliennan's  Views 
— The  True  Explanation — Origin  of  Msrriage  by  Capture — Pre« 
valence  of  Marriage  by  Capture — Originally  a  Reality — Subsequently 
a  Form — ^Hindostan— Oentral  India — Malay  Peninsula — SLalmucks — 
Tonguses — Eamchadales — ^Mongols — Koreans — Esquimaux — North 
.  and  South  Americans  —  Feejeeans  —  Polynesians  —  Philippine 
Islanders — ^Negritos  — ^Africa — Circassians — ^Europe— Rome — Poland 
— ^Russia — ^Britain — Explanation  of  Marriage  Ceremonies — Marriage 
by  Confarreatio— Expiation  for  Marriage — Babylonia — Armenia  ~ 
Balearic  Islands — Suppl3ring  guests  with  Temporary  Wives — Re- 
spect for  Courtesans — Exogamy — Origin  of  Exogamy — Prevalence 
of  Exogamy  —  Australia  —  Africa — Hindostan  —  Northern  Asia — 
China— Circassia — North  America — South  America — ^The  Causes 
of  Polygamy  —  Polyandry — Polyandry  Exceptional — The  System 
of  Levirate  —  Endogamy — The  Milk-tie  —  Relationship  through 
Females — Causes  and  Wide  Distribution  of  the  Custom — Neglect  of 
Paternal  Relation — Origin  of  Relationship  in  the  Male  Line — 
Change  from  Female  to  Male  Einship— System  of  Kinship  through 
Males— The  Present  System 67 

CHAPTER  IV. 

RELATIONSHIPS. 

On  the  Development  of  Relationships — Different  Systems  of  Relation- 
ships— Classification  of  Systems — Nature  of  the  Evidence — Custom 
of  Addressing  Persons  by  their  Relationship — Similarities  of  System 
among  the  Lower  liaces — Malayans — Feejeeans — Redskins — Nomen- 
clature of  Relationships — Effect  of  Female  Kinship  on  Systems  of 
lielationship — The  Hawaiian  System— American  Systems — Impor- 
tance of  the  Mother's  Brother  in  the  Family  System — The  Micmac 
System — ^Burmese  and  Japanese  Systems — ^Tbe  Wyandot  System — 
The  Tamil  and  Feejeean  Systems — Remarkable  Terms  in  Use — 
Explanation  of  the  Terms — System  of  the  Oneidas — Otawas — The 
Kaffir  System — Mohegans — Crees — Cbippewas — Summary  of  Red- 
skin Systems — Hindoo  Systems — Karens — Esquimaux — Remarkable 
Similarities — Indications  of  Progress — Incompleteness  of  Systems — 
Existing  Systems  Incompatible  with  the  Theory  of  Degradation — 
Evidence  of  Progress — No  Evidence  of  Degradation— Conclusion.  150 

CHAPTER  V. 

RELIGION. 

Mental  Inactivity  of  Savages— Religious  Characteristics  of  Savages- 
Religious  Characteristics  of  the  Ix>wer  Races  of  Man— Classification  of 
the  Lower  Religiona— Religions  according  to  Sanchoniaiho— Reli- 


CONTENTa.  xi 

PAOS 

gious  Condidon  of  the  Lowest  Bacea — ^Absence  of  BeUgion — Rudi- 
mentary Beligiona — ^Religiooa  Ideas  as  suggested  by  Sleep^Keli- 
gious  Ideas  as  suggested  by  Dreams — ^Nightmare — Shadows — 
Thunder — Spirits  regarded  as  Evil — Spirits  regarded  as  causing 
Disease — Madness  Reverenced — ^Belief  in  Witchcraft — ^Disbelief 
among  Savages  in  the  Existence  of  Natural  Death — Low  Ideas  of 
Spirits  entertained  by  Savages — Greek  and  Roman  Conceptions — 
Savage  Ideas  as  to  Eclipses — Various  Notions  as  to  Eclipses — ^Belief 
in  Ghosts — ^Future  Life  dependent  on  Mode  of  Death — ^Belief  in  the 
Plurality  of  Souls — Divination — Sorcery — Confusion  of  Name  and 
Thing — Confusion  of  Part  and  Whole — Similarity  of  Witchcraft — 
Wizards — Belief  in  Witchcraft  shared  by  European  Travellers — 
Sorcerers  not  necessarily  Impostors — ^Fasting — Religious  Dances-^ 
Smoking  as  a  Religious  Ceremony — ^Intoxication  as  a  Religious  Rite  193 

CHAPTER   VL 

RELIGION  {continued). 

Animal  Worship— Origin  of  Animal  Worship— The  Kobong — ^The 
Totem — ^Totemism  in  America — ^Totems  in  India  and  Polynesia — Ser- 
pent-Worahip— Serpent- Worship  in  Asia — Africa — Guinea — Why- 
dah — Agoye  the  Fetich  of  Whydah  —  ELafiraiia — ^Madagascar- 
Polynesia — America — ^The  Worship  of  other  Animals — Polynesia — 
Sandwich  Islandfl — Feejee  Islands — Siberia — China — ^India---Ceylon 
— ^The  Philippines — Africa — ^Madagascar — ^Europe— The  Custom  of 
Apologizing  to  Animals  for  Killing  them — ^The  Worship  of  the 
Celestial  Bodies — Savage  Tendency  to  Deification — Deities  not  sup- 
posed to  be  Supernatural — Life  attributed  to  Inanimate  Objects — 
Souls  Attributed  to  Inanimate  Objects — Tree- Worship  in  Europe — 
Egypt — ^Arabia — Congo— India  —  Ceylon  —  Hill  Tribes  of  India — 
Siberia  —  Sumatra  —  Philippines  —  Feejeeans  —  North  America — 
Mexico — Peru — Patagonia — Water- Worship —  Europe  —  Siberia — 
India — Africa — North  America — Central  iVmerica — ^The  Worship  of 
Stones — Attributes  of  the  God  Mercury — Siberia — ^ffindostan — ^New 
Zealand — ^The  Arabians — ^Phoenicians  in  Europe — Africa — Polynesia 
— Feejee  Islands — ^Micronesia — ^America — ^Rre- Worship— Vestals — 
Asia — ^America — Africa — Sun  and  Moon  Worship — ^America — India 
— ^Asia — ^Africa — Sundry  Worships 261 


CHAPTER  Vn. 
R£LlQlON  {concluded). 

Religion  of  Australians  —  Veddahs  —  Califomians  —  Bachapins  — 
Kaffirs— Fetichism — HindoHtan — Negroes — Fetichism  in  other  Races 
— North  America —  China — Siberia — ^Africa  —  Totemism — ^Develop- 


Zll 


CONTENTS. 


PAUK 

mental  and  Adaptational  ModiBcations  of  Religion — Myths — Sham- 
anism in  Siberia  —  Greenland  —  Pacific  Islands — ^Africa  —  India  — 
Idolatry — Origin  of  Idolatry — Connection  with  the  worship  of  An- 
cestors— India — Africa — ^Polynesia — Siberia — Solomon's  Explanation 
—  Idols  not  Mere  Emblems — Worship  of  Men — Worship  of  Chiefis 
— Worship  of  Travellers — The  Worship  of  Principles — Sacrifices 
— Confusion  of  the  Victim  with  the  Deity — Worship  of  the  Sacrifice 
— Eating  the  Sacrifice — Human  Sacrifices — Europe — America — The 
Jews  —  Temples  —  Priests  —  Mystery  Men — The  Soul — Ideas  of 
Heaven  —  The  Future  State  —  Creation — Prayer  —  Morality  —  The 
Progress  of  Religion — Science  and  Religion 312 


CHAPITER  VIII. 

CHARACTEB   AND   MORALS. 

Difficulty  of  ascertaining  the  Character  of  Savage  Races — Insecurity 
of  Life  and  Property  among  Savages — Progress  in  Morals — Moral 
Condition  of  Savages — Confusion  of  Family  Afiection  and  Moral 
Feeling — Absence  of  Moral  Feeling — Religion  not  necessarily  con- 
nected with  Morality — Future  Life  not  necessarily  one  of  Punish- 
ment or  Reward — liank  in  Heaven — Law  and  Ilight — Growth  of 
Moral  Feeling — Origin  of  Moral  Feeling i^TO 


CHAI^TER    IX. 
LANGUAGE. 

Gesture  Language — The  Origin  of  Language — All  Language  reducible 
to  a  Few  Root-words — Origin  of  Root- words — Onomatopoeia — Wear 
and  Tear  of  Words — Nicknames  and  Slang  Terms — Origin  of  the 
Terms  Father  and  Mother — Words  for  Father  and  Mother  in  various 
Ijanguages — The  Choice  of  Hoot-words — Poverty  of  Savage  lan- 
guages— Deficiency  in  Tcrmsof  Afi'eclion — Absence  of  Abstract  Terms 
— Deficiency  in  Numerals— Savage  Difficulties  in  Arithmetic — Use 
of  the  Fingers  in  Arithmetic,  as  shown  in  the  Names  of  Numerals 
— The  Origin  of  the  Decimal  System 401 


CHAPTER  X. 

LAWS. 

luiportiince  of  tho  Subj»  ct — Savage  1>aws  not  Founded  on  the  Family 
— Tyranny  of  FiiNluon  anion^  SnvngoH — Tyranny  of  Cu»^)nl  among 
SttvfljTfK-  SuptTStilious  ("uNtoiiis  -Kulort  relating  to  Legal  Cere- 
monies and  Contracts -Court  ]^iii>!uage— Giadulioub  of  Runk — Salu- 


CONTENTS.  xiii 

PAOB 

tations  and  Ceremonies — Conduct  of  Public  Business — Property  in 
I^and  —  Communal  Property  —  Laws  of  Inheritance  —  Absence  of 
Wills— Roman  Wills— Rights  of  Children— The  Vasu— Custom  ot 
Naming  Parents  after  Children — Laws  of  Inheritance — The  Punish- 
ment of  Crime — Regulated  Revenge — The  Laws  of  Property — Mani- 
fest and  Non-Manifest  Thieves — ^The  Wergild — General  Conclusion   431 


APPENDIX. 

PART    I. 

Difficulty  of  obtaining  Conclusive  Evidence — The  Stationary  Condi- 
tion of  Savages — No  Evidence  of  earlier  Civilisation — Evidence 
derivable  from  Domestic  Animals  and  Pottery — Indications  of  Pro- 
gress among  Savages  — Savages  not  incapable  of  Civilisation — ^In- 
digenous Origin  of  Mexican  Civilisation — Progress  as  indicated  by 
Language— Traces  of  Barbarism  in  Civilised  Countries — ^Arbitrary 
Customs — Unity  of  the  Human  Race — Mental  Differences  in  the 
Different  Races 466 

PART     II. 

The  Weapons  of  Monkeys — True  Nature  of  Barbarism — Sequence  of 
Customs — The  Diffusion  of  Mankind — The  Influence  of  External 
Conditions — The  Esquimaux — Original  and  Universal  Barbarism — 
Supposed  Inevitability  of  Degradation — Supposed  Evidence  of  De- 
gradation— The  Survival  of  Customs — Progress  of  Religious  Ideas — 
Fetichism — Totemism — Idolatry — The  True  Theory  of  the  Four 
Ages — Evidence  from  Crossed  Races — Similarity  existing  between 
Savages  and  Children — Language  of  Savages — Tendency  to  Redu- 
plications— Ancient  Ceremonies  and  Modem  Games — Development 
of  the  Individual,  and  that  of  the  Species 479 


NOTES 609 


INDEX 616 


ILLUSTBATIONS 


•«o*- 


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES. 

FsoimflracB— Vow  or  SroiOEBxifOB.    From  an  original  drawing  by  H. 

Gnset  7b  face  TUU 

rULTE  PAOB 

I.    Sketch   of  Mammoth,  on  a  piece  of  ivory,  found  in  the  Bock- 
shelter  at  La  Madeleine,  in  the  Dordogne  .        .  To  face        37 

n.    FnnnBAy  Modbs  of  Dnsssiiro  thb  Haib.    After  Williama.    *Fiji 

andthe  Fijian8,'p.  158 To  fact        66 

nL    Ihdiam   Sacbkb    Stohis.     After  Forbes  Leslie.    *  Early  Baces  of 

Scotland,'  toL  ii.  p.  464 To  face      296 

IV.    A  HuMAX  Sac&ifici  nr  Tahiti.    After  Cook    .  .     To  face      867 

V.    Oboup  of  Sacbbd  Stomxs  or  thb  Bskhaw.    After  Forbes  Leslie. 

*Eariy  Baces  of  Scotland,'  toI.  ii.  p.  460   .  .     To  face      861 


DESCBIPTION  OF  THE  FI0UBE8. 

fig. 
1.    Gnoup  OF  Bnnnnn,    Fsom  a  photograph  presented  to  me  by  M.  le 

Marquis  de  Vibraye 88 

2-4.  Dbawimos   ok   Esquimattx   Bomb   Dbuxbows^     Presented  to  the 

Ashmolean  Mnsenm  at  Oxford,  by  Captain  Beechey  89 

6.    NoBTH  Ambbicab  Ibdiab  Cbbsus  Boll.    After  Schoolcraft    'His- 
tory of  the  Indian  Tribes,'  voL  ii.  p.  222  .        .        46 

6.  IjrDiAB   Obatbfost.    After  Schoolcraft     'History  of  the  Indian 

Tribes,' ToL  i.  p.  866 47 

7.  Ibmav   Obatbpost.    After   Schoolcraft     'History  of  the  Indian 

Tribes,'  toL  i.  p.  366 47 


xvi  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Fia.  PAOB 

8.  Indian  Bark  Lsttrb.     Aft«r  Schoolcraft.     *  History  of  the  Indian 

Tribes,'  voL  i.  p.  338 48 

9.  Indian  Bark  Lettbb.     After  Schoolcraft.     *  History  of  the  Indian 

Tribes/  Yol.  i.  p.  336 50 

10.  Indian  Bark  Lbttbr.    After  Schoolcraft     *  History  of  the  Indian 

Tribes/  voL  i.  p.  336 51 

11.  Indian    Pbtition.      After  Schoolcraft      'History  of   the  Indian 

Tribes/ vol.  i.  p.  416 52 

12.  Carolinb  Islander.    After  Freycinet.    *  Voyage  antour  da  Monde/ 

pi.  57 63 

13.  New  Zealand  Hbad.    After  Freycinet    '  Voyage  antonr  da  Monde,' 

pi.  107 64 

14.  New  Zealand  Head.    After  Freycinet.    '  Voyage  aatoar  da  Monde,' 

pi.  107 64 

16-17.    SHOrLDBR-BLADBS  PREPARED  FOR  DiTINATION.     AftOT  Klemm,  *  AIL 

Coltor.  d.  Mens.'  toI.  iii.  p.  200 231 

18.  A  Sacbbd  Dance  of  the  Viboinians.    Lafitao,  vol.  ii.  p.  135  .  248 

19.  AooTB.    An  Idol  of  Whiddah.    Astley^s  *  Coll.  of  Voyages,'  vol.  iii. 

p.  50 261 

20.  Sacred  Stones.    F\ji  Islands.    Williams,  loc,  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  220  302 


LIST  OF  THE  PEINCIPAL  WORKS  QUOTED 

m  THIS  VOLUME. 


■  Ot 


AdeluDg,  Mithridates. 

Arago,   Narrative  of  a  Voyage    round 

the  World. 
Arbousset  and  Daumas.    Tour  at  the 

Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
Asiatic  Eesearches. 
Astley,  Collection  of  Voyages. 
Atkinson,  Oriental  and  Western  Siberia. 

„        Upper  and  Lower  Amoor. 
Azara,   Voyages  dans  TAm^nqne  Me- 

ridionale. 

Hachofen,  Das  Mutterrecht. 

Baikie,  Exploring  Voyage  np  the  rivers 

Kwora  and  Binue. 
Bain,  Mental  and  Moral  Science. 
Baker,  Albert  Nyanza. 

„      Nile  Tributaries  of  Abyssinia. 
Barth,  Travels  in  Central  Africa. 
Battel,  The  strange  Adventures  of  (Pin- 

kerton's  Voyages  and  Travels). 
Beechey,  Narrative  of  a  Voyage  to  the 

Pacific 
Bosman,  Description  of    Guinea  (Pin- 

kerton's  Voyages  and  Travels). 
Brett,  Indian  Tribes  of  Guiana. 
Brooke,  Lapland. 
Bruce,  Travels  in  Abyssinia. 
Burchell,  Travels  in  Southern  Africa. 
Burton,  Lake  Kegions  of  Africa. 

„      First  Footsteps  in  Africa. 

„      Abbeokuta   and   the   Cameron 

Mountains. 

.,      City  of  the  Saints. 

„      M  i ssion  to  the  King  of  Dahome. 


Cailli^,  Travels  to  Timbuctoo. 
Callaway,    Religious    System    of    tlie 

Amazulu. 
Campbell,  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands. 
Wild  Tribes  of  B3ioudistan. 
Carver,  Travels  in  North  America. 
Casalis,  The  Basutos.' 
Catlin,  North  American  Indians. 
Chapman,  Travels  in  S.  Africa. 
Charlevoix,  History  of  Paraguay. 
Clarke,  Travels. 
Collins,  English  Colony  in  New  South 

Wales. 
Cook,  Voyage  round  the  World.     (In 

Hawkesworth*s  Voyages.) 

„    Second  Voyage  towards  the  Soutli 

Pole. 

„    Third   Voyage    to    the    Pacific 

Ocean. 
Cox,  Manual  of  Mythology. 
Crantz,  History  of  Greenland. 

Dalton,     Descriptive     Ethnolrgy     of 

BengaL 
Darwin,    Animals    and  Plants  under 

Domestication. 

Origin  of  Species. 
Beseatches  in  Geology    and 

Natural  History. 
Davis,  Dr.  J.  B.,  Thesaurus  Craniorum. 
Davis,  The  Chinese. 
Davy,  Account  of  Ceylon. 
Deane,  Worship  of  the  Serpent  traced 

throughout  the  World. 
De  Brosses,  Du  CultedesDieuxfi&tiches. 


I* 


If 


a 


xvm 


LIST  OF  W0BK8  QUOTED. 


Be  Hell,  Steppes  of  the  Caspian  Sea. 
Benham,  Travols  in  Africa. 
Bopons,  Travels  in  South  America. 
Bias,  Biccionario  da  Lingua  Tupj. 
BicfS)nbacb,  New  Zealand. 
BobrizhofTor,  History  of  the  Abi pones. 
Bruiy,  Adventures  in  Madagascar. 
Babois,  Bescription  of  tlio  People  of 

India. 
Bunn,  The  Oregon  Territory. 
Bulaure,  Histoire  abr^g6e  des  differents 

Cultos. 
B'Un-ille,  Voyage  au  P61e  sud. 

■ 

Earle,  Kesidonco  in  New  Zealand. 

Egedo,  Greenland. 

Ellis,  Three  Visits  to  Madagascar. 

„    PolyneHian  Researches. 
Erman,  Travels  in  Silieria. 
KrHkine,  Western  Pacific. 
Eyre,  Biscoveriee  in  Central  Australia. 

Farrar,  Origin  of  Language. 

FergusHon,  Tree  and  Scri>ent  Worship. 

Fitzroy,  Vojrage  of  the   *  Adventure  ' 
and  'lieagle.' 

Forbes  Leslie,  Early  Kacos  of  Scotland, 

Fonttor,   Observations  made  during  a 
Voyage  round  the  World. 

Furnytli,  Ili^hlandM  of  Central  India. 

Franklin,  Journey  U)  the  Shores  of  the 
Polar  S<'a. 

FraKcr,  TravelH  in  KcMrdistjin  and  Me- 
sopotamia. 

„      Tour  to  the  Himalaya  Moun- 
tains. 

F«'ycinet,  Voyage  autour  du  Monde. 

OaiuN,  CommentaricM  on  Konmu  Law. 
Oama,    Iiewripcion  hintorioa  y  crono- 

logica  do  Ian  Podnui  de  Mexico. 
Oari'ilasiKi  flo  la  Vega,  Commentaries  of 

the  Vncas. 

Oanlnirr,  Faiths  of  the  World. 

Oaltoii,  Tropical  South  Afru^a. 

Oihb«,  II.  IL,  lO^manco  of  the  ( lievelerc 
AsNii^im. 

Oinnl-Teiilon,   Jjt  Men*  ehex  ccrl.-iins 

Peuplft  dA  rAnti(|iiiti\ 
Oladslone,  Juvcntus  Miiniii. 
(iQguet.  Ih-  rOrigine  (U-n  liois.  ilcs  An.i 

et  dtm  Sciences. 


Graah,  Voyage  to  Greenland. 
Gray,  Travels  in  Western  Africa. 
Grey,  Sir  G.,  Polynesian  Mjrthology. 
„  Journal  of  two  Expeditions 

of   Biscovery    in  North- West   and 

Western  Australia. 

Hale,  Ethnology  of  the  United  States 

Exploring  Expedition. 
„      Ethnology  and  Philology. 
Hallam,  History  of  England. 
Hamilton,  Account  of  the  Kingdom  of 

Nepaul. 
Han  way,  Travels  in  Persia. 
Hayes,  Open  Polar  Sea. 
Hawkesworth,  Voyages  of  Biscovery  in 

the  Southern  Hemisphere. 
Heame,      Voyage    to    the    Northern 

Ocean. 
Herodotus. 

Hooper,  Tents  of  the  Tuski. 
num1)oldt,  Personal  Rosearches. 
Hunter,  Comparative  Bictionary  of  the 

Non-Aryan  Languages  of  India  and 

High  Asia. 

„      The  Annals  of  Rural  Bengal. 
Hume,  ICssays. 

„      History  of  England. 

Inman,  Ancient  Faiths  in  Ancient 
Names. 

James,  Expedition  to  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains. 

Jones.  Antiquities  of  the  Southern 
IndiauF. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Institution. 

Jukes,  Voyage  of  the  '  Fly.* 

Kames,  Iliston*  of  Man. 

Ki-nrick,  Phoenicia. 

Kepjjel,  Visit  to  the  Jn<lian  Archipelngo. 

„      Expi'dition  to  Borneo. 
Klcmm,    Allgemeino   Culturgesehichte 

dor  Mcnst'lilieit. 
.,        Werkzeiigo  nn<l  Waffen. 
Kwlle.  Polyglotta  Africana. 
KolU'ii.  History  of  the  Cape  of  Goo<l 

Kolfl",  Voya^  of  the  *  Dourga.* 
Kotzebue,  V(»yag«?  round  the  World. 


LIST  OF  WORKS  QUOTED. 


XIX 


Labaty  Voyage  anz  lies  de  rAmerique. 
Labillardidre»  Voyage  in  search  of  La 

Perouse. 
Lafitaujkloeurs  des  Sauvages  am^ricains. 
Laird,  Expedition  into  the  Interior  of 

Africa. 
Lander  (R.  and  J.),  Niger  Expedition. 
Lang,  Aborigines  of  Australia. 
Latham,  Descriptive  Ethnology. 
Lecky,  History  of  Bationalism. 
Lewin,  Hill  Tracts  of  Cbittagong* 
Lichtenstein,  Travels  in  South  Africa. 
Livingstone,   Missionary  Travels    aod 

Researches  in  South  Africa. 
„      Expedition  to  the  Zambesi. 
Locke,  On  the  Human  Understanding. 
Lubbock,  Prehistoric  Times. 
Lyon,  Journal  during  the    Voyage  of 

Captain  Parry. 


McGillivray,  Voyage  of  the   'Rattle- 
snake.' 

HacLean,  Compendium  of  Kaffir  Laws 
and  Customs. 

M'Lennan,  Primitive  Marriage. 

Maine,  Ancient  Law. 

Marco  Polo,  Travels  of. 

Marsden,  History  of  Sumatra. 

Mariner,  Tonga  Islands. 

Martins,  Von  dem  Rechtszustande  unter 
den  Urcinwohnem  Bmsiliens. 

Merolla,  Voyage  to  Congo  (PinkertOD*s 
Voyages  and  Travels). 

Hetz,  Tribes  of  the  Neilgherries. 

Metlahkatlah,  published  by  the  Church 
Missionary  Society. 

Middendorf,  Sibirische  Reise. 

MoUhausf'n,  Journey  to  the  Pacific. 

Monboddo,  Origin  and  Progress  of  Lan- 
guage. 

Montesquieu,  Enprit  des  Lois. 

Moser,  The  Caucasus  and  its  People. 

Moor,   Notices    of    the  Indian  Archi- 
pelago. 

Morgan,  Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phila- 
delphia. 

Mouhot,  Travels  in  the  Central  Parts 
of  Indo-China. 

Muller  (Max),  Chips  from  a  German 
Workshop. 


Miiller  (Max),  Lectures  on  Language, 
First  Series. 

,»  Lectures  on  Language, 

Second  Series. 
Miiller  (F.  G.),  Geschichte  dep  Ameri- 

kanischen  Urreligionen. 
Muller  (C.  0.),  Scientific  Mythology. 
„      (C.  S.),   Description   de  toutes 
les  Nations  de  I'Empire  de  Russe. 

Nilsson,  On  the  Stone  Age. 

Olaus  Magnus. 
Ortolan,  Justinian. 

Pallas,  Voyages  en  difierentes  Provinces 

de  I'Empire  de  Russie. 

„     Voyages  entrepris  dans  les  Gou- 

vemements  m^ridionaux  de  I'Empire 

de  Russie. 
Park,  Travels. 
Parkyns,  Life  in  Abyssinia. 
Perouse,  La,  Voyage  autour  du  Monde. 
Pliny,  Natural  History. 
Prescott,  History  of  Peru. 

„         History  of  Mexico. 
Prichard,  Natural  History  of  Man. 
Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy 

of  Arts  and  Sciences. 
Proceedings  of  the  Boston  Society  of 

Natural  History. 
Proyart,  History  of  Loango(Pinkerton's 

Voyages  and  Travels). 

Raffles,  History  of  Java. 

Report  of  Committee  of  Legislative^ 
Council  of  Victoria  on  the  Abori- 
gines. 

Reade,  Savage  Africa. 

Renan,  Origine  du  Langage. 

Richardson,  Journal  of  a  Boat  Journey. 

Robertson,  History  of  America. 

Ross,  Voyage  to  Baffin's  Bay. 

Rutimeyer,  Beitr.   zur  Kenntniss  der 
fossilen  Pferde. 

Scherzer,  Voyage  of  the  *  Novara.' 
Schoolcraft,  Indian  Tribes. 
Sccman,  A  Mission  to  Viti. 
Shortland,  Traditions  and  Superstitions 
of  the  Now  Zealanders. 


XX 


LIST  OF  WORKS  QUOTED. 


»» 


>i 


f« 


Smith  A.,  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments, 

and  Dissertation  on  tho  Origin  of 

Languages. 

G.   (Bishop  of  Victoria),    Ten 

Weeks  in  Japan. 

I.  History  of  Virginia. 
W.,  Voyage  to  Guinea. 
Smithsonian  Reports. 
Snowden  and  Prall,  Grammar  of  the 

Mpongwe  Language.     New  York. 
Speke,  Discovery  of  the  Source  of  the 

NUe. 
Spencer's  Principles  of  Biology. 
Spiers,  Life  in  Ancient  India. 
Spix  and  Martius,  Travels  in  Brazil. 
Sproat,  Scenes  and  Studies  of  Savage 

Life. 
Squiers,  Serpent  Symbol  in  America. 
Stephens,  South  Australia. 
Stevenson,  Travels  in  South  America. 
Strahlenbeig,  Description  of    Kussia, 

Siberia,  and  Great  Tartary. 
Systems  of  Land  Tenure.  Published  by 

the  Cobden  Club. 

Tacitus. 

Tanner,  Narrative  of  a  Captivity  among 
the  North  American  Indians. 

Taylor,  New  Zealand  and  its  Inhabi- 
tants. 

Tertre,  History  of  the  Caribby  Islands. 

Tindall,  Grammar  and  Dictionary  of 
the  Namaqua  (Hottentot)  Language. 

Transactions  of  the  Americ.  Antiq.Soc. 

Transactions  of  the  EthnologicalSociety. 


Transactions  of  the  B.  S.  of  Victoria. 
Tuckey,  Expedition  to  Explore  Biver 

Zaire. 
Turner,  Nineteen  Years  in  Polynesia. 
Tylor,  Anahuac. 

„     Early  History  of  Man. 

XJpham,  History  and  Doctrine  of  Budd- 
hism  in  Ceylon. 

Vancouver,  Voyage  of  Discovery. 
Vogt,  Lectures  on  Man. 

Waitz,  Anthropologic  der  Natorvolker. 

Wake,  Chapters  on  Man. 

Wallace,  Travels  in  the  Amazons  and 
Rio  Negro. 

Wallace,  Malay  Archipelago. 

Watson  and  Kaye,  The  People  of  India. 

Wedgwood,  Introduction  to  the  Diction- 
ary of  the  English  Language. 
„  Origin  of  Language. 

Whately    (Archbishop     of      Dublin). 
Political  Economy. 

Whipple,  Report  on  the  Indian  Tribes. 

Wilkes,  United  States  Exploring  Expe- 
dition. 

Williams,  Fiji  and  the  Fijians. 

Wood,  Natural  History  of  Man. 

Wrangel,  Siberia  and  the  Polar  Sea. 

Wright,  Superstitions  of  England. 

Wuttke,  Die  ersten  Stufen  der  Gesch. 
der  Menschheit. 

Yato,  New  Zealand. 


Erratum. 


P.  317,  line  10, /or  'Umklanga*  read  '  Utlilanga.' 


THE  OEIGm  OF  CIVILISATION 


(^C. 


■«o*- 


CHAPTER  L 


INTBODUCTION. 


rE  study  of  the  lower  races  of  men,  apart  from  the 
direct  importance  which  it  possesses  in  an  empire 
like  ours,  is  of  great  interest  from  three  points  of  view. 
In  the  first  place,  the  condition  and  habits  of  existing 
savages  resemble  in  many  ways,  though  not  in  all,  those 
of  our  own  ancestors  in  a  period  now  long  gone  by :  ^ 
in  the  second,  they  illustrate  much  of  what  is  pass- 
ing among  ourselves,  many  customs  which  have  evi- 
dently no  relation  to  present  circumstances ;  and  even 
some  ideas  which  are  rooted  in  our  minds,  as  fossils  are 
imbedded  in  the  soil  :  while,  thirdly,  we  can  even,  by 
means  of  them,  penetrate  some  of  that  mist  which 
separates  the  present  from  the  future. 

In  fact,  the  lower  races  of  men  in  various  parts  of 

1  I  am  Terj  glad  to  find  that  so  the  general  condosions  at  which  I 

able  and  caatioua  a  critic  as  Mr.  have  arriyed.    See  hia  Physics  and 

Bagehot  has  expressed  his  assent  to  Politics,  1872;  espedally  the    ex« 

the  line  of  nrgament  here  used,  and  cellent  chapter  on  '  Nation-making.' 

r 


2  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  SUBJECT. 

the  world  present  US  with  illustrations  of  a  social  condition 
ruder,  and  more  archaic,  than  any  which  history  records 
as  having  ever  existed  among  the  more  advanced  races. 
Even  among  civilised  peoples,  however,  we  find  traces 
of  former  barbarism.  Not  only  is  language  in  this  re- 
spect very  instructive ;  but  the  laws  and  customs  are 
often  of  very  ancient  origin,  and  contain  symbols  which 
are  the  relics  of  former  realities.  Thus  the  use  of  stone 
knives  in  certain  Egyptian  ceremonies  points  to  a  tune 
when  that  people  habitually  used  stone  implements. 
Again,  the  form  of  marriage  by  coemptio  among  the 
Romans  indicates  a  period  in  their  history  when  they 
habitually  bought  wives,  as  so  many  savage  tribes  do 
now.  So  also  the  form  of  capture  in  weddings  can  only 
be  explained  by  the  hypothesis  that  the  capture  of  wives 
was  once  a  stem  reality.  In  such  cases  as  these  the 
sequence  is  obvious.  The  use  of  stone  knives  in  cer- 
tain ceremonies  is  evidently  a  case  of  survival,  not  of 
invention  ;  and  in  the  same  way  the  form  of  capture  in 
weddings  would  naturally  survive  the  actual  reality, 
while  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  reality  would  rise  out 
of  the  symbol. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  condition 
of  primitive  man  is  correctly  represented  by  even  the 
lowest  of  existing  races.  The  very  fact  that  the  latter 
have  remained  stationary,  that  their  manners,  habits, 
and  mode  of  life  have  continued  almost  unaltered  for 
generations,  has  created  a  strict,  and  often  compli- 
cated, system  of  customs,  from  which  the  former  was 
necessarily  fi-ee,  but  which  has  in  some  cases  gradually 
acquired  even  more  than  the  force  of  law.  In  order, 
then,  to  arrive  at  a  clear  idea  of  this  primitive  con- 


NATURE  OF  ,THE  EVIDENCE.  3 

dition  of  the  human  race,  we  must  eUminate  these 
customs  from  our  conception  of  that  condition ;  and 
this  we  are  best  enabled  to  do  by  a  comparison  of 
savage  tribes  belonging  to  different  femilies  of  the 
human  race. 

Although  the  differences  of  race,  of  geographical  posi- 
tion, and  of  their  general  surroundings,  have  necessarily 
led  to  considerable  divergencies  in  the  social  and  mental 
development  of  different  tribes,  still  I  have  endeavoured 
to  show  that,  in  the  main,  the  development  of  higher 
and  better  ideas  as  to  Marriage,  Relationships,  Law, 
Religion,  &c.,  has  followed  in  its  earlier  stages  a  very 
similar  course  even  in  the  most  distinct  races  of  man; 
and  when  we  find  customs  and  ideas  which  to  us  seem 
absurd  or  illogical,  reappearing  in  distinct  families  of 
mankind  at  the  same  stage  of  development,  we  may  safely 
conclude  that,  however  absurd  they  may  appear  to  us, 
they  are  founded  on  the  innate  characteristics  of  hu- 
manity, and  are  no  unmeaning  or  insignificant  accidents. 
It  has  been  said  by  some  writers  that  savages  are  merely 
the  degenerate  descendants  of  more  civilised  ancestors, 
and  I  am  far  from  denying  that  there  are  cases  of  retro- 
gression. But,  in  the  first  place,  a  tribe  which  had  sunk 
from  civilisation  into  barbarism  would  by  no  means  ex- 
hibit the  same  features,  as  one  which  had  risen  into  bar- 
barism from  savagery.  And,  what  is  even  more  im- 
portant, races  which  fall  back  in  civilisation,  diminish  in 
numbers.  The  whole  history  of  man  shows  how  the 
stronger  and  progressive,  increase  in  numbers  and  drive 
out  the  weaker  and  lower  races.  I  have  endeavoured, 
for  instance,  to  show  that  the  ideas  on  the  subject  of  re- 

B  2 


4  EVIDENOE  OF,  PB00BE88. 

lationships  which  are  prevalent  among  the  less  advanced 
races,  would  naturally  arise  in  the  course  of  progress, 
but  are  inconsistent  with  the  theory  of  degradation.    So, 
again,  a  people  who  trusted  in  luck  would  have   no 
chance  in  the  struggle  for  existence  against  one  which 
believed  in  law :  if  we  find  a  belief  in  fetichism  inter- 
woven with  the  religion  of  even  the  highest  races,  it  is 
because  these  races  were  Fetichists  before  they  became 
Buddhist,  Mahometan,  or  Christian.     A  tribe  in  which 
the  feeling  of  relationship  was  weak  and  ill-defined  would, 
cceteris  parilms^  have  no  chance  in  a  struggle  with  one 
in  which  the  family  feeling  was  strong  and  well-organ- 
ised.    Hence,  although  we  are  very  far  as  yet  from 
having  arrived  at  such  a  result,  I  believe  it  will  be  pos- 
sible for  us  to  realise  to  ourselves  a  condition  through 
which  our  ancestors  must  have  passed  in  pre-historic 
times — one  far  more  primitive  than  any  of  which  we 
have  at  present  an  actual  example. 

At  any  rate  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  careful 
study  of  manners  and  customs,  traditions  and  super- 
stitions, will  eventually  solve  many  difficult  problems 
of  Ethnology.  This  mode  of  research,  however,  requires 
to  be  used  with  great  caution,  and  has  in  fact  led  to 
many  erroneous  conclusions.  For  instance,  in  more 
than  one  case  savage  races  have  been  regarded  as  de- 
scendants of  the  Ten  Tribes,  because  their  customs 
oflFer  some  smgular  points  of  resemblance  with  those  re- 
corded in  the  Pentateuch.  In  these  cases,  more  pro- 
fbimd  acquaintance  with  the  manners  and  customs  of 
savage  races  would  have  shown  that  these  coincidences, 
00  far  from  being,  as  supposed,  peculiar  to  these  tribes, 
were,  in  fact,  common  to  several,  if  not  to  all,  the  prin- 


DIFFIOULTY  OF  THE  SUBJECT.  « 

cipal  races  of  mankind.  Much  careful  study  will,  there^ 
fore,  be  required  before  this  class  of  evidence  can  be  used 
with  safety,  though  I  doubt  not  that  eventually  it  will 
be  found  most  instructive. 

The  study  of  savage  life  is,  moreover,  of  peculiar  im- 
portance to  us,  forming,  as  we  do,  part  of  a  great  empire, 
Mrith  colonies  in  every  part  of  the  world,  and  fellow- 
citizens  in  every  stage  of  civilisation.  Of  this  our  Indian 
possessions  afford  us  a  good  illustration.  *  We  have 
studied  the  lowland  population,'  says  Mr.  Hunter,^  '  as 
no  conquerors  ever  studied  or  understood  a  subject 
race.  Their  history,  their  habits,  their  requirements, 
their  very  weaknesses  and  prejudices  are  known,  and 
furnish  a  basis  for  those  political  inductions  which, 
under  the  titles  of  administrative  foresight  and  timely 
reform,  meet  popular  movements  half-way.  The  East 
India  Company  grudged  neither  honours  nor  solid  re- 
wards to  any  meritorious  effort  to  illustrate  the  peoples 
whom  it  ruled/  ....  .  ,  . 
*  The  practical  result  now  appears.  English  admi- 
nistrators  understand  the  Aryan,  and  are  almost  totally 
ignorant  of  the  non-Aryan,  population  of  India.  They 
know  with  remarkable  precision  how  a  measure  will  he 
received  by  the  higher  or  purely  Aryan  ranks  of  the 
community ;  they  can  foresee  with  less  certainty  its 
effect  upon  the  lower  or  semi- Aryan  classes,  but  they 
neither  know  nor  venture  to  predict  the  results  of  any 
line  of  action  among  the  non- Aryan  tribes.  Political 
calculations  are  impossible  without  a  knowledge  of  the 
people.     But  the  evil  does  not  stop  here.    In  the  void 

'  Non-ArjAn  Languages  of  India,  p.  2. 


C  DIFFICULTY  OF  THE  SUBJECT. 

'  left  by  ignorance,  prejudice  has  taken  up  its  seat,  and 
'  the  calamity  of  the  non- Aryan  races  is  not  merely  that 

*  they  are  not  understood,  but  that  they  are  misrepre- 

*  sented.' 

Well,  therefore,  has  it  been  observed  by  Sir  Henry 
Maine,  in  his  excellent  work  on  'Ancient  Law,'  that,  *even 
if  they  gave  more  trouble  than  they  do,  no  pains  would 
be  wasted  in  ascertaining  the  germs  out  of  which  has 
assuredly  been  unfolded  every  form  of  moral  restraint 
which  controls  our  actions  and  shapes  our  conduct  at 
the  present  moment.  The  rudiments  of  the  social 
state,'  he  adds,  *  so  far  as  they  are  known  to  us  at  all, 
are  known  through  testimony  of  three  sorts — ^accounts 
by  contemporary  observers  of  civilisations  less  advanced 
than  their  own,  the  records  which  particular  races  have 
preserved  concerning  their  primitive  history,  and 
ancient  law.  The  first  kind  of  evidence  is  the  best  we 
could  have  expected.  As  societies  do  not  advance 
concurrently,  but  at  different  rates  of  progress,  there 
have  been  epochs  at  which  men  trained  to  habits  of 
methodical  observation  have  really  been  in  a  position 
to  watch  and  describe  the  infancy  of  mankind.'  ^  He 
refers  particularly  to  Tacitus,  whom  he  praises  for  hav- 
ing *  made  the  most  of  such  an  opportunity  ;'  adding, 
however,  *  but  the  **  Germany,"  unlike  most  celebrated 

*  classical  books,  has  not  induced  others  to  follow  the 

*  excellent  example  set  by  its  author,  and  the  amount  of 

*  this  sort  of  testimony  which  we  possess  is  exceedingly 

*  small.' 

This  is,  however,  I  think,  far  from  being  really 

'  Maine's  Ancient  I^w,  p.  120. 


MENTAL  CONDITION  OF  SAVAGES.  7 

the  case.     At  all  epochs  some  ^  men  trained  to  habits 

*  of  methodical  observation  have  really  been  in  a  posi- 

*  tion  to  watch  and  describe  the  infancy  of  mankind/  and 
the  testimony  of  our  modem  travellers  is  of  the  same 
nature  as  that  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  Tacitus. 

It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  our  information 
with  reference  to  the  social  and  moral  condition  of  the 
lower  races  of  man  is  certainly  very  far  from  being 
satisfactory,  either  in  extent  or  in  accuracy.  Travellers 
naturally  find  it  far  easier  to  describe  the  houses, 
boats,  food,  dress,  weapons,  and  implements  of  savages, 
than  to  understand  their  thoughts  and  feelings.  The 
whole  mental  condition  of  a  savage  is  so  different 
from  ours,  that  it  is  often  very  difficult  to  follow  what 
is  passing  in  his  mind,  or  to  understand  the  motives 
by  which  he  is  influenced.  Many  things  appear  natural 
and  almost  self-evident  to  him,  which  produce  a  very 
different  impression  on  us.  *  What ! '  said  a  negro  to 
Burton,  *  am  I  to  starve,  while  my  sister  has  children 

*  whom  she  can  sell  ? ' 

Though  savages  always  have  a  reason,  such  as  it  is, 
for  what  they  do  and  what  they  believe,  their  reasons 
often  are  very  absurd.  Moreover,  the  difficulty  of 
ascertaining  what  is  passing  in  their  minds  is  of  course 
much  enhanced  by  the  difficulty  of  communicating 
with  them.  This  has  produced  many  laughable  mis- 
takes. Thus,  when  Labillardifere  enquired  of  the 
Friendly  Islanders  the  word  for  1,000,000,  they  seem 
to  have  thought  the  question  absurd,  and  answered  him 
by  a  word  which  apparently  has  no  meaning  ;  when  he 
asked  for  10,000,000,  they  said  Maoalai,'  which  I  will 


8  EBB0B8  ABI8ING  FBOM 

leave  unexplained  ;  for  100,000,000,  ^  laonnooa,'  tibat 

is  to  say,  *  nonsense  ; '  while  for  the  higher  numbers 
they  gave  him  certain  coarse  expressions,  which  he  has 
gravely  published  in  his  table  of  numerals. 

A  mistake  made  by  Darapier  led  to  more  serious 
results.  He  had  met  some  Australians,  and  appre- 
hending an  attack,  he  says  : — *  I  discharged  my  gun  to 

*  scare  them,  but  avoided  shooting  any  of  them  ;  till 
'  finding  the  yoimg  man  in  great  danger  from  them, 

*  and  myself  in  some,  and  that  though  the  gun  had  a 

*  little  frightened  them  at  first,  yet  thet/  had  soon  learnt 

*  to  despise  itj  tossing  up  their  hands,  and  crying  "  Pooh, 
'  "  pooh,  pooh ! ''  and  coming  on  afresh  with  a  great  noise, 
'  I  thought  it  high  time  to  charge  again,  and  shoot  one 
'  of  them,  which  I  did.     The  rest,  seeing  him  fall,  made 

*  a  stand  again,  and  my  young  man  took  the  opportunity 

*  to  disengage  himself,  and  come  ofi^  to  me  ;  my  other 
^  man  also  was  with  me,  who  had  done  nothing  all  this 
^  while,  having  come  out  unarmed  ;  and  I  returned 
'  back  with  my  men,  designing  to  attempt  the  natives 

*  no  farther,  being  very  sorry  for  what  had  happened 

*  already.'  ^  '  Pooh,  pooh,'  however,  or  *  puff,  puff,'  is 
the  name  which  savages,  like  children,  naturally  apply 
to  guns. 

Another  source  of  error  is,  that  savages  are  often 
reluctant  to  contradict  what  is  said  to  them.  Living- 
stone calls  special  attention  to  this  as  a  charac* 
teristic  of  the  natives  of  Africa.'  Mr.  Oldfield,'  again, 
speaking  of  the  Australians,  tells  us :— .'  I  have  found 

*  Pinkorton's  Vojagos,  vol.  xi.  p.  473. 
'  Expedition  to  tho  Zambesi^  p.  309. 
»  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc,  N.S.,  vol  iii.  p.  256. 


IGNORANCE  OF  LANGUAGE.  9 

this  hafait  of  non-oontradiction  to  stand  very  much 
in  my  way  when  making  enquiries  of  them,  for,  as 
my  knowledge  of  their  language  was  only  sufficient 
to  enable  me  to  seek  information  on  some  points  by 
putting  suggestive  questions,  in  which  they  im- 
mediately concurred,  I  was  frequently  driven  nearly 
to  my  wits'  end  to  arrive  at  the  truth.  A  native  once 
brought  me  in  some  specimens  of  a  species  of  euca- 
lyptus,  and  being  desirous  of  ascertaining  the  habit  of 
the  plants  I  asked,  ^*  A  tall  tree?  "  to  which  his  ready 
answer  was  in  the  affirmative.  Not  feeling  quite 
satisfied,  I  again  demanded,  ^^  A  low  bush?  "  to  which 
"  Yes,"  was  also  the  response.' 
Again,  the  mind  of  the  savage,  like  that  of  the  child, 
is  easily  &tigued,  and  he  will  then  give  random  answers, 
to  spare  himself  the  trouble  of  thought.  Speaking  of 
the  Ahts  (N.W.  America),  Mr.  Sproat  ^  says  : — *The 
^  native  mind,  to  an  educated  man,  seems  generally  to 

*  be  asleep  ;  and  if  you  suddenly  ask  a  novel  question, 

*  you  have  to  repeat  it  while  the  mind  of  the  savage  is 
^  awaking,  and  to  speak  with  emphasis  until  he  has 

*  quite  got  your  meaning.  This  may  partly  arise  from 
^  the  questioner's  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  language ; 
^  still,  I  think,  not  entirely,   as  the  savage  may  be 

*  observed  occasionally  to  become  forgetfiil  when  volun- 
^  tarily  communicating  information.  On  his  attention 
^  being  fully  aroused,  he  often  shows  much  quickness 
Mn  reply  and  ingenuity  in  argument.  But  a  short 
^  conversation  wearies  him,  particularly  if  questions  are 

*  asked  that  require  efforts  of  thought  or  memory  on 

>  SoeDefl  and  Studies  of  Savage  Life,  p.  120. 


10  CONDITION  OF  THE 

*  his  part.     The  mind  of  the  savage  then  appears  to 

*  rock  to  and  fro  out  of  mere  weakness,  and  he  tells  lies 

*  and  talks  nonsense.' 

^  I  frequently  enquired  of  the  negroes,'  says  Park, 

*  what  became  of  the  sun  during  the  night,  and  whether 
^  we  should  see  the  same  sun,  or  a  different  one,  in  the 

*  morning ;  but  I  found  that  they  considered  the  ques- 

*  tion  as  very  childish.     The  subject  appeared  to  them 

*  as  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  human  investigation ; 

*  they  had  never  indulged  a  conjecture,  nor  formed  any 

*  hypothesis,  about  the  matter.'  ^ 

Such  ideas  are,  in  fact,  entirely  beyond  the  mental 
range  of  the  lower  savages,  whose  extreme  mental  in- 
feriority we  have  much  difficulty  in  realising. 

Speaking  of  the  wild  men  in  the  interior  of  Borneo, 
Mr.  Dalton  ^  says  that  they  arc  found  living  *  absolutely 
in  a  state  of  nature,  who  neither  cultivate  the  ground 
nor  live  in  huts  ;  who  neither  eat  rice  nor  salt,  and  who 
do  not  associate  with  each  other,  but  rove  about  some 
woods,  like  wild  beasts  ;  the  sexes  meet  in  the  jungle, 
or  the  man  carries  away  a  woman  from  some  campong. 
When  the  children  are  old  enough  to  shift  for  them- 
selves, they  usually  separate,  neither  one  afterwards 
thinking  of  the  other.  At  night  they  sleep  under  some 
large  tree,  the  branches  of  which  hang  low  ;  on  these 
they  fasten  the  children  in  a  kind  of  swing  ;  around 
the  tree  they  make  a  fire  to  keep  off  the  wild  beasts 
and  snakes.  They  cover  themselves  with  a  piece  of 
bark,  and  in  this  also  they  wrap  their  children  ;  it  is 
soft  and  warm,  but  will  not  keep  out  the  rain.     The 

*  Park's  Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  265.         Archipelago,  p.  40.   See  also  KeppeFs 
'  Moor's  Notices  of  the  Indian      Expedition  to  Borneo,  vol.  ii.  p,  10. 


LOWEST  BAGE8  OF  MEN.  11 

^  poor  creatures  are  looked  on  and  treated  by  the  other 
'  Dyaks  as  wild  beasts.' 

Lichtenstein  describes  a  Bushman  as  presenting  Hhe 
^  true  physiognomy  of  the  small  blue  ape  of  Caffraria. 
'  What  gives  the  more  verity  to  such  a  comparison  was 
'  the  vivacity  of  his  eyes,  and  the  flexibility  of  his  eye- 
'  brows.  .  .  .  Even  his  nostrils  and  the  comers  of 
^his  mouth,  nay  his  very  ears,  moved  involuntarily. 
* .  .  .  There  was  not,  on  the  contrary,  a  single 
^  feature  in  his  countenance  that  evinced  a  consciousness 
^  of  mental  powers.'  ^ 

Under  these  circumstances  it  cannot  be  wondered  at 
that  we  have  most  contradictory  accounts  as  to  the  cha- 
racter and  mental  condition  of  savages.  Nevertheless,  by 
comparing  together  the  accounts  of  different  travellers, 
we  can  to  a  great  extent  avoid  these  sources  of  error ; 
and  we  are  very  much  aided  in  this  by  the  remarkable 
similarity  between  different  races.  So  striking,  indeed,  is 
this,  that  different  races  in  similar  stages  of  development 
often  present  more  features  of  resemblance  to  one 
another  than  the  same  race  does  to  itself  in  different 
stages  of  its  history. 

Some  ideas,  indeed,  which  seem  to  us  at  first  inex- 
plicable and  fentastic,  are  yet  very  widely  distributed. 
Thus  among  many  races  a  woman  is  absolutely  forbidden 
to  speak  to  her  son-in-law.  Franklin^  tells  us  that 
among  the  American  Indians  of  the  far  North  '  it  is 

*  considered  extremely  improper  for  a  mother-in-law  to 

*  speak  or  even  look  at  him ;  and  when  she  has  a  com- 

*  munication  to  make  to  him  it  is  the  etiquette  that  she 

>  Liclitenstein,  vol.  ii.  p.  224. 

'  Journey  to  the  Shores  of  the  Polar  Sea,  yoL  i.  p.  \^7, 


12        CURIOUS  CUSTOMS  WITH  BEFERENCE  TO 

*  should  turn  her  back  upon  him,  and  address  him  only 
^  through  the  medium  of  a  third  person.' 

Further  south,  among  the  Omahaws,  *  neither  the 

*  father-in-law  nor  mother-in-law  will  hold  any  direct 
'  commimication  with  their  son-in-law ;  nor  will  he,  on 

*  any  occasion,  or  under  any  consideration,  converse  im- 
'  mediately  with  them,  although  no  ill-will  exists  between 
'  them ;  they  will  not,  on  any  account,  mention  each 

*  other's  name  in  company,  nor  look  in  each  other's  £aces ; 

*  any  conversation  that  passes  between  them  is  conducted 
'  through  the  medium  of  some  other  person.'^ 

Harmon  says  that  among  the  Indians  east  of  the 
Rocky  Mountains  the  same  rule  prevails. 

Baegert  ^  mentions  that  among  the  Indians  of  Cali- 
fornia '  the  son-in-law  was  not  allowed,  for  some  time,  to 
'  look  into  the  face  of  his  mother-in-law,  or  his  wife's 
'  nearest  relations,  but  had  to  step  x>n  one  side,  or  to 

*  hide  himself  when  these  women  were  present.' 

Lafitau,^  indeed,  makes  the  same  statements  as  re- 
gards the  North  American  Indians  generally.  We  find 
it  among  the  Crees  and  Dacotahs,  and  again  in  Florida. 
Rochefort  mentions  it  among  the  Caribs,  and  in  South 
America Jt  recurs  among  the  Arawaks. 

In  Asia,  among  the  Mongols  and  Kalmucks,  a  woman 
must  not  speak  to  her  father-in-law  nor  sit  down  in  his 
presence.     Among  the  Ostiaks  of  Siberia,*  '  une  fille 


*  James's    Expedition    to    the  *  Pallas,  vol.  iv.  pp.  71,    677. 

Rocky  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  232.  He  makes  the  same  statement  with 

'  Account   of   California,  1773.  reference  to  the  Samoyedes,  he.  dt 

Translated  by  C.  Rau,  in  Smith-  p.  00.    See  also  Miiller,  Description 

sonian  Rep.  for  1863-4,  p.  3Gd.  de  toutes  les  Nations  do  TEmpire  de 

'  Mocurs  des  Sauvagcs  Amdri-  Russie,  pt.  i.  pp.  191-203;   pt  ii, 

caiDB,  vol  L  p.  670.  p.  104. 


MOTHEBS'IN'LAW.  13 

*  marine  ^vite  autant  qu'il  lui  est  possible  la  presence  du 

*  pire  de  son  mari,  tant  qu'elle  n'a  pas  d'enfant ;    et  le 

*  mari,  pendant  ce  temps,  n'ose  pas  paroitre  devant  la  mere 

*  de  sa  femme.     S'ils  se  rencontrent  par  hasard,  le  man 

*  lui  toume  le  dos,  et  la  femme  se  couvre  le  visage.  On  ne 

*  donne  point  de  nom  aux  filles  ostiakes ;  lorsqu'elles  sont 

*  marines,  les  hommes  les  nomment  Imij  femmes.     Les 

*  femmes,  par  respect  pour  leurs  maris,  ne  les  appellent 

*  pas  par  leur  nom  j  elles  se  servent  du  mot  de  TahS^ 

*  hommes.' 

Dubois  mentions  that  in  certain  districts  of  Hindo- 
Stan  a  woman  *  is  riot  permitted  to  speak  to  her  mother- 
'  in-law.   When  any  task  is  prescribed  to  her,  she  shows 

*  her  acquiescence  only  by  signs ; '  a  contrivance,  he 
sarcastically  adds,  '  well  adapted  for  securing  domestic 
'  tranquillity.'^ 

In  China,  accorduig  to  Duhalde,  the  father-in-law, 
after  the  wedding-day,  *  never  sees  the  face  of  his 
'  daughter-in-law  again ;  he  never  visits  her,'  and  if  they 
chance  to  meet  he  hides  himself.^  A  similar  custom 
prevails  in  Borneo  and  in  the  Fiji  Islands.  In  Australia, 
also,  Ej^e  states  that  a  man  must  not  pronounce  the 
name  of  his  father-in-law,  his  mother-in-law,  or  his  son- 
in-law. 

In  Central  Africa,  Cailli^^  observes  that,  *  from  this 

*  moment  the  lover  is  not  to  see  the  father  and  mother 
'  of  his  future  bride :  he  takes  the  greatest  care  to  avoid 
'  them,  and  if  by  chance  they  perceive  him  they  cover 

*  their  feces,  as  if  all  ties  of  friendship  were  broken.    I 

'  On  the  People  of  India,  p.  236.  '  Cailli^'s  Trayela  to  Timbuctoo 

«  Astley's  Collection  of  Voyages,      voL  L  p.  04. 
vol.  iv.  p.  01. 


14  MOTHEBS-IN'LAW, 

tried  in  vain  to  discover  the  origin  of  this  whimsical 
custom;  the  only  answer  I  could  obtain  was,  "  It's  our 
"way."  The  custom  extends  beyond  the  relations:  if 
the  lover  is  of  a  different  camp,  he  avoids  all  the  in- 
habitants of  the  lady's  camp,  except  a  few  intimate 
friends  whom  he  is  permitted  to  visit.  A  little  tent  is 
generally  set  up  for  him,  under  which  he  remains  all 
day,  and  if  he  is  obliged  to  come  out,  or  to  cross  the 
camp,  he  covers  his  face.  He  is  not  allowed  to  see  his 
intended  during  the  day,  but,  when  everybody  is  at 
rest,  he  creeps  into  her  tent  and  remains  with  her  till 
daybreak.'  Among  the  Kaffirs^  a  married  woman  *  is 
required  to  "  hlonipa "  her  father-in-law  and  all  her 
husband's  male  relations  in  the  ascending  line— that 
is,  to  be  cut  off  from  all  intercourse  with  them.  She 
is  not  allowed  to  pronounce  their  names,  even  mentally; 
and  whenever  the  emphatic  syllable  of  either  of  their 
names  occurs  in  any  other  word,  she  must  avoid  it,  by 
either  substituting  an  entirely  new  word,  or  at  least 
another  syllable,  in  its  place.  The  son-in-law  is  placed 
under  certain  restrictions  towards  his  mother-in-law. 
He  cannot  enjoy  her  society,  or  remain  in  the  same 
hut  with  her ;  nor  can  he  pronounce  her  name.'  Among 
the  Bushmen  in  the  far  South,  Chapman  recounts 
exactly  the  same  thing,  yet  none  of  these  observers  had 
any  idea  how  general  the  custom  is. 

In  Australia,  among  the  aborigines  of  Victoria,  *  it 

*  is  compulsory  on  the  mothers-in-law  to  avoid  the  sight 

*  of  their  sons-in-law,  by  making  the  mothers-in-law 

*  take  a  very  circuitous  route  on  all  occasions  to  avoid 

*  Kaffir  Laws  and  Customs;  pp.  95,  00. 


LA  00JJ7ADE.  15 

*  being  seen,  and  they  hide  the  face  and  figure  with  the 

*  rug  which  the  female  carries  about  her.'  ^  So  strict  is 
this  rule,  that  if  married  men  are  jealous  of  any  one, 
they  sometimes  promise  to  give  him  a  daughter  in 
marriage.  This  places  the  wife,  according  to  custom, 
in  the  position  of  a  mother-in-law,  and  renders  any 
communication  between  her  and  her  future  son-in-law 
a  capital  crime.' 

Mr.  Tylor,  who  has  some  very  interesting  remarks 
on  these  customs  in  his  *  Early  History  of  Man,'  observes 
that  *  it  is  hard  even  to  guess  what  state  of  things  can 

*  have  brought  them  into  existence,'  nor,  so  far  as  I 
am  aware,  has  any  one  else  attemped  to  explain 
them.  In  the  Chapter  on  Marriage  I  shall,  however, 
point  out  the  manner  in  which  I  conceive  that  they 
have  arisen. 

Another  curious  custom  is  that  known  in  Beam 
under  the  name  of  La  Couvade.  Probably  every  Eng- 
lishman who  had  not  studied  other  races  would  assume, 
as  a  matter  of  course,  that  on  the  birth  of  a  child  the 
mother  would  everywhere  be  put  to  bed  and  nursed. 
But  this  is  not  the  case.  In  many  races  the  father,  and 
not  the  mother,  is  doctored  when  a  baby  is  bom. 

Yet,  though  this  custom  seems  zo  ludicrous  to  us,  it 
is  very  widely  distributed.  Commencing  mth  South 
America,  Dobritzhoffer  tells  us  that  *  no  sooner  do  you 

*  hear  that  a  woman  has  borne  a  child,  than  you  see  the 
'  husband  lying  in  bed,  huddled  up  with  mats  and  skins, 
'  lest  some  ruder  breath  of  air  should  touch  him,  fasting, 
'  kept  in  private,  and  for  a  number  of  days  abstaining 

>  Report  of  Select  Committee  on  Aborigines,  Victoria,  1869,  p.  73. 
3  Xoc  cit  p.  78. 


1(5  REASON  FOB  LA  COUVABE. 

religiously  from  certain  viands :  you  would  swear  it 
was  he  who  had  had  the  child.  ...  I  had  read 
about  this  in  old  times,  and  laughed  at  it,  never  think- 
ing I  could  believe  such  madness,  and  I  used  to 
suspect  that  this  barbarian  custom '  was  related  more 
in  jest  than  in  earnest ;  but  at  last  I  saw  it  with  my 
own  eyes  among  the  Abipones.' 

In  Brazil,  among  the  Coroados,  Martins  tells  us  that 
as  soon  as  the  woman  is  evidently  pregnant,  or  has 
been  delivered,  the  man  withdraws.  A  strict  regimen 
is  observed  before  the  birth  ;  the  man  and  the  woman 
refrain  for  a  time  from  the  flesh  of  certain  animals,  and 
live  chiefly  on  fish  and  fruits.'  ^ 

Further,  north  in  Guiana,  Mr.  Brett  ^  observes  that 
some  of  the  men  of  the  Acawoio  and  Caribi  nations, 
when  they  have  reason  to  expect  an  increase  of  their 
fiimilies,  consider  themselves  bound  to  abstain  from 
certain  kinds  of  meat,  lest  the  expected  child  should,  in 
some  very  mysterious  way,  be  injured  by  their  partaking 
of  it.  The  Acouri  (or  Agouti)  is  thus  tabooed,  lest,  like 
that  little  animal,  the  child  should  be  meagre  ;  the 
Haimara^  also,  lest  it  should  be  blind — the  outer  coating 
of  the  eye  of  that  fish  suggesting  film  or  cataract ;  the 
LabbUj  lest  the  infant's  mouth  should  protrude  Hke  the 
labba's,  or  lest  it  be  spotted  like  the  labba,  which  spots 
would  ultimately  become  ulcers.  The  Marudi  is  also 
forbidden,  lest  the  infant  be  stillborn,  the  screeching 
of  that  bird  being  considered  ominous  of  death.'  And 
again : — *  On  the  birth  of  a  child,  the  ancient  Indian 
*  etiquette  requires  the  father  to  take  to  his  hammock, 

^  Spix^s  and  Martius's  Trarcls  in  ^  Brett's  Indian  Tribes  of  GuiaDa, 

Brazil;  toI.  ii  p.  247.  p.  355. 


LA  GOUVAJDE.  17 

*  where  he  remains  some  days  as  if  he  were  sick,  and 

*  receives  the  congratulations  and  condolence  of  his 
'  friends.  An  instance  of  this  custom  came  under  my 
'  own  observation,  where  the  man,  in  robust  health 

*  and    excellent    condition,   without    a   single  bodily 

*  ailment,    was  lying    in  his  hammock  in    the  most 

*  provoking  manner,  and  carefully  and  respectfully  at- 

*  tended  by  the  women,  while  the  mother  of  the  new- 

*  born  infant  was  cooking — none  apparently  regarding 
^  her ! '  ^ 

Similar  statements  have  been  made  by  various  other 
travellers,  including  De  Tertre,  Giliz,  Biet,  Fermin,  and 
in  fact  almost  all  who  have  written  on  the  natives  of 
South  America. 

In  North  America,  R^my  mentions  that  among  the 
Shoshones,  when  a  woman  is  in  labour,  the  husband 
'  also  is  bound  to  remain  in  seclusion,  away  from  every 
'  one,  even  from  his  wife.'  *  In  Greenland,  after  a 
woman  is  confined,  the  ^  husband  must  forbear  working 
.  for  some  weeks,  'neither  must  .bey  drive  any  2 

*  during  that  time ; '  *  in  Kamskatka,  for  some  time  before 
the  birth  of  a  baby,  the  husband  must  do  no  hard  work. 
In  South  India,  according  to  Mr.  Tylor,*  Mr.  F.  W. 
Jennings  states  that  among  natives  of  the  higher 
castes  about  Madras,  Seringapatam,  and  on  the 
Malabar   Coast  *  a  man,  at  the  birth  of  his  first  son 

*  or  daughter  by  the  chief  wife,  or  for  any  son  after- 
^  wards,  will  retire  to  bed  for  a  lunar  month,  living 
'principally  on  a  rice  diet,  abstaining  fix)m  exciting 

*  Brett,  foe.  cU,  p.  101.  City,  p.  126. 

«  Egede's  Greenland,  p.  190.  *  Tylor'a  Early  Hutory  of  Man, 

*  Journey  to  the  Great  Salt  Lake      2nd  ed.,  p.  301. 

C 


1*  EEJSOX  FOB  LA 


^  £3od  and  from  anoking/  Siiiulja' nodoos  occnr  am<»ig 
the  Qiineee  of  W^t  Ymmfln.  among  the  Dyaks  of 
Borneo,  among  the  Eaffiis.  in  the  nonh  of  Spain,  in 
Ccx'sica,  and  in  the  sooih  of  Fiance,  id^re  it  is  called 


'fiiire  1a  oonvade.'  While,  however,  I  r^ard  this 
carious  custom  as  of  mach  ethnological  iaterest,  I 
cannot  agree  with  Mr.  Trior  in  regarding  it  as  evi- 
dence that  the  races  by  whom  it  is  practised  belong  to 
one  variety  of  the  homan  species.'  On  the  contrary,  I 
believe  that  it  originated  independently,  in  several  dis- 
tinct parts  of  the  worid. 

It  is  of  eoui^e  evident  that  a  cnstcMn  so  ancient,  and 
so  widely  spread,  must  have  its  origin  in  some  idea  which 
satisfies  the  savage  mind.  Several  explanations  have  been 
suggested.     Professor  Max  MiiUer,*  in  his  *  Chips  finom 

*  a  German  Workshop/  says  : — •  It  is  dear  that  the 

*  poor  husband  was  at  first  tyrannised  over  by  his  female 

*  relations,  and  afterwards  finghtened  into  superstition. 

*  He  then  began  to  make  a  martyr  of  himself  till  he  made 
'  himself  really  ill,  or  took  to  his  bed  in  self-defence. 

*  Strange  and  absurd  as  the  couvade  appears  at  first 

*  sight,  there  is  something  in  it  with  which,  we  believe, 
*most  mothers-in-law  can  sjinpathLsc/  Lafitau*  re- 
gards it  as  arising  from  a  dim  recollection  of  original 
sin ;  rejecting  the  Carib  and  Abipon  expbination,  which 
I  liave  little  doubt  is  the  correct  one,  that  they  do  it 
l>ecause  they  believe  that  if  the  father  engaged  in 
any  rough  work,  or  was  careless  in  his  diet,  *  cola  feroit 

tnal  k  Tcnfant,  et  que  cet  enfant  participeroit  a  tons 

•  />^.  cii.  p.  2(X).  3  Ma>uw  des  Saurages   Am^Sri- 

ihi^  from  a  Otnntn  Work-      cains,  vol.  i.  p.  209. 
•bop,  vol.  ii.  p.  :fHl. 


SAVAGE  IDEAS  ON  TEE  INFLUENCE  OF  FOOD.    19 

^  les  defauts  natorels  des  AnimAnY  dont  le  pere  aaroit 

This  idea — ^namely,  that  a  person  imbibes  the  charac- 
teristics of  an  animal  which  he  eats — is  very  widely 
distributed.  In  India,  Forsyth  mentions  that  Hahoats 
often  give  their  elephant  *  a  piece  of  a  tiger's  Kver  to  make 

*  him  courageous,  and  the  eyes  of  the  brown  homed 

*  owl  to  make  him  see  well  at  night.'  *  The  Malaya  at 
Singapore  also  give  a  large  price  for  the  flesh  of  the  tiger, 
not  because  they  like  it,  but  because  they  believe  that 
the  man  who  eats  tiger '  acquires  the  sagacity  as  well  as 
^  the  courage  of  that  animal,'  ^  an  idea  which  occors 
among  several  of  the  Indian  hill  tribes.' 

'  The  Dyaks  of  Borneo  have  a  prejudice  against  the 
^  flesh  of  deer,  which  the  men  may  not  eat,  but  which 
^  is  allowed  to  women  and  children.  The  reason  given 
^  for  this  is,  that  if  the  warriors  eat  the  flesh  of  deer 
*'  they  become  as  &int-hearted  as  that  animaL'  ^ 

^  In  ancient  times  those  who  wished  for  children  used 
*'  to  eat  frogs,  because  that  animal  lays  so  many  ^gs.'  * 

The  Caribs  will  not  eat  the  flesh  of  pigs  or  of  tor- 
toises,  lest  their  eyes  should  become  as  small  as  tiioee 
of  these  animals.*  The  Dacotahs  eat  the  liver  of  the 
dog,  in  order  to  possess  the  sagacity  and  courage  of 
that  animal.^  The  Arabs  also  impute  the  passionate 
and  revengeful  character  of  their  countryn^n  to  the 


1  Fonjth'i  Higlikiids  of  Cental  Toi  L  p.  2S1. 
ludia,  p.  452.  *  Liiiiaii^s  Andest  Fntlis  io  As- 

*  Eeppel's  Visit  to   tiie    Indian  dent  Names,  p.  383. 
Archipelago,  p.  13.  •  Miillcr'aGeadiidiiederAiiieri- 

»  Dalton*8  Des.  Ethn.  of  Bengal,  caniadien  UneHgionen,  p.  22L 
p.  38.  ^  Sdioolcnf^sIndiJBiTxibeSyTd. 

*  Keppel's  Expedition  to  Borneo,  iL  p.  80. 

c2 


20    BAVAQE  IDEAS  ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  FOOD. 

use  of  earners  flesh.^  In  Siberia  the  bear  is  eaten  under 
the  idea  that  its  flesh  ^  gives  a  zest  for  the  chase,  and 
'  renders  them  proof  against  fear.'  *  The  Kaffirs  also 
prepare  a  powder  '  made  of  the  dried  flesh  of  various 
'  wild  beasts — ^leopard,  lion,  elephant,  snakes,  &c. — ^the 

*  natives  intending  by  the  administering  of  this  com- 

*  pound  to  impart  to  the  men  the  qualities  of  the  several 

*  animals.'  ^ 

Tylor  *  mentions  that '  an  English  merchant  in  Shang- 

*  hai,  at  the  time  of  the  Taeping  attack,  met  his  Chinese 
'  servant  carrying  home  a  heart,  and  asked  him  what  he 

*  had  got  there.     He  said  it  was  the  heart  of  a  rebel, 

*  and  that  he  was  going  to  take  it  home  and  eat  it  to 
'  make  him  brave.'  The  New  Zealanders,  after  baptis- 
ing an  infant,  used  to  make  it  swallow  pebbles,  so  that 
its  heart  might  be  hard  and  incapable  of  pity.^ 

Even  cannibalism  is  sometimes  due  to  this  idea,  and 
the  New  Zealanders  eat  their  most  formidable  enemies 
partly  for  this  reason.  It  is  from  the  same  kind  of 
idea  that  *  eyebright,'  because  the  flower  somewhat 
resembles  an  eye,  was  supposed  to  be  good  for  ocular 
complaints. 

To  us  the  idea  seems  absurd.  Not  so  to  children.  I 
have  myself  heard  a  little  girl  say  to  her  brother,  '  If 

*  you  eat  so  much  goose  you  will  be  quite  silly ; '  and 
there  are  perhaps  few  children  to  whom  the  induction 
would  not  seem  perfectly  legitimate. 

From  the  same  notion,  the  Esquimaux,  *  to  render 

'  .;^tle/»  CoUecUon  of  Vojage«,  »  CaUaway't  Religious  System  of 

n  "a  ^1  •        .  ^®  Amaxulu,  pt  iv.  p.  438. 
AUanjona  Upper  and  Lower  «  Early  HUtory  of  Man,  p  131 

Amoor,  p.  402.  6  YKts'B  New  Zealand,  p  8  > 


SAVAGE  IDEAS  WITH  BEFEBENOE  TO  POBTBAITS.    21 

'  barren  women  fertile  or  teeming,  take  old  pieces  of  the 

*  soles  of  our  shoes  to  hang  about  them  ;  for,  as  they 
'  take  our  nation  to  be  more  fertile,  and  of  a  stronger 

*  disposition  of  body  than  theirs,  they  fancy  the  virtue 

*  of  our  body  communicates  itself  to  our  clothing.'  ^ 

In  fact,  savages  do  not  act  without  reason,  any  more 
than  we  do,  though  their  reasons  may  often  be  bad  ones 
and  seem  to  us  singularly  absurd.  Thus  they  have  a 
great  dread  of  having  their  portraits  taken.  The  better 
the  likeness,  the  worse  they  think  for  the  sitter ;  so 
much  life  could  not  be  put  into  the  copy,  except  at  the 
expense  of  the  original.  Once,  when  a  good  deal  an- 
noyed by  some  Indians,  Kane  got  rid  of  them  instantly 
by  threatening  to  draw  them  if  they  remained.  Catlin 
tells  an  amusing,  but  melancholy,  anecdote  in  reference 
to  this  feeling.  On  one  occasion  he  was  drawing  a 
chief  named  Mahtocheega,  in  profile.  This,  when  ob- 
served, excited  much  commotion  among  the  Indians  : 

*  Why  was  half  his  face  left  out?'  they  asked  ;  *Mah- 

*  tocheega  was  never  ashamed  to  look  a  white  in  the 

*  face.'  Mahtocheega  himself  does  not  seem  to  have 
taken  any  offence,  but  Shonka,  *  the  Dog,'  took  advan- 
tage of  the  idea  to  taunt  him.  '  The  Englishman  knows,' 
he  said,  *  that  you  are  but  half  a  man ;  he  has  painted 

*  but  one-half  of  your  face,  and  knows  that  the  rest  is 

*  good  for  nothing.'  This  view  of  the  case  led  to  a 
fight,  in  which  poor  Mahtocheega  was  shot ;  and  as  ill 
luck  would  have  it,  the  bullet  by  which  he  was  killed 
tore  away  just  that  part  of  the  face  which  had  been 
omitted  in  the  drawing. 

>  Egede's  Qreenland,  p.  108, 


22    CURIOUS  IDEAS  WITH  BEFEBENOE  TO  POBTBAITB. 

This  was  very  unfortunate  for  Mr.  Catlin,  who  had 
great  difficulty  in  making  his  escape,  and  lived  some 
months  after  in  fear  for  his  life ;  nor  was  the  matter 
settled  until  both  Shonka  and  his  brother  had  been 
killed  in  revenge  for  the  death  of  Mahtocheega, 

Franklin  also  mentions  that  the   North  American 
Indians    *  prize  pictures  very  highly,  and  esteem  any 
they  can   get,  however   badly   executed,  as  efficient 
charms.'  ^ 

The  natives  of  Bomou  had  a  similar  horror  of  being 
written ; '  they  said  *  that  they  did  not  like  it ;  that 
the  Sheik  did  not  like  it ;  that  it  was  a  sin ;  and  I  am 
quite  sure,  from  the  impression,  that  we  had  much 
better  never  have  produced  the  book  at  all.'  ^  The 
Fetich  women  in  Dahome,  says  Burton,  *were  easily 
dispersed  by  their  likenesses  being  sketched.'  ^  In  his 
Travels  in  Lapland,  Sir  A.  de  C.  Brooke  says: — *I 
could  clearly  perceive*  that  many  of  them  imagined 
the  magical  art  to  be  connected  with  what  I  was  doings 
and  on  this  account  showed  signs  of  uneasiness,  till 
reassured  by  some  of  the  merchants.  An  instance  of 
this  happened  one  morning,  when  a  Laplander  knocked 
at  the  door  of  my  chamber,  and  entered  it,  as  they 
usually  did,  without  further  ceremony.  Having  come 
from  Alten  to  Hammerfest  on  some  business,  curiosity 
had  induced  him,  previously  to  his  return,  to  pay  the 
Englishman  a  visit.  After  a  dram  he  seemed  quite  at 
his  ease ;  and,  producing  my  pencil,  I  proceeded,  as  he 
stood,  to  sketch  his  portrait.      His  countenance  now 

»  Voyage  to  the  Polar  Seas,  ii.  6.  3  Mission   to  the  King  of  Da- 

»  Denham's  TraYels   in  Africa,      home,  i,  278. 
vol.  i.  p.  276.  i  Brooke's  Lapland,  p.  364. 


USB  OF  PBAYUB8  AS  MEDIOINE.  23 

*  immediately  changed,  and,  taking  up  his  cap,  he  was 

*  on  the  point  x)f  making  an  abrupt  exit,  without  my 

*  being  able  to  conjecture  the  cause.  As  he  spoke  only 
^  his  own  tongue,  I  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  as- 
'  sistance  ;  when  I  found  that  his  alarm  was  occasioned 
'  by  my  emplojonent,  which  he  at  once  comprehended, 
^  but  suspected  that,  by  obtaining  a  likeness  of  him,  I 

*  should  acquire  over  him  a  certain  power  and  influence 

*  that  might  be  prejudicial.     He  therefore  refused  to 

*  allow  it,  and  expressed  a  wish,  before  any  other  steps 

*  were  taken,  to  return  to  Alten,  and  ask  the  permission 

*  of  his  master.'  Mr.  Ellis  mentions  the  existence  of  a 
similar  feeling  in  Madagascar.^ 

We  can  hardly  wonder  that  writing  should  seem  to 
savages  even  more  magical  than  drawing.  Carver,  for 
instance,  allowed  the  North  American  Indians  to  open 
a  book  as  often  as  and  wherever  they  pleased,  and  then 
told  them  the  number  of  leaves.  *  The  only  way  they 
'  could  account,'  he  says,  '  for  my  knowledge,  was  by 

*  concluding  that  the  book  was  a  spirit,  and  whispered 

*  me  answers  to  whatever  I  demanded  of  it.'  ^ 

Father  Baegert  mentions^  that  *  a  certain  missionary 

*  sent  a  native  to  one  of  his  colleagues,  with  some  loaves 

*  of  bread  and  a  letter  stating  their  number.     The  mes- 

*  senger  ate  a  part  of  the  bread,  and  the  theft  was  con- 

*  sequently  discovered.     Another  time  when  he  had  to 

*  deliver  four  loaves,  he  ate  two  of  them,  but  hid  the 

*  accompanying  letter  under  a  stone  while  he  was  thus 

*  engaged,  believing  that  his   conduct  would   not  be 

>  Three  Visito  to  Madagascar,  p.  358. 

»  Travels,  p.  265. 

»  Smithflonian  Report,  1864,  S79. 


24  VSE  OF  TEAYER8  AS  MEDICINE. 

*  revealed  this  time,  as  the  letter  had  not  seen  him  in 

*  the  act  of  eating  the  loaves.' 

Further  north,  the  Minatarrees,  seeing  Catlin  intent 
over  a  copy  of  the  '  New  York  Commercial  Advertiser,* 
were  much  puzzled,  but  at  length  came  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  it  was  a  medicine-cloth  for  sore  eyes.  One  of 
them  eventually  bought  it  for  a  high  price.^ 

This  use  of  writing  as  a  medicine  prevails  largely  in 
Africa,  where  the  priests  or  wizards  write  a  prayer  on  a 
piece  of  board,  wash  it  off  and  make  the  patient  drink 
it.  Cailli^^  met  with  a  man  who  had  a  great  reputation 
for  sanctity,  and  who  made  his  living  by  writing  prayers 
on  a  board,  washing  them  off,  and  then  selling  the 
water,  which  was  sprinkled  over  various  objects,  and 
supposed  to  improve  or  protect  them. 

Mungo  Park  on  one  occasion  profited  by  this  idea, 
A  Bambarran  having,'  he  says,  *  heard  that  I  was  a 
Christian,  immediately  thought  of  procuring  a  saphie; 
and  for  this  purpose  brought  out  his  walha  or  writing- 
board,  assuring  me  that  he  would  dress  me  a  supper 
of  rice,  if  I  would  write  him  a  saphie  to  protect  him 
from  wicked  men.  The  proposal  was  of  too  great  con- 
sequence to  me  to  be  refused:  I  therefore  wrote  the 
board  full  from  top  to  bottom  on  both  sides;  and  my 
landlord,  to  be  certain  of  having  the  whole  force  of 
the  charm,  washed  the  writing  from  the  board  into  a 
calabash  with  a  little  water,  and,  having  said  a  few 
prayers  over  it,  drank  this  powerful  draught ;  after 
which,  lest  a  single  word  should  escape,  he  licked  the 
board  until  it  was  quite  dry.' ' 

»  American  Indian*,  Tol.  ii.  p.  02.      See  altto  p.  50.    Caillitf'a  Travela  to 
*  TraTels,  toI.  i.  p.  202.  Tinibuctoo,  vol  i.  p.  370. 

»  Park'i  TniTela,  roL  L  p.  3i57. 


SAVAGE  IDEAS  ON  DISEASE.  25 

In  Africa,  the  prayers  written  as  medicine  or  as 
amulets  are  generally  taken  from  the  Koran.  It  is 
admitted  that  they  are  no  protection  from  firearms ;  but 
this  does  not  the  least  weaken  the  faith  in  them,  because, 
as  guns  were  not  invented  in  Mahomet's  time,  he  natu- 
rally provided  no  specific  against  them.^ 

Among  the  Kirghiz,  also,  Atkinson  tells  us  that  the 
Mullas  sell  similar    amulets,  ^at  the  rate  of  a  sheep 

*  for  each  scrap  of  paper ; '  ^  and  similar  charms  are 

*  in  great  request  among  the  Turkomans,^  and  in 
Afghanistan.'  * 

The  science  of  medicine,  indeed,  like  that  of  astro- 
nomy, and  like  religion,  assimies  among  savages  very 
much  the  character  of  witchcraft. 

Ignorant  as  they  are  of  the  processes  by  which  life 
is  maintained,  of  anatomy  and  of  physiology,  the  true 
nature  of  disease  does  not  occur  to  them.  Thus  the 
negroes  universally  believe  that  diseases  are  caused  by  evil 
spirits:^  among  the  Kaffirs,  ^diseases  are  all  attributed 
'  to  three   causes — either  to  being  enchanted   by  an 

*  enemy,  to  the  anger  of  certain  beings  whose  abode 

*  appears  to  be  in  the  rivers,  or  to  the  power  of  evil 

*  spirits.'  •  So,  again,  in  Guinea,  the  native  doctors  paint 
their  patients  different  colours  in  honour  of  the  spirit 
which  is  supposed  to  have  caused  the  disease.^ 

Similar  theories  on  the  origin  and  nature  of  disease 

>  Astley's  Collection  of  Voyages,  *  Pritcliard'a  Natural  History  of 

Tol.  ii.  p.  35.  Man,  toI.  ii.  p.  704. 

«  Siberia,  p.  810.  •  Lichtenatein,    voL    L  p.  265. 

»  Vambery'a  Travela  in  Central  Maclean's  Kaffir  Laws  and  Customs, 

Asia,  p.  60.  P-  ^• 

*  Masson's    Travels     in    Bnlo-  ^  Astley's  Collection  of  Voyages, 

cbistan,    Afghanistan,    Sec,  vol.  i.  voL  ii.  p.  430. 
pp.  74, 00,  812 ;  voL  ii.  pp.  127, 802. 


26         DISEASES  SUPPOSED  TO  BE 

occur  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  as,  for  instance,  in 
Siberia,  among  the  Kalmucks,  the  Earghiz,  and  Bash- 
kirs;^ in  many  of  the  Indian  tribes,  as  the  Abors, 
Eitcharis,  Kols,  &c.;*^  in  the  Andamans ;  in  the  Samoan 
and  other  Pacific  Islands;®  in  Madagascar,  among  the 
Caribs,^  &c.  The  consequence  of  this  is  that  cures  are 
effected  by  ejecting  or  exorcising  the  evil  spirit.  Among 
the  Kalmucks,  this  is  the  business  of  the  so-caUed 
*  Priests,'  who  induce  the  evil  spirit  to  quit  the  body  of 
the  patient  and  enter  some  other  object.  If  a  chief  is 
ill,  some  other  person  is  induced  to  take  his  name,  and 
thus,  as  is  supposed,  'the  evil  spirit  passes  into  his  body.'* 
In  Rome  there  was  an  altar  dedicated  to  the  Goddess 
Fever.^  Certain  forms  of  disease,  indeed,  are  now,  and, 
as  we  know,  have  long  been  regarded,  even  among  the 
more  advanced  nations  of  the  East,  as  caused  by  the 
presence  of  evil  spirits.  'The  Assyrians  and  Baby- 
'  lonians,'  says  the  Rev.  A.  H.  Sayce,  '  like  the  Jews  of 
'  the  Talmud,  believed  that  the  world  was  swarming 
'  with  obnoxious  spirits  who  produced  the  various 
'  diseases  to  which  man  is  liable.'  ^ 

Many  savage  races  do  not  believe  in  natural  death, 
and  if  a  man,  however  old,  dies  without  being  wounded, 
conclude  that  he  must  have  been  the  victim  of  magic. 
Tims,  then,  when  a  savage  is  ill,  he  naturally  attributes 

>  Muller*8  BcB,  do  toules  Its  Na-  ii.  p.  134. 
tioni  do  TEmpiio  do  lliwsie,  part  i.  &  Do  IlelFs  Stoppcs  of  the  Ca»- 

pp.  123,  100.  pian  Sea,  p.  250. 

'  Dalton's    Des.    Ethnology    of  «  Epictetun,  trs.  by  Mra.  Carter, 

BoDgal,  pp.  25,  85.  vol.  i.  pp.  01,  104. 

•  Turner's     Nineteen    Years   in  '  Kecorda  of  tho  Past,  pub.  by 

Pol^-ncflia,  p.  224.    Oerland's  Cont.  tho  Society  of  Biblical  Literature, 

of  Waitz'fl  Anthrop.,  vol.  vi.  p.  082.  vol.  i.  p.  .131. 


Tylor's  Primitive  Culture,  vol. 


CAUSED  BY  SPIRITS.  27 

his  sufferings  to  some  enemy  within  him,  or  to  some 
foreign  object,  and  the  result  is  a  peculiar  system  of 
treatment,  curious  both  for  its  sunplicity  and  uni- 
versality. 

*  It  is  remarkable  in  the  Abiponian  (Paraguay)  phy- 
sicians,' says  Father  Dobritzhoffer,^  'that  they  cure 
every  kind  of  disease  with  one  and  the  same  medicine. 
Let  us  examine  this  method  of  healing.  They  apply 
their  lips  to  the  part  affected,  and  suck  it,  spitting 
after  every  suction.  At  intervals  they  draw  up  their 
breath  fix)m  the  very  bottom  of  their  breast,  and  blow 
upon  that  part  of  the  body  which  is  in  pain.  That 
blowing  and  sucking  are  alternately  repeated.  .  .  . 
This  method  of  healing  is  in  use  amongst  all  the 
savages  of  Paraguay  and  Brazil  that  I  am  acquainted 
with,  and,  according  to  Father  Jean  Grillet,  amongst 
the  Galibe  Indians.  .  .  .  The  Abipones,  still  more 
irrational,  expect  sucking  and  blowing  to  rid  the  body 
of  whatever  causes  pain  or  inconvenience.  This  belief 
is  constantly  fostered  by  the  jugglers  with  fresh 
artifices;  for  when  they  prepare  to  suck  the  sick 
man,  they  secretly  put  thorns,  beetles,  worms,  &c. 
into  their  mouths,  and  spitting  them  out,  after  having 
sucked  for  some  time,  say  to  him,  pointing  to  the 
worm  or  thorn,  "  See  here  the  cause  of  your  disorder." 
At  this  sight  the  sick  man  revives,  when  he  thinks  the 
enemy  that  has  tormented  him  is  at  length  expelled.' 
At  first  one  might  almost  be  disposed  to  think  that 
some  one  had  been  amusing  himself  at  the  expense  of 
the  worthy  father,  but  we  shall  find  the  very  same  mode 

*  History  of  the  Abipones,  vol.  ii.      TAmdr.  M^rid.;  vol.  ii  pp.  26,  117, 
p.  249.    See_Blao  Azara,  Voy.  dans      140, 142. 


28  MEDICAL  TREATMENT 

of  treatment  among  other  races.  Martins  tells  us  that 
the  cures  of  the  Guaycurus  (Brazil)  *  are  very  simple, 
and  consist  principally  in  fumigating  or  in  sucking 
the  part  aflFected,  on  which  the  Pay^  spits  into  a  pit, 
as  if  he  would  give  back  the  evil  principle  which  he 
has  sucked  out  to  the  earth  and  bury  it.'  ^ 

In  British  Guiana,  Mr.  Brett  mentions  that,  *  if  the 
patient  be  strong  enough  to  endure  the  disease,  the 
excitement,  the  noise,  and  the  fumes  of  tobacco  in 
which  he  is  at  times  enveloped,  and  the  sorcerer 
observes  signs  of  recovery,  he  will  pretend  to  extract 
the  cause  of  the  complaint  by  sucking  the  part 
affected.  After  many  ceremonies,  he  will  produce 
from  his  mouth  some  strange  substance,  such  as  a 
thorn  or  gravel-stone,  a  fish  bone  or  bird's  claw,  a 
snake's  tooth  or  a  piece  of  wire,  which  some  malicious 
yauhahu  is  supposed  to  have  inserted  in  the  affected 
part.' 2 

Father  Baegert  mentions  that  the  Californian  sor- 
cerers blow  upon  and  suck  those  who  are  ill,  and  finally 
show  them  some  small  object,  assuring  them  that  it  had 
been  extracted,  and  that  it  was  the  cause  of  the  pain. 
Wilkes  thus  describes  a  scene  at  Wallawalla,  on  the 
Columbia  River  : — *  The  doctor,  who  was   a   woman, 

*  bending  over  the  body,  began  to  suck  his  neck  and 

*  chest  in  different  parts,  in  order  more  effectually  to 

*  extract  the  bad  spirit.     She  would  every  now  and  then 
'  seem  to  obtain  some  of  the  disease,  and  then  faint 

*  away.     On  the  next  morning  she  was  still  found  suck- 
'  ing  the  boy's  chest.  ...  So  powerful  was  the  influence 

*  Travols  in  nrazil,  rol.  ii.  p.  77. 

«  Brett*8  Indian  Tribca  of  Guiana,  p.  304. 


AMONG  SAVAGES.  29 

*  operated  on  the  boy  that  he  indeed  seemed  better.  .  .  . 

*  The  last  time  Mr.  Drayton  visited  the  doctress,  she 
'  exhibited  a  stone,  about  the  size  of  a  goose's  egg,  say- 

*  ing  that  she  had  taken  the  disease  of  the  boy  out  of 
*him;i 

Among  the  Prairie  Indians,  also,  all  diseases  are 
treated  aUke,  being  referred  to  one  cause,  viz.  the 
presence  of  an  evil  spirit,  vl^ch  must  be  expelled. 
This  the  medicine -man  *  attempts,  in  the  first  place,  by 
'  certain  incantations  and  ceremonies,  intended  to  secure 

*  the  aid  of  the  spirit  or  spirits  he  worships,  and  then 

*  by  all  kinds  of  frightful  noises  and  gestures,  and  suck- 

*  ing  over  the  seat  of  pain  with  his  mouth.'  ^  Speaking 
of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Indians,  Heame  says : — *  Here  it  is 

*  necessary  to  remark  that  they  use  no  medicine  either 

*  for  internal  or  external  complaints,  but  perform  all 

*  their  cures  by  charms— in  ordinary  cases  sucking  the 
'  part  affected,  blowing  and  singing.'  ^ 

Again,  in  the  extreme  North,  Crantz  tells  us  that 
among  the  Esquimaux  old  women  are  accustomed  *  to 

*  extract  from  a  swollen  leg  a  parcel  of  hair  or  scraps  of 

*  leather  ;   they  do  it  by  sucking  with  their  mouth, 

*  which  they  had  before  crammed  full  of  such  stuff.'  * 
Passing  now  to  the  Laplanders,  we  are  told  that  if  any 
one  among  them  is  ill,  a  wizard  sucks  his  forehead  and 
blows  in  his  face,  thinking  thus  to  cure  him. 

In  South  Africa,  Chapman  thus  describes  a  similar 
custom  : — A  man  having  been  injured,  he  says,  *  our 

*  United  States  Exploring  Expe-  L  p.  250. 
dition,    Tol.   iv.   p.  400.    See  alflo  •  Voyage  to  the  Northern  Ocean, 

Jones's  Antiquities  of  the  Southern  p.  180. 
Indians,  pp.  20,  30.  ^  Historj  of  Greenland,  voL  i.  p. 

3  Schoolcraft's  Indian  Tribes,  vol.  21 4. 


30  8UCKIN0  OUT  THE  EVIL, 

*  friend  sucked  at  the  wound,  and  then  .  .  .  extracted 

*  from  his  mouth  a  lump  of  some  substance,  which  was 

*  supposed  to  be  the  disease/  ^ 

In  Australia,  we  are  told  by  ex-Governor  Eyre,  in 
his  interesting  work,  that,  '  as  all  internal  pains  are  at- 
'  tributed  to  witchcraft,  sorcerers  possess  the  power  of 

*  relieving  or  curing  them.    Sometimes  the  mouth  is  ap- 

*  plied  to  the  surface  where  the  pain  is  seated,  the  blood 

*  is  sucked  out,  and  a  bunch  of  green  leaves  applied  to 
'  the  part.   Besides  the  blood,  which  is  derived  from  the 

*  gums  of  the  sorcerer,  a  bone  is  sometimes  put  out  of 

*  the  mouth,  and  declared  to  have  been  procured  fix)m 
'  the  diseased  part.    On  other  occasions  the  disease  is 

*  drawn  out  in  an  invisible  form,  and  burnt  in  the  fire 

*  or  thrown  into  the  water.'  ^ 

Thus,  then,  we  find  all  over  the  world  this  primitive 
cure  by  sucking  out  the  evil,  which  perhaps  even  with 
ourselves  lingers  among  nurses  and  children  in  the 
universal  nursery  remedy  of  '  Kiss  it  and  make  it 
'  well.' 

These  misconceptions  of  the  true  nature  of  disease 
lead  to  many  other  singular  modes  of  treatment.  Thus, 
among  the  Kukis,  the  doctor,  not  the  patient,  takes  the 
remedies.  Consequently,  food  is  generally  prescribed, 
and  in  cases  of  severe  illness  a  buffalo  is  sacrificed,  and 
the  doctor  gives  a  feast.® 

Another  curious  remedy  practised  by  the  Australians 
is  to  tie  a  line  round  the  forehead  or  neck  of  the  patient, 

>  Travels  in  Africa,  vol.  ii  p.  4«.  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  N.S^  voL  iiL  p. 

See    aliw)  I^ivingstone'a  Travela   in  243. 
South  Africa,  p.  130.  >  Dalton^a  Des.  Ethn.  of  Bengal, 

■  Discoveries  in  Central  AoitrHlia,  p.  40. 
Tol.  iL  p.  300.    See  also  Oldiield, 


FANCIES  ABOUT  TWINS.  31 

while  some  kind  friend  rubs  her  lips  with  the  *  other 

*  end  of  the  string  until  they  bleed  freely ;  this  blood  is 

*  supposed  to  come  from  the  patient,  passing  along  the 

*  string.'  ^ 

A  dislike  of  twins  is  widely  distributed.  In  the 
Island  of  Bali  ^  (near  Java),  the  natives  *  have  the  sin- 

*  gular  idea,  when  a  woman  is  brought  to  bed  of  twins, 
^  that  it  is  an  unlucky  omen  ;  and  immediately  on  its 
'  being  known,  the  woman,  with  her  husband  and  chQ- 

*  dren,  is  obliged  to  go  and  live  on  the  seashore  or 

*  among  the  tombs  for  the  space  of  a  month,  to  purify 
'  themselves,   after   which   they   may  return  into  the 

*  village,  upon  a  suitable  sacrifice  being  made/  This 
idea  is,  however,  far  from  being  peculiar  to  that  island. 

Among  the  Khasias  of  Hindostan,^  '  in  the  case  of 
'  twins  being  bom,  one  used  frequently  to  be  killed;  it 

*  is  considered  unlucky,  and  also  degrading,  to  have 

*  twins,  as  they  consider  that  it  assimilates  them  with 

*  the  lower  animals.' 

Among  some  of  the  Siberian  tribes,  twins  are  at- 
tributed to  the  influence  of  evil  spirits.* 

Among  the  Ainos  of  Japan,^  when  twins  are  bom, 
one  is  always  destroyed.  Among  some  of  the  South 
African  tribes  one  of  two  twins  is  killed.^  At  Arebo,  in 
Guinea,  Smith  and  Bosman^  tell  us  that  when  twins  are 
bora,  both  they  and  the  mother  are  killed.     *  In  Dahome 

'  EngliBh  Colony  in  New  South  p.  138, 

Wales,  pp.  363,  382.  *  Bickmore,  Proc.  Bost.  Soc.  of 

'  Moor*8   Notices  of  the  Indian  Nat.  His.  1867. 

Archipelago,  p.  06.  ^  Livingstone's  Travels  in  South 

»  Steel,  Trans.  Ethn,  Soc,  N.S.,  Africa,  p.  677. 

Tol.  Tii.  p.  308.  ^  Voyage  io  Guinea,  p.  233.  Pin- 

^  Miiller'sDes.  detoutes  les  Na-  kerton,  vol.  zv.  p.  626.    Elsewhere 

^ODB  de  TEmp.  de  Kussiei  vol.  iii.  in  Guinea  twins  are  welcomed. 


32  FANCIES  ABOUT  TWINS. 

*  and  in  Nguru,  one  of  the  sister  provinces  to  Unyan- 
'  yemb6,  twins  are  ordered  to  be  killed  and  thrown  mto 

*  the  water  the  moment  they  are  bom,  lest  droughts 

*  and  famines  or  floods  should  oppress  the  land.    Should 

*  any  one  attempt  to  conceal  twins,  the  whole  family 

*  would  be  murdered.'  ^ 

In  Peru,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  tells  us  that  some 
tribes  welcomed  twins,  as  an  evidence  of  fertility,  while 
others  *  held  such  births  to  be  a  bad  omen.'  * 

The  Australians  ^  and  the  North  American  Indians,^ 
on  the  birth  of  twins  killed  one ;  perhaps  merely  under 
the  idea  that  one  strong  child  was  better  than  two  weak 
ones. 

This  is  not,  however,  I  think,  the  general  cause  of 
the  prejudice  against  twins.  I  should  rather  account 
for  it  by  the  idea  indicated  in  the  following  passage  from 
the  introduction  to  the  curious  old  Chevalier  Assigne, 
or  Knight  of  the  Swan  (the  king  and  queen  are  sitting 
on  the  wall  together)  : — 

The  kynge  loked  adowne,  and  byholde  under, 
And  seygli  a  poro  womman,  at  the  yate  sytte, 
Withe  two  chyldereu  her  byfore,  were  borne  at  a  byrthe  ; 
And  he  turned  him  thennc,  and  teres  lette  he  falle. 
Sythen  sykede  he  on  hyghe,  and  to  the  qwene  sayde. 
So  ye  the  yonder  poor  womman.     Now  that  she  is  pyned 
With  twynlengea  two,  and  that  dare  I  my  hedde  wedde. 
The  qweue  nykked  Iiim  with  nay,  and  scyde  it  is  not  to  Icve ; 
Oon  manne  for  oon  chylde,  and  two  wyninien  for  tweyno  j 
Or  ellis  hit  wore  unsemelye  thynge,  as  me  wolde  thenke, 
But  eche  chylde  haddo  a  fader,  how  manye  so  ther  were.* 


*  Spoke's  Discovery  of  the  Source  *  Waitz,  Anthropologic,  toI.  tL 

of  the  Nile,  pp.  541,  542.  p.  770. 

»  Iloyal    Commentaries  of   the  *  I^afitau,  vol.  i.  p.  5l>2. 

Incas.   Ilakluyt  Society,   vol.  i.  p.  *  The  Romance  of  the  Chevalier 

110.  Aasigne,  edited  by  II.  H.  Gibbs,  Esq. 

Trubncrs,  1868. 


LIFE  ATTRIBUTED  TO  INANIMATE  OBJECTS.      33 

Since  reading  this  I  have  found  that  the  very  same 
idea  occurs  in  Guinea.* 

Some  curious  ideas  prevalent  among  savages  arise 
from  the  fact  that  as  their  own  actions  are  due  to  life, 
so  they  attribute  life  even  to  inanimate  objects.  Even 
Plato  assumed  that  everything  which  moves  itself  must 
have  a  soul,  and  hence  that  the  world  must  have  a  soul. 
Hearne  tells  us  that  the  North  American  Indians  pre- 
fer a  hook  that  has  caught  a  big  fish  to  a  handftd  that 
have  'never  been  tried ;  and  that  they  never  put  two 
nets  together  for  fear  they  should  be  jealous.* 

The  Esquimaux  thought  that  Captain  Lyons's 
musical  box  was  the  child  of  his  small  hand-organ.^ 

The  Bushmen  thought  Chapman's  big  waggon  was 
the  mother  of  his  smaller  ones  ;  they  *  despise  an  arrow 

*  that  has  once  failed  of  its  mark ;  and  on  the  contrary 
'  consider  one  that  has  hit  as  of  double  value.     They 

*  will,  therefore,  rather  make  new  arrows,  how  much 
'  time  and  trouble  soever  it  may  cost  them,  than  collect 
'  those  that  have  missed,  and  use  them  again.'  ^ 

The  natives  of  Tahiti  sowed  some  iron  nails  given 
them  by  Captain  Cook,  hoping  thus  to  obtain  young 
ones.  They  also  believe  that  *  not  only  all  animals,  but 
^  trees,  fruit,  and  even  stones,  have  souls,  which  at  deaths 
'  or  upon  being  consumed  or  broken,  ascend  to  the  di- 
'  vinity,  with  whom  they  first  mix,  and  afterwards  pass 
^  into  the  mansion  allotted  to  each.' 

>  Astle/s  Collection  of  Voyages,  p.  145. 
Tol.  iii.  p.  83.  At  p.  358,  in  the  tame  '  Loc.  cii.^  p.  390. 

ToL,  we  find  a  curious  variatiun  of  *  Lyons's  Joomal,  p.  140. 

this    idea    among    the  Hottentots.  *  Lichtenstein's  TniTels  in  South 

See  also  Burton's  Dahome,  toI.  iL  Africa,  toI.  iL  p.  271. 


34  KILLING  INANIMATE  OBJECTS. 

The  Tongans  were  of  opinion  that  *  if  an  animal  dies/ 

*  its  soul  immediately  goes  to  Bolotoo  ;  if  a  stone  or  any 
^  other  substance  is  broken,  immortality  is  equally  its 

*  reward  ;  nay,  artificial  bodies  have  equal  good  luck 
^  with  men,  and  hogs,  and  yams.     If  an  axe  or  a  chisel 

*  is  worn  out  or  broken  up,  away  flies  its  soul  for  the 

*  service  of  the  gods.  If  a  house  is  taken  down  or  any 
^  way  destroyed,  its  immortal  part  will  find  a  situation 
'  on  the  plains  of  Bolotoo.'  Hence  probably  the  custom 
of  breaking  the  implements,  &c.  buried  with  the  'dead. 
This  was  not  done  to  render  them  useless,  for  the  8a\'age 
would  not  dream  of  violating  the  tomb,  bringing  on 
himself  the  wrath  of  its  occupant;  but  because  the  im- 
plements required  to  be  '  killed,'  so  that  their  spirits, 
like  those  of  the  wives  and  slaves,  might  accompany 
their  master  to  the  land  of  shadows. 

Lichtenstein  relates  that  the  king  of  the  Coussa 
Kaffirs,  having  broken  off  a  piece  of  the  anchor  of  a 
stranded  ship,  died  soon  afterwards  ;  upon  which  all  the 
Kaffirs  made  a  j)oint  of  saluting  the  anchor  very  respect- 
fully whenever  they  passed  near  it,  regarding  it  as  a 
vindictive  being. 

Some  similar  accident  probably  gave  rise  to  the  an- 
cient Mohawk  notion  that  some  great  misfortune  would 
happen  if  any  one  spoke  on  Saratoga  Lake.  A  strong- 
minded  Englishwoman,  on  one  occasion,  while  being 
ferried  over,  insisted  on  talkin;^,  and,  as  she  got  across 
safely,  rallied  her  boatman  on  his  superstition;  but  I 
think  he  had  the  best  of  it  after  all,  for  he  at  once  re- 
plied, *  The  Great  Spirit  is  merciful,  and  knows  that  a 

*  white  woman  cannot  hold  her  tongue.'  *^ 

•  Mariner's  Tonga  Islands,  vol.  '  JJurtou's  AbUcokuta,  vol.  L  p. 

ii.  p.  V67.  lOH. 


SALUTATIONS,  35 

The  forms  of  salutation  among  savages  are  sometimes 
very  curious,  and  their  modes  of  showing  their  feelings 
quite  unlike  ours.  Kissing  appears  to  us  to  be  the 
natural  language  of  affection.  '  It  is  certain/  says 
Steele,  ^  that  nature  was  its  author,  and  it  began  with 
*  the  first  courtship; '  but  this  seems  to  be  quite  a  mis- 
take. In  fact,  it  was  unknown  to  the  Australians,  the 
New  Zealanders,  the  Papouans,  and  the  Esquimaux; 
the  African  negroes,  we  are  told,  do  not  like  it,  other- 
\vise  I  should  have  thought  that,  when  once  discovered, 
it  would  have  been  universally  popular.  The  New 
Zealanders,  according  to  Shortland,  did  not  know  how 
to  whistle;^  the  West  Africans  do  not  shake  hands  ;^ 
the  Batonga  (one  of  the  tribes  residing  on  the  Zambesi) 
salute  their  friends  by  throwing  themselves  on  their 
backs  on  the  ground,  rolling  from  side  to  side,  and 
slapping  their  thighs  with  their  hands.^  In  the  same 
country  the  Bakaa  have  a  peculiar  prejudice  against 
children  who  cut  the  upper  front  teeth  before  the  lower 
ones ;  and  '  you  cut  your  top  teeth  first '  is  one  of  the 
bitterest  insults  a  man  can  receive.* 

The  Polynesians  and  the  Malays  always  sit  down 
when  speaking  to  a  superior;  a  Chinaman  puts  on  his 
hat  instead  of  taking  it  off.  Cook  asserts  that  the 
people  of  MallicoUo  show  their  admiration  by  hissing, 
and  the  same  is  the  case,  according  to  Casalis,  among 
the  Kaffirs.^  In  some  of  the  Pacific  Islands,  in  parts  of 
Hindostan*  and  some  parts  of  Africa,  it  is  considered 

'  TraditioDfl    of  the  New  Zea-  Africa,  p.  551. 
landers,  p.  131.  *  Livingstone,  ioc.  cit,,  p.  677. 

^  Barton's  Mission  to  Dahome,  ^  The  Basutos,  bj  the  Key.  £. 

vol.  i.  p.  36.  Casalis,  p.  234. 

*  Livingstone's  Travels  in  South  ^  Dubois,  Ioc,  cit.,  p.  210. 

D  2 


36  SALUTATIONS, 

respectful  to  turn  your  back  to  a  superior.  The  Todas 
of  the  Neilgherry  Hills  are  said  to  show  respect  by 

*  raising  the  open  right  hand  to  the  brow,  resting  the 

*  thumb  on  the  nose  ; '  on  the  upper  Nile,  Dr.  Schwein- 
furth  tells  us,^  that  the  mode  of  sho>ving  admiration  is 
to  open  the  mouth  wide,  and  then  cover  it  with 
the  open  hand;  and  it  has  been  asserted  that  in  one 
tribe  of  Esquimaux  it  is  customary  to  pull  a  person's 
nose  as  a  compliment,  though  it  is  but  right  to  say  that 
Dr.  Rae  thinks  there  was  some  mistake  on  the  point ; 
on  the  other  hand,  Dr.  Blackmore  mentions  that  *  the 

*  sign  of  the  Arapahoes,  and  from  which  they  derive 

*  their  name,'  consists  in  seizing  the  nose  with  the 
thumb  and  forefinger.^ 

It  is  asserted  that  in  China  a  coffin  is  regarded  as  an 
appropriate  present  for  an  aged  relative,  especially  if  he 
be  in  bad  health. 

*  Heart  of  Africa,  vol.  ii.  p.  77. 
3  Tranfl.  Ethn.  Soc  1869,  p.  310. 


« 


4r 


/ 


^ 


■^. 


J» 


« 


37 


CHAPTER  II. 


ART   AND   ORNAMENTS. 


T^HE  earliest  traces  of  art  yet  discovered  belong  to  the 
Stone  Age — ^to  a  time  so  remote  that  the  reindeer 
was  abundant  in  the  south  of  France,  and  that  probably, 
though  on  this  point  there  is  some  doubt,  even  the 
mammoth  had  not  entirely  disappeared.  These  works 
of  art  are  sometimes  sculptures,  if  one  may  say  so,  and 
sometimes  drawings  or  etchings  made  on  bone  or  horn 
with  the  point  of  a  flint. 

They  are  of  peculiar  interest,  both  as  being  the  ear- 
liest works  of  art  known  to  us — older  than  any  Egyp- 
tian statues,  or  any  of  the  Assyrian  monuments — and 
also  l)ecause,  though  so  ancient,  they  show  really  con- 
siderable skill.     There  is,  for  instance,  a  certain  spirit 
about  the  subjoined  group  of  reindeer  (fig.  1),  copied 
from  a  specimen  in  the  collection  of  the  Marquis  de 
Vibraye.     The  mammoth  (PL  I.)  represented  on  the 
opposite  page,  though  less  artistic,  is  perhaps  even  more 
interesting.     It  is  scratched  on  a  piece  of  mammoth's 
tusk,  and  was  found  in  the  cave  of  La  Madeleine  in  the 
I^ordogne. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  while  even  in  the 
Stone  Period  we  find  very  fair  drawings  of  animals,  yet 
m  the  latest  part  of  the  Stone  Age,  and  throughout  that 
of  Bronze,  they  are  almost  entirely  wanting,  axad  the 


ABT  Aa  AN 


ornftmentation  is  confined  to  various  combinationB  of 
straight  and  curved  lines  and  geometrical  patt«m?. 
This,  I  bfiHcve,  will  eventually  be  found  to  imply  a 
difterence  of  race  between  the  popuhition  of  Weston 


Knro|H>  at  these  different  perio<l«.  Thus  at  present  the 
KK(|niiiiim\  (sc<^  li^jw.  2-1)  are  very  fair  draughtsmen, 
wliile_the  I'olyncsinns,  thon^h  nmcli  more  advanced  in 
many  ways,  and  thiingU  skilful  in  ornamenting  both 
tlioniBclvi's  and  their  weapons,  have  very  little  idea 
indeed  of  ri'prcsciitiii*;  animals  or  plants.  Their  tattoo- 
ingR,  for  inataiii'c,  and  the  [Hitti-rns  on  their  weapons, 
are,  like  tlie  ornaments  of  the  Umnze  Afio,  almost 
invariably  of  n  geometrical  chanit'tcr.  Kcpresentationa 
of  animals  and  plants  are  not,  iiiderd,  i-ntirely  wanting; 
but,  whether  attempted  in  drawing  or  in  »oiil))tnre,  they 
are  alwayn  rude  and  gn)teKque.  With  tlie  I'lsqnimaux 
the  very  reverHe  it*  the  cawe:  anmng  tliem  wc  fiii<l  none 
of  those  ^'ract'fnl  npinds,  and  other  geometrical  patterns, 


BTENOLOOTCAL  CBARAiyrES. 


40  AFT  AS  AN 

so  cliaractcristic  of  Polynesia ;  but,  on  the  other  haml, 
tlieir  weapons  are  often  covered  with  representations 
of  animals  and  hunting  scenes.  Thus  Beechey,^  de- 
scribing the  weapons  of  the  Esquimaux  at  Hotham's 
Inlet,  says : — 

*  On  the  outside  of  this  and  other  instruments  there 
were  etched  a  variety  of  figures  of  men,  beasts,  birds, 
&c.,  with  a  truth  and  a  character  which  showed  the 
art  to  be  common  among  them.  The  reindeer  were 
generally  in  herds;  in  one  picture  they  were  pursued 
by  a  man  in  a  stooping  posture,  in  snow-shoes ;  in 
another  he  had  approached  nearer  to  his  game,  and 
was  in  the  act  of  drawing  his  boWl  A  third  repre- 
sented the  manner  of  taking  seals  with  an  inflated  skin 
of  the  same  animal  as  a  decoy ;  it  was  placed  upon  the 
ice,  and  not  far  from  it  was  a  man  lying  upon  his 
belly,  with  a  harpoon  ready  to  strike  the  animal  when 
it  should  make  its  appearance.  Another  was  dragging 
a  seal  home  upon  a  small  sledge  ;  and  several  baidars 
were  employed  har})Ooning  whales  which  had  been 
previously  shot  with  arrows  ;  and  thus,  by  comparing 
one  with  another,  a  little  history  was  obtained  which 
gave  us  a  ])etter  insight  into  their  habits  than  could  be 
elicited  from  any  signs  or  intimations.'  Some  of  these 
Irawings  are  represented  in  figs.  2-4,  which  are  taken 

m 

from  specimens  presented  by  Captain  Becchey  to  the 
Ashmolean  Museum  .it  Oxford. 

H(H)per'  also  mentions  drawings  amcmg  the  Tuski, 
especially  *a  sealskin  tanned  and  bleached  perfectly 
*  white,  ornamentcil  all  over  in  painting  and  staining 

'   NiiiTAtivo  «ir  n  V«tvji«;<*  to  the  Pnoific.  vi»l.  i.  p.  i>r>L 
»  IViits  <if  the  TuHki.  p.  <K. 


ETHNOLOOICAL  OHABAGTEB.  41 

*  with  figures  of  men,  boats,  animals,  and  delineations  of 

*  whale-fishing,  &c. — a  valuable  curiosity/ 

In  the  same  way  we  may,  I  think,  fairly  hope  even- 
tually to  obtain  from  the  ancient  drawings  of  the  bone 
caves  a  better  insight  into  the  habits  of  our  predecessors 
in  Western  Europe ;  to  ascertain,  for  instance,  whether 
their  reindeer  were  domesticated  or  wild.  As  yet, 
however,  mere  representations  of  animals  have  been 
met  with,  and  nothing  has  been  found  to  supplement 
in  any  way  the  evidence  derivable  from  the  imple- 
ments, &c. 

But  though  we  thus  find  art — simple,  indeed,  but 
by  no  means  contemptible — in  very  ancient  times,  and 
among  very  savage  tribes,  there  are  also  other  races  who 
are  singularly  deficient  in  it. 

Thus,  though  some  Australians  are  capable  of  mak- 
ing rude  drawings  of  animals,  &c.,  others,  on  the  con- 
trary, as  Oldfield^  tells  us,  *seem  quite  unable  to 
'  realise  the  most  vivid  artistic   representations.     On 

*  being  shown  a  large   coloured  engraving  of  an  abo- 
'  riginal   New  Hollander,  one  declared  it  to  be  a  ship, 

*  another  a  kangaroo,  and  so  on  ;  not  one  of  a  dozen 
'  identifying  the  portrait  as  having  any  connection  with 

*  himself.  A  rude  drawing,  with  all  the  lesser  parts 
'  much  exaggerated,  they  can  realise.  Thus,  to  give 
'  them  an  idea  of  a  man,  the  head  must  be  drawn  dis- 
'  proportionately  large.' 

Dr.  Collingwood,'^  speaking  of  the  Kibalans  of  For- 
mosa, to  whom  he  showed  a  copy  of  the  '  Illustrated 
*  London  News,'  tells  us  that  he  found  it  '  impossible 

*  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  N.S.,  vol.  iii.  p.  227. 
2  Ihid.,  vol.  vi.  p.  139. 


42  ART  IN  AFRICA. 

*  to  interest  them  by  pointing  out  the  most  Btriking 

*  illustrations,  which    they    did    not    appear    to  com- 

*  prehend.' 

Denham,  in  his '  Travels  in  Central  Africa,*  saystlist 
Bookhaloom,  a  man  otherwise  of  considerable  intelli- 
gence, though  he  readily  recognised  figures,  could  not 
understand  a  landscape.     *  I  could  not,'  he  says,  *  make 

*  him  understand  the  intention  of  the  print  of  the  sand- 
'  wind  in  the  desert,  which   is  really  so  well  described 

*  by  Captain  Lyons's  drawing  ;  he  would  look  at  it  up- 
'  side  down  ;  and  when  I  twice  reversed  it  for  him  heex- 
'  claimed, ''  Why  !  why  !  it  is  all  the  same."  A  camel  or 
'  a  human  figuixj  was  all  I  could  make  him  understand, 
'  and  at  these  he  was  all  agitation  and  delight — "  Gieb! 
'  "  gieb ! '' — Wonderful !  wonderful !  The  eyes  first  took 
'  his  attention,  then  the  other  features  ;  at  the  sight  of 
'  the  sword  he  exclaimed,  "  Allah  !  Allah !  "  and,  on 
'  discovering  the  guns,  instantly  exclaimed,  "  Where  is 
'  "  the  powder  ?  "  '  ^ 

So  also  the  Kaffir  has  great  difficulty  in  understand- 
ing drawings,  and  perspective  is  altogether  beyond  him. 
Central  and  Southern  Africa  seem,  indeed,  to  be  very 
backward  in  matters  of  art.  Still  the  negroes  are  not 
altogetlier  deficicMit  in  the  idea.  Their  idols  cannot  be 
called,  indeed,  works  of  art,  but  they  often  not  only 
represent  men,  but  give  some  of  the  African  charac- 
teristics with  grotesque  fidelity. 

The  Kaffirs  also  can  carve  fair  representations  of 
animals  an<l  plants,  and  are  fond  of  doing  so.  The 
handles  of  their  sjx)ons  are  often  shaped  into  unmistake- 
able  likenesses  of  giraffes,  ostriches,  and  other  animals. 

•  lk*n)iniirM  TniTclH  in  Afric«,  vol.  i.  p.  U\7. 


THE  QUIPPU.  43 

As  to  the  Bushmen,  we  have  rather  different  ac- 
counts. It  has  been  stated  by  some  that  they  have 
no  idea  of  perspective,  nor  of  how  a  curved  surface  can 
possibly  be  represented  on  a  flat  piece  of  paper ;  while, 
on  the  contrary,  other  travellers  assert  that  they  readily 
recognise  drawings  of  animals  or  flowers.  The  Chinese, 
although  so  advanced  in  many  ways,  are,  we  know, 
very  deficient  in  the  idea  of  perspective. 

Probably  no  race  of  men  in  the  Stone  Age  had  at- 
tained the  art  of  communicating  facts  by  means  of 
letters,  or  even  by  the  far  ruder  system  of  picture- 
writing  ;  nor  does  anything,  perhaps,  surprise  the 
savage  more  than  to  find  that  Europeans  can  com- 
municate with  one  another  by  means  of  a  few  black 
scratches  on  a  piece  of  paper. 

Even  the  Peruvians  had  no  better  means  of  record- 
ing events  than  the  Quippu  or  Quipu,  which  was  a  cord 
about  two  feet  long,  to  which  a  number  of  different 
coloured  threads  were  attached  in  the  form  of  a  fringe. 
These  threads  were  tied  into  knots,  whence  the  name 
Quippu,  meaning  a  knot.  These  knots  served  as  cyphers, 
and  the  various  threads  had  also  conventional  meanings 
attached  to   them,  indicated   by   the   various   colours. 
This  singular  and  apparently  very  cumbersome  mode  of 
assisting  ti»e  memory  reappears  in  China  and  in  Africa. 
Thus,  *  As  to  ^  the  original  of  the  Chinese  characters, 
'  before  the  commencement  of  the  monarchy,  little  cords 
'  with  sliding  knots,  each  of  which  had  its  particular 
'  signification,  were  used  in  transacting  business.  These 
'are  represented  in  two  tables  by  the  Chinese^  called 
'  flort),  and  Lo-shu.      The  first  colonies  who  inhabited 

*  Astley'e  Collection  of  Voyages,  vol.  iv.  p.  104. 


zij-.t^mL  •^'^  :•:'  i-iizn-c-z^  rjnit  whi  iinle  ]aM>tted  cords, 
II-  izj^'iT-ii.    .•:  L  ?.Lr-:;ir  vC  TM^czja  l«c:adab  'prith  which 


It-.   :•-•:!*  t:t»i.  iirr 


.^.-.- 


"  Ti>eT  T-^-rni^iin'i  i:iii  r:a»»5e  lif*  HI  ibsr  accounts  in  com- 
"  nrr.^e-'  Arsii-  in  W^s;  A^ml  we  are  told  that  the 
Teii  Ir    :  Arir^  -  "  mt.  r.^rhho'  write  ixm"  read.     Thev 

[be  kDccs  ot  which  have  their 
Tr."e>r  LT^  ako  used  by  seTeral  savage 
'ZLii'l.z.^  in  Amrrl.^a-'  I:  seens  not  impossible  that 
7}  i-z  i.  k:^ : :  I-  i  TK^.k-ei-handitrivhaef  may  be  the  direct 
IIl^t^I  re:  rt^zLTaTive-:'-'  :his  ancient  and  widelv-extended 

T'r-r  s.-c^l'c-i  r'l.:ur>r-wri;in^  is,  however,  a  crreat 
aJvucoe.  Y^i  ir^Mn  representations  of  hunts  in  general, 
such  as  thc-se  of  ine  Es'i^uimaux  (see  figs.  2—4),  it  is 
iiidr^l  bi;:  a  s:ep  to  K-o^rd  pictorially  some  particular 
hunt.  Aeain.  the  Esquimaux  almost  always  places  his 
mark  on  hi<  arrc»ws,  but  I  am  not  aware  that  any  Polv- 
ne^ian  ever  c«jiiceived  the  idea  of  doinir  so.  Thus  we 
get  among  the  Esquimaux  a  double  commencement,  as 
it  were,  for   the  representation  of  ideas  by  means  of 


signs. 


This  art  of  pictorial  writing  was  still  more  advanced 
among  the  Red  Skins. 

Thus  Carver  tells  us  that  on  one  occasion  his  Chipc- 
Avay  guide,  fearing  that  the  Xaudowcssies,  a  hostile  tribe, 
might  accidentally  fall  in  with  and  attack  them,  *  peeled 
'  the  bark  from  a  large  tree  near  the  entrance  of  a  river, 
'  and  with  wood-coal  mixe<l  with  bear's  grease,  their 
'  usual  Hubstitute  for  ink,  ma<le  in  an  micouth  but  ex- 
*  pn*Hsive  manner  the   figure  of  the  town  oftheOtta- 

•   Aiitli7*ii  ( \4lc»eti4»ii  of  Vnyagei*,  vol.  iii.  p.  71. 


PIGTUBJE'WBITING.  46 

'  guumies.     He  then  formed  to  the  left  a  man  dressed 
'  in  skins,  by  which  he  intended   to  represent  a  Nau- 

*  dowessie,  with  a  line  drawn  from  his  mouth  to  that  of 
'  a  deer,  the  symbol  of  the  Chip^ways.  After  this  he 
'  depicted  still  farther  to  the  left  a  canoe  as  proceeding 
'  up  the  river,  in  which  he  placed  a  man  sitting  with 

*  a  hat  on  ;  this  figure  was  designed  to  represent  an 

*  Englishman,  or  myself,  and  my  Frenchman  was  drawn 

*  with  a  handkerchief  tied  round  his  head,  and  rowing 

*  the  canoe  ;  to  these  he  added  several  other  significant 

*  emblems,  among  which  the  pipe  of  peace  appeared 

*  painted  on  the  prow  of  the  canoe.     The  meaning  he 

*  intended  to  convey  to  the  Naudowessies,  and  which  I 
'  doubt  not  appeared  perfectly  intelligible  to  them,  was 

*  that  one  of  the  Chipeway  chiefs  had  received  a  speech 
'  from  some  Naudowessie  chiefs  at  the  town  of  the  Otta- 

*  gaumies,  desiring  him  to  conduct  the  Englishman,  who 

*  had  lately  been  among  them,  up  the  Chipeway  river  ; 
*and  that  they  thereby  required  that  the  Chipeway, 
'  notwithstanding  he  was  an  avowed  enemy,  should  not 
'  be  molested  by  them  on  his  passage,  as  he  had  the 
'  care  of  a  person  whom  they  esteemed  as  one  of  their 
'nation.'  ^ 

An  excellent  account  of  the  Red  Skin  pictorial  art 
is  given  by  Schoolcraft  in  his  '  History  of  the  Indian 
'  Tribes  in  the  United  States.' 

Fig.  5  represents  the  census-roll  of  an  Indian  band 
at  Mille  Lac,  in  the  territory  of  Minnesota,  sent  in  to 
the  United  States  agent  by  Nago-nabe,  a  Chipeway 
Indian,  during  the  progress  of  the  annuity  payments  in 
1849.    The  Indians  generally  denote  themselves  by  their 

*  Carver's  Travels,  p.  418. 


4G 


INDIAN  OENBUS-ROLL. 


Fig.  5. 


II 


III 


13 


II 


III 


14 


m 


II 


8 


1   •  r  I  I 


inn 


9 


III! 


I  II 


10 


^■'jTrr-.: 


II  III 


10 


Nil 


mill 


11 


111 


17 


III  I 


nil 


13 


II  II 


18 


^ 


I  I  I 


ID 


20 


^/^ 


O 


21 


» 


^ 


28 


U 


lill 


nil 


II 


II 


I'C 


T) 


28 


"A 


80 


lllll 


null 


III! 


Ill 


nil 


31 


3'i 


33 


34 


80 


III 


II 


inn 


INDIAN   CENSUS-ROLL. 


INDIAN  TOMBSTONES, 


47 


'  totem/  or  family  sign  ;  but  in  this  case,  as  they  all  had 
the  same  totem,  he  had  designated  each  family  by  a  sign 
denoting  the  common  name  of  the  chief.  Thus  number 
5  denotes  a  catfish,  and  the  six  strokes  indicate  that 
the  Catfish's  family  consisted  of  six  individuals  ;  8  is  a 
beaver  skin,  9  a  sun,  13  an  eagle,  14  a  snake,  22  a 
bu£falo,  34  an  axe,  35  the  medicine-man,  and  so  on. 


FiQ.  6. 


Fig.  7. 


t^.: 


"^ 


ISDIAV   GBAVE-POSTO. 


(Schoolcraft,  vol.  i.  pi.  60.) 


Fig.  6  is  the  record  of  a  noted  chief  of  the  St.  Mary's 
band,  called  Shin-ga-ba-was-sin,  or  the  Image-stone,  who 
died  on  Lake  Superior  in  1828.  He  was  of  the  totem 
of  the  crane,  as  indicated  by  the  figure.  The  six  strokes 
on  the  right,  and  the  three  on  the  left,  are  marks  of 
honour.  The  latter  represent  three  important  general 
treaties  of  peace  in  which  he  had  taken  part  at  various 
times.^      Among  the  former   marks    are   included  his 

*  Schoolcraft;  Indian  Tribes,  vol.  i.  p.  367. 


48  PIGTUBE^WBITING. 

presence  under  Tecumseh,  at  the  battle  of  Moravian- 
town,  where  he  lost  a  brother. 

Fig.  7  represents  the  adjedatig,  or  tomb-board,  of 

Wabojeeg,  a  celebrated 
^^'  '  war-chief,  who  died  on 

Lake  Superior,  about 

1793.     He  was  of  the 

family  or  clan  of  the 

reindeer.     This  fact  is 

symbolised     by     the 

figure    of    the    deer. 

.^^.^^^         The  reverse  position 

^         ^       -<ia        ^^^^tes   death.      His 

^^^^  x^i      ^J^    .    ^^^^  personal    name, 

_^^  =><^      "^  I    ^i^^h  was  the  WTiite 


^xsg^  ^-315^   ^-^^^ 


^^^^pL  -^  Fisher,  is  not  noticed. 

^^       -^  I  The  seven  marks  on 

^^^  ^xitij      =>-=i^  I  he  had  led  seven  war 

^^  ^-j^      ■-'^s^  parties.       The   three 


>,5^jjgg      "^^         perpendicular  lines  be- 

loAv  the  totem  repre- 
sent three  wounds  re- 
ceived in  battle.  The 
figure  of  a  moose's 
head  relates  to  a  des- 
perate conflict  with  an 
enraged  animal  of  this 
khid.  Fig.  8  is  copied 
from    a    bark    letter 

which  was  found  above  St.  AnthoiiyV  Falls,  in  1820. 

*  It  consisted  of  white  birch  bark,  and  the  figures  had 


IN  NORTH  AMERICA.  49 

been  carefully  drawn.  No.  1  denotes  the  flag  of 
the  Union :  No.  2  the  cantonment,  then  recently- 
established,  at  Cold  Spring,  on  the  western  side  of 
the  cliffs,  above  the  influx  of  the  St.  Peters :  No.  4 
is  the  symbol  of  the  commanding  officer  (Colonel 
H.  Leavenwcwth),  under  whose  authority  a  mission 
of  peace  had  been  sent  into  the  Chippewa  country: 
No.  11  is  the  symbol  of  Chakope,  or  the  Six,  the 
leading  Sioux  chief,  under  whose  orders  the  party 
moved  :  No.  8  is  the  second  chief,  called  Wabedatunka, 
or  the  Black  Dog.  The  symbol  of  his  name  is  No.  10 ; 
he  has  fourteen  lodges.  No.  7  is  a  chief,  subordinate 
to  Chakope,  with  thirteen  lodges,  and  a  bale  of  goods 
(No.  9),  which  was  devoted  by  the  Government  to  the 
objects  of  the  peace.  The  name  of  No.  6,  whose 
wigwam  is  No.  5,  with  thirteen  subordinate  lodges, 
was  not  given.'  ^ 
This  was  intended  to  imply  that  a  party  of  Sioux, 
headed  by  Chakope,  and  accompanied  or  at  least  coun- 
tenanced by  Colonel  Leavenworth,  had  come  to  this  spot 
in  the  hope  of  meeting  the  Chippewa  hunters  and  con- 
cluding a  peace.  The  Chippewa  chief,  Babesacundabee, 
who  found  this  letter,  read  off  its  meaning  without 
doubt  or  hesitation. 

On  one  occasion  a  party  of  explorers,  with  two 
Indian  guides,  saw,  one  morning,  just  as  they  were 
about  to  start,  a  pole  stuck  in  the  direction  they  were 
going,  and  holding  at  the  top  a  piece  of  bark,  covered 
with  drawings,  intended  for  the  information  of  any  other 
Indians  who  might  pass  that  way.  This  is  represented 
in  fig.  9. 

*  Schoolcraft's  Indian  Tribes,  vol.  i.  pp.  352,  363. 

E 


50  INDIAN  BIOGRAPHY. 

2so.  1  represeuts  the  subaltern  officer  in  commiDd 
of  the  party.  He  is  drawn  with  a  sword  to  denote  his 
rank.  No.  2  denotes  the  secretary.  He  is  represented 
as  holding  a  book,  the  Indians  having  understood  him 
to  be  an  attorney.  No.  3  represents  the  geologist  ip 
propr lately  indicated  by  a  hammer.  Nos.  4  and  5  are 
attxvch6s  ;  No.  G  the  interpreter.  The  group  of  figures 
marked  9  represents  seven  infantry  soldiers,  each  of 
whom,  as  shown  in  group  No.  10,  was  armed  with  a 
musket.     No.  1 5  denotes  that  they  had  a  separate  fiiv. 

Fig.  0. 


11 


mmin 


6    6    4    i     «    I  /" 


INDIAN    IIAIIK    LETTEIU 


and  constituted  a  separate  mess.     Figs.  7  and  8  repre- 
sont  tlie  two  Chippewa  guides.     These   are   the  only 
human  figures  drawn  without  the  distinguishing  symbol 
of  a  hat.     This  was  the  characteristic  seized  on  by  them* 
.i'.xl  concrally  eniploytul  by  the  Indians,  to  distinguisb 
/»v   AW  from  tho    H7//A  race.     Figs.  11  and  12  repre- 
vx  »t,  4,  -^THirie  hen  and  a  gncn  tortoise,  which  constituted 
•  N  xxt't^  vxf  the  priri'diuLi  day's  chase,  and  were  eaten  at 
N    .  tu.«to;Muent.     T\\v  inrlination  of  the  pole  was  de- 
,^  ....    \»  Jtow  Uic  courso  pursued,  and  there  w^ere three 
,.   V .    ■    \    ^v-Iow  the  scroll  of  hark,  to  indicate  the  esti- 
.;,t  .1   -i  •  Iii;*  p»^'*  «'f  <  l»«^  Journey,  computing  from 
v.^.u.      VUc  foHowinji  fipirc  (fig.  10)  gives 


50  IXDIAK  BIOGRAPHY. 

No.  1  represents  the  subaltern  officer  in  comnuuid 
of  the  party.  He  is  drawn  with  a  sword  to  denote  his 
rank.  No.  2  denotes  the  secretary.  He  is  represented 
as  holding  a  book,  the  Indians  having  understood  him 
to  be  an  attorney.  No.  3  represents  the  geologist,  ap- 
propriately indicated  by  a  hammer.  Nos.  4  and  5  are 
attaches  ;  No.  6  the  interpreter.  The  group  of  figures 
marked  9  represents  seven  infantry  soldiers,  each  of 
whom,  as  shown  in  group  No.  10,  was  armed  with  a 
musket.     No.  15  denotes  that  they  had  a  separate  fire, 

Fig.  9. 


mmm 


6    J    4     !     «  1    *^ 


^1    >^f. 


u^  dk^  X 


INDIAN    BARK    LETTER. 


and  constituted  a  separate  mess.  Figs.  7  and  8  repre- 
pent  the  two  Chippewa  guides.  These  are  the  only 
human  figures  drawn  without  the  distinguishing  symbol 
of  a  hat.  This  was  the  characteristic  seized  on  by  thenif 
and  generally  employed  by  the  Indians,  to  distinguiah 
the  Bed  from  tlie  White  race.  Figs.  11  and  12  repre- 
sent a  prairie  lien  and  a  green  tortoise,  which  constituted 
the  sum  of  the  preceding  day's  chase,  and  were  eaten  at 
the  encampment.  The  inclination  of  the  i)ole  was  dc* 
signed  to  show  the  course  pursued,  and  there  were  three 
hacks  in  it  below  the  scroll  of  bark,  to  indicate  the  esti- 
mated length  of  this  part  of  the  journey,  computing  from 
water  to  water.     The  following  figure  (fig.  10)  gives 


INDIAN  PETITION 


51 


the  biography  of  Wingemund,  a  noted  chief  of  the  Dela- 
wares.  1  shows  that  it  belonged  to  the  oldest  branch 
of  the  tribe,  which  use  the  tortoise  on  their  symbol;  2 
is  his  totem  or  symbol  ;  3  is  the  sun,  and  the  ten  strokes 
represent  t^n  war  parties  in  which  he  was  engaged. 
Those  figures  on  the  left  represent  the  captives  which 
he  made  in  each  of  his  excursions,  the  men  being  distin- 

Fig.  10. 


DTDIAK   BARK  LETTER. 


guished  from  the  women,  and  the  captives  being  denoted 
by  having  heads,  while  a  man  without  his  head  is  of 
course  a  dead  man.  The  central  figures  represent  three 
forts  which  he  attacked ;  8  one  on  Lake  Erie,  9  that  of 
Detroit,  and  10  Fort  Pitt,  at  the  junction  of  the  Alleg- 
hany and  the  Monongahela.  The  sloping  strokes  denote 
the  number  of  his  followers.^ 

Fig.  1 1  represents  a  petition  presented  to  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States  for  the  right  to  certain  lakes 
(8)  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Superior  (10). 

'  Schoolcraft,  vol.  i.  p.  353. 
E  2 


JNDUN  FBTFTIOST. 


SAVAGE  OENAMENTS.  53 

No.  1  represents  Oshcabawis,  the  leader,  who  is  of 
the  Crane  clan.  The  eyes  of  his  followers  are  all  con- 
nected with  his  to  sjonbolise  unity  of  views,  and  their 
hearts  to  denote  unity  of  feeling.  No.  2  is  Wai-mit-tig- 
oazh,  whose  totem  is  a  marten ;  No.  3  is  Ogemagee- 
zhig,  also  a  marten ;  4  is  another  marten,  Muk-o-mis-ud- 
ains,  the  Little  Tortoise  ;  5  is  0-mush-kose,  the  Little 
Elk,  belonging,  however,  to  the  Bear  totem;  6  belongs 
to  the  Manfish  totem,  and  7  to  the  Catfish.  The  eye  of 
the  leader  has  a  line  directed  forwards  to  the  President, 
and  another  backwards  to  the  lakes  (8). 

In  some  places  of  Western  Europe,  rock  sculptures 
have  been  discovered,  to  which  we  cannot  yet  safely 
ascribe  any  meaning,  but  on  which  perhaps  the  more 
complete  study  of  the  picture-writing  of  modem 
savages  may  eventually  throw  some  light. 

We  will  now  pass  to  art  as  applied  to  the  purposes 
of  personal  decoration.  Savages  are  passionately  fond 
of  ornaments.  In  some  of  the  very  lowest  races,  indeed, 
the  women  are  almost  undecorated,  but  that  is  only  be- 
cause the  men  keep  all  the  ornaments  themselves.  As 
a  general  rule,  we  may  say  that  Southerners  ornament 
themselves,  Northerners  their  clothes.  In  fact,  all  savage 
races  who  leave  much  of  their  skin  uncovered  delight  in 
painting  themselves  in  the  most  brilliant  colours  they 
can  obtain.  Black,  white,  red,  and  yellow  are  the 
favourite,  or  rather,  perhaps,  the  commonest  colours. 
Although  perfectly  naked,  the  Australians  of  Botany 
Bay  were  by  no  means  without  ornaments.  They 
painted  themselves  with  red  ochre,  white  clay,  and 
charcoal ;  the  red  was  laid  on  in  broad  patches,  tlie 
white  generally  in  stripes,  or  on  the  face  in  spots,  often 


54  SAVAGE  OBNAMENTS. 

with  a  circle  round  each  eye  ;  ^  through  the  septum  of 
the  nose  they  wore  a  bone  as  thick  as  a  man's  finger  and 
five  or  six  inches  long.  This  was  of  course  very  awk- 
ward, as  it  prevented  them  from  breathing  freely  through 
the  nose,  but  they  submitted  cheerfully  to  the  incon- 
venience for  the  sake  of  appearance. 

They  had  also  necklaces  made  of  shells,  neatly  cut 
and  strung  together  ;  earrings,  bracelets  of  small  cord, 
and  strings  of  plaited  human  hair,  which  they  wound 
round  their  waists.  Some  also  had  gorgets  of  large 
shells  hanging  from  the  neck  across  the  breast.  On  all 
these  things  they  placed  a  high  value. 

Spix  and  Martins^  thus  describe  the  ornaments  of  ft 
Coroado  woman : — '  On  the  cheek  she  had  a  circle,  and 
'  over  that  two  strokes ;  under  the  nose  several  marks 
'  resembling  an  M  ;  from  the  corners  of  the  mouth  to 
'  the  middle  of  the  check  were  two  parallel  lineSi  and 

*  below  them   on  both    sides  many   straight   stripes; 

*  below  and  between  her  breasts  there  were  some  con- 
'  nected  segments  of  circles,  and  down  her  arms  the 

*  figure  of  a  snake  was  depicted.  This  beauty  wore  no 
'  ornaments,  except  a  necklace  of  monkeys'  teeth.' 

In  Tanna  '  one  would  have  the  one-half  of  his  face 

*  smeared  with  rinl  clay,  and  the  other  the  plain  dark 

*  copper  skin;  another  would  have  the  brow  and  cheeks 

*  red  ;  another  would  have  the   brow  red  and  cheeks 

*  black ;  another  all  the  face  red,  and  a  round,  black, 

*  glittering  s})ot  on  the  forehead;  and  another  would  have 

*  his  face  black  all  over.  The  black  all  over,  by  the  way, 
'  was  the  sign  of  mourning.'^ 

*  lIfiwke8worth*a   VoyB^fi***,  vol.  '  Tumer'H    Ninotoeu    Ye«n    in 
iii.  p.  OiWi.                                              rt>l3iK'»i»>  p.  5. 

*  TraTeU  in  nraziI,vol.  ii.  p.  224. 


CHEEK  STUDS.      LAB  BETS.  55 

The  savage  also  wears  necklaces  and  rings,  bracelets 
and  anklets,  armlets  and  leglets — even,  if  I  may  say  so, 
bodylets.  Round  their  bodies,  round  their  necks, 
round  their  arms  and  legs,  their  fingers,  and  even  their 
toes,  they  wear  ornaments  of  all  kinds.  From  their 
number  and  weight  these  must  sometimes  be  very 
inconvenient.  Lichtenstein  saw  the  wife  of  a  Beetuan 
chief  wearing  no  less  than  seventy-two  brass  rings. 

A  South  African  chiefbainess,  visited  by  Living- 
stone,^ wore  'eighteen  solid  brass  rings,  as  thick  as 
'  one's  finger,  on  each  leg,  and  three  of  copper  under 
'  each  knee ;  nineteen  brass  rings  on  her  left  arm,  and 
*  eight  of  brass  and  copper  on  her  right ;  also  a  large 
'  ivory  ring  above  each  elbow.  She  had  a  pretty  bead 
'  necklace,  and  a  bead  sash  encircled  her  waist.' 

Nor  are  they  particular  as  to  the  material :  copper, 
brass,  or  iron,  leather  or  ivory,  stones,  shells,  glass,  bits 
of  wood,  seeds,  or  teeth — ^nothing  comes  amiss.     In 
South  East  Island,  one  of  the  Louisiade  Archipelago, 
M'Gillivray  even  saw  several  bracelets  made  each  of  a 
lower  human  jaw,  crossed  by  a  collar-bone  ;  and  other 
travellers  have  seen  brass  curtain  rings,  the  brass  plates 
for  keyholes,  the  lids  of  sardine  cases,  and  other  such 
incongruous  objects  worn  with  much  gravity  and  pride. 
The  Felatah  ladies  in  Central  Africa  spend  several 
hours  a  day  over  their  toilet.     In  fact  they  begin  over- 
night by  carefully  wrapping  their  fingers  and  toes  in 
henna  leaves,   so   that  by   morning  they  are   a   rich 
purple.     The  teeth  are  stained  alternately  blue,  yellow, 
snd  purj)le,  one  here  and  there  being  left  of  its  natural 
colour,  as  a  contrast.     About  the  eyelids  they  are  very 

'  Exp.  to  the  Zambesi,  p.  284. 


5G  TRIBE  MABK8. 

particular;  pencilling  them  with  sulphivret  of  antimonv. 
The  hair  is  coloured  carefully  with  indigo.  Studs  and 
other  jewellery  are  worn  in  great  profusion.^ 

Not  content  with  hanging  things  round  their  necU 
arms,  ancles,  and  in  fact  wherever  nature  has  enabled 
them  to  do  so,  savages  also  cut  holes  in  themselves  for 
the  purpose. 

The  Esquimaux  from  Mackenzie  River  westward 
make  two  openings  in  their  cheeks,  one  on  each  side, 
which  they  gradually  enlarge,  and  in  which  they  wear 
an  ornament  of  stone  resembling  in  form  a  large  stud, 
and  which  may  therefore  be  called  a  cheek  stud. 
Brenchley  saw  the  natives  of  the  Solomon  Islands 
decorated  by  crabs'  claws  stuck  in  the  cartilage  rf 
the  nose.* 

Throughout  a  great  part  of  Western  America,  and 
again  in  Africa,  we  also  find  the  custom  of  wearing  a 
piece  of  wood  through  the  central  part  of  the  lower  lip. 
A  small  hole  is  made  in  the  lip  during  infancy,  and  it  is 
then  extended  by  degrees  until  it  is  sometimes  as  much 
as  two  inches  lon^. 

Some  races  extend  the  lobe  of  the  ear  until  it 
reaches  the  shoulder  ;  others  file  the  teeth  in  various 
manners. 

Thus,  among  the  Kcjangs  of  Sumatra,  *  both  sexes 
'  have  the  extniordinary  custom  of  filhig  and  otherwise 

*  disfiguring  their  teeth,  which  are  naturally  very  white 
'  and  l)eautiful,  from  the  Hiniplicity  of  their  food.     For 

*  files  they  make  use  of  small  whetstones  i>f  different 

*  (l(';.M'(»e8  of  (iruMicrts,  and  the  patients  lie  on  their  backs 

'   Lninr?*  KxiHMlifion  into  Uio  Iiitviior  of  Africii,  vol  ii.  j>.  04. 
=*  Cruiiio  uf  Uio  •  Cunicoii,*  p.  2.>0. 


ORNAMENTATION  OF  THE  SKIN.  57 

*  during  the  operatioD.     Many,  particularly  women  of 

*  the  Lampong  country,  have  their  teeth  rubbed  down 

*  quite  even  with  the  gums ;  others  have  them  formed 
'  in  points,  and  some  file  off  no  more  than  the  outer 

*  coat   and   extremities,  in  order  that   they  may  the 

*  better  receive   and   retain  the  jetty  blackness  with 

*  which  they  almost  universally  adorn  them/^ 

Dr.  J.  B.  Davis  has  a  Dyak  skull  in  which  the  six 
front  teeth  have  each  been  carefully  pierced  with  a 
small  hole,  into  which  a  pin  with  a  spherical  brass  head 
has  been  driven.  In  this  way,  the  upper  lip  being 
raised,  the  shining  knob  on  each  tooth  would  be  dis- 
played.^ Some  of  the  African  tribes  also  chip  their 
teeth  in  various  manners,  each  community  having  a 
fSftshion  of  its  own. 

Ornamentation  of  the  skin  is  almost  universal  among 

ihe  lower  races  of  men.     In  some  cases  every  individual 

follows  his  own  fancy ;  in  others,  each  clan  has  a  special 

pattern.    Thus,  speaking  of  Abeokutxi,  Captain  Burton* 

says : — ^  There  was  a  vast  variety  of  tattoos  and  orna- 

'  mentation,    rendering    them   a   serious    difficulty   to 

'  strangers.     The  skin  patterns  were  of  every  variety, 

'  from  the  diminutive  prick  to  the  great  gash  and  the 

'  large  boil-like  lumps.    They  affected  various  figures — 

'  tortoises,   alligators,  and  the  favourite  lizard,   stars, 

*  concentric  circles,  lozenges,  right  lines,  welts,  gouts  of 

'  gore,  marble  or  button-like  knobs  of  flesh,  and  ele- 

'  vated  scars,  resembling  scalds,  which  arc  opened  for 

'  the  introduction  of  fetish  medicines,  and  to  expel  evil 


'  Marsden's  History  of  Sumatra,  p.  52. 
2  Thesaurus  Cranioruin,  p.  28i>. 
^  Abeokuta,  vol.  i.  p.  104. 


58  TATTOOma. 

*  influences.     In  this  country  every  tribe,  sub-tribe,  and 

*  even  fiunily,  has  its  blazon,^  whose  infinite  diversifica- 
^  tions  may  be  compared  with  the  lines  and  ordinaries 
'  of  European  heraldry.' 

In  South  Africa  the  Nyambanas  are  characterised  by 
a  row  of  pimples  or  warts,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  and 
extending  from  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead  to  the 
tip  of  the  nose.  Among  the  Bachapin  Kaffirs,  those  who 
have  distinguished  themselves  in  battle  are  allowed  the 
privilege  of  marking  their  thigh  with  a  long  scar,  which 
is  rendered  indelible  and  of  a  bluish  colour  by  rubbing 
ashes  into  the  fresh  wound. 

The  tribal  mark  of  the  Bunns^  (Africa)  consists  of 
three  slashes  from  the  crown  of  the  head  down  the 
face  towards  the  mouth ;  the  ridges  of  flesh  stand  out 
in  bold  relief.  This  painful  operation  is  performed  by 
cutting  the  skin,  and  taking  out  a  strip  of  flesh  ;  palm 
oil  and  wood  ashes  are  then  rubbed  into  the  wound, 
thus  causing  a  thick  ridge. 

The  Bornouese  in  Central  Africa  have  twenty  cuts 
or  lines  on  each  side  of  the  face,  which  are  drawn  frova 
the  corners  of  the  mouth  towards  the  angles  of  the 
lower  jaw  and  cheekbone.  They  have  also  one  cut  in 
the  centre  of  the  forehead,  six  on  each  arm,  six  on  each 
leg,  four  on  each  breast,  and  nine  on  each  side,  just 
above  the  hips.  This  makes  91  large  cuts,  and  the 
process  is  said  to  be  extremely  painful  on  account  of 
the  heat  and  flies.^ 

The  islanders  of  Torres  Straits  ornament  themselves 


*  See    also   Baikie's    Explorinf^  '  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  toI.  v.  p.  80. 

Voyage,  pp.  77,  204,  330,  and   es-  »  Denliam,  vol.  iU.  p.  175. 

pecially  400. 


TATTOOING,  59 

by  a  large  oval  scar,  slightly  raised  and  neatly  made. 
It  is  situated  on  the  right  shoulder,  but  some  of  them 
have  a  second  on  the  left.  At  Cape  York  many  of  the 
natives  also  had  two  or  three  long  transverse  scar$  on 
the  chest.  Many  had  also  a  two-homed  mark  on  each 
breast,  but  these  differences  seemed  to  depend  on  the 
taste  of  the  individual. 

The  custom  of  tattooing  is  found  almost  all  over 
the  world,  though,  as  might  be  expected,  it  is  most 
developed  in  hot  countries.  In  Siberia,  however,  the 
Ostiak  women  tattoo  the  backs  of  the  hands,  the  fore- 
arm, and  the  front  of  the  leg.  The  men  only  tattoo, 
on  the  wrist,  the  mark  or  sign  which  stands  as  their 
signature.^ 

Among  the  Tuski*  *the  fiwes  of  the  women  are  tat- 
'  tooed  on  the  chin  in  diverging  lines  ;  men  only  make 
'  a  permanent  mark  on  the  face  for  an  act  of  prowess 
'  or  success,  such  as  killing  a  bear,  capturing  a  whale, 
'  &c.,  and  possibly  also,  in  war  time,  for  the  death  of 
*an  enemy.' 

Among  the  Arabs ^ 'the  Aenezi  women  puncture 
'their  lips  and  dye  them  blue  ;  the  Serhhan  women 
'  puncture  their  cheeks,  breasts,  and  arms,  and  the 
'  Ammour  women  their  ancles.' 

The  Aleutian  Islanders  decorate  their  hands  and 
faces  with  figures  of  quadrupeds,  birds,  flowers,  &c. 
.'Vmong  the  Tunguses  the  patterns  are  generally  formed 
by  straight  and  curved  lines.* 


*  PallftP,  vol.  iv.  Tp.  •'iO.  douins  and  Wahabys,  vol.  i.  p.  ol. 
'  Hooper.     The    Tents    of    the  *  Muller.      Dep.    de    toutes   Ics 

Tuski,  p.  37.  Nat.  de  TEmp.  de  Russe,  Tt.    HI. 

»  Burckbardt.     Notes  on  the  Be-  p.  58,  112. 


■i 


58  TATTOOING. 

*  influences.     In  this  country  every  tribe,  sub-tribe,  and 

*  even  family,  has  its  blazon/  whose  infinite  diversifica- 
'  tions  may  be  compared  with  the  lines  and  ordinaries 

*  of  European  heraldry.' 

I  n  South  Africa  the  Nyambanas  are  characterised  by 
a  row  of  pimples  or  warts,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  aiid 
extending  from  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead  to  the 
tip  of  the  nose.  Among  the  Bachapin  Kaffirs,  those  who 
have  distinguished  themselves  in  battle  are  allowed  the 
privilege  of  marking  their  thigh  with  a  long  scar,  which 
in  rc^ndercd  indelible  and  of  a  bluish  colour  by  rubbing 
luthos  into  the  fresh  wound. 

The  t  rilml  mark  of  the  Bunns^  (Africa)  consists  of 
thn*c  nlashes  from  the  crown  of  the  head  down  the 
faro  towarilH  the  mouth;  the  ridges  of  flesh  stand  out 
in  lK>ld  relief.  This  ]>ainful  operation  is  performed  by 
cutting  the  skin,  and  taking  out  a  strip  of  flesh  ;  palm 
oil  and  W(hhI  ashes  are  then  rubbed  into  the  wound, 
tluiH  ransing  a  thick  ridge. 

Tho  Hornouose  in  Central  Africa  have  twenty  cuts 
or  lint'M  on  earh  side  of  the  face,  which  are  drawn  from 
tlir  rornrrs  of  the  mouth  towards  the  angles  of  the 
h»>vrr  JHW  and  oheeklu>no.  They  have  also  one  cut  in 
ihi*  rphtrr  of  the  forrluMid,  six  on  each  arm,  six  on  each 
If^,  lour  on  each  breast,  and  nine  on  each  side,  just 
mImivo  the  hips.  This  makes  !)1  large  cuts,  and  the 
lirotTMn  \H  Haid  to  i>e  extremely  painful  on  account  of 
(hn  himt  and  (lies." 

Thn  Uhuidem  of  Torres  Straits  ornament  themselves 

•  rw    »U.    Mullil..'-     Kxplorinj^  '  Trnn*.  Kthn.  S<v.,vol.  v.  p.  Sa 

Vnt*M«S  I'll,  /i',  yUl.  a:kl.  ,„u|    ».«.  »  Donlmm,  vol.  iii.  p.  175. 

|mimnIIv  1.'i4I.  ^ 


TATTOOINO,  61 

Not  content  with  the  paint  already  mentioned,  the 
inhabitants  of  Tanna'have  on  their  arms  and  chests 
elevated  scars,  representing  plants,  flowers,  stars,  and 
various  other  figures.      *  The  inhabitants  of  Tazovan, 

*  or  Formosa,  by  a  very  painful  operation,  impress  on 

*  their  naked   skins   various  figures   of  trees,  flowers, 

*  and  animab.     The  great  men  in  Guinea  have  their 

*  skin  flowered  like  damask  ;  and  in  Decan  the  women 

*  likewise  have  flowers  cut  into  their  flesh  on  the  fore- 
^  head,  the  arms,  and  the  breast,  and  the  elevated  scars 
'  are  painted  in  colours,  and  exhibit  the  appearance  of 
'  flowered  damask/  ^ 

In  the  Tonga  Islands  *  the  men  are  tattooed  from 
^  the  middle  of  the  thigh  to  above  the  hips.  The  women 

*  are  only  tattooed  on  the  arms  and  fingers,  and  there 
'  very  slightly.'  ^  In  the  Feejee  Islands,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  women  are  tattooed  and  not  the  men. 

In  the  Gambier  Islands,  Beechey  says,^  ^  tattooing  is 
'  so  universally  practised,  that  it  is  rare  to  meet  a  man 

*  without  it ;  and  it  is  carried  to  such  an  extent  that 

*  the  figure  is  sometimes  covered  with  small  checkered 
'  lines  from  the  neck  to  the  ancles,  though  the  breast  is 
'  generally  exempt,  or  only  ornamented  with  a  single 
'  device.  In  some,  generally  elderly  men,  the  face  is 
'  covered  below  the  eyes,  in  which  case  the  lines  or  net- 

*  work  are  more  open  than  on  other  parts  of  the  body, 

*  probably  on  account  of  the  pain  of  the  operation,  and 
^  terminate  at  the  upper  part  in  a  straight  line  from  ear 
'  to  ear,  passing  over  the   bridge   of  the  nose.      With 

*  Forster's     Observations    made  '  Cook's   Voyage    towards    the 

daring  a  Voyage  Round  the  World,      South  Pole,  vol.  i.  p.  218. 
p.  5db.  '  Beechey,  vol.  i.  p.  138. 


02  TATTOOINO. 

'  these  exceptions,  to  which  we  may  add  the  fashion, 

*  with  some  few,  of  blue  lines,  resembling  stoddngs, 

*  from  the  middle  of  the  thigh  to  the  ancle,  the  effect  is 

*  becoming,  and  in  a  great  measure  destroys  the  appear* 

*  ance  of  nakedness.     The  patterns  which  most  unprove 

*  the  shape,  and  which  appear  to  me  pecidiar  to  thk 

*  group,  are  those  which  extend  from  the  armpits  to 

*  the  hips,  and  are  drawn  forward  with  a  curve  which 
^  seems  to  contract  the  waist,  and  at  a  short  distance 

*  gives  the  figure  an  elegance  and  outline,  not  unlike 
'  that  of  the  figures  seen  on  the  walls  of  the  Egyptian 

*  tombs.' 

Fig.  12  represents  a  Caroline  Islander,  after  Frey- 
cinet,  and  gives  an  idea  of  the  tattooing,  though  it 
cannot  be  taken  as  representing  the  form  or  features 
characteristic  of  those  islanders. 

The  tattooing  of  the  Sandwich  Islanders  is  less 
ornamental,  the   devices   being,    according   to   Anigo. 

*  umneaning  and  whimsical,  without  taste,  and  in  general 
'  l)adly  executed.'  ^  Perhaps,  however,  the  most  beaun- 
ful  of  all  was  that  of  the  New  Zealanders  (see  figs. 
13  and  14),  who  were  generally  tattooed  in  curved  or 
spiral  lines.  The  process  is  extremely  painful,  par- 
ticularly on  the  lips ;  but  to  shrink  from  it,  or  even  to 
show  any  signs  of  suffering  while  under  the  operation, 
would  be  thought  very  unmanly.  The  natives  used 
the  '  Moko '  or  pattern  of  their  tattooing  as  a  kind  of 
signature.  The  women  have  their  lips  tattooed  with 
horizontal  lines.  To  have  red  lips  is  thought  to  be  a 
great  reproach.' 

»  Arago's  Letlore.Pt.  II.  p.  147.      Exploring    Kxpodition :   Ethmigw 
^  For  dotnils  of  PolyiieMon  tat-      phv,  p.  40. 
tooing    SCO    lIalo*8    Uoitod    St«to8 


When  taatefiilly  executed,  tattooing  has  been  re- 
garded by  many  travellers  as  a  real  ornament.  Thus 
Laird  says  liiat  some  of  the  tattooing  in  West  Airica 
'  in  the  absence  of  clothing  gives  a  finish  to  the  skin.'  ^ 


Many  similar  cases  might  be  given  in  which  savages 

ornament  themselves,  as  they  suppose,  in  a  manner  which 

'  NmratiTe  of  an  Expedition  into  the  Interior  of  Africti,  vol.  i.  p.  291. 


64  ABTIFICUL  ALTERATION  OF  FORM. 

must  be  very  painful.  Perhaps  none  is  more  remarkable 
than  the  practice  which  we  find  in  several  parts  of  the 
world  of  modifying  the  human  form  by  means  of  tight 
bandages.  The  small  size  of  the  Chinese  ladies'  feet  is 
a  well-known  case,  but  is  scarcely  less  mischievous  than 
the  compression  of  the  waist  as  practised  in  Europe. 
The  Samoans '  and  some  of  the  American  tribes  even 
modified  the  form  of  the  head.     One  would  have  sup- 


HEAD  OF  MBW  ZEAL.11JDEB. 


posed  that  any  such  compression  would  have  exercised 
a  very  prejudicial  effect  on  the  intellect,  but,  as  far  as 
the  existing  evidence  goes,  it  does  not  appear  to  do  so. 

The  mode  of  dealing  with  the  hair  varies  very  much 
in  different  races.  Some  races  remove  it  almost  entirely, 
some  leave  a  ridge  along  the  top  of  the  head  ;  the  Kafiir 
wears  a  round  ring  of  hair  ;  the  North  American  Indian 

'  Turner'a  Nineteon  Years  id  Poljno»i«,  p.  175. 


1    . . 


!• 


:"»• 


•i  .: 


I 


111       I  '*'  ■  •  I «   '■•.-• 

• '      ■  ■     :  .  >•  I        •  I      \ .    '    \    ».       !  .  -  ' 

f 


'  ».  ■ 


r    ■;    ;  '  *•! "i'    •    •. 


1     iK    ■  pi-'i      i?;.    •     ■: 


i;. 


t  i 


■  I 


■*'       .■..•»■    •  i"  '   •  ■ 


t 


:  I  ■ 


I       I    •     '■ 


I   . 


I ' 


.  .    '    '. 


'  ■;.■■. 


\ " 


■  I ' 


HAIBDBESSmO,  65 

regards  it  as  a  point  of  honour  to  leave  one  tuft,  in  case 
he  ever  has  the  misfortune  of  being  defeated,  for  it  would 
be  mean  to  cheat  his  victor  of  the  scalp,  the  recognised 
emblem  of  conquest. 

The  Islanders  of  Torres  Straits  twist  their  hair  into 
long  pipe-like  ringlets,  and  also  wear  a  kind  of  wig  pre- 
pared in  the  same  fashion.  Sometimes  they  shave  the 
head,  leaving  a  transverse  crest  of  hair.  At  Cape  York 
the  hair  is  almost  always  kept  short.^  In  Tanna  the 
women  wear  it  short,  but  have  it  all  laid  out  in  a  forest 
of  little  erect  curls,  about  an  inch  and  a  half  long. 
The  men  wear  it  twelve  and  eighteen  inches  long, 
and  have  it  divided  into  some  six  or  seven  hundred 
little  locks  or  tresses.  Beginning  at  the  roots,  every  one 
of  these  is  carefully  wound  round  by  the  thin  rind  of  a 
creeping  plant,  giving  it  the  appearance  of  a  piece  of 
twine.  The  ends  are  left  exposed  for  about  two  inches, 
and  oiled  and  curled.^ 

The  Feejeeans  give  a  great  deal  of  time  and  attention 
to  their  hair,  as  is  shown  in  PI.  II.  Most  of  the  chiefs 
have  a  special  hairdresser,  to  whom  they  sometimes 
devote  several  hours  a  day.  Their  heads  of  hair  are 
often  more  than  three  feet  in  circumference,  and  Mr. 
Williams  measured  one  which  was  nearly  five  feet  round. 
This  forces  them  to  sleep  on  narrow  wooden  pillows  or 
neck-rests,  which  must  be  very  uncomfortable.  They 
also  dye  the  hair.  Black  is  the  natural  and  favourite 
colour,  but  some  prefer  white,  flaxen,  or  bright  red. 

'  On  one  head,'  says  Mr.  Williams,^  'all  the  hair  is 

'  McGillivray*8  Voyage  of    tlie      Polynesia,  p.  77. 
^ttJesnake,  pp.  11, 13.  *  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  vol.   i.  p. 

*  Tamer's    Nineteen    Years    in       158. 


OG  FEEJEE  HAIBDBE8SES. 

*  of  a  uniform  height ;   but  one-third  in  front  is  ashy  or 

*  sandy,  and  the  rest  black,  a  sharply  defined  reparation 
'  dividing  the  two  colours.  Not  a  few  are  so  ingenioudj' 
'  grotesque  as  to  appear  as  if  done  purposely  to  excite 
'  laughter.     One  has  a  large  knot  of  fier}'  hair  on  bis 

*  crown,  all  the  rest  of  liis  head  being  bald.  Another 
'  has  the  most  of  his  hair  cut  away,  leaving  three  or  four 

*  rows  of  small  clusters,  as  if  his  head  were  planted  with 
'  small  paint-brushes.    A  third  has  his  head  bare  except 

*  wlicrc  a  large  patch  projects  over  each  temple.     One, 

*  two,  or  three  cords  of  twisted  hair  often  fall  from  the 
'  right  temple,  a  foot  or  eighteen  inches  long.     Some 

*  men  wear  a  number  of  these  braids,  so  as  to  form  a 

*  curtain  at  the  back  of  the  neck,  reaching  from  one  ear 
'to  tlie' other.  A  mode  that  requires  great  care  has 
'  tlie  hair  brought  into  distinct  locks  radiating  from  the 

*  luMul.     Kach  lock  is  a  perfect  cone  about  seven  inches 

*  long,  having  the  base  outwards  ;  so  that  the  surface  of 
'  thv  liair  is  marked  out  into  a  great  number  of  small 
'  circk»s,  tlui  ends  being  turned  in  in  each  lock,  towards 
'  th(»  centre  of  the  cone.'  ^  In  some  of  the  Pacific 
Ishuids  tlie  natives  wear  wigs,  or  tresses  of  hair,  in 
addition  to  their  own.^ 

Scliweinfurth  describes  a  dandy,  belonging  to  the 
Dinkas,  a  negro  tribe  of  the  Soudan,  whose  hair  was 
dyed  r(»d,  and  trained  up  into  points  like  tongues  ci 
Ihime,  standing  stiflly  up,  all  round  his  head. 

In  fact,  the  i>assion  for  self-ornamentation  seems  to 
prevail  umongHt  the  lowest  as  nmch  as,  if  not  more  than, 
among  the  njore  civilised  races  of  man. 

'  Sco,  for    iiiiiiiy    further   par-  '^  Haloes   United     States    £xpL 

ticulnrh,  1  >urwiu*M  DcBcuut  of  Man^      Kxp. :  Ethnography,  p.  12. 
p.  tUiS,  H  $rq. 


67 


CHAPTER  m. 

MARRIAGE   AND   RELATIONSHIP. 

NOTHING,  perhaps,  gives  a  more  instructive  insight 
into  the  true  condition  of  savages  than  their  ideas 
on  the  subject  of  relationship  and  marriage ;  nor  can 
the  great  advantages  of  civilisation  be  more  conclusively 
proved  than  by  the  improvement  which  it  has  already 
effected  in  the  relation  between  the  two  sexes. 

Marriage,  and  the  relationship  of  a  child  to  its  father 
and  mother,  seem  to  us  so  natural  and  obvious,  that  we 
are  apt  to  look  on  them  as  aboriginal  and  general  to  the 
human  race.  This,  however,  is  very  far  from  being  the 
case.  The  lowest  races  have  no  institution  of  marriage  ; 
true  love  is  almost  unknown  among  them ;  and  mar- 
riage, in  its  lowest  phases,  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of 
affection  and  companionship. 

The  Hottentots,  says  Kolben,^ '  are  so  cold  and  in- 

*  different  to  one  another  that  you  would  think  there 
^was  no  such  thing  as  love  between  them.'  Among  the 
Koussa  Kaffirs,  Lichtenstein  asserts  that  there  is  'no 

*  feeling  of  love  in  marriage.'  '^  In  North  America,  the 
Tiling  Indians  had  no  word  for  '  dear '  or  '  beloved ;  * 
^d  the  Algonquin  language  is  stated  to  have  contained 
^0  verb  meaning  *  to  love  ; '  so  that  when  the  Bible  was 

*  Kolben'g  Hist  of  tlie  Cape  of  *  Travels  in  South  Africa,  vol.  i. 

Qood  Hope,  vol  i.  p.  162.  p.  261. 

F  2 


I:::  lir  -E^iil  zzz.iT  T^rT  s-rTttiraTf  "wiihoTit  anv  further 
'."^Ti^.:?/^.  I-  riLrr  r«.T"K'CT5  xhf-y  do  noi  appear  to 
li^ve  :':.-:  zrr.rri  ii^TiiiiT  ro:5ar.s  of  ihai  "hashfulriess  so 
r.-iVir:.!  ::  :!ir  rvrr:  ccTTAr^V.Tid."'     The  Guaranis  seen 

I::  y '  r:h  Am-rrica  iLe  Tnarriap?  tie  was  ^y  no  means 
T^T^T-l^i  s5of  a  r^'ir:Mi5  characicr.* 

In  AusTTJilia   •  I::de  real   affeorion   exists  between 

*  liusbar.ds  and  wives:  ard  vouu?  men  value  a  wife 
'  pr:r.:i!ally  for  her  services  as  a  slave  :  in  fact,  when 
*a-kol  whv  thev  are  anxious  to  obtain  wives,  their 
'  ii-»:il  replv  is.  that  tbev  mav  s*^:  wood,  water,  and 

*  food    for   them,  and   carry   whatever    properrv  they 

*  jKi=?sc'.ss.' *  The  position  of  women  in  Australia  seems 
indr^od  to  be  wretched  in  the  extreme.  Thev  are 
treatod  with  the  utmost  brutality,  beaten  and  speared  in 
the  limbs  on  the  most  trixial  provocation.  Few  womea, 
Hfiys  Kyre,  '  will  be  found,  upon  examination,  to  be  finee 
'  from  frifrlitfiil  scars  upon  the  head,  or  the  marks  of 
'  tiuciiT  wounds  about  the  bodv.  I  have  seen  a  voiuiij 
'  woifijin  who,  from  the  number  of  these  marks,  appeared 
'  lo  liiiv(;  b(ien  almost  riddled  with   spear  wounds.    If 

*  lit  Jill  ;rood -looking,  their  position  is,  if  possible,  even 
'  wor^f  l.linii  olliorwise.' 

A;.^iiri,  our  family  system,  which  regards  a  child  as 
<M|u;iIly  n'hi1<*d  to  his  father  and  his  mother,  seems  so 
nalunil  tlnit  \v<*  expcTience  a  feeling  of  surprise  on 
iinrt/ni;r  with  uuv  other  system.  Yet  we  shall  find,  I 
think,  rniHon  for  eoncluding  that  a  man  was  first  re- 

'  ( 'lmrl«\iiix,  Ili^t  nf  riiianruuy,  ■*  Jones,     Antiquitiei*      of     the 

v<»l  i   p.  *H.  Simthem  Indiiinfl,  p.  07. 

'  Lm:    rii,f    p.    iVt^j,    S4h«    bIhu  *  Kvre's   I  >iHCoveriefl,  vol.  iL  pt 

A /urn,  vul.  ii.  |i.  IM).  ;)21.     Sec  uotv«. 


ABSENCE   OF  AFFECTION  IN  MARRIAGE.  69 

*  the  occupations  of  his  household,  and  making  his  own 
'  clothes.     The  Midiki  (queen)  and  he  have  distinct 

*  establishments,   divided    fortunes,   and    separate    in- 

*  terests ;    indeed,    they   appear    to    have    nothing   in 

*  common  with  each  other,  and  yet  we  have  never  seen 
'  so  friendly  a  couple  since  leaving  our  native  country.' 
On  the  Gold  Coast,  '  not  even  the  appearance  of 
'  affection  exists  between  husband  and  wife/^  Among 
the  Mandingoes  marriage  is  merely  a  form  of  regulated 
slavery.     Husband  and  wife  'never  laugh  or  joke  to- 

'  gether.'  *  I  asked  Baba/  says  Cailli6, '  why  he  did  not 
'  sometimes  make  merry  with  his  wives.  He  replied 
*'  that  if  he  did  he  should  not  be  able  to  manage  them, 
'  for  they  would  laugh  at  him  when  he  ordered  them  to 

*  do  anything.'  ^ 

In  India,  the  Hill  tribes  of  Chittagong,  says  Captain 
Lewm,  regard  marriage  '  as  a  mere  animal  and  con- 
'  venient  connection  ; '  as  the  '  means  of  getting  their 

*  dinner  cooked.     They  have  no  idea  of  tenderness,  nor 

*  of  chivalrous  devotion.'  ^ 

Among  the  Samoyedes^  of  Siberia  the  husbands 
show  little  affection  for  their  wives,  and,  according  to 
Pallas,  ^  daignent  k  peine  leur  dire  une  parole  de 
'  douceur.'  Further  East,  in  the  Aleutian  Islands,  the 
Daarriages,  according  to  Miiller,^  '  meritent  a  peine  le 
Jiom;'  and  the  facts  he  mentions  go  far  to  justify  this 
statement. 

Among  the  Guyacurus  of  Paraguay   '  the  bonds  of 
Diatrimony  are  so  very  slight,  that  when  the  parties  do 

'  Burton's  Mission  to  the  King  p.  116. 
°'  Dahomey,  vol.  ii.  p.  190.  *  Pallas's  Voyages,  vol.  iv.  p.  94. 

Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  360.  *  Des.  de  toutes  les  Nat.  de  I'Em- 

'  Hill    Tracts    of    Chittagong,  pire  de  Riisse,  Part  III.,  p.  129. 


70         ABSENCE  OF  AFFEOTION  IN  MABBIAGE. 

'  not  like  each  other  they  separate  without  any  further 

*  ceremony.     In  other  respects  they  do  not  appear  to 

*  have  the  most  distant  notions  of  that  bashfulness  so 

*  natural  to  the  rest  of  mankind.'^  The  Guaranis  seem 
to  have  been  in  a  very  similar  condition.^ 

In  North  America  the  marriage  tie  was  by  no  means 
regarded  as  of  a  religious  character.^ 

In  Australia   '  little  real   affection  exists  between 

*  husbands  and  wives:  and  young  men  value  a  wife 
'  principally  for  her  services  as  a  slave  ;   in  fact,  when 

*  asked  why  they  are   anxious   to  obtain  wives,  their 

*  usual  reply  is,  that  they  may  get  wood,  water,  and 

*  food  for  them,  and  carry  whatever  property  they 
'  possess.'*  The  position  of  women  in  Australia  seems 
indeed  to  be  wretched  in  the  extreme.  They  are 
treated  with  the  utmost  brutality,  beaten  and  speared  in 
the  limbs  on  the  most  tri^dal  provocation.  Few  women, 
says  Eyre,  '  will  be  found,  upon  examination,  to  be  tree 

*  from  frightful  scars  upon  the  head,  or  the  marks  of 

*  spear  wounds  about  the  body.  I  have  seen  a  young 
'  woman  who,  fi'om  the  number  of  these  marks,  appeared 
'  to  have  been  almost  riddled  with  spear  wounds.  If 
^  at  all  good-looking,  their  position  is,  if  possible,  even 
'  worse  than  otherwise.' 

Again,  our  family  system,  which  regards  a  child  as 
equally  related  to  his  father  and  his  mother,  seems  so 
natural   that  we  experience    a  feeling  of  surprise  oa 
meeting  with  any  other  system.     Yet  we  shall  find,  L 
think,  reason  for  concluding  that  a  man  was  first  re— 

'  CliarleToix,  Hist,  of  Paraguay,  '  Jones,     Antiquities      of     ih^» 

ToL  i.  p.  01.  Southern  Indiana,  p.  67. 

'  Loc,    cit,f   p.    3*52.    Sco    also  ^  Eyre's  Discoveries,  voL  iL  ]^- 

Azara,  vol.  ii.  p.  00.  821.    See  notes. 


RELATIONSHIP  AMONG  SAVAGES.  71 

garded  as  merely  related  to  his  tribe  ;  then  to  his 
mother  but  not  to  his  father;  then  to  his  father  and 
not  to  his  mother ;  and  only  at  last  to  both  father  and 
mother.  Even  among  the  Romans  the  family  was 
based,  not  on  marriage  or  on  relationship,  but  on  power ;  ^ 

*  le  lien  seul,*  says  Ortolan,  *  de  la  parent^  naturelle,  de 

*  la  parent^  de  sang,  n'est  rien  chez  les  Romains  ; '  and 
a  man's  wife  and  children  only  formed  apart  of  his 
family,  not  because  they  were  his  relatives,  but  because 
they  were  subject  to  his  control ;  so  that  a  son  who  was 
emancipated — that  is  to  say,  made  free — had  no  share 
in  the   inheritance,  having   ceased   to  belong   to   the 
fiEimily.     We  shall,  however,  be  better  able  to  under- 
stand this  part  of  the  question  when  we   have  con- 
sidered the  various  phases  which  marriage  presents ;  for 
it  is  by  no  means  of  an  uniform  character,  but  takes 
almost  every  possible  form.     In  some  cases  nothing  of 
the  sort  appears  to  exist  at  all ;  in  others  it  is  essentially 
temporary,  and  exists  only  till  the  birth  of  the  child, 
when  both  man  and  woman  are  free  to  mate  themselves 
afresh.      In   others,    the   man   buys  the  woman,  who 
hecomcs  as  much  his  property  as  his  horse  or  his  dog. 

In  Sumatra  there  were  formerly  three  perfectly  dis- 
tinct kinds  of  marriage:  the  '  Jugur,'  in  which  the  man 
purchased  the  woman ;  the  '  Ambel-anak,'  in  which  the 
woman  purchased  the  man  ;  and  the  '  Semando,'  in 
which  they  joined  on  terms  of  equality.  In  the  mode  of 
^^larriage  by  Ambel-anak,  says  Marsden,^  '  the  father 
*  of  a  virgin  makes  choice  of  some  young  man  for  her 

'  Ortolan's  Expl.  His.  des  Insti-  '  Marsden's  Hist,  of  Sumatra,  p. 

^*8  de  rEmp.  Justinien,  vol.  i.  pp.      2G2. 
126, 128, 130,  416. 


72  DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF  MABBIAGE, 

husband,  generally  from  an  inferior  family,  which  re- 
nounces all  further  right  to,  or  interest  in,  him ;  and 
he  is  taken  into  the  house  of  his  father-in-law,  who 
kills  a  buflfalo  on  the  occasion,  and  receives  twenty 
dollars  from  his  son's  relations.     After  this,  the  bunik 
baik'  nia  (the  good  and  bad  of  him)  is  invested  in  tk 
wife's  family.     If  he  murders  or  robs,  they  pay  Ae 
bangun,  or  fine.     If  he  is  murdered,  they  receive  the 
baiigun.     They  are  liable  to  any  debts  he  may  con- 
tract in  marriage;  those  prior  to  it  remaining  wiA 
his  parents.    He  lives  in  the  family,  in  a  state  behreet 
that  of  a  son  and  a  debtor.     He  partakes  as  a  son 
what  the  house  affords,  but  has  no  property  in 
His  rice  plantation,  the  produce  of  his  pepper 
with  everything  that  he  can  gain  or  earn,  belongs 
the   family.      He   is  liable  to  be  divorced   at 
pleasure,  and  though  he  has  children,  must  leave 
and  return  naked  as  he  came.' 

'  The  Seniando^  is  a  regular  treaty  between 
parties,  on  the  footing  of  equality.  Tlie  adat  paid 
tlie  girl's  friends  has  usually  been  twelve  do! 
The  agreement  stipulates  that  all  effects,  gains, 
earnings  are  to  be  equally  the  property  of  both  ; 
in  case  of  divorce  by  mutual  consent,  the  stock,  debti| 
and  credits  are  to  be  equally  divided.  If  the  man  onlf 
insists  on  the  divorce,  he  gives  the  woman  her  half  of 
the  effects,  and  loses  the  twelve  dollars  he  has  pwd* 
If  the  woman  only  claims  the  divorce,  she  forfeits  hflf 
right  to  the  proportion  of  the  effects,  but  is  entitled 
to  keep  her  tikar,  bantal,  and  dandjui  (i):iraphernalia)i 

'  Marfidcirs  IlUt.  <»f  Sumatra,  p.  i>ij;t. 


DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF  MAEEIAQE.  73 

^  and  her  relations  are  liable  to  pay  back  the  twelve 

*  dollars  ;    but   it   is   seldom  demanded.      This  mode, 

*  doubtless  the  most  conformable  to  our  ideas  of  con- 

*  jugal  right  and  felicity,  is  that  which  the  chiefs  of  the 

*  Rejang  country  have  formally  consented  to  establish 
'  throughout  their  jurisdiction,  and  to  their  orders  the 
^  influence  of  the  Malayan  priests  will  contribute  to 
'  give  efficacy.' 

In  the  Jugur  marriage  the  woman  became  the  pro- 
perty of  the  man. 

The  Hassaniyeh  Arabs  have  a  very  curious  form 
of  marriage,  which  may  be  called  '  three-quarter ' 
marriage  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  woman  is  legally  married 
for  three  days  out  of  four,  remaining  perfectly  free  for 
the  fourth. 

In  Ceylon  there  were  two  kinds  of  marriage — the 
Deega  marriage,  and  the  Beena  marriage.  In  the 
former  the  woman  went  to  her  husband's  hut  ;  in  the 
latter  the  man  transferred  himself  to  that  of  the  woman. 
Moreover,  according  to  Davy,  marriages  in  Ceylon 
were  provisional  for  the  first  fortnight,  at  the  ex- 
piration of  which  they  were  either  annulled  or  con- 
firmed.^ 

In  Japan,  among  the  higher  classes,  it  is  said  that 
the  eldest  son  brings  his  bride  to  the  paternal  home; 
button  the  other  hand,  the  eldest  daughter  does  the 
^ttie,  and  retains  her  name,  which  is  assumed  by  the 
bridegroom.  Thus  the  wife  of  an  eldest  son  joins  her 
husband's  family;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  husband 
^f  an  eldest  daughter  enters   into  that   of  his  wife. 

»  Davy's  Ceylon,  p.  28G. 


74  POLTANDET. 

Hence  the  eldest  son  of  one  family  cannot  marry  the 
eldest  daughter  of  another.  As  regards  the  younger 
children,  if  the  husband's  father  provides  the  house,  the 
wife  takes  her  husband's  name ;  while  if  the  bride's 
father  does  so,  the  bridegroom  assumes  that  of  hi« 
wife.^ 

Among  the   Reddies^  of  Southern   India  a  very 
singular  custom  prevails : — *  A  young  woman  of  sixteen 
or  twenty  years  of  age  may  be  married  to  a  boy  of  five 
or  six  years!     She,  however,  lives  with  some  other 
adult  male — perhaps  a  maternal  uncle  or  cousin — ^but 
is  not  allowed  to  form  a  connection  with  the  father's 
relatives ;   occasionally  it  may  be  the  boy-husband's 
father   himself — that  is,  the  woman's  father-in-law! 
Should  there  be  children  from  these  liaisons,  they  are 
fathered  on  the  boy-husband.     When  the  boy  grows 
up  the  wife  is  either  old  or  past  child-bearing,  when 
he  in  his  turn  takes  up  with  some  other  "  boy's  "  wife 
in  a  manner  precisely  similar  to  his  own,  and  pro- 
creates children  for  the  boy-husband.' 

Polyandr}',  or  the  marriage  of  one  woman  to  several 
men  at  once,  is  more  common  than  is  generally  sup- 
jK)sed,  though  much  less  so  than  polygamy,  which  is 
almost  universally  permitted  among  the  lower  races  of 
men.  One  reason — though  T  do  not  say  the  only  one — 
for  this,  is  obvious  when  pointed  out.  Long  after  our 
children  are  weaned,  milk  remains  an  important  and 
necessary  part  of  their  food.  We  supply  this  want  with 
cow's  milk  ;   but  among  people  who  have  no  domesti- 

*  MorfranV    S}>tom  of  Confian-  '  Shortt,  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  N 

guinity  and  Affinity  of  th<»  TJunmn      Soriof,  vol.  vii.  p.  104. 
Family,  p.  428. 


SEPARATION  OF  HUSBAND  AND   WIFE.  75 

cated  animals  this  cannot,  of  course,  be  done,  and  con- 
sequently the  children  are  not  weaned  until  they  are 
two,  three,  or  even  four  years  old,  during  all  which  period 
the  husband  and  wife  generally  remain  apart.  Thus, 
in  Feejee  '  the  relatives  of  a  woman  take  it  as  a  public 
'  insult  if  any  child  should  be  bom  before  the  customary 

*  three  or  four  years  have  elapsed,  and  they  consider 

*  themselves  in  duty  bound  to  avenge  it  in  an  equally 

*  public  manner/  ^ 

It  seems  to  us  natural  and  proper  that  husband  and 
wife  should  enjoy  as  much  as  possible  the  society  of  one 
another;  but,  among  the  Turkomans,  according  to 
Fraser,  for  six  months  or  a  year,  or  even  sometimes  two 
years,  after  a  marriage,  the  husband  was  only  allowed 
to  visit  his  wife  by  stealth,  '  After  the  wedding,'  says 
Bumes,  '  the  bride  returns  to  the  house  of  her  parents, 

*  and  passes  a  year  in  preparing  the  carpets  and  clothes, 

*  wUch  are  necessary  for  a  Toorkmun  tent ;  and  on  the 
^  anniversary  of  her  elopement,  she  is  finally  transferred 

*  to  the  arms  and  house  of  her  gallant  lover/  ^ 

Klemm  states  that  the  same  is  the  case  amono:  the 
Circassians  until  the  first  child  is  born.  Among  the 
Feejeeans,  husbands  and  wives  do  not  usually  spend  the 
night  together,  except  as  it  were  by  stealth.  It  is 
qnite  contrary  to  Feejeean  ideas  of  delicacy  that  they 
should  sleep  under  the  same  roof.  A  man  spends  his 
%  with  his  family,  but  absents  himself  on  the  ap- 
proach  of  niglit.^     In    Chittagong  (India),   although. 


'  Seemann,  A  Mission  to  Fiji,  p.  Travels  in  Central  Asia,  p.  323. 
^^^'  '  Seemann's  Mission  to  Viti,  p. 

'  Bumes*    Travels    in  Bokhara,  191. 
^^^ii.  p.  56.    See  also  Vamber/s 


76  SEPARATION  OF  HUSBAND  AND  WIFE, 

^  according  to  European  ideas,  the  standard  of  morality 
'  among  the  Kyoungtha  is  low/  yet  husband  and  wife 
are  on  no  account  permitted  to  sleep  together  until 
seven  days  after  marriage.^ 

Burckhardt^  states,  that  in  Arabia,  after  the  wedding, 
if  it  can  be  called  so,  the  bride  returns  to  her  mother^s 
tent,  but  again  runs  away  in  the  evening,  and  repeats 
these  flights  several  times,  till  she  finally  returns  to  her 
tent.  She  does  not  go  to  live  in  her  husband's  tent  for 
some  months,  perliaps  not  even  till  a  full  year,  from  the 
wedding-day.  Among  the  Votyaks,  some  weeks  after 
the  wedding  the  bride  returns  to  her  father's  tent,  and 
lives  there  for  two  or  three  months,  sometimes  even  for 
a  year,  during  wliich  time  she  dresses  and  behaves  like 
a  girl,  and  after  which  she  returns  to  her  husband ; 
making,  however,  even  on  the  second  occasion,  a  show 
of  resistance.' 

Lafitau  informs  us  that  among  the  North  American 
Indians  the  husband  only  visits  the  wife  as  it  were  by 
steal  til : — '  ils  n'osont  aller  dans  les  cabanes  particuliires, 
'  ou  habitent  leurs  (l;|X)uses,  que  durant  TobscuriuS  de  la 
'  nuit  .  .  .  .  ce  serait  une  action  extraordinaire  de  s'y 
'  presenter  le  jour.'* 

In  Futa,  one  of  the  West  African  kingdoms,  it  is 
said  that  no  husband  is  allowed  to  see  his  wife's  face 
until  lie  has  been  three  years  married. 

In  Si)arta,  and  in  Crete,  according  toXenophon  and 
Stnibo,  married  peoj)le  were  for  some  time  after  the 

^  Lowin's  Hill  Tracts  of  Chitta-  '  Miiller's  Des.    do    toutes    let 

gonpr,  p.  ^>1.  Nations  de  lEmp.  de  Rtiase,  Ptat 

2  niirckhanit*8  Not»»«,  vol.  ii.  p.  If.,  p.  71. 
200,  quottsi  in  M*l>jnnairB  IVimitivo  *  LfH\  cif.,  vol.  i.  p.  570. 

Marriage,  p.  -Kh). 


ABSENCE  OF  MAERIAGE  OEBEMONY.  77 

wedding  only  allowed  to  see  one  another  as  it  were 
clandestinely  ;  and  a  similar  custom  is  said  to  have 
existed  among  the  Lycians.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  no 
satisfactory  explanation  of  this  custom  has  yet  been 
given.  I  shall,  however,  presently  venture  to  suggest 
one. 

There  are  many  cases  in  which  savages  have  no  such 
thing  as  any  ceremony  of  marriage.  '  I  have  said  nothing,' 
says  Metz,  *  about  the  marriage  ceremonies  of  the  Bada- 
'  gas  (Hindostan),  because  they  can  scarcely  be  said  to 

*  have  any.'  The  Kurumbas,  another  tribe  of  the  Neil- 
gherry  Hills, '  have  no  marriage  ceremony.'  ^  According 
to  Colonel  Dalton,^  the  Keriahs  of  Central  India  'have  no 

*  word  for  marriage  in  their  own  language,  and  the  only 

*  ceremony  used  appears  to  be  little  more  than  a  sort  of 

*  public  recognition  of  the  fact.'  It  is  very  singular,  he 
adds  elsewhere,  *  that  of  the  many  intelligent  observers 
'  who  have  visited  and  written  on  Butan,  not  one  has 

*  been  able  to  tell  us  that  they  have  such  an  institution 

*  as  a  marriage  ceremony.'  The  tie  between  man  and 
woman  seems  to  be  very  slight,  and  to  be  a  mere  matter 
of  servitude.    'From  my  own  observation,'  he  continues, 

*  I  believe  the  Butias  to  be  utterly  indifferent  on  the 

*  subject  of  the  honour  of  their  women."  So  also  the 
Spanish  missionaries  found  no  word  for  marriage,  nor 
any  marriage  ceremony,  among  the  Indians  of  Califor- 
nia.* Farther  north,  among  the  Kutchin  Indians, 
'  there  is  no  ceremony  observed  at  marriage  or  birth.'  ^ 


*  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc,  vol.  vil  p.  *  Bagaert,  Smithaonian  Report, 
270.  1803,  p.  308. 

*  IM.f  yoL  tL  p.  25.  ^  Smithsonian  Report,  1860,  p. 
'  Dva.  Ethn.  of  Bengal,  p.  07.  320. 


/'* 


ABSESCE  OF  MAEBIAGE  CEEEMONT. 


TLe  marital  rii^,  says  Schoolcraft,  ^  among  our  tribes' 
( Le.  the  Redskins  of  the  United  States)  *  is  nothing  more 

•  iLaii  ihe  [>er-?onal  consent  of  the  parties,  without  re- 
'  quiring'  any  concurrent  act  of  a  priesthood,  a  magistracy, 
'  o.'  witne^.-e.<;  the  act  is  assumed  by  the  parties,  without 

•  the  neces&itv  of  anv  extraneous  sanction.'  * 

According  to  Brett,  there  is  no  marriage  ceremony 
SLinoiyr  the  Arawaks  of  South  America.*  Martius  makes 
the  ^ame  a:^^e^tion  with  reference  to  the  Brazilian  tribes 
generally/  and  it  is  also  the  case  with  some  of  the 
Australian  tribes."* 

There  is,  savs  Bruce,  '  no  such  thintr  as  marriage  in 
Abys^^inia,  unless  that  which  is  contracted  by  mutual 
consent,  without  other  form,  subsisting  only  till  dis- 
solved by  dissent  of  one  or  other,  and  to  be  renewed 
or  repeated  as  often  as  it  is  agreeable  to  both  parries, 
who,  when  they  please,  live  together  again  as  man  and 
wifu,  after  having  been  divorced,  had  children  by  others, 
or  whether  tliey  have  been  married,  or  had  children 
with  others  or  not.     I  remember  to  have  once  been  at 
Koscani  in  presence  of  the  Iteghe  (the  queen),  when, 
in  the  circle,  there  was  a  woman  of  great  quality,  and 
«even  nu;n  who  had  all  been  her  husbands,  none  of 
whom  was  the  happy  spouse  at  that  time.*     And  yet 
there  is  no  country  in  the  world  where  there  are  so 
many  churches.'*     Among  the  Dedouin  AiTibs  there  is 
a  marriage  ceremony  in  the  case  of  a  girl,  but  the  re- 
marrijige  of  a  widow  is  not    thought  sufficiently    im- 

'  Indian  Tnhi%  pp.  248,  lli2,  310. 

'  (Juiaiin,  p.  101.  *  Hruro'a  TraveK  v«»l.  ir.p.  487. 

»  LiK\  cit.,  p.  51.  «  IbuL,  vol.  V.  p.  1. 

*  K3fTi»*»  lli^ouvvrivH,  vul.  ii.  p. 


ABSENCE  OF  JiABRIAGE  CEBEMONT.  79 

portant  to  deserve  one.  Speke  says,  ^  there  are  no  such 
'  things  as  marriages  in  Uganda/^ 

Of  the  Mandingoes  (West  Africa),  Caillie '  says  that 
husband  and  wife  are  not  united  by  any  ceremony ;  and 
HuttOQ '  makes  the  same  statement  as  regards  the  Ash- 
antees.    In  Congo  and  Angola^  ^  they  use  no  peculiar 

*  ceremonies  in  marriage,  nor  scarce  trouble  themselves 

*  for  consent  of  fi-iends/  Le  Vaillant  says  that  there  are 
no  marriage  ceremonies  among  the  Hottentots ;  ^  and  the 
Bushmen^  according  to  Mr.  Wood^  had  in  their  language 
no  means  of  distinguishing  an  unmarried  from  a  married 
girL« 

Yet  we  most  not  assume  that  marriage  b  necessarily 
and  always  lightly  regarded,  where  it  is  unaccompanied 
by  ceremoniaL     Thus,  ^  marriage  in  this  L&land  ( Tahiti) 

*  as  i^>peared  to  us,'  aays  Cook,  ^  is  nothing  more  than 
^  an  agreement  between  the  man  and  woman,  with  which 

*  the  priest  has  no  concern.     Where  it  is  contracted  it 

*  ai^icars  to   be   pretty   well  kept,  though  sometimes 

*  the  parties  separate  by  mutual  consent,  and  in  that 

*  CMse  a  divorce  takes  place  with  as  little   trouble  as 

*  the  marriage.     But  though  the   priesthood  has  laid 

*  the  people  under  no  tax  for  a   nuptial  benedictioa, 

*  there  are  two  operations  which  it  has  appropriated, 
*'  and  from  which  it  derives  considerable  advantages. 

*  One  is  tattooing,  and  the  other  circumciaon.^     Yet 

*  JooBd,  pu  aSl.  *  Xatmal  HiBt/.'Zr  a£  Mm,  toL  L 


CaltBr  d.  v^«*-4>— »^  '  Cook'§   Votb^     Boaad    iht 

wL  SL  pu  290l  World.      II«wketwcirt2k'i  VoTare«9 

«  Aflde^'i  CcJLoiXon^t^ToL  roL  iL  p.  i.'40.     Far  CcroSiDe 'l*- 

SL  fp.  221y  2S7.  laadiiy  ttt  KVmm,  loc  dL,  roL  It.  p. 

•  yoja^m,  TdL  i.  p.  5a.  299 


80  MABRIAOE  0EBEM0NIE8. 

he  elsewhere  informs  us  that  married  women  in  Tahiti 
are  as  faithful  to  their  husbands  as  in  any  other  part  of 
the  world. 

We  must  bear  in  mind  that  there  is  a  great  distinction 
between  what  may  be  called  *  lax '  and  *  brittle '  mar- 
riages. In  some  countries  the  marriage  tie  may  be 
broken  with  the  greatest  ease,  and  yet,  as  long  as  it  lasts, 
is  strictly  respected ;  while  in  other  countries  the  very 
reverse  is  the  case. 

Perhai)s  on  the  whole  any  marriage  ceremony  is  better 
than  none  at  all,  but  some  races  have  practices  at  mar- 
riage which  are  extremely  objectionable.     Some,  also, 
are  very  curious,  and  no  doubt  sjinbolicak     At  Banabe, 
one   of  the   Micronesian   Pacific   Islands,   the   wife  is 
tattooed  with  the  marks  standing  for  the  names  of  her 
husband's   ancestors.^      One  portion  of  the  marriage 
ceremony  among  the  Mundaris,  one  of  the  Bengal  Hill 
tribes,  is  very  suggestive.     The  bride  walks  in  front  of 
the  bridegroom  with  a  pitcher  of  water  on  her  head, 
supported  by  one  arm.     The  bridegroom  walks  behind, 
and  through  the  i)retty  loop-hole  thus  formed  he  shoots 
an  aiTow.     The  girl  walks  on  to  where  the  arrow  falls, 
picks  it  up  with  her  foot,  takes  it  into  her  hand,  and  re- 
spectfully returns  it  to  her  husband.^    In  many  parts  of 
India,    bride   and   bridegroom   are   marked    with   one 
another's  blood,  probably  to  signify  the  intimate  union 
which   has    taken   i)lace   between    them.     This  is  the 
custom,  for  instance,  among  the  Birhors.     Col.  Dalton 
believes  this  to  be  '  the  origin  of  the  custom  now  so 


'  Ilftlf'H  riiitcd  Statoft   Kxplor.  ^  1  )ftlton'M  1  »i«fl.  Ethn.  of  Rengal, 

Expod.":  EthnoMrnphy,  p.  Til  p.  VXk 


MABBIAQE  0EBEM0NIE8.  81 

'  universal  of  marking  with  red  lead.'  ^     In  other  cases 

the  idea  symbolised  is  less  obvious.     Among  some  of  the 

Hindoo  tribes  the  bride  and  bridegroom  are  respectively 

married  to  trees  in  the  first  instance,  and  subsequently 

to  one  another.     Thus  a  Kurmi  bridegroom  is  married 

to  a  mango,  his  bride  to  a  malwa  tree.^     The  idea  un- 

derl3ing  this  1  take  to  be  that  they  are  thus  devoted  to 

the  deities  of  the  Mango  and  Malwa,  and  having  thus 

become  respectively  tabooed  to  other  men  and  women, 

are,  with  the  consent  of  the  deities,  espoused  to  one 

another. 

Among  the  Canadian  Indians,  Carver*  says  that 
when  the  chief  has  pronounced  the  pair  to  be  married, 
4he  bridegroom  turns  round,  and,  bending  his  body, 

*  takes  his  wife  on  his  back,  in  which  manner  he  carries 
^  her,  amidst  the  acclamations  of  the  spectators^  to  his 
*tent.'  Bruce,  in  Abyssinia,  observed  an  identical 
custom.  When  the  ceremony  is  over,  he  says,  'the 
'  bridegroom  takes  his  lady  on  his  shoulders,  and  carries 
'  her  off  to  his  house.     If  it  be  at  a  distance  he  does 

*  the  same  thing,  but  only  goes  entirely  round  about  the 

*  bride's  house.'  * 

In  China,  when  the  bridal  procession  reaches  the 
bridegroom's  house,  the  bride  is  carried  into  the  house 
by  a  matron,  and  '  lifted  over  a  pan  of  charcoal  at  the 
*door;* 

We  shall  presently  see  that  these  are  no  isolated  cases, 
nor  is  the  act  of  lifting  the  bride  over  the  bridegroom's 

^  Dalton'fi  Des.  Ethn.  of  Bengal,  <  Vol.  vii.  p.  67. 

pp.  220, 319.  ^  Davis.    The  Chinese,  vol.  i.  p. 

'  Ibid.,  p.  319.  285. 
'  Travels,  p.  374. 

G 


82  LIFTING  THE  BRIDE. 

threshold  an  act  without  a  meaning.  I  shall  shortly 
mention  many  allied  castoms,  to  the  importance  and 
significance  of  which  our  attention  has  recently  been 
called  by  Mr.  McLennan,  in  his  masterly  work  on 
'  Primitive  Marriage.' 

I  will  now  attempt  to  trace  up  the  custom  of  marriage 
in  its  gradual  development.  There  is  strong  evidence 
that  the  lowest  races  of  men  live,  or  did  live,  in  a  state 
of  what  may  perhaps  be  called  '  Communal  Marriage.' 
In  the  Andaman  Islands,^  Sir  Edwai'd  Belcher  states 
that  the  custom  is  for  the  man  and  woman  to  remain 
together  until  the  child  is  weaned,  when  they  separate 
as  a  matter  of  course,  and  each  seeks  a  new  partner. 
The  Bushmen  of  South  Africa  are  stated  to  be  entirely 
without  marriage.  Among  the  Nairs  (India),  as  Buchanan 
tells  us,  '  no  one  knows  his  father,  and  every  man  loob 

*  on  his  sister's  children  as  his  heirs.'  The  Teehurs  of 
Oude  'live   together  almost  indiscriminately  in  laijc 

*  communities,  and  even  when  two  people  are  regarded 

*  as  married  the  tie  is  but  nominal.'  ^ 

In  China,  communal  marriage  is  stated  to  have  pre- 
vailed down  to  the  time  of  Fouhi,^  and  in  Greece  to  that 
of  Cecrops.  The  Messageta?,*  and  the  Auses,*  an  Ethio- 
pian tribe,  had,  according  to  Herodotus,  no  marriage — a 
statement  which  is  confirmed  by  Strabo  as  regards  the 
former.  Strabo  and  Solinus  make  the  same  statement 
as  regards  the   Garamantes,  another   Ethiopian   tribe. 


*  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  vol.  v.  p.  45.  '  Ooguct,    L'Origine  dea    Loin, 

'  Tho  Pcoplo  of  India,  l.y  J.  F.  dcs  ArU  et  des  Sciences,  voL  iii.  p. 

WntHon  and  J.  W.  Kaye,  published  328. 

by  tho  Indian  Governnunt,  vol.  ii.  *  Clio,  vol.  i.  p.  21fl. 

pi.  B.').  *  Melpomene,  vol.  iv.  180. 


RELATIONSHIPS  INDEPENBENT  OF  MASBIAQE,    83 

In  Califoniia,  according  to  Baegert,^  the  sexes  met 
without  any  formalities,  and  their  vocabulary  did  not 
even  contain  the  words  *  to  marry.'  Garcilasso  de  la 
Yega  asserts  that  among  some  of  the  Peruvian  tribes, 
before  the  time  of  the  Incas,  men  had  no  special 
wives.' 

Speaking  of  the  natives  of  Queen  Charlotte  Island, 
Kr.  Poole  says,'  *  among  these  simple  and  primitive 
'tribes,  the  institution  of  marriage  is  altogether  un- 
*  known.'  The  women  appear  to  consider  almost  all 
the  men  of  their  own  tribe  in  the  light  of  husbands. 
They  are,  on  the  contrary,  very  circumspect  in  their 
behaviour  with  other  men. 

The  backwardness  (until  lately)  of  the  Sandwich 
Islanders  in  their  social  relations,  is  manifested  in  their 
language.  This  is  shown  from  the  following  table 
extracted  from  a  longer  one,  given  by  Mr.  Morgan  in  a 
most  interesting  work  on  the  Origin  of  the  Classifica- 
tory  System  of  Relationship.* 

Hawaian  English 

r  Great  grandfather 


Kupuna  signifies 


Great  great  uncle 
Great  grandmother 
Great  grandaunt 
Grandfather 
Granduncle 
Grandmother 
.  Grandaunt 


*  Loc.  cU,,  p.  368.  '  Queen    Charlotte  lelands,    p. 

'  Commentaries  of    the    Incas,  312. 
*™^  by  C.  R.  Markhanii  vol.  ii.  p.  *  Proc.  of  the  Amer.  Acad,  ot 

^.  Arts  and  Sciences,  1868. 

G  2 


84 


BOUTS  SEA  SYSTEJI  OF  BELATIONSSIP. 


Hawaian 


Makua  wahecna  = 


Ilunona 


Wahecna 


Makua  kuDa       =  ^ 


Kaikec  kana       =   * 


r  Father 
Father's  brother 
Father's  brother-in-law 
Mother's  brother 
Mother's  brother-in-law 
Grandfather's  brother's  son. 

/  Mother 

Mother  s  sister 
-<  ^Mother's  sister-in-law 

Father's  sister 
^  Father  s  sister-in-law. 


Son 

Sister's  son 
Brother's  son 
Brother's  son's  son 
Brotlicr's  daughter's  son 
Sister's  son's  son 
Sister's  daughter's  son 
Mother's  sister's  son's  son 
^  Slother's  brother's  son's  son. 


Brother's  son's  wife 
Brother's  daughter's  husband 
Sister's  son's  wife 
Sister's  daughter's  husband. 

rWife 
AVife's  sister 
Brother's  wife 
Wife's  brother's  wife 
Father's  brother's  soli's  wife 
Father's  sister's  son's  wife 
Mother's  sister's  son's  wife 

L  Mother's  brother  s  son's  wife. 


SOUTH  SEA  SYSTEM  OF  RELATIONSHIP.         85 

Hawaiau  Engliah 

I  Husband 
Kana  =    J  Husband's  brother 

i  Sister's  husband. 

Panalua  =      Wife's  sister'shusband  (brother-in-law). 

Kaikoaka  =      Wife's  brother. 

The  key  of  this  Hawaian  or  Sandwich  Island  ^  system 
is  the  idea  conveyed  in  the  word  waheena  (woman)  • 

Thus— 

rWife 

Wife's  sister 

Brother's  wife 

Wife's  brotlier's  wife. 


Waheena 


All  these  are  equally  related  to  each  husband.  Hence 
the  word — 

Kaikee  =  Child,  also  signifies  the  brother's  wife's  child ; 

and  no  doubt  the  wife^s  sister's  child,  and  the  wife's 
brother's  wife's  child.  So  also,  as  the  sister  is  wife  to 
the  brother-in-law  (though  not  to  her  brother),  and  as 
the  brother-in-law  is  husband  to  his  brother's  wife,  he  is 
consequently  a  father  to  his  brother's  children.  Hence 
'  Kaikee '  also  means  '  sister's  son  '  and  '  brother's  son.' 
In  fact  *  Kaikee  '  and  '  Waheena '  correspond  to  our 
^'ords  •child  '  and  'woman,'  and  there  are  apparently 
no  words  answering  to  ^son,'  ^daughter,'  'wife,'  or 
'husband.'  That  this  does  not  arise  from  poverty  of 
language  is  evident,  because  the  same  system  discrimi- 
nates between  other  relationships  which  we  do  not 
tlistinguish. 

^  Morgan,  Proceedings  of  the  American  Association,  18G8. 


86  SOUTH  SEA   SYSTE}£  OF  BELATIONSHIP. 

Perhaps  the  contrast  is  most  clearly  shown  in  the 
terms  for  brother-m-law  and  sister-in-law. 
Thus,  when  a  woman  is  speaking — 

Sister-in-law  =s  husband's  brother's  wife  =  punalua. 
Sister-in-law  =  husband's  sister  =  kaikoaka. 


But  brother-in-law,  whether  sister's 
husband  or  husband's  brother 


j-  =  kana,  i.e.  husband. 


When,  on  the  contrary,  a  man  is  speaking — 

Sister-in-law  =  wife's  sister      =  waheena,  i.e.  wife. 
Sister-in-law  =  brother's  wife  =  waheena^  i.e.  wife. 

And  so — 

Brother-in-law  =■  wife's  brother  =  kaikoaka. 

Brother-in-law  =  wife's  sister's  husband  =  punalua. 

Thus  a  woman  has  husbands  and  sisters-in-law,  but 
no  brothers-in-law  ;  a  man,  on  the  contrary,  has  wives 
and  brothers-in-law,  but  no  sisters-in-law.  The  same 
idea  runs  through  all  other  relationships :  cousins,  for 
instance,  are  called  brothers  and  sisters. 

So  again,  while  the  Romans  distinguished  between 
the 

Father's  brother  =  patruus,  and  the  mother^s  brother  = 

avunculus, 
Father's    sister    =     amita,    and    the    mother's    sister  = 

matertera ', 

the  first  two  in  Ilawaian  are  makua  kana,  which  also 
signifies  father  ;  and  the  last  two  are  makua  waheena, 
which  also  means  mother. 

In  the  next  chapter  1  shall  enter  more  at  length 


TODA  SYSTEM  OF  RELATIONSHIP.  87 

into  the  subject  of  Relationships,  but  the  above  will 
suffice  to  show  that  the  idea  of  marriage  does  not,  in 
feet,  enter  into  the  Hawaian  system.     Uncleship,  aunt- 
Bhip,  cousinship,  are  ignored  ;  and  we  have  only — 

Grandparents 

Parents 

Brothers  and  sisters 

Children  and 

Grandchildren. 

Here  it  is  clear  that  the  child  is  related  to  the  group. 
It  is  not  specially  related  either  to  its  father  or  its 
mother,  who  stand  in  the  same  relation  as  mere  uncles 
and  aunts  ;  so  that  every  child  has  several  fathers  and 
several  mothers. 

There  are,  I  think,  reasons  in  the  social  habits  of 
these  islanders  which  go  far  to  explain  the  persistence 
of  this  archaic  nomenclature.  From  the  mildness  of 
the  climate  and  the  abundance  of  food,  children  soon 
become  independent  ;  the  prevalence  of  large  houses, 
used  as  mere  dormitories,  and  the  curious  prejudice 
against  eating  in  common,  must  also  have  greatly 
tended  to  retard  the  development  of  special  family 
feelings.  Yet  the  system  of  nomenclature  above  men- 
tioned did  not  correspond  with  the  actual  state  of 
society  as  found  by  Captain  Cook  and  other  early 
voyagers. 

Among  the  Todas  of  the  Neilgherry  Hills,  however, 
when  a  man  marries  a  girl  she  becomes  the  wife  of  all 
his  brothers  as  they  successively  reach  manhood,  and 
tbey  also  become  the  husbands  of  all  her  sisters  as  they 
become  old  enough  to  marry.     In  this  case  *  the  first-. 


88  PREVALENCE  OF  ADOPTION. 

'  born  child  is  fathered  upon  the  eldest  brother,  the 

*  next-born  on  the  second,  and  so  on  throughout  the 

*  series.  Notwithstanding  this  unnatural  system,  the 
^  Todas,  it  must  be  confessed,  exhibit  much  fondness 

*  and  attachment  towards  their  oflfspring,  more  so  than 

*  their  practice  of  mixed  intercourse  would  seem  to 
'  foster; 1 

In  the  Tottiyars  of  India,  also,  we  have  a  case  in 
which  it   is  actually  recorded  that   *  brothers,  uncles, 

*  and  nephews  hold  their  wives  in  common.' '  So  also, 
according  to  Nicolaus,^  the  Galactophagi  had  commu- 
nal marriage,  *  where  they  called  all  old  men  fathers, 

*  young  men  sons,  and  those  of  equal  age  brothers.' 

*  Among  the  Sioux  and  some  other  North  American 

*  tribes  the  custom  is  to  buy  the  eldest  of  the  chiefs 
'  daughters  ;  then  the  others  all  belong  to  him,  and  are 

*  taken  to  wife  at  such  times  as  the  husband  sees  fit** 

Such  social  conditions  as  these  tend  to  explain  the 
frequency  of  adoption  among  the  lower  races  of  men, 
and  the  fact  that  it  is  often  considered  to  be  as  close  a 
connection  as  real  parentage.     Among  the  Esquimaux, 
Captain  Lyon  tells   us   that  ^this   curious  connection 
'  binds  the  parties  as   firmly  together   as   the  ties  of 
'  blood  ;  and  an  adopted  son,  if  senior  to  one  by  nature, 
^  is  the  heir  to  all  the  family  riches.^  ^ 

In  Central  Africa,  Denham  states  that  Uhe  practice 
'  of  adopting  children    is  very  prevalent   among   the 

*  Felatahs,  and,  though  they  have  sons  and  dau^rhters  of 
'  their  own,  the  adopted  child  generally  bec<^mcs  heir 

'  Shortt, Tmn*.  Ktlin.Sor.,  N.S.  »  Hachof.'n,  Djus  Mutt«»rrecht,  p. 

vol.  vii.  p.  iMO.  -J I. 

^  I)ul>)i8*  Uoflcripti.'iiof  tho  IVo-  *  Kthii.  Journal,  IHIV.I.  p.  iviij. 

pl«'  of  luvliii,  p.  -l  *  Juurnul,  p.  .*J.7:J.     St^?  W>. 


THE  MILK-TIE.  89 

^  to  the  whole  property/^     In  Madagascar*^  also  'the 

'  adoption  of  other  children,  generally  those  of  relatives, 

'  is  of  frequent  occurrence.     These  children  are  regarded 

'  in  every  respect  as  if  they  were  bom  of  their  adopted 

'  parents,  and  their  real  father  and  mother  give  up  all 

'  ckiin  to  them.' 

*  It  is  a  custom,'  says  Mariner,^  'in  the  Tonga 
'  Islands,  f6r  women  to  be  what  they  call  mothers  to 
'  children  or  grown-up  young  persons  who  are  not  their 

*  own,  for  the  purpose  of  providing  them,  or  seeing  that 

*  diey  are  provided,  with  all  the  conveniences  of  life  ; ' 
this  is  often  done  even  if  the  natural  mother  be  still 
living,  in  .which  case  the  adopted  mother  '  is  regarded 
'  the  same  as  the  natural  mother.'     The  same  custom 
also  existed  in  Samoa,*  the  Marquesas,  and  other  Pacific 
Islands.^     Among  the  Romans,  also,  adoption  was  an 
important  feature,  and  was  effected  by  the  symbol  of  a 
mock  birth,  without  which  it  was  not  regarded  as  com- 
plete.    This  custom  seems  to  have  continued  down  to 
the  time  of  Nerva,  who,  in  adopting  Trajan,  transferred 
the  ceremony  from  the  marriage-bed  to  the  temple  of 
Jupiter.^     Diodorus  ^  gives  a  very  curious  account  of 
the  same  custom  as  it  existed  among  the  Greeks,  men- 
tioning that  Juno  adopted  Hercules  by  going  through 
a  ceremony  of  mock  birth. 

In  other  cases  the  symbol  of  adoption  represented 
^ot  the  birth,  but  the  milk-tie.     Thus,  in  Circassia,  the 

*  Denhain's  Travels    in    Africa,      p.  179. 

^ol.  iy.  p.  131.  ^  Gerland.  Waitz'  Anthropologic, 

'  Sibree'u    Madagascar    and    its  vol.  vi.  p.  210. 
^^ple,p.  197.  ^^  MiilW,     Das    Mnttomxlit,    p. 

^  Mariner's  Tonga   Islands,  vol.  '2^)\. 
"•  p.  08.  7  IV.  :]9.     See  Note^i. 

*  Nineteen    Year^  in  Pcjlyniijia, 


90  ORIGINAL  OB  COMMUNAL  MAEUUQB. 

woman   offered    her   breast    to    the    person  she  was 
adopting.     In  Abyssinia,  Parkyn  tells  us  that  *  if  a  man 

*  wishes  to  be  adopted  as  the  son  of  one  of  superior 
'  station  or  influence,  he  takes  his  hand,  and,  sucking 

*  one  of  his  fingers,  declares  himself  to  be  his  "  child  by 

*  ''  adoption,"  and  his  new  father  is  bound  to  assist  him 

*  as  far  as  he  can.'^ 

The  same  idea  underlies,  perhaps,  the  curious  Ea- 
quimaux  habit  of  licking  anything  which  is  presented 
to  them,  apparently  in  token  of  ownership.' 

Dieff^enbach  ®  also  mentions  the  practice  of  licking  a 
present  in  New  Zealand  ;  here,  however,  it  is  the  donor 
who  does  so.  In  the  Tonga  Islands,  Captain  Cook  tells 
us  that  the  natives  ^  have  a  singular  custom  of  putting 
'  everything  you  give  them  to  their  heads,  by  way  of 

*  thanks,  as  we  conjectured.'  *     Labillardi^  observed 
the  same  practice  in  Tasmania.^ 

Assuming,  then,  that  the  communal  marriage  sjrstem 
shoAvn  in  the  preceding  pages  to  prevail,  or  have  pre- 
vailed, so  widely  among  races  in  a  low  stage  of  civilisa- 
tion, represents  the  primitive  and  earliest  social  con- 
dition of  man,  wc  now  come  to  consider  the  various 
ways  in  which  it  may  have  been  broken  up  and  replaced 
by  individual  marriage. 

Montesquieu  lays  it  Aovm  almost  as  an  axiom,  that 
'  rohlijration  naturelle  qu'a  le  pere  dc  nourrir  ses 
'  enfants  a  fait  (^'tablir  Ic  mariage,  qui  declare  celui  qui 

*  doit  reniplir  cctte  obligation.'^     Elsewhere  he  states 

'  riirkyn's  Abyfwinia,  p.  IJW.  Pole,  vol.  i.  p.  221. 
'  Fniiikliirs  Journeys,  1810-22,  *  (tcrliind.    WaiU*    Anthropolo* 

vol.  i.  p.  ;U.  gie,  v«>l.  vi.  p.  812. 

'  New  Zealand,  vol.  ii.  p.  101.  •  i:»prit  ded  I^w,  vol.  ii.  p.  ISC. 

*  Voyiijrv    tuwordfl    the    South 


OniOm  OF  MAEEIAGE.  91 

that  *  il  est  arriv^  dans  tous  les  pays  et  dans  tons  les 
*  temps  que  la  religion  s'est  mSl^e  des  mariages.'  ^  How 
fiff  these  assertions  are  from  the  truth  will  be  conclu- 
sively shown  in  the  following  pages. 

Bachofen,*  McLennan,*  and  Morgan,  the  most  recent 
aathors  who  have  studied  this  subject,  all  agree  that 
the  primitive  condition  of  man,  socially,  was  one  in 
which  marriage  did  not  exist,*  or,  as  we  may  perhaps 
for  ccmvenience  call  it,  of  communal  marriage,  where 
all  the  men  and  women  in  a  small  community  were 
regarded  as  equally  married  to  one  another. 

Bachofen  considers  that  after  a  while  the  women, 
shocked  and  scandalised  by  such  a  state  of  things, 
revolted  against  it,  and  established  a  system  of  marriage 
with  female  supremacy,  the  husband  being  subject  to 
the  wife,  property  and  descent  being  considered  to  go 
in  the  female  line,  and  women  enjoying  the  principal 
share  of  political  power.  The  first  period  he  calls  that 
of  ^  Hetairism,'  the  second  of  '  Mutterrecht,'  or  '  mother- 
'  right; 

In  the  third  stage  he  considers  that  the  ethereal 
influence  of  the  father  prevailed  over  the  more  material 
idea  of  motherhood.  Men  claimed  pre-eminence,  pro- 
perty and  descent  were  traced  in  the  male  line,  sun 
worship  superseded  moon  worship,  and  many  other 
changes  in  social  organisation  took  place — mainly 
Wuse  it  came  to  be  recognised  that  the  creative 
influence  of  the  father  was  more  imix)rtant  than  the 
Material  tie  of  motherhood.  The  father,  in  fact,  was 
the  author  of  life,  the  mother  a  mere  nurse. 

*  Loc  cit.j  p.  299.  '  Primitive  Marriage. 

'  Das  Mutterrecht.  *  Ihid.^  xviii.  xix. 


92  BAOHOFEirS  VIEWS. 

Thus  he  regards  the  first  stage  as  lawless,  the  second 
as  material,  the  third  as  spiritual.  I  believe,  however, 
that  communities  in  which  women  have  exercised  the 
supreme  power  are  rare  and  exceptional,  if  indeed  they 
ever  existed  at  all.  We  do  not  find  in  history,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  that  women  do  assert  their  rights,  and 
savage  women  would,  I  think,  be  peculiarly  unlikely  to 
uphold  their  dignity  in  the  manner  supposed.  On  the 
contrary,  among  the  lowest  races  of  men,  as,  for 
instance,  in  Australia,  the  position  of  the  women  is  one 
of  complete  subjection  ;  and  it  seems  to  me  perfectly 
clear  that  the  idea  of  marriage  is  founded  on  the  rights, 
not  of  the  woman,  but  of  the  man,  being  an  illustra- 
tion of 

the  good  old  plan, 

That  he  should  take  who  has  the  power. 
And  he  should  keep  who  can. 

Among  low  races  the  wife  is  indeed  literally  the 
property    of    the    husband.      As    Petruchio    says   of 

Catherine  : 

I  will  be  master  of  what  is  mine  own. 

She  is  my  goo<ls,  my  chattels ;  she  is  my  house. 

My  household  stuff,  my  field,  my  bam, 

My  horse,  my  ox,  my  ass,  my  anything. 

So  thoroughly  is  this  the  case,  that  a  Romanes 
'  lUniily '  originally,  and  indeed  throughout  classical 
times,  meant  his  slaves,  and  the  childron  only  formed 
jmrt  of  the  family  because  they  were  his  slaves;  so  that 
if  a  father  freed  his  son,  the  latter  eeased  to  In?  one  of 
the  family,  ami  had  im  part  in  tlie  inlieritanee. 

'The  mere  tie  of  bhuwl  relationship,' savs  (Ortolan, 


WRE8TLIN0  FOB  WIVES.  93 

*  was  of  no  account  among  the  Komans The 

*  most  general  expression  and  the  most  comprehensive 

*  term  indicating  relationship  in  Roman  Law  is  cognatio 

*  — ^the  cognation,  that  is  to  say,  the  tie  between  persons 
'  who  are  united  by  the  same  blood,  or  those  reputed 

*  by  the  law  as  such  (cognati;  quasi  una  communiter 

*  Tkiti).     But  cognation  alone,  whether  it  proceeds  from 

*  legal  marriage  or  any  other  union,   does  not  place 

*  the  individual  within  the  family,  nor  does  it  give  any 

*  right  of  family.'  ^  Even  at  the  present  day,  in  some 
parts  of  Africa,  a  man's  property  goes,  not  to  his  chil- 
dren, as  such,  but  to  his  slaves. 

The  feet  that  the  wife  is  regarded  literally  as  the 
property  of  the  husband  explains  those  cases  which  seem 
to  us  so  remarkable,  in  which  great  laxity  of  conduct 
before,  is  combined  with  the  utmost  strictness  after, 
marriage.  Hence,  also,  the  custom,  so  prevalent  among 
the  lower  races  of  men,  that  on  the  death  of  the  elder 
brother  the  wives  belong  to  the  second. 

This  complete  subjection  of  the  woman  in  marriage 
also  explains  those  cases  in  which  women  of  rank  were 
considered  too  great  to  marry.  Livingstone  distinctly 
states  this  in  the  case  of  Mamochisdne,  daughter  of 
Sebituane,  chief  of  the  Bechuanas.     Sebituane  '  could 

*  not  look  upon  the  husband   except  as  the  woman's 

*  lord,  so  he  told  her  all  the  men  were  hers,  she  might 

*  take  any  one,  but  ought  to  keep  none.'*^ 

Heame  tells  us,  that  among  the  Hudson's  Bay 
Indians  *  it  has  ever  been  the  custom  for  the  men  to 

>  Ortolan*!  Historj    of   Roman  170.    See  also  Burton's  Dabomeji 

Law,  tr.  by  Prichard  and  Nasmith,  vol.  i.  pp.  107,  300,  vol.  ii.  p.  72. 

p,  129,  Tuckey*s  Exp.  to  the  River    Zaire 

*  Travels  in   South   Africa,  p.  p.  140. 


94  M'LENNAirS  VIEWS. 

'  wrestle  for  any  woman  to  whom  they  are  attached; 
'  and,  of  course,  the  strongest  party  always  carries  off 
^  the  prize.     A  weak  man,  unless  he  be  a  good  hunter 

*  and  well-beloved,  is  seldom  permitted  to  keep  a  irifc 

*  that  a  stronger  man  thinks  worth  his  notice 

*  This  custom  prevails  throughout  all  their  tribes,  and 
^  causes  a  great  spirit  of  emulation  among  their  youtli, 

*  who  are  upon  all  occasions,  from  their  childhood,  trying 

*  their  strength  and  skill  in  wrestling/  ^  Franklin  also 
says  that  the  Copper  Indians  hold  women  in  the  same 
low  estimation  as  the  Chipewyans  do,  booking  upon 

*  them  as  a  kind  of  property,  which  the  stronger  may 

*  take  from  the  weaker  ;'*  and  Richardson'  ^  more  than 
^  once  saw  a  stronger  man  assert  his  right  to  take  the 

*  wife  of  a  weaker  countryman.    Anyone  may  challenge 

*  another  to  wrestle,  and,  if  he  overcomes,  may  carry  off 

*  the  wife  as  the  prize.'  Yet  the  women  never  dream 
of  protesting  against  this,  which,  indeed,  seems  to  them 
perfectly  natural.  The  theory,  therefore,  of  Dr.  Bacho- 
fen,  and  the  sequence  of  social  customs  suggested  by 
him,  although  supported  with  much  learning,  cannot,  I 
think,  be  regarded  as  correct.* 

McLennan,  like  Bachofen  and  Morgan,  starts  with  a 
stage  of  Hctairism  or  communal  marriage.  The  next 
stage  was,  in  his  opinion,  that  form  of  polyandry  in 
which  brothers  had  their  wives  in  common ;  afterwards 
came  that  of  the  levirate^  i.e.  the  system  under  which, 
wlien  an  elder  brother  died,  his  second  brother  married 
the  widow,  and  so  on  with   the  others  in  succession. 

*  Ilcnrno,  p.  lai.  vol.  ii.  p.  24. 

'  Journey  to  the  Shores  of  the  *  See,  for  instance,  Lewin*i  ITill 

Polar  Sew,  vol.  viii.  p.  4S,  Twcta  of  Chittagong,  pp.  47, 77, 80^ 

'  Kichard80D*8    Boat    Journey,  as,  98, 101. 


THE  TRUE  EXPLANATION.  95 

Thence  he  considers  that  some  tribes  branched  off  into 
endogamy,  others  into  exogamy ;  ^  that  is  to  say,  some 
ferhade  marriage  out  of,  others  within,  the  tribe.  If 
either  of  these  two  systems  was  older  than  the  other, 
he  considers  that  exogamy  must  have  been  the  most 
ancient  Exogamy  was  based  on  infanticide,^  and  led 
to  the  practice  of  marriage  by  capture.^ 

In  a  further  stage  the  idea  of  female  descent,  pro- 
ducing as  it  would  a  division  in  the  tribe,  obviated  the 
necessity  of  capture  as  a  reality  and  reduced  it  to  a 
symbol. 

In  support  of  this  view  Mr.  M'Lennan  has  certainly 
brought  forward  many  striking  facts  ;  but,  while  ad- 
mitting that  it  probably  represents  the  succession  of 
events  in  some  cases,  I  cannot  but  think  that  these  are 
exceptional.  Fully  admitting  the  prevalence  of  infanti- 
cide among  savages,  it  will,  I  think,  be  found  that 
among  the  lowest  races  boys  were  killed  as  frequently 
as  ^Is.  £3nre  expressly  states  that  this  was  the  case 
in  Aostralia.^  In  &ct,  the  distinction  between  the  sexes 
implies  an  amount  of  forethought  and  prudence  which 
the  lower  races  of  men  do  not  possess. 

For  reasons  to  be  given  shortly,  I  believe  that  com- 
munal marriage  was  gradually  superseded  by  individual 
marriage  founded  on  capture,  and  that  this  led  firstly 
to  exogamy  and  then  to  female  infanticide ;  thus  re- 
versing M^Lennan's  order  of  sequence.  Endogamy  and 
regulated  polyandry,  though  frequent,  I  regard  as  ex- 
ceptional, and  as  not  entering  into  the  normal  progress 
of  development. 

»  Loe,  eU.f  p.  146.  '  Loc.  cU.y  p.  140. 

•  Zoo.  cU^  p.  188.  *  Discovories,  &c.,  vol.  ii.  p.  324. 


96  THE  TBUE  EXPLANATION. 

With  M'Lennan,  Bachofen,  and  Morgan,  I  believe 
that  our  present  social  relations  have  arisen  from  an 
initial  stage  of  Hetairism  or  communal  marriage.    It  is 
obvious,  however,  that  even  under  communal  marringe,  a 
warrior  who  had  captured  a  beautiful  girl  in  some  maraud- 
ing expedition  would  claim  a  peculiar  right  to  her,  and, 
when  possible,  would  set  custom  at  defiance.     We  have 
already  seen  that  there  are  other  cases  of  the  existence 
of  marriage  under  two  forms  side  by  side  in  one  coun- 
try; and  there  is,  therefore,  no  real  difficulty  in  assuming 
the  co-existence  of  communal  and  individual  marriage. 
It  is  true  that  under  a  communal  marriage  system  no 
man  could  appropriate  a  girl  entirely  to  himself  without 
infringing  the  rights  of  the  whole  tribe.     Such  an  act 
would  naturally  be  looked  on  with  jealousy,  and  only 
regarded  as  justifiable  under  peculiar  circumstances.   A 
war-captive,  however,  was  in  a  peculiar  position :  the 
tribe  had  no  right  to  her ;    her  capturer  might  have 
killed  her  if  he  chose ;  if  he  preferred  to  keep  her  alive 
he  was  at  liberty  to  do  so;  he  did  as  he  liked,  and  the 
tribe  was  no  sufferer. 

M*Lcnnan,'  indeed,  says  that  ^  it  is  impossible  to 
'  believe  that  the  mere  lawlessness  of  savages  should  be 
'  consecrated  into  a  legal  symbol,  or  to  assign  a  reason 
'  — could  this  be  believed — why  a  similar  symbol  should 
*  not  a])pear  in  transferences  of  other  kinds  of  property.* 
The  symlx)!  of  cajrture,  however,  was  not  one  of  law- 
lessness, but,  on  the  other  hand,  of — according  to  the 
ideas  of  the  time — lawful  ])ossession.  It  did  not  refer 
to  those'  from  whom   the  captive  was  taken,  but  was 

'    I^k:  rit.,  p.  41. 


ORIGIN  OF  MARRIAOE  BY  CAPTURE.  97 

iutended  to  bar  the  rights  of  the  tribe  into  which  she 
iras  introduced.  Individual  marriage  was,  in  fact,  an 
infiringement  of  communal  rights ;  the  man  retaining  to 
himwelf,  or  the  man  and  woman  mutually  appropriating 
to  each  other,  that  which  should  have  belonged  to  the 
whole  tribe.  Thus,  among  the  Andamaners,  any 
woman  who  attempted  to  resist  the  marital  privileges 
claimed  by  any  member  of  the  tribe  was  liable  to  severe 
punishment.^ 

Nor  is  it,  I  think,  difficult  to  understand  why  the 
symbol  of  capture  does  not  appear  in  transferences  of 
odier  kinds  of  property.  Every  generation  requires 
freah  wives;  the  actual  capture,  or  at  any  rate  the 
•ymbol,  needed  therefore  repetition.  This,  however, 
doett  not  apply  to  land ;  when  once  the  idea  of  landed 
property  arose,  the  same  land  descended  from  owner  to 
owner.  In  other  kinds  of  property,  again,  there  is  an 
important,  though  different  kind  of,  distinction.  A 
man  made  his  own  bow  and  arrows,  his  own  hut,  his 
own  arms ;  hence  the  necessity  of  capture  did  not  exist, 
and  the  83rmbol  would  not  arise. 

McLennan  supposes  that  savages  were  driven  by 
female  in&nticide,  and  the  consequent  absence  or 
paucity  of  women,  into  exogamy,  and  marriage  by  cap- 
ture. I  shall  presently  give  my  reasons  for  rejecting 
this  explanation. 

He  also  considers  that  marriage  by  capture  followed, 
and  arose  from^  that  remarkable  custom  of  marry- 
ing always  out  of  the  tribe,  for  which  he  has  pro- 
posed the  appropriate  name  of  exogamy.     On  the  con- 

"  Txaot.  EUiD.  So«.,  N.S.,  voL  il  p.  35. 

H 


98  MARRIAGE  BY  CAPTURE 

trary,  I  believe  that  exogamy  arose  from  niarriage  by 
capture,  not  marriage  by  capture  from  exogamy ;  tbt 
capture,  and  capture  alone,  could  originally  give  a  niflD 
the  right  to  monopolise  a  woman,  to  the  exclasionof 
his  fellow-clansmen ;  and  that  hence,  even  after  ill 
necessity  for  actual  capture  had  long  ceased,  the  symbol 
remained ;  capture  having,  by  long  habit,  come  to  be 
received  as  a  necessary  preliminary  to  marriage. 

That  marriage  by  capture  has  not  arisen  from  female 
modesty  is,  I  think,  evident,  not  only  because  we  have 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  such  a  feeling  prevails  spe 
cially  among  the  lower  races  of  man,  but  also,  firstly, 
because  it  cannot  explain  the  mock  resistance  of  the 
relatives ;  and,  secondly,  because  the  very  question  to  be 
solved  is  why  it  became  so  generally  the  custom  to  win 
the  female  not  by  persuasion  but  by  force. 

Mr.  M'Lennan's  view  throws  no  light  on  the  remark- 
able ceremonies  of  expiation  for  marriage,  to  which  I 
shall  presently  call  attention. 

I  will,  however,  first  proceed  to  show  bow  widely 
*  capture,'  either  actual  or  symbolical,  enters  into  the 
idea  of  marriage.  Mr.  M'Lennan  was,  I  believe,  the 
first  to  appreciate  its  importance.  I  have  taken  some 
of  the  following  instances  from  his  valuable  work, 
adding,  however,  many  additional  cases. 

It  requires,  no  doubt,  strong  evidence,  which,  how- 
ever, exists  in  abundance,  to  satisfy  us  that  the  origin 
of  maiTiage  was  independent  of  all  sacred  and  social 
considerations ;  that  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  mutual 
nflcctifjn  or  synipatliy;  tliat  it  was  invalidated  by  any 
appcaranct;  of  consL'ut ;  jind  that  it  was  syniholisinl,  not 
by  any  demonstration  of  warm  aliection  on  the  one  side 


OB IG 11^ ALLY  A  UEALFFY,  9D 

•nd  tender  devotion  on  the  other,  but  by  brutal  violence 
iod  unwilling  submission. 

Yet,  as  already  mentioned,  the  evidence  is  over- 
whelming. So  completely,  for  instance,  did  the  Caribs 
aapply  themselves  with  wives  from  the  neighbouring 
noes,  and  so  little  communication  did  they  hold  with 
tiiem,  that  the  men  and  women  actually  spoke  different 
knguages.  So,  again,  in  Australia  the  men,  says  Old- 
iield,  ^  are  in  excess  of  the  other  sex,  and,  consequently, 
many  men  of  every  tribe  are  unprovided  with  that 
especial  necessary  to  their  comfortable  subsistence,  a 
wife ;  who  is  a  slave  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word, 
being  a  beast  of  burden,  a  provider  of  food,  and  a 
ready  object  on  which  to  vent  those  passions  that  the 
men  do  not  dare  to  vent  on  each  other.  Hence,  for 
those  coveting  such  a  luxury,  arises  the  necessity  of 
stealing  the  women  of  some  other  tribe ;  and,  in  their 
expeditions  to  effect  so  laudable  a  design,  they  will 
cheerfully  undergo  privations  and  dangers  equal  to 
those  they  incur  when  in  search  of  blood-revenge. 
When,  on  such  an  errand,  they  discover  an  unprotected 
female,  their  proceedings  are  not  of  the  most  gentle- 
natm^  Stunning  her  by  a  blow  from  the  dowak  (to 
make  her  love  them,  perhaps),  they  drag  her  by  the 
hair  to  the  nearest  thicket  to  await  her  recovery. 
When  she  comes  to  her  senses  they  force  her  to 
accompany  them ;  and  as  at  worst  it  is  but  the  ex- 
change of  one  brutal  lord  for  another,  she  generally 
enters  into  the  spirit  of  the  affair,  and  takes  as  much 
pains  to  escape  as  though  it  were  a  matter  of  her  own 
free  choice/* 

*  Tnna.  Ethn.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  p.  250. 

n  2 


100  MABBIAGE  BY  CAPTUBE  OBIOINALLY  A  BEALITT; 

Collins  thus  describes  the  manner  in  which  the  natives 
about  Sydney   used    to    procure  wives  : — ^  The  poor 

*  wretch  is  stolen  upon  in  the  absence  of  her  protectors. 
^  Being  first  stupefied  with  blows,  inflicted  with  clubs 

*  or  wooden  swords,  on  the  head,  back,  and  shoulders, 

*  every  one  of  which  is  followed  by  a  stream  of  blood, 

*  she  is  then  dragged  through  the  woods  by  one  arm, 
^  with  a  perseverance  and  violence  that  it  might  be  sup- 

*  posed  would  displace  it  from  its  socket.     The  lover, 

*  or  rather  the  ravisher,  is  regardless  of  the  stones  (X 

*  broken  pieces  of  trees  which  may  lie  in   his  route, 

*  being  anxious  only  to  convey  his  prize  in  safety  to  Us 

*  own  party,  when  a  scene  ensues  too  shocking  to  relate. 

*  This  outrage  is  not  resented  by  the  relations  of  the 

*  female,  who  only  retaliate  by  a  similar  outrage  when 

*  they  find  an  opportunity.     This  is  so  constantly  the 
^  practice  among  them  that  even  the  children  make  it  a 

*  play-game,  or  exercise.'  ^ 

In  Bali  also,^  one  of  the  islands  between  Java  and 
New  Guinea,  it  is  stated  to  be  the  practice  that  girk 

*  are  stolen  away  by  their  brutal  lovers,  who  sometimea 

*  surprise  them  alone,  or  overpower  them  by  the  way, 

*  and  carry  them  off  with  dishevelled  hair  and  tattered 

*  garments  to  the  woods.     When  brought  back  from 

*  thence,   and   reconciliation  is  effected   with  enraged 
^  friends,  the  poor  female  becomes  the  slave  of  her  rough 

*  lover,  by  a  certain  compensation-price  being  paid  to 

*  her  relatives.' 

So   deei)ly   rooted   is   the  feeling  of  a  connection 
between  force  and  marriage,  tliat  we  find  the  former 

^  ColliiiH*A    Kiiglish    Colony   iu  ''  Noticen  of  the  ludiau  Axdii* 

New  South  Wales,  p.  302.  pelago,  p.  00. 


SUBSEQUENTLY  A  FOBM.  101 

used  as  a  form  long  after  all  necessity  for  it  had  ceased  ; 
and  it  is  very  interesting  to  trace,  as  Mr.  M'Lennan 
has  done,  the  gradual  stages  through  which  a  stern 
reality  softens  down  into  a  mere  symbol. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  if  we  assume  the  case  of  a 
coantry  in  which  there  are  four  neighbouring  tribes, 
who  have  the  custom  of  exogamy,  and  who  trace  pedi- 
through  the  mother,  and  not  through  the  fiither 
custom  which,  as  we  shall  presently  find,  is  so 
common  that  it  may  be  said  to  be  the  usual  one  among 
the  lower  races — after  a  certain  time  the  result  would 
be  that  each  tribe  would  consist  of  four  septs  or  clans, 
representing  the  four  original  tribes,  and  hence  we 
should  find  communities  in  which  each  tribe  is  divided 
into  clans,  and  a  man  must  always  marry  a  woman  of  a 
different  clan.  But  as  communities  became  larger  and 
more  civilised,  the  actual  *  capture '  would  become 
inconvenient,  and  at  last  impossible. 

Gradually  therefore  it  came  to  be  more  and  more  a 
mock  ceremony,  forming,  however,  a  necessary  part  of 
the  marriage  ceremony.  Of  this  many  cases  might  be 
l^ven. 

Speaking  of  the  Khonds  of  Orissa,  Major-General 
GampbeU  says  that  on  one  occasion  he  ^  heard  loud  cries 
'  proceeding  from  a  village  close  at  hand.  Fearing  some 
'  quarrel,  I  rode  to  the  spot,  and  there  I  saw  a  man 

*  bearing  away  upon  his  back  something  enveloped  in 

*  an  ample  covering  of  scarlet  cloth  ;  he  was  surrounded 

*  by  twenty  or  thirty  young  fellows,  and  by  them  pro- 

*  tected  from  the  desperate  attacks  made  upon  him  by 

*  a  party  of  young  women.  On  seeking  an  explanation 
^  of  this  novel  scene,  I  was  told  that  the  man  had  just 


102  UINDOSTAN—CENTBAL  INDIA. 

^  been  married,  and  his  precious  burden  was  his  bloom- 
'  ing  bride,  whom  he  was  conveying  to  his  own  village. 
^  Her  youthful  friends  (as  it  appears  is  the  custom) 
^  were  seeking  to  regain  possession  of  her,  and  hurled 
^  stones  and  bamboos  at  the  head  of  the  devoted  bride* 
^  groom,  until  he  reached  the  confines  of  his  own  vil- 
'  lage;  ^ 

Dalton  mentions  that  among  the  Kols  of  Central 
India,  when  the  price  of  a  ^1  has  been  arranged,  'the 
'  bridegroom  and  a  large  party  of  his  fiiends  of  both 
'  sexes  enter  with  much  singing  and  dancing,  and  sham 
*  fighting  in  the  village  of  the  bride,  where  they  meet 
'  the  bride's  party,  and  are  hospitably  entertained.'  * 

Sir  W.  Elliot  also  mentions  that  not  only  amongst 
the  Khonds,  but  also  in  '  several  other  tribes  of  Central 
'  India,  the  bridegroom  seizes  his  bride  by  force,  either 
'  affected  or  real ; ' '  and  the  same  was  customary 
among  the  Badagas  of  the  Neilgherry  Hills,  the  Mun- 
dahs,  Hos,  Garos,  Oraons,  Ghonds,  and  other  Hill  tribes.^ 

Among  the  Garos  a  young  man  and  woman  who 
wish  to  marry,  take  some  provisions  and  retire  to  the 
Hills  for  a  few  days.  The  girl  goes  first,  and  the  lover 
follows  after,  well  knowing  of  course  where  she  will  be 
found.  In  a  few  days  they  return  to  the  village,  when 
the  marriage  is  publicly  announced  and  solenmised,  a 
mock  fight  taking  place,  though  in  this  case  the  pre- 
tended reluctance  is  on  the  part  of  the  bridegroouL* 

1  Quoted  in  M*I^nnau  s  Prinii-  '  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc  1600,  pi  135. 

tiv(>  Murril^r»^  p.  L>s.  «  Metz.    The  tribes  of  the  Neil* 

*  Tnui8.  ICtlni.  Sjit.,  vol.  vi.  p.  24,  jrherrios,  p.  74.     See  also   Lewin*a 

Sr.MiWp.  L»7;  t ho  Tribes  of  India,  Hill  TracU  of  Chittagong,  ppi  96^ 

vtil.   i.    p.   lo;    and    DaltonV    Des.  JSO. 

Kthimlivy  of    Hiignl,  pp.  0»,  80,  *  Dalton's  Des.  Ethn. of  Bengal, 

1!WJ,  -J.-ii',  L>7s,  ;uo.  p.  IW. 


MALAY  PENINSULA— KALMUCKS.  103 

In  this  tribe  the  girls  propose  to  the  men,  as  is  also  said 
to  be  the  case  among  the  Bhiuyas.^ 

M.  Bourien*  thus  describes  the  marriage  ceremony 
among  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Malay  Peninsula : — *  When 

*  all  are  assembled,  and  all  ready,  the  bride  and  bride* 

*  groom  are  led  by  one  of  the  old  men  of  the  tribe 

*  towards  a  circle  more  or  less  great,  according  to  the 

*  presumed  strength   of  the  intended  pah-  ;    the  gu-l 

*  rons  round  first,  and  the  young  man  pursues  a  short 

*  distance  behind ;  if  he  succeed  m  reaching  her  and 

*  retaining  her,  she  becomes  his  wife  ;  if  not,  he  loses 
*all  claim  to  her.     At  other  times,  a  larger  field  is 

*  appointed  for  the  trial,  and  they  pursue  one  another 

*  in  the  forest.     The  race,  according  to  the  words  of  the 

*  duronicle,  "  is  not  to  the  swift  nor  the  battle  to  the 

*  "  strong,"  but  to  the  young  man  who  has  had  the  good 

*  fortune  to  please  the  intended  bride.' 

Among  the  Kalmucks,  De  Hell  tells  us  that,  after 
the  price  of  the  girl  has  been  duly  agreed  on,  when  the 
bridegroom  comes  with  his  friends  to  carry  off  his 
bride,  ^  a  sham  resistance  is  always  made  by  the  people 

*  of  her  camp,  in  spite  of  which  she  fails  not  to  be  borne 
^  away  on  a  richly  caparisoned  horse,  with  loud  shouts 

*  and  feu  de  joie.'* 

Dr.  Clarke  *  gives  a  charmiogly  romantic  account  of 
the  ceremony.  *  The  girl,'  he  says,  '  is  first  mounted, 
^  who  rides  off  at  full  speed.     Her  lover  pursues ;  if  he 

*  overtaken  her,  she  becomes  his  wife,  and  the  marriage 

>  Loe.  eU.^  p.  142.  *  Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  332.     See 

»  Trans.  EUin.  Soc.  1806,  p.  81.  also  Vamb^ry's  Travels  in  Central 

*  Steppes  of  the  Caspian,  p.  250.  Asia,  p.  323.     Buraes'  Travels  in 

Quoted   in    M'Lennan's    Primitive  Bokhara,  pp.  11,  60. 

Marriage,  p.  80. 


104  TUNGUSES'-KAMCEADALES—MONaOLS. 

is  consummated  on  the  spot;  after  this  she  returns 
with  him  to  his  tent.  But  it  sometimes  happens  that 
the  woman  does  not  wish  to  many  the  person  by 
whom  she  is  pursued ;  in  this  case,  she  will  not  suffer 
him  to  overtake  her.  We  were  assured  that  no  m- 
stance  occurs  of  a  Eahnuck  girl  being  thus  caught, 
unless  she  have  a  partiality  to  the  pursuer.  If  she 
dislikes  him,  she  rides,  to  use  the  language  of  English 
sportsmen,  "  neck  or  nought,"  until  she  has  completely 
effected  her  escape,  or  until  her  pursuer's  horec 
becomes  exhausted,  leaving  her  at  liberty  to  return, 
and  to  be  afterwards  chased  by  some  more  fiEkVOured 
admirer; 

^  Among  the  Tunguses  and  Eamchadales,'  says 
Eman,^  *  a  matrimonial  engagement  is  not  definitely 
arranged  and  concluded  until  the  suitor  has  got  the 
better  of  his  beloved  by  force,  and  has  torn  her 
clothes.'  Attacks  on  women  are  not  allowed  to  be 
avenged  by  blood  unless  they  take  place  within  the 
yourt  or  house.  The  man  is  not  regarded  as  to  blame, 
if  the  woman  '  has  ventured  to  leave  her  natural  place, 

*  the  sacred  and  protecting  hearth.'  Pallas  observes 
that  in  his  time  *  marriage  by  capture  prevailed  also 
'  among  the  Samoyedes.'  * 

Among  the  Mongols,^  when  a  marriage  is  arranged, 
the  girl  *  flies  to  some  relations  to  hide  herself.     The 

*  bridegroom  coming  to  demand  his  wife,  the  father-in- 

*  law  says,  "  My  daugliter  is  yours;  go,  take  her  whcr- 


*  Tiavrl*  in   Siberia,  vol.  ii.  p.  A8tley*8  Collections  of  VojagM^  toL 
4 12.     Pee  also   Kanics'  IIiMt'>ry  of  iv.  p.  675. 

Man,  vol.  ii.  p.  58.  '  s  Astloy,  voL  iv.  p.  77. 

•  Vol.    iv.     p.    07.      See    also 


"KOEEANa^ESQrjmAUX.  105 

*  "  ever  you  can  find  her."     Having  thus  obtained  his 

*  warrant,  he,  with  his  friends,  runs  about  searching, 

*  and  having  found  her,  seizes  her  as  his  property,  and 

*  carries  her  home  as  it  were  by  force.'  Marriage  by 
capture,  indeed,  prevails  throughout  Siberia.  In  Kam- 
akatka,  says  Miiller,  *attraper  une  fiUe  est   leur  ex- 

*  pression  pour  dire  marier.'^ 

*  In  the  Korea,  when  a  man  marries,  he  mounts  on 

*  horseback,  attended  by  his  friends,  and,  having  ridden 

*  about  the  town,  stops  at  the  bride's  door,  where  he  is 

*  received  by  her  relations,  who  then  carry  her  to  his 

*  house,  and  the  ceremony  is  complete.'  *  Traces  of  the 
custom  also  occur  in  Japan.^ 

Amongthe  Esquimaux  of  Cape  York  (Smith  Sound), 
according  to  Dr.  Hayes,*  *  there  is  no  marriage  cere- 

*  mony  further  than  that  the  boy  is  required  to  carry 
^  off  his  bride  by  main  force ;   for,  even  among  these 

*  blubber-eating  people,  the   woman   only    saves    her 

*  modesty  by  a  sham  resistance,  although  she  knows 
^  years  beforehand  that  her  destiny  is  sealed,  and  that 

*  she  is  to  become  the  wife  of  the  man  from  whose 

*  embraces,  when  the  nuptial  day  comes,  she  is  obliged 

*  by  the  inexorable  law  of  public  opinion  to  free  herself 
^  if  possible,  by  kicking  and  screaming  with  might  and 

*  main,  until  she  is  safely  landed  in  the  hut  of  her  future 

*  lord,  when  she  gives  up  the  combat  very  cheerfully 

*  and  takes  possession  of  her  new  abode.' 

In  Greenland,  according  to  Egede,  ^  when  a  young 


1  Des.  de  toutea  les  Nations  de  '  Ihul,  p.  842. 

I'Empire  de  Ruse,  Pt  II.  p.  89.  »  L©  Japon   Dlustrt,  toI.  ii.  p. 

See  alto  Pt  L  p.  170;  Pt  UI.  pp.  130. 
8S^  71.  ^  Open  Polar  Sea,  p.  432. 


106  NORTH  AND  SOUTH  AMERICA. 

^  man  likes  a  maiden  he  commonly  proposes  it  to  their 
^  parents  and  relations  on  both  sides  ;  and  after  he  has 
'  obtained  their  consent,  he  gets  two  or  more  old  women 
^  to  fetch  the  bride  (and  if  he  is  a  stout  fellow  he  will 

*  fetch  her  himself).      They  go  to  the  place  where 

*  the  young  woman  is,  and  carry  her  away  by  force/ ^ 

AVe  have  already  seen  (p.  93)  that  marriage  by 
capture  exists  in  full  force  among  the  Northern  Red- 
skins. 

The  Aborigines  of  the  Amazon  Valley,  says 
Wallace,"  '  have  no  particular  ceremony  at  their  mar- 

*  riages,  except  that  of  always  carrying  away  the  ^rl 

*  by  force,  or  making  a  show  of  doing  so,  even  when 

*  she  and  her  parents  are  quite  >villing.' 

!M.  Bardel,  in  the  notes  to  D'Qrville's  Voyage,  men- 
tions  that  among  the  Tndians  round  Conception,  in 
South  America,  after  a  man  has  agreed  on  the  price  of 
a  girl  with  her  parents,  he  surprises  her,  and  carries 
her  off  to  the  woods  for  a  few  days,  after  which  the 
happy  couple  return  homc.^ 

In  Tierra  del  Fuego,  as  Admiral  Fitzroy  tells  us,* 
as  soon  '  as  a  youth  is  able  to  maintain  a  wife  by  his 
exertions  in  fishing  or  bird-catching,  he  obtains  the 
consent  of  her  relations,  and  ....  having  built  or 
stolen  a  canoe  for  himself,  he  watches  for  an  oppor- 
tunity, and  carries  off  his  bride.  If  she  is  imwilling 
slie  hides  herself  in  the  woods  until  her  admirer  is 
heartily  tired  of  looking  for  her,  and  gives  up  the 
pursuit  ;  but  tins  seldom  happens.' 

»  Hi*»tory  of  (2rtt*n1aml,  p.  14.'l.  *  Voyajro  of  tho  ^Vdventure '  and 

*  Trav^'lflinthoAiimzonj*.  p.  407.      'IJoa^'lo/  vol.  ii.  p.  18J. 
»  Vol.  iii.  pp.  i>77  aud  l*i\ 


FEEJEEANS—POLYNESIANS.  107 

Williams  mentions  that  among  the  Feejeeans  the 
custom  prevails  *  of  seizing  upon  a  woman  by  apparent 

*  or  actual  force,  in  order  to  make  her  a  wife.  On 
^  reaching  the  home  of  her  abductor,  should  she  not 

*  approve  of  the  match,  she  runs  to  some  one  who  can 

*  protect  her :  if,  however,  she  is  satisfied,  the  matter  is 

*  settled  forthwith ;  a  feast  is  given  to  her  friends  the 
^  next  morning,  and  the  couple  are  thenceforward  con- 
'  sidered  as  man  and  wife.'  ^ 

Earle*  gives  the  following  account  of  marriage  in 
New  Zealand,  which  he  regards  as  *  most  extraordinary,' 
while  in  reality  it  is,  as  we  now  see,  nothing  of  the 
sort : — *  The  New  Zealand  method  of  courtship  and 
matrimony  is,'  he  says,  *  most  extraordinary ;  so  much 
so  that  an  observer  could  never  imagine  any  affection 
existed  between  the  parties.  A  man  sees  a  woman 
wlKHn  he  fancies  he  should  like  for  a  wife ;  he  asks  the 
consent  of  her  father,  or,  if  an  orphan,  of  her  nearest 
relation;  which,  if  he  obtains,  he  carries  his  '*  intended" 
off  by  force,  she  resisting  with  all  her  strength ;  and, 
as  the  New  Zealand  girls  are  generally  pretty  robust, 
sometimes  a  dreadful  struggle  takes  place;  both  are 
soon  stripped  to  the  skin  ;  and  it  is  sometimes  the 
work  of  hours  to  remove  the  fair  prize  a  hundred 
yards.  If  she  breaks  away  she  instantly  flies  from  her 
antagonist,  and  he  has  his  labour  to  commence  again. 
We  may  suppose  that  if  the  lady  feels  any  wish  to  be 
united  to  her  would-be  spouse  she  will  not  make  too 
violent  an  opposition ;  but  it  sometimes  happens  that 
she  secures  her  retreat  into  her  father's  house,  and  the 

'     '  Fiji  and  the  Fijiani;  toI.  i.  p.  *  Residence  in  New  Zealand,  p. 

174.  244. 


108  POLYNESIANS. 

*  lover  loses  all  chance  of  ever  obtaining  her ;  whereas, 

*  if  he  can  manage  to  carry  her  in  triumph  into  his  own| 

*  she  immediately  becomes  his  wife.' 

Even  after  a  marriage,  it  is  customary  in  New  Zea- 
land to  have  a  mock  scuflBle.  Mr.  Yate  ^  gives  a  good 
illustration.  There  was,  he  says,  ^  a  little  opposition  to 
the  wedding,  but  not  till  it  was  over,  as  is  always  the 
custom  here.  The  bride's  mother  came  to  me  the 
preceding  afternoon,  and  said  she  was  well  pleased  in 
her  heart  that  her  daughter  was  going  to  be  married 
to  Pahau  ;  but  that  she  must  be  angry  about  it  with 
her  mouth  in  the  presence  of  her  tribe,  lest  the  natives 
should  come  and  take  away  all  her  possessions,  and 
destroy  her  crops.  Tliis  is  customary  on  all  occasions. 
If  a  chief  meets  with  an  accident  he  is  stripped,  as  a 
mark  of  respect ;  if  he  marries  a  wife  he  has  to  lose 
all  his  property  ;  and  this  is  done  out  of  respect — ^not 
from  disrespect,  as  it  was  once  printed,  inadvertently, 
in  an  official  publication.  A  chief  would  think  himself 
slighted  if  his  food  and  garments  were  not  taken  away 
from  him  upon  many  occasions.  To  prevent  this, 
Manga,  the  old  mother,  acted  with  policy.  As  I  was 
returning,  therefore,  from  the  church  with  the  bride- 
groom and  bride,  she  met  the  procession  and  began 
to  assaU  us  all  furiously.  She  put  on  a  most  terrific 
countenance,  threw  her  garments  about,  and  tore  her 
hair  like  a  fury  ;  then  said  to  me,  **  Ah !  you  white 
"  missionary,  you  are  worse  than  the  devil :  you  first 
"  make  a  slave-lad  your  son  by  redeeming  bim  firom 
"  his  master,  and  then  marry  him  to  my  daughter, 
"  who  is  a  lady.     I  will  tear  your  eyes  out !  I  will 

>  Yate's  New  Zealnnd,  p.  Oa 


PHILIPPISB  ISLANDERS^XEGniTOS.  109 


a 


tear  your  eyes  out  ! "  The  old  woman,  suiting  the 
action  to  the  word,  feigned  a  scratch  at  my  £ice,  at 
the  same  time  saying  in  an  under  tone  that  it  was  ^^  all 
^  mouthy"  and  that  she  did  not  mean  what  she  said. 
I  told  her  I  should  stop  her  mouth  with  a  blanket. 
^  Ha,  ha,  ha  !  "  she  replied ;  ^^  that  was  all  I  wanted  : 
^  I  <mly  wanted  to  get  a  blanket,  and  therefore  I 
^  made  this  noise.*'  The  whole  affair  went  off  after 
this  remarkably  well ;  all  seemed  to  enjoy  themselves ; 
and  everyone  was  satisfied.'  It  is  evident,  however, 
that  Yate  did  not  thoroughly  understand  the  meaning 
of  the  scene. 

Among  the  Ahitas  of  the  Philippine  Islands,  when 
Bman  wishes  to  marry  a  girl,  her  parents  send  her 
before  sunrise  into  the  woods.  She  has  an  hour's  start, 
after  which  the  lover  goes  to  seek  her.  If  he  finds  her 
and  brings  her  back  before  sunset,  the  marriage  is 
acknowledged  ;  if  not,  he  must  abandon  all  claim  to 
ber.^  The  natives  of  New  Guinea  also  have  a  very 
custom.' 


Among  the  Kaffirs  marriage  is  an  affair  of  purchase, 
notwithstanding  which  ^  the  bridegroom  is  required  to 

*  cany  off  his  bride  by  force,  after  the  preliminaries  are 
'  completed.  This  is  attempted  by  the  help  of  all  the 
'  fiiends  and  relatives  that  the  man  can  muster,  and 
'  resisted  by  the  friends  and  relatives  of  the  woman  ; 

*  and  the  contest  now  and  then  terminates  in  the  dis- 

*  comfiture  of  the  unlucky  husband,  who  is  reduced  to 

*  the  necessity  of  waylaying  his  wife,  when  she  may 

*  be  alone  in  the  fields  or  fetching  water  from  the  well.'  • 

*  Etfl*t  NattTe    Races   of   the      gie,  vol.  i.  p.  0^3 
iBdisn  Aichipekgo,  p.  133.  '  Pritchard's  Nat  Ilia,  of  Man, 

'  Gedand'a  Waiu*  AnUiropolo-      iL  iOS.      See  aXto  Arbooasei'a  Tour 


110  AFBIGA. 

In  the  West  African  kingdom  of  Futa,*  after  all 
other  preliminaries  are  arranged,  *one  difficulty  yet 
remains,  viz.,  how  the  young  man  shall  get  his  wife 
home  ;  for  the  women-cousins  and  relations  take  on 
mightily,  and  guard  the  door  of  the  house  to  prevent 
her  being  carried  away.  At  last,  by  the  bridegroom's 
presents  and  generosity,  their  grief  is  assuaged.  He 
then  provides  a  friend,  well  mounted,  to  carry  her  off; 
but  as  soon  as  she  is  on  horseback  the  women  renew 
their  lamentations,  and  rush  in  to  dismount  her. 
However,  the  man  is  generally  successful,  and  rides 
off  with  his  prize  to  the  house  prepared  for  her.' 
Gray  mentions  *  that  a  Mandingo  (West  Africa) 
wishing  to  marry  a  young  girl  at  Kayaye,  applied  to 
her  mother,  who  *  consented  to  his  obtaining  her  in  any 
way  he  could.  Accordingly,  when  the  poor  girl  was 
employed  preparing  some  rice  for  supper,  she  was 
seized  by  her  intended  husband,  assisted  by  three  or 
four  of  his  companions,  and  carried  off  by  force.  She 
made  much  resistance,  by  biting,  scratching,  kicking, 
and  roaring  most  bitterly.  Many,  both  men  and 
women,  some  of  them  her  own  relations,  who  wit- 
nessed the  affair,  only  laughed  at  the  farce,  and  con- 
soled her  by  saying  that  she  would  soon  be  reconciled 
to  her  situation.'  Evidently  therefore  this  was  not, 
as  Gray  seems  to  have  supposed,  a  mere  act  of  lawless 
violence,  but  a  recognised  custom,  which  called  for  no 
interference  on  tlie  part  of  spectators.  Denham,*  de- 
scribing a  marriage  at  Sockna  (North  Africa),  says  that 

to  tho  North-«?n8t  of  tho  Capo   of  vol.  ii.  p.  240. 

(lood  Hopr,  p.  21J»;  and  MRvliWa  «  (Iray's     Travels    in    WmUth 

Koflir  I-41W8  himI  (.'iijjtonw,  p.  W.  Africa,  ]>.  oO. 

*  Atttlev  fl  Colliftiou  of  Voyngt-i*,  "  Luc.  vit.,  vul.  i.  p.  :ll). 


CIBCASSIA^EUBOPE'-nOME.  1 1 1 

the  bride  is  taken  on  a  camel  to  the  bridegroom's  house, 

*  upon  which  it  is  necessary  for  her  to  appear  greatly 

*  surprised,  and  refuse  to  dismount ;  the  women  scream, 

*  the  men  shout,  and  she  is  at  length  persuaded  to  enter.' 

Among  the  Arabs  of  Sinai,  when  a  marriage  has 
been  arranged,  the  girl  is  waylaid  by  her  lover  '  and 

*  a  couple  of  his  friends,  and  carried  off  by  force  to  his 

*  father's  tent.     If  she  entertains  any  suspicion  of  their 

*  designs,  she  defends  herself  with   stones,  and  often 

*  inflicts  wounds  on  the  young  men,  even  though  she 

*  docs  not  dislike  the  lover.'  ^ 

In  Circassia  weddings  are  accompanied  by  a  feast, 

*  in  the  midst  of  which  the  bridegroom  has  to  rush  in, 

*  and,  with  the  help  of  a  few  daring  young  men,  carry 

*  ofi^  the  lady  by  force  ;  and  by  this  process  she  becomes 

*  the  lawful  wife.'  *  According  to  Spencer,  another  im- 
portant part  of  the  ceremony  consists  in  the  bridegroom 
drawing  his  dagger  and  cutting  open  the  bride's  corset. 

As  regards  Europe,  Plutarch  '  tells  us  that  in  Sparta 
the  bridegroom  usually  carried  off  his  bride  by  force, 
evidently,  however,  of  a  friendly  character.  I  would 
venture  to  suggest  that  the  character  of  Helen,  as 
portrayed  in  the  '  Iliad,'  can  only  be  understood  by 
regarding  her  marriage  with  Paris  as  a  case  of  marriage 
by  capture.*  *Les  premiers  Romains,'  says  Ortolan,^  'ont 
•^t^  obliges  de  recourir  a  la  surprise  et  a  la  force  pour  en- 
*lever  leurs  premieres femmes,' and  he  pointsout  that  long 
after  any  actual  violence  had  ceased,  it  was  customary  to 

'  Burckhardt's  Noto«  on  the  Be-  lo<\  cit.,  p.  oO. 
dotiinB  and  WahaW,  vol.  L  p.  203.  '  S«!e  also  1 1.  rmlotiiJ*,  vi.  6i>. 

tiJee  alf)  pp.  108,  --M.  '  -^^^'^  A])|m  n.lix. 

'  Mo«er,  The  Cuucabuh  niiil  itd  ^  K\\\   IIi.s.  dos  Iii^.  de  rEiiip. 

People,  p.  31 }  quoted bj  M'Luuuau  Justiitiim,  pp.  til,  82. 


112  POLAND— BVSSIA—BBITAm. 

pass  a  lance  over  the  head  of  the  bride,  ^  en  signe  de  la 
'  puissance  que  va  acquerir  le  mari.'  Hence  also  while 
a  man  might  be  married  in  his  absence,  this  was  not 
the  case  as  regards  the  woman.  A  man  might  capture 
a  bride  for  his  friend,  but  the  woman  could  not  be 
captured  unless  really  present.^     In  North  FriesLuid, 

*  a  young  fellow  called  the  bride-lifter  lifts  the  bride 

*  and  her  two  bridesmaids  upon  the  waggon  in  which 

*  the  married  couple  are  to  travel  to  their  home/' 
M'Lennan  states  that  in  some  parts  of  France,  down  to 
the  seventeenth  century,  it  was  customary  for  the  bride 
to  feign  reluctance  to  enter  the  bridegroom's  house. 

In  Poland,  Lithuania,  Russia,  and  parts  of  Prussia, 
according  to  Seignior  Gaya,'  young  men  used  to  carry 
off  their  sweethearts  by  force,  and  then  apply  to  the 
parents  for  their  consent. 

Lord  Kames,*  in  his  *  Sketches  of  the  History  of 

*  Man,'  mentions  that  the  following  marriage  ceremony 
was,  in  his  day,  or  at  least  had  till  shortly  before,  been 
customary  among  the  Welsh: — '  On  the  morning  of  the 

wedding-day  the  bridegroom,  accompanied  by  his 
friends  on  horseback,  demands  the  bride.  Her  friends, 
who  are  likewise  on  horseback,  give  a  positive  refusal, 
on  which  a  mock  scuffle  ensues.  The  bride,  mounted 
behind  her  nearest  kinsman,  is  carried  off,  and  \a  pur- 
sued by  the  bridegroom  and  his  friends,  with  loud 
shouts.  It  is  not  uncommon  on  such  an  occasion  to 
see  200  or  300  sturdy  Cambro- Britons  riding  at  full 
siKjed,  crossing  and  jostling,  to  tlie  no  small  amuse* 
ment  of  the  spectators.     When   they  have  fatigued 

"  /y»r.  ri7.,  p  127.  Sw  iiU»  OIhus    Mftgnu.^  vol.   lir, 

*  M'U'iiiiHn,  /<»r.  n>.,  p.  ;U1.  chapter  0. 

'  Murriftijo  Coremuuiw,    p.   35.  •  History  of  Miiii,  \ol  ii.  p,  «>. 


WIDE  BANOE  OF  MABEIAOE  BY  GAPTUBE.      113 

*  themselves  and  their  horses,  the  bridegroom  is  suflFered 

*  to  overtake  his  bride.     He  leads  her  away  in  triumph, 

*  and  the  scene  is  concluded  with  feasting  and  festivity.' 

In  European  Turkey  Mr.  Tozer  tells  uls  that  *  the 

*  Hirdites  never  intermarry  ;  but  when  any  of  them, 

*  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  wants  a  wife,  he  carries 

*  off  a  Mahometan  woman  from  one  of  the  neighbouring 

*  tribes,  baptizes  her,  and  marries  her.     The  parents, 

*  we  were  told,  do  not  usually  feel  much  aggrieved,  as 

*  it  is  well  understood  that  a  sum  of  money  will  be  paid 

*  in  return.'  ^ 

Thus,  then,  we  see  that  marriage  by  capture,  either 
a  stern  reality  or  as  an  important  ceremony,  pre- 
in  Australia,  among  the  Malays,  in  Hindostan, 
Central  Asia,  Siberia,  and  Kamskatka ;  among  the 
Esquimaux,  the  Northern  Redskins,  the  Aborigines  of 
Brazil,  in  Chili,  and  Tierra  del  Fuego,  in  the  Pacific 
Islands,  both  among  the  Polynesians  and  the  Feejeeans, 
in  the  Philippines,  among  the  Kaffirs,  Arabs,  and 
Negroes,  in  Circassia,  and,  until  recently,  throughout  a 
great  part  of  Europe. 

I  have  already  referred  to  the  custom  of  lifting  the 
bride  over  the  doorstep,  which  we  find  in  such  distinct  and 
distant  races  as  the  Romans,  the  Redskins  of  Canada, 
the  Chinese,  and  the  Abyssinians.  Hence,  also,  perhaps 
our  honeymoon,  during  which  the  bridegroom  keeps 
Wb  bride  away  from  her  relatives  and  friends  ;  hence 
even,  perhaps,  as  Mr.  M'Lennan  supposes,  the  slipper 
i«,in  mock  anger,  thrown  after  the  departing  bride  and 
bridegroom. 

The  curious  custom  which  forbids  the  father  and 

'  The  Highlands  of  Turkey,  vol.  i.  p.  318. 

I 


114  MABBIAOE  BY  CONFABBEATIO. 

mother-in-law  to  speak  to  their  son-in-law,  and  vice 
versd^  which  I  have  already  shown  (p.  15)  to  be  very 
widely  distributed,  but  for  which  no  satisfactory  ex- 
planation has  yet  been  given,  seems  to  me  a  natural 
consequence  of  marriage  by  capture.  When  the  capture 
was  a  reality,  the  indignation  of  the  parents  would  also 
be  real ;  when  it  became  a  mere  symbol,  the  parental 
anger  would  be  symbolised  also,  and  would  be  con- 
tinued even  after  its  origin  was  forgotten. 

The  separation  of  husband  and  wife,  to  which  also  1 
have  referred  (p.  75),  may  also  arise  from  the  same 
custom.     It  is  very  remarkable,  indeed,  how  persistent 
are  all  customs  and  ceremonies  connected  with  marriage. 
Thus  our  '  bride  cake,'  which  so  mvariably  accompanies 
a  wedding,  and  which  must  always  be  cut  by  the  bridij 
may  be  timced  back  to  the  old  Roman  form  of  uiarria^ 
by  ^  confarreatio,'  or  eating  together.     So  also  among 
the  Iroquois,  bride  and   bridegroom   used  to  partake 
together  of  a  cake  of  *  sagamite,'  ^  which  the  bride  offered 
to  her  husband.     The  Feejee  Islanders  ^  have  a  very 
similar  custom.      The  marriage   ceremony  in   Samoa, 
says  Turner,  '  remhids  us  of  the  Roman  confarreatio.*' 
Again,  among  tlie  Tipperahs,  one  of  the  Hill  tribes  of 
Chittagong,  the  bride  prepares  some  drink,  'sits  on  her 

*  lover's  knee,  drinks  half,  and  gives  him  the  other  half; 

*  they  afterwards  crook  together  their  little  fingers.'  * 
In  one  form  or  another  a  similar  custom  is  found  among 
most  of  the  Hill  tribes  of  India.     A  very  similar  custom 

'  I^afitauy  vol.  i.  pp.  r>0(J,  571.  p.  180. 

^  Fiji  aud  Uie  Fijians,  vol.  i.  p.            *  Ixjwin'rt   Hill  Tnctii  of  Chit- 

^"0-  ^  tflfronjr,  pp.  71,  HO.     Daltons  D«#. 

•  Ninetei>ii  Yvhth  iu   rolyueaia,  Ethn.  of  Dengal,  p.  103. 


MABBIAOE  iT  CAPTUBE.  115 

occurs  in  New  Guiuea/  and  in  Madagascar  also,  part 
of  the  marriage  ceremony  consists  in  the  bride  and  bride- 
groom eating  out  of  one  dish.^ 

Mr.  McLennan  conceives  that  marriage  by  capture 
arose  from  the  custom  of  exogamy,  that  is  to  say,  from 
the  custom  which  forbade  marriage  within  the  tribe. 
Exogamy,  again,  he  considers  to  have  arisen  from  the 
practice  of  female  in&nticide.  I  have  already  indicated 
the  reasons  which  prevent  me  from  accepting  this  ex- 
planation, and  which  induce  me  to  regard  exogamy  as 
arising  from  marriage  by  capture,  not  marriage  by 
capture  from  exogamy.  Mr.  M'Lennan's  theory  seems 
to  me  quite  inconsistent  with  the  existence  of  tribes 
which  have  marriage  by  capture  and  yet  are  endoga- 
mous.  The  Bedouins,  for  instance,  have  marriage  by 
capture,  and  yet  the  man  has  a  recognised  right  to 
marry  his  cousin,  if  only  he  be  willing  to  give  the  price 
demanded  for  her.^ 

Mr.  McLennan,  indeed,  feels  the  difficulty  which 
would  be  presented  by  such  cases,  the  existence  of 
which  he  seems,  however,  to  doubt;  adding,  that  if 
the  symbol  of  capture  be  ever  found  in  the  marriage 
ceremonies  of  an  endogamous  tribe,  we  may  be  sure 
that  it  is  a  relic  of  an  early  time  at  which  the  tribe  was 
organised  on  another  principle  than  that  of  exogamy.* 

That  marriage  by  capture  has  not  arisen  merely 
from  female  coyness  is,  I  think,  evident,  as  already 
mentioned,  firstly,  because  it  does  not  account  for  the 

■  GeriMid*t  Coo.  of  Wtiti'  An-  '    Klemm,    Allg.    Culturg.    d. 

^mp^  ToL  tL  p.  63S.  Meiwch.  voL  iv.  p.  146. 

•  Sibne's  IfadagMcar   and   its  *  Loe.  cU,,  p.  53. 

pMiple,p.l03. 

i2 


IIG  EXPIATION  FOB  MAEBIAOE. 

resistance  of  the  relatives  ;  secondly,  because  it  b  con- 
trary to  all  experience  that  feminine  delicacy  diminishes 
with  civilisation ;  and  thirdly,  because  the  very  question 
to  be  solved  is  why  it  has  become  so  generally  the  cus- 
tom to  win  the  wife  by  force  rather  than  by  persuasion. 

The  explanation  which  I  have  suggested  derives 
additional  probability  from  the  evidence  of  a  general 
feeling  that  marmge  was  an  act  for  which  some  com- 
pensation was  due  to  those  whose  rights  were  invaded. 

The  nature  of  the  ceremonies  by  which  this  was 
effected  makes  me  reluctant  to  enter  into  this  part  of 
the  subject  at  length  ;  and  I  will  here  therefore  merely 
indicate  in  general  terms  the  character  of  the  evidence. 

I  will  firstly  refer  to  certain  details  given  by 
Dulaure  ^  in  his  chapter  on  the  worship  of  Venus, 
of  which  he  regards  these  customs  merely  as  one 
illustration,  although  they  have,  I  cannot  but  think,  a 
signification  deeper  than,  and  different  from,  that  which 
he  attributes  to  them. 

We  must  remember  that  the  better  known  savage 
races  have,  in  most  cases,  now  arrived  at  the  stage  in 
which  paternal  rights  are  recognised,  and  hence  that 
fathers  can  and  do  sell  their  daughters  into  matrimony. 
The  price  of  a  wife  is  of  course  regulated  by  the 
circumstances  of  the  tribe,  and  every,  or  nearly  every, 
industrious  young  man  is  enabled  to  buy  one  for  him- 
self. As  long,  however,  as  communal  marriage  rights 
were  in  force  this  would  be  almost  im[>os«ible.  That 
special  marriage  was  an  infringement  of  these  com- 
munal  rights,  for  which  some  compensation  was  due, 
seems  to  me  the  true  explanation  of  the  offerings  which 

'  llist,  abr^*6  do))  ditT.  Cultcs. 


BABYLONIA— ARMENIA^BALEABIG  ISLANDS.      117 

virgins  were  so  generally  compelled   to   make  before 
being  permitted  to  marry. 

In  many  cases  the  exclusive  possession  of  a  wife 
could  only  be  legally  acquired  by  a  temporary  recogni- 
tion of  the  pre-existing  communal  rights.  See,  for 
instance,  the  account  given  by  Herodotus,^  of  the  cus- 
tom existing  in  Babylonia.  According  to  Strabo,  there 
was  a  very  similar  law  in  Armenia.^  In  some  parts  of 
Cjrprus  also,  among  the  Nasamones,^  and  other  jEthio- 
pian  tribes,  he  tells  us  that  the  same  custom  existed ;  and 
Dulaure  asserts  that  it  occurred  also  at  Carthage,  and  in 
several  parts  of  Greece,  as  also,  according  to  Hamilton,* 
in  Hindostan.  The  account  which  Herodotus  gives  of 
the  Lydians,  though  not  so  clear,  seems  to  indicate  a 
nmilar  law. 

The  customs  of  the  Thracians,  as  described  by 
Herodotus,^  point  to  a  similar  feeling.  Among  races 
somewhat  more  advanced,  the  symbol  supersedes  the 
reality  of  this  custom,  and  St.  Augustine  found  it  neces- 
sary to  protest  against  that  which  prevailed,  even  in 
his  time,  in  Italy .^ 

Diodorus  Siculus  mentions  that  in  the  Balearic 
Islands,  Majorca,  Minorca,  and  Ivica,  the  bride  was 
for  one  night  considered  as  the  common  property  of 
all  the  guests  present ;  after  which  she  belonged  ex- 
clusively to  her  husband.''  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega 
records  the  existence  of  a  similar  custom  among  the 


•  Clio,  109.  *  Terpsichore,  v.  6. 

•  Stnbo,  lib.  2.  •  Dulaure,  he,  cit.,  voL  il  p.  160. 

*  Melpomene,  172.  See  App. 

*  AooooDt  of  the  East  Indies.  ^  Diodorus,  t.  18. 
Plnkartoo's  Voja§^  toL  yiiL  p.  374. 


118    8UPPLTIN0  QUESTS  WITH  TEMPOEABT  WIVES. 

Mantas,  a  Peruvian  tribe,^  as  also  does  Langsdorf,*  in 
Nukahiva. 

In  India,'  and  particularly  in  the  valleys  of  the 
Ganges,  \nrgins  were  compelled  before  marrioge  to  pre- 
sent themselves  in  the  temploe  dedicated  to  Juggernaut, 
and  the  same  is  said  to  have  been  customjiry  in  Pondi* 
cherry  and  at  Goa.* 

Among  the  Sonthals,  o«e  of  the  aboriginal  Indian 
tribes,  the  marriages  take  place  once  a  year,  mostly 
in  January.      'For   six  days   all   the   candidates  for 

*  matrimony  live  together  ;'  after  which  only  are  the 
separate  couples  regarded  as  having  established  their 
right  to  marry .^ 

Carver  mentions'^  that  while  among  the  Naudowes- 
sies,  he  observ^ed  that  they  paid  uncommon  respect  to 
one  of  their  women,  and  found  that  she  was  considered 
to  be  a  person  of  high  distinction,  because  on  one  oc- 
casion she  invited  forty  of  the  principal  warriors  to  her 
tent,  provided  them  with  a  feast,  and  treated  them  in 
every  respect  as  husbands.  On  enquiry  he  was  in- 
formed that  this  was  an  old  oustom,  but  had  fallen  into 
abeyance,  and  '  scarcely  once  in  an  age  any  of  the 
'  females  are  hardy  enough  to  make  this  feast,  notwith- 
'  standing  a  husband  of  the  first  rank  awaits  as  a  sure 

*  reward  the  successful  giver  of  it.' 

Speaking  of  the  Greenland  Esqin'maux,  Egcde  ex- 
pressly   states    that  '  those  are  ropute<l   the  best   and 

'  Uoval    CnmnionlarieH    of   the  toI.  i.  p.  4.T1. 
liiciw,  voL  ii.  p.  442.  *  Jbid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  108. 

«  WuttkoVl)io«'i^fon  Stnfen  dor  "^  Tho  People  of  India,  by  J.  F. 

Clcpcbichto  derMcDBchbeit,  vol.  i.  p.  WatHon  mid  .7.  W.  Kayo,  vol.  i.p.2. 
177.  *»  TravflH  in  Ni^rlh  America,  p. 

»  Hietoire    abr<^g<^   dis  Cultes,  '24!}.     t^  al«m  NoteK. 


TEMPORARY  WIVES.  119 

'noblest  tempered  who,  without  any  pain  or  reluctancy, 
'will  lend  their  friends  their  wives.'  ^ 

The  same  feeling,  probably,  -gave  rise  to  the  curious 
custom  existing,  according  to  Strabo,^  among  the  (Par- 
thian) Tapyrians,  that  when  a  man  had  had  two  or  three 
children  by  one  wife,  he  was  obliged  to  leave  her,  so  that 
she  might  marry  some  one  else.  There  is  some  reason 
to  suppose  that  a  similar  custom  once  prevailed  among 
the  Romans ;  thus  Cato,  who  was  proverbially  austere 
in  his  morals,  did  not  think  it  right  permanently  to 
retain  his  wife  Martia,  whom  his  friend  Hortensius 
wished  to  marry.  This  he  accordingly  permitted,  and 
Martia  lived  with  Hortensius  until  his  death,  when  she 
returned  to  her  first  husband.  The  high  character 
of  Cato  is  sufficient  proof  that  he  would  not  have 
permitted  this,  if  he  had  regarded  it  as  wrong ;  and 
Plutarch  expressly  states  that  the  custom  of  lending 
wives  existed  among  the  Romans.  Akin  to  this  feeling 
is  that  which  induces  so  many  savage  tribes  ^  to  provide 
their  guests  with  temporary  wives.  To  omit  this  would 
be  regarded  as  quite  inhospitable.  The  practice,  more- 
over, seems  to  recognise  the  existence  of  a  right  in- 
herent in  every  member  of  the  community,  and  to 
visitors  as  temporary  members ;  which,  in  the  case  of 
the  latter,  could  not  be  abrogated  by  arrangements 
Diade  before  their  arrival,  and,  consequently,  without 
^heir  concurrence.  The  prevalence  of  this  custom 
brings    home   to   us   forcibly    the   difference    existing 

*  History  of  Greenland,  p.  142.  Polynesians,     Australians,     Intern 

'  Strabo,  ii.  pp.  516,  620.  and  Western  Negroes,  Arabs,  Abys- 

'  For  instance,  the  Esquimaux,  sinians,  Kaffirs,  Mongols,  Tutski,  &c. 
^orth  and  South  American  Indians, 


120  RE8PE0T  FOR  COURTESANS. 

between  the  savage  and  the  civilised  modes  of  regard- 
ing the  relation  of  the  sexes  to  one  another. 

Perhaps  the  most  striking  case  of  all  is  that  afforded 
by  some  of  the  Brazilian  tribes.  The  captives  taken 
by  them  in  war  used  to  be  kept  for  some  time  and  fatted 
up  ;  after  which  they  were  killed  and  eaten.  Yet  even 
here,  during  the  time  that  they  had  to  live,  the  poor 
wretches  were  always  provided  with  a  temporary  wife.* 

This  view  also  throws  some  light  on  the  remarkable 
subordination  of  the  wife  to  the  husband,  which  is  so 
characteristic  of  marriage,  and  so  curiously  inconsistent 
with  all  our  avowed  ideas ;  moreover  it  tends  to  explain 
those  curious  cases  in  which  HetaireB  were  held  in 
greater  estimation  than  those  women  who  were,  as  we 
should  consider,  properly  and  respectably  married  to  a 
single  husband.2  The  former  were  originally  fellow- 
countrywomen  and  relations;  the  latter  captives  and 
slaves.  And  even  when  this  ceased  to  be  the  case, 
the  idea  would  long  survive  the  circumstances  which 
gave  rise  to  it. 

We  know  that  in  Athens  courtesans  were  highly 
respected.  '  The  daily  conversation  they  listened  to,' 
says  Lord  Karnes,^  '  on  philosophy,  politics,  poetry,  en- 
'  lightened  their  understanding  and  improved  their  taste. 
'  Their  houses  became  agreeable  schools,  where  every- 
*  one  might  be  instructed  in  his  own  art.  Socrates  and 
'  Pericles  met  frequently  at  the  house  of  Aspasia,  for 
'  from  her  they  acquired  delicacy  of  taste,  and,  in 
'  return,  procured  to  her  public  re.s])oct  and  reputation. 

*  I^afitau^MoDuradesSauT.Am^r.,      pp.    xix.  125.     Burton's   I^e  Re- 
vol.  ii.  p.  204.  gions  of  Africa,  vol.  i.  p.  198. 

*  nachofeDy     Da«    Mutteirecbt,  Mlistory  of  Man,  vol  iL  p.  60. 


BE8PEGT  FOB  GOUBTESANS.  121 

'Greece  at  that  time  was  governed  by  orators,  over 

*  whom  Bome  celebrated  courtesans  had  great  influence, 

*  and  by  that  means  entered  deep  into  the  government.' 

So  also  it  was  an  essential  of  the  model  Platonic 
Republic  that  *  among  the  guardians,  at  least,  the 
'sexual  arrangements  should  be   under  public  regu- 

*  lation,  and  the  monopoly  of  one  woman  by  one  man 

*  forbidden/ 1 

In  Java,  we  are  told  that  courtesans  are  by  no 
means  despised,  and  in  some  parts  of  Western  Africa 
the  negroes  are  stated  to  look  on  them  with  respect ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  oddly  enough,  they  have  a 
strong  feeling  against  musicians,  who  are  looked  on  as 

*  infamous,  but  necessary  tools  for  their  pleasure.'  They 
did  not  even  permit  them  to  be  buried,  lest  they  should 
pollute  the  earth.^  In  India,  again,  various  occupations 
which  we  regard  afi  useful  *  and  innocent,  if  humble,  are 
considered  to  be  degrading  in  the  highest  degree.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  the  famous  Indian  city  of  Vesali, 
•marriage  was  forbidden,  and  high  rank  attached  to  the 
*lady  who  held  office  as  Chief  of  the  Courtesans.' 
When  the  Holy  Buddha  (Sakyamuni),  in  his  old  age, 
visited  Vesali,  *  he  was  lodged  in  a  garden  belonging  to 
'  the  Chief  of  the  Courtesans,  and  received  a  visit  from 

*  this  grand  lady,  who  drove  out  to  see  him,  attended 
*by  her  suite  in  stately  carriages.  Having  approached 
*and  bowed  down,  she  took  her  seat  on  one  side  of  him 

^  and  listened  to  a  discourse  on  Dharma On 

'.entering  the  town  she  met  the  rulers  of  Vesali,  gor- 

*  geously  apparelled ;  but  their  equipages  made  way  for 

>  Btin*8      Menttl     and    Moral  *  Waitz'  ADthropology,  p.  817. 

»  Aatley,  vol  ii.  p.  270. 


122  EXOGAMY. 

*  her.     They  asked  her  to  resign  to  them  the  honour  of 

*  entertaining  Sakyamuni ;   but   she   refused,  and  the 

*  great  man  himself,  when  solicited  by  the  rulers  in  per- 
^  son,  also  refused  to  break  his  engagement  with  the 

'  lady;  1 

Until  recently  the  courtesans  were  the  only  educated 
women  in  India.*  Even  now  many  of  the  great  Hindoo 
temples  have  bands  of  women  attached  to  them,  and  it 
seems  at  iirst  sight  a  strange  anomaly  that,  while  a 
woman  bom  of,  or  adopted  into,  one  of  these  families 
is  not  held  to  pursue  a  shameless  vocation,  other  women 
who  have  fallen  from  good  repute  are  esteemed  disgrace- 
ful.' There  is,  in  reality,  however,  nothing  anomalous 
in  this.  The  former  continue  an  old  custom  of  the 
country,  under  solemn  religious  sanction  ;  the  latter,  on 
the  contrary,  have  given  way  to  lawless  inclinations, 
have  outraged  public  feelings,  and  brought  disgrace  on 
their  families.  In  Ancient  Egypt,  again,  it  would 
appear  that  illegitimate  children  were,  under  certain 
circumstances,  preferred  over  those  bom  in  wedlock.* 

When  the  special  wife  was  a  stranger  and  a  slave, 
while  the  communal  wife  was  a  relative  and  a  free- 
woman,  such  feelings  would  naturally  arise,  and  would, 
in  Rome  cases,  long  survive  the  social  condition  to  which 
they  owed  their  origin. 

I  now  pass  to  the  curious  custom,  for  which 
M'Lcnnan  has  proposed  the  convenient  term  *exo- 
'  gamy ' — that,  namely,  of  necessarily  marrying  out  d 

'  Mr*.  SpiorH  Jiifo   in  Ancient      Watoon  and  J.  W.  Kayo,  voL  iii.  p. 
India,  p.  2rtl.  105. 

*  Dubois*   People  of  India,  pp.  *  Uachofen,  Das  Muttorrecht,  p. 

217. 402.  12r>. 

»  The  People  of  India,  by  J.  F. 


EXOGAMY.  123 

the  tribe.  Tylor,  who  also  called  particular  attention 
to  this  custom  in  his  interesting  work  on  '  The  Early 

*  History  of  Man,'  which  was  published  in  the  very 
same  year  as  M'Lennan's  *  Primitive  Marriage,'  thought 
that  *  the  evils  of  marrying  near  relatives  might  be  the 
*main  ground  of  this  series  of  restrictions.'  Morgan^ 
also  considers  exogamy  as  *  explainable,  and  only  ex- 

*  plainable,  as  a  reformatory  movement  to  break  up  the 

*  intermarriage  of  blood  relations,'  and  which  could  only 
be  eflected  by  exogamy  because  all  in  the  tribe  were 
raided  as  related.  In  fact,  however,  exogamy  afforded 
little  protection  against  the  marriage  of  relatives,  and, 
wherever  it  was  systematised,  it  permitted  marriage 
even  between  half  brothers  and  sisters,  either  on  the 
father's  or  mother's  side.  Where  an  objection  to  the 
intermarriage  of  relatives  existed,  exogamy  was  un- 
necessary ;  where  it  did  not  exist,  exogamy,  if  this  view 
was  correct,  could  not  arise. 

MXennan  says,  *  I  believe  this  restriction  on  mar- 
'  riage  to  be  connected  with  the  practice  in  early  times 

*  of  female  infanticide,  which,  rendering  women  scarce, 
'  led  at  once  to  polyandry  within  the  tribe,  and  the  cap- 
'turing  of  women  from  without.'  ^  He  has  not  alluded 
to  the  natural  preponderance  of  men  over  women.  Thus, 
throughout  Europe,  the  proportion  of  boys  to  girls  is  as 
106  to  100.^  Here,  therefore,  even  without  infanticide 
^e  see  that  there  is  no  exact  balance  between  the 
sexes.  In  many  savage  races,  in  various  parts  of  the 
^^rld,  it  has  been  observed  the  men  are  much  more 


I*roc.  Amer.  Acad,  of  Arta  and  '  Loc.  city  p.  138. 

^«nc€8, 1866.  »  Waitz'  Anthropology,  p.  111. 


124  OBIOIN  OF  EXOGAMY. 

numerous,  but  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  how  far  this  i^ 
due  to  an  original  difference,  and  how  far  to  othei 
causes. 

It  is  conceivable  that  the  diflference  between  endo- 
gamous  and  exogamous  tribes  may  have  been  due  to 
the  different  proportion  of  the  sexes:  those  races  tend- 
ing to  become  exogamous  where  boys  prevail;  those,  on 
the  other  hand,  endogamous  where  the  reverse  is  the 
case.^  I  am  not,  however,  aware  that  we  have  any 
statistics  which  enable  us  to  determine  this  point,  nor 
do  I  believe  that  it  is  the  true  explanation  of  the 
custom. 

Infanticide  is,  no  doubt,  very  prevalent  among 
savages.  As  long,  indeed,  as  men  were  few  in  number, 
enemies  were  scarce  and  game  was  tame.  Under  these 
circumstances,  there  was  no  temptation  to  infanticide. 
There  were  some  things  which  women  could  do  better 
than  men — some  occupations  which  pride  and  laziness, 
or  both,  induced  them  to  leave  to  the  women.  As 
soon,  however,  as  in  any  country  population  became 
even  slightly  more  dense,  neighbours  became  a  nuisance. 
They  invaded  the  hunting  grounds,  and  disturbed  the 
game.  Hence,  if  for  no  other  reason,  wars  would  arise. 
Once  begun,  they  would  continually  break  out  again 
and  again,  under  one  pretence  or  another.  Men  for 
slaves,  women  for  wives,  and  the  thirst  for  glory,  made 
a  weak  tribe  always  a  temptation  to  a  strong  one. 
Under  these  circumstances,  female  children  became  a 
source  of  weakness  in  several  ways.  They  ate,  and  did 
not  hunt.     They  weakened  their  mothers  when  young, 

*  See  Das  Mutterrecbt,  p.  109. 


OBiaiN  OF  EXOGAMY,  125 

and,  when  grown-up,  were  a  temptation  to  surrounding 

tribes.     Hence  female  infanticide  is  very  prevalent,  and 

easily  accounted  for.     Yet  I  cannot  regard  it  as  the 

true  cause  of  exogamy.     On  the  other  hand,  we  must 

remember  that  under  the  communal  system  the  women 

of  the  tribe  were  all  common  property.     No  one  could 

appropriate  one  of  them  to  himself  without  infringing 

on  the  general  rights  of  the  tribe.     Women  taken  in 

TOT  were,  on  the  contrary,  in  a  different  position.     The 

tribe,  as  a  tribe,  had  no  right  to  them,  and  men  surely 

would  reserve   to  themselves    exclusively  their    own 

prizes.    These  captives  then  would  naturally  become 

the  wives  in  our  sense  of  the  term. 

Several  causes  would  tend  to  increase  the  importance 
of  the  separate,  and  decrease  that  of  communal,  mar- 
riage. The  impulse  which  it  would  give  to,  and  receive 
back  from,  the  development  of  the  affections;  the  con- 
venience with  reference  to  domestic  arrangements;  the 
natural  wishes  of  the  wife  herself;  and  last,  not  least, 
the  inferior  energy  of  the  children  sprung  from  '  in 

*  and  in  '  marriages,  would  all  tend  to  increase  the  im- 
portance of  individual  marriage. 

Even  were  there  no  other  cause,  the  advantage  of 
crossmg,  so  well  known  to  breeders  of  stock,  would 
soon  give  a  marked  preponderance  to  those  races  by 
whom  exogamy  was  largely  practised,  and  for  several 
reasons  therefore  we  need  not  be  surprised  to  find  exo- 
'^amy  very  prevalent  among  the  lower  races  of  man. 
When  this  state  of  things  had  gone  on  for  some  time, 
^e,  as  M'Lennan  well  observes,  would  '  establish  a 

*  prejudice  among  the  tribes  observing  it— a  prejudice 
strong  as  a  principle  of  religion,  as  every  prejudice 


126       PBEVALENCE  OF  EXOGAMY— AUSTBALU. 


^  relating  to  marriage  is  apt  to  be — against  marrying 
'  women  of  their  stock.'  ^ 

We  should  not,  perhaps,  have  a  priori  expected  to 
find  among  savages  any  such  remarkable  restriction,  jel 
it  is  very  widely  distributed;  and  firom  this  point  of 
view  we  can,  I  think,  clearly  see  how  it  arose. 

In  Australia,  where  the  same  family  names  are  com- 
mon almost  over  the  whole  continent,  no  man  may 
marry  a  woman  whose  family  name  is  the  same  as  Us 
own,  and    who  belongs  therefore  to  the  same  tribe.* 

*  No  man,'  says  Mr.  Lang,  *  can  marry  a  woman  of  the 
'  same  clan,  though  £he  parties  be  no  way  related  ac- 
'  cording  to  our  ideas.'* 

In. many  parts  there  are  four  male  and  four  femak 
names  in  each  tribe.     Thus: — 

The  Kimilaroi  natives,  near  Sydney,  are  divided  mto 
four  families,^  in  which  the  males  are  known  as  ipptt, 
murri,  kubbi,  and  kumbo;  the  females,  ippata,  mata, 
kapota,  and  buta. 

'  I.  Ippai  may  marry  an  ippata  (of  another  family) 

*  or  any  kapota. 

'  II.  Murri  may  marry  only  buta. 
'  III.  Kubbi  may  marry  only  ippata. 
'IV.  Kuuibo  may  marry  only  mata. 
'Any   attempt   to   infringe   these   rules  would  be 
'  unanimously  resisted,  even  to  bloodshed  ;  but  it  aeema 

*  tliey  never  dream  of  attempting  to  transgress  thentL 


*  Loc,  cit.f  p.  140.  p.  10. 

'  Kyre*8  Discoveries  in  Australia,  *  Prichard^s  Nat  Ilit.  of  Mn, 

Tol.  ii.  p.  320.     Grey*8  Journal,  p.  vol.    ii.    p.    491,       Ridlej*a    Jour. 

242.  Anthr.  Inst  1872,  p.  203.     Uiig*s 

'  The  Aborigines  of  Australia,  Queensland,  p.  liSil. 


AFRICA— HDWOSTAN.  127 

^  I.  The  children  of  ippai  by  ippata  are  all  kumbo 
^  and  buta. 

*  11.  The  children  of  ippai  by  kapota  are  aU  murri 
^  or  baia  and  mata. 

'  III.  The  children  of  mnrri  or  baia  are  all  ippai 
^  and  ippata. 

^IV.  The  children  of  kubbi  are  all  kumbo  and 
'buta. 

'  V.  The  children   of  kumbo   are    all    kubbi  and 

*  kapota.' 

In  Eastern  Africa,  Burton^  says  that  ^  some  clans  of 

*  the  Somal  will  not  marry  one  of  the  same,  or  even  of 

*  a  consanguineous  fiEunily ; '  and  the  Bakalari  have  the 
same  rule.' 

Du  Chaillu,'  speaking  of  Western  Equatorial  Africa, 
Bays,  ^  the  law  of  marriages  among  the  tribes  I  have 

*  visited  is  peculiar ;  each  tribe  is  divided  into  clans ; 
'  the  children  in  most  of  the  tribes  belong  to  the  clan  of 

*  the  mother,  and  these  cannot  by  any  possible  laws 

*  marry  among  themselves,  however  removed  in  degree 
'  they  may  have  been  connected :  it  is  considered  an 

<  abomination  among  them.     But  there  exists  no  ob- 

<  jection  to  possessing  a  father's  or  bix)ther's  wife.     I 

*  could  not  but  be  struck  with  the  healthful  influence 

*  of  Buch  regulations  against  blood  marriages  among 
^them.' 

In  India  the  Khasias,^  Juangs,'  and  Waralis  are 
divided  into  sections,  and  no  man  may  marry  a  woman 
belonging  to  his  own  section.     In  the  Magar  tribes 

*  FEnt  Footstepfl^  p.  120.  *  Godwin  Austen,  Jour.  Anthrop. 

*  Tnni.  Etho.  8oc.,N.  8.,  toL  i.      Inst,  1871,  p.  131. 

p.  821.  *  Dalton's  Dee.  Ethn.of  Bengal, 

»  Ibid.,  p.  307.  p.  168. 


128  NOBTHEBN  ASIA. 

these  sections  are  called  Thuras,  and  tlie  same  rule  pre- 
vails.    Col.  Dalton  tells  us  that  'the  Hos,  Moondahs, 

*  and  Oraons  are  divided  into  dans  or  keelis,  and  may 

*  not  take  to  wife  a  girl  of  the  same  keeli.*  Again,  the 
Garrows  are  divided  into  '  maharis,'  and  a  man  may  not 
marry  a  girl  of  his  own  '  mahari.' 

The  Munnieporees  and  other  tribes  inhabiting  the 
hills  round  Munniepore — the  Koupooees,  Mows,  Mu- 
rams,  and  Murrings,  as  M'Lennan  points  out  on  the 
authority  of  M'Culloch — '  are  each  and  all  divided  into 

*  four  families :  Koomrul,  Looang,  Angom,  and  Ning- 

*  thaja.  A  member  of  any  of  these  families  may  marr)' 
'  a  member  of  any  other,  but  the  intermarriage  of 
'  members  of  the  same  family  is  strictly  prohibited/' 
On  the  contrary,  the  Todas,  says  Metz,*  *are  divided  into 
'  five   distinct  classes,  known   by  the   names    Peiky, 

*  Pekkan,  Kuttan,  Kennae,  and  Tody;  of  which  the 
^  first  is  regarded  as  the  most  aristocratic.  These  classes 
'  do  not  even  intermarry  with  each  other,  and  can  there- 
'  fore  never  lose  their  distinctive  characteristics.'  The 
Khonds,  as  we  are  informed  by  General  Campbell,  *  re- 

*  gard  it  as  degrading  to   bestow  their  daughters  in 

*  marriage  on  men  of  their  own  tribe ;  and  consider  it 
'  more  manly  to  seek  their  wives  in  a  distant  country." 
Major  M'Pherson  also  tells  us  that  they  consider  mar- 
riage between  people  of  the  same  tribe  as  wicked,  and 
punishable  with  death.  The  mountain  tribes  of  Nepaul, 
before  the  advent  of  the  Kajpoots,  are  said  to  have  con- 
sisted of  twelve  Thums  or  clans,  and  no  man  was  per- 

»  Account  of  the  Valley  of  Mun-  ^  Tribes  of  the  Neilgherry  IliUi, 

niopore,  IST)!),  pp.  40.  00.  p.  21. 

>  Campbell,  p.  142. 


NOBTHEBN  A8U-CIBGA88Li^CHINA. 


129 


mitted  to  many  a  woman  of  the  same  Tlium.^  The 
Kalmucks,  according  to  De  Hell,  are  divided  into 
hordes,  and  no  man  can  marry  a  woman  of  the  same 
horde.  The  bride,  says  Bergman,  speaking  of  the 
Bame  people,  is  always  chosen  from  another  stock  ; 
'  among  the   Derbets,  for  instance,  from  the  Torgot 

*  stock,  and  among    the    Torgots   from    the    Derbet 

*  stock/ 
The  same  custom  prevails  among  the  Circassians  and 

the  Samoyedes.^  The  Ostyaks  regard  it  as  a  crime  to 
marry  a  woman  of  the  same  family  or  even  of  the  same 
name.' 

When  a  Jakut  (Siberia)  wishes  to  marry,  he  must, 
s»ys  Middcndorf,*  choose  a  girl  from  another  clan.  No 
one  is  permitted  to  marry  a  woman  from  his  own.  In 
tTiina,  says  Davis,^  *  marriage  between  all  persons  of 
*the  same  surname  being  unlawful,  this  rule  must  ol 
'  course  include  all  descendants  of  the  male  branch  foi 

*  ever ;  and  as,  in  so  vast  a  population,  there  are  not  a 
'great  many  more  than  one  hundred  surnames  through- 

*  out  the  empire,  the  embarrassments  that  arise  from  so 
'  strict  a  law  must  be  considerable.' 

Amongst  the  Tinn6  Indians  of  North-west  America^ 

*  a  Chit-saugh  cannot,  by  their  rules,^  marry  a  Chit- 

*  sangli,  although  the  rule  is  set  at  nought  occasionally ; 

*  but  when  it  does  take  place  the  persons  are  ridiculed 
'  and  laughed  at.     The  man  is  said  to  have  married  his 


^  IlAmilion*8  Account  of  the 
Kin^om  of  Ncpanl,  p.  27. 

>  Palltf ,  ToL  iT.  p.  00. 

*  Ibid.j  ToL  iT.  p.  00. 

^  Siburiadie  Rdie,  p.  72.  Sco 
■ko    Maller'0   Des.    do   toutes  lea 


Hacea  de  TEmp.  Ilusse,  Ft.  II.  p. 
58. 

»  The  Chinese,  vol.  i.  p.  282. 

^  Notes  on  the  Tinneh.  liar- 
dinty.  Smithsonian  lieport,  I8CU| 
p.  315. 


130  EXOGAMY  IN  NORTH  AMERICA. 

sister,  even  though  she  may  be  from  another  tril)e, 
and  there  be  not  the  slightest  connection  by  blocd 
between  them.     The  same  way  with  the  other  two 
divisions.      The  children  are  of  the  same  colour  a8 
their  mother.     They  receive  caste  from  their  mother; 
if  a  male  Chit-sangh  marry  a  Nah-tsingh  woman,  the 
children  are  Nah-tsingh,  and  if  a  male  Nah-tsingh 
marry  a  Chit-sangh  woman,  the  children  are  Chit- 
sangh,  so  that  the  divisions  are  always  changing.    As 
the  fathers   die  out    the   country   inhabited   by  the 
Chit-sangh  becomes  occupied  by  the  Nah-tsingh,  and 
so  vice  versa.     They  are  continually  changing  coun- 
tries, as  it  were.* 

Among  the  Kenaiyers  (N.W.  America),  4t  was  the 
custom  that  the  men  of  one  stock  should  choose  their 
wives  from  another,  and  the  offspring  belonged  to  the 
race  of  the   mother.      This  custom  has  fallen  into 
disuse,  and  marriages  in  the  same  tribe  occur;  but  the 
old  people  say  that  mortality  among  the  Kenaiyers  has 
arisen  from  the  neglect  of  the  ancient  usage.     A  man's 
nearest  heirs  in  this  tribe  are  his  sister's  children.*  * 
The    Tsimsheean    Indians   of  Ilritish   Columbia*  arc 
similarly  divided   into  tribes   and  totems,  or  *  crest?, 
which  are  common  to  all  the  tribes.     The  crests  arc 
the  whale,  the  porpoise,  the  eagle,  the  coon,  the  wolf, 
and  the  frog.     In  connection  with  these  crests,  several 
very  important  points  of  Indian  character  and  law  arc 
seen.     The  relationship  existing  between  persons  of 
the  same  crest  is  nearer  than  that  l)etween  members 

*  UiclmrJson'd     Boat    Journey,  '  Moiluhkallah,  publisboil  by  tbc 

vol.  i.  p.  IKJ.     Soo  jil?o  Siuitliioiiian      Church    Mi^^ionary    iSocictv,    li^-5$\ 
report,  ISCW,  p.  :Jl>({.  p.  0. 


EXOGAMY  IN  KORTH  AND  SOUTH  AMERICA.     131 

*  of  the  same  tribe,  which  is  seen  in  this,  that  members 
'  of  the  same  tribe  may  marry,  but  those  of  the  same 
'  crest  are  not  aUowed  to  do  so  under  any  circumstances ; 

*  that  is,  a  whale  may  not  marry  a  whale,  but  a  whale 
'  may  marry  a  frog,  ifec.' 

Indeed,  as  regards  the  Northern  Redskins  generally, 
it  is  stated/  in  the  Archoeologia  Americana  that  '  every 
nation  was  divided  into  a  nimaber  of  clans,  vaiying  in 
the  several  nations  from  three  to  eight  or  ten,  the 
members  of  which  respectively  were  dispersed  indis- 
criminately throughout  the  whole  nation.  It  has  been 
fully  ascertained  that  the  mviolable  regulations  by 
which  these  clans  were  perpetuated  amongst  the 
southern  nations  were,  first,  that  no  man  could  marry 
m  his  own  clan ;  secondly,  that  every  child  should 
belong  to  liis  or  her  mother's  clan.' 

The  Indians  of  Guiana,^  *  are  divided  into  families, 
each  of  which  has  a  distinct  name,  as  the  Siwidi^ 
Karuafudi^  Onisidi^  &c.  Unlike  our  families,  these  all 
descend  in  the  female  line,  and  no  individual  of  either 
aex  is  allowed  to  marry  another  of  the  same  family 
name.  Thus,  a  woman  of  the  Siwidi  family  bears  the 
same  name  as  her  mother,  but  neither  her  father  nor 
her  husband  can  be  of  that  family.  Her  children  and 
the  children  of  her  daughters  will  also  be  called  Siwidi, 
but  both  her  sons  and  daughters  are  prohibited  from 
an  alliance  with  any  individual  bearing  the  same  name ; 
though  they  may  marry  into  the  family  of  their  father 
if  they  choose.     These  customs  arc  strictly  observed, 

>  Gallatin,  loc.  ciV.,  vol.  xi.  p.  109.  ^  Brett's  Indian  Tribes  of  Guiana, 

Lafitau,  Tol.  i.  p.  6^.     Tanner's      p.  08. 
KarratiTe,  p.  313. 

K  2 


132  TEE  CAUSES  OF  POLTOAMY. 

^  and  any  breach  of  them  would    be   considered  as 
*  wicked.' 

Lastly,  the  Brazilian  races,  according  to  Martius, 
differ  greatly  in  their  marriage  regulations.  In  some  of 
the  verj'  scattered  tribes,  who  live  in  small  families  fiur 
remote  from  one  another,  the  nearest  relatives  often 
intermarry.  In  more  populous  districts,  on  the  contrary, 
the  tribes  are  divided  into  families,  and  a  strict  system 
of  exogamy  prevails.* 

Thus,  then,  we  see  that  this  remarkable  custom  of 
exogamy  prevails  throughout  Western  and  Eastern 
Africa,  in  Circassia,  Hindostan,  Tartary,  Siberia, 
China,  and  Australia,  as  well  as  in  North  and  South 
America. 

The  relations  existing  between  husband  and  wife  in 
the  lower  races  of  man,  as  indicated  in  the  preceding 
pages,  are  sufficient  to  remove  all  surprise  at  the  preva- 
lence of  polygamy.  There  are,  however,  other  causes, 
not  less  powerful,  though  perhaps  less  prominent,  to 
which  much  influence  must  be  ascribed.  Thus  in  all 
tropical  regions  girls  become  marriageable  very  young; 
their  beauty  is  acquired  early,  and  soon  fades,  while 
men,  on  the  contrary,  retain  their  full  powers  much 
longer.  Hence,  when  love  depends,  not  on  similarity  of 
tastes,  pursuits,  or  s}inpatliics,  but  entirely  on  external 
attractions,  we  cannot  wonder  that  every  man  who  is 
able  to  do  so,  provides  himself  with  a  succession  of 
favourites,  even  when  the  first  wife  remains  not  only 
nominally  the  head,  but  really  his  confidant  and  adviser. 
Another  cause  has  no  doubt  exercised  great  influence. 

*  Loc.  eit.,  p.  03. 


FOLYANLEY.  133 

Milk  is  necessary  for  children,  and  in  the  absence  of 
domestic  animals  it  consequently  follows  that  they  are 
not  weaned  until  they  are  several  years  old.  The  effect 
of  this  on  the  social  relations  has  been  already  referred 
to  {ante  p.  74). 

Polyandry,  on  the  contrary,  is  far  less  common, 
though  more  frequent  than  is  generally  supposed. 
McLennan  and  Morgan,  indeed,  both  regard  it  as  a 
phase  through  which  human  progress  has  necessarily 
passed.  If,  however,  we  define  it  as  the  condition  in 
which  one  woman  is  married  to  several  men,  but  (as 
distinguished  from  communal  marriage)  to  them  exclu- 
sively, then  I  am  rather  disposed  to  regard  it  as  an 
exceptional  phenomenon,  arising  from  the  paucity  of 
females. 

McLennan,  indeed,*  gives  a  long  list  of  tribes  which 
he  regards  as  polyandrous,  namely,  those  of  Thibet, 
Cashmeer,  and  the  Himalayan  regions,  the  Todas, 
Coorgs,  Nairs,  and  various  other  races  in  India,  in 
Ceylon,  in  New  Zealand,^  and  one  or  two  other  Pacific 
iBlands,  in  the  Aleutian  Archipelago,  among  the 
Koryaks,  the  Saporogian  Cossacks,  on  the  Orinoco,  in 
parts  of  Africa,  and  in  Lancerote.  He  also  mentions 
the  ancient  Britons,  some  of  the  Median  cantons,  the 
Picts,  and  the  Getes,  while  traces  of  it  occurred  among 
the  ancient  Germans.  On  the  other  hand,  to  the  in- 
Btances  quoted  by  M'Lennan  we  may  add  that  of  some 
families  among  the  Australians,^  Nukohivans,*  and 
Iroquois. 

'  LiK.  cii,,  p.  180.  l*^g»e>  ^ol-  vi.  p.  774. 

'  Lftfitaa,  ioc,  cit,  Tol.  i.  p.  6oo,  *  Gerland's  Waitz'    Antbropo- 

'  GerUtid*0   Waits'    Aiithropo-      logie,  vol.  vi.  p.  128. 


131  I'OLYANDltY  BXCErTIONAL. 

If  wc  examine  the  above  instances,  some  of  them 
will,  I  think,  prove  irrelevant.  The  passage  referred 
to  in  Tacitus  ^  does  not  appear  to  me  to  justify  us  in 
regarding  the  Germans  as  having  been  polyandrous. 

Erman  is  correctly  referred  to  by  Mr.  M'Lennan  as 
mentioning  the  existence  of  '  lawful  polyandry  in  the 
'  Aleutian  Islands.'  He  does  not,  however,  give  his 
authority  for  the  statement.  The  account  he  gives  of 
the  Koryaks  by  no  means,  I  think,  proves  that  poly- 
andry occurs  among  them.  The  case  of  the  Kalmucks, 
to  judge  from  the  account  given  by  Clarke,^  is  certainly 
one  in  which  brothers,  but  brothers  only,  have  a  wife 
in  common. 

For  Polynesia,  M'Lennan  relies  on  the  Legend  of 
liupe,  as  told  by  Sir  G.  Grey.®  Here,  however,  it 
is  merely  stated  that  two  brothers  named  Ihuatamai 
and  Ihu  ware  ware,  having  found  Hinauri,  when  she  was 
thrown  by  the  surf  on  the  coast  at  AYairarawa,  *  looked 
'  upon  her  with  pleasure,  and  took  her  as  a  wife  between 
'  them  both.'  This  seems  to  me  rather  a  case  of  com- 
munal marriage  than  of  polyandry,  especially  when  the 
rest  of  the  legend  is  borne  in  mind.  Neither  is  the  evi- 
dence as  regards  Africa  at  all  satisfactory.  The  custom 
referred  to  by  Mr.  M'Lennan*  probably  originates  in 
the  subjection  of  the  woman  which  is  there  implied  by 
marriage,  and  which  may  be  regarded  as  inconsistent 
with  high  rank. 

Several  of  the  above  cases  are,  indeed,  I  think, 
merely  instances  of  communal  marriage.  Indeed,  it  is 
evident    that  where  our  information  is  incomplete,  it 

*  Oeniiiinia,  xx.  ^  Polyncsiim  Mytholofry,  p.  81. 

'  Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  :?41.  -•  lleado'd  Savage  Africa,  p.  43. 


THE  SYSTEM  OF  LEVIRATE.  135 

must  often  be  far  from  easy  to  distinguish  between 
communal  marriage  and  true  polyandry. 

Polyandry  is  no  doubt  widely  distributed  in  Ceylon, 

India,  and  Thibet,  and  among  some  of  the  Hill  tribes 

of  India.     A  very  pretty  Dophla  girl  once  came  into 

tlie  station   of  Luckimpur,    threw  herself  at   Colonel 

Walton's  feet,  *  and  in  most  poetical  language  asked  me 

to  give  her  my  protection.'     She  was   promised  by 

^^^r  father  to  a  man  whom  she  did  not  love,  and  had 

sloped  with  her  beloved.     This  was  interesting  and 

^tmantic'    Colonel  Dalton  sent  for  the  beloved,  and,  he 

^ys,  'the  romance  was  dispelled.     She  had  eloped  with 

*'Mro  young  men.'  ^     In  Ceylon  the  joint  husbands  arc 

^^ays  brothers,^  and  this  is  also  the  case  among  the 

*^^bes  residing  at  the  foot  of  the  Himalaya  ^  Mountains. 

-"^^t,  on  the  whole,  lawful   polyandry  (as  opposed  to 

^^re  laxness  of  morality)  seems  to  be  an  exceptional 

^y^tem,  generally  intended  to  avoid  the  evils  arising 

*^m  monogamy  where  the  number  of  women  is  less 

^Man  that  of  men. 

The  system  of  Levirate,  under  which,  at  a  man's 
death,  his  wife  or  wives  pass  to  his  brother,  is,  I 
think,  more,  intimately  connected  with  the  rights 
of  property  than  with  polyandry.  This  custom  is 
tridely  distributed.  It  is  found,  for  instance,  among 
the  Monijols*  and  Kaffirs.*  When  an  elder  brother 
dies,   says  Livingstone,®   *  the   same   thing   occurs   in 

'  Des.  EthD.  of  Bengftl,  p.  .*UJ.  *  Arbousset's  Tour  to  the  X.K. 

'  Davy's  Ceylon,  p.  280.  of  the  Cape  of  (J cod  Hope,  pp.  38, 

»  Frasers  Tour 'to  the  Ilimala  108. 
Mountaindy  pp.  70,  20<5.  ^  Travels  iu    South    Africa,   p. 

*  Wuttke  8  Oes.  der  Menschbeit,  185. 
Tol.  i.  p.  223. 


I  ••  '         —     ■• 


"ter    I    ^-   TT-r^    -::-:  "inrajer  a^vr  in  ace  take 
:_  -i-  -l:i.:i-i  T«r  T-t:^  shL  ziut  "■TiTtdpea  thai  ma 


:  J^  ':-    ^ ■*  Tisr  3br^  '  r  nux  i^wav?  takes  t 

I?  fcSrr  brother 


-■^  -r^  iiz-  T'iLzriii  ViLTiy  Mr.  Brenchle 

—       •      • « 

III.-:!-^    "'-— .-rc^    liar      :aif    ^ennrc   c3>di>?aiiK> 
"T-  --   :j»-  irsT—  Sfr  :iiinn?r"-Ti»».  sitz  ibcx  4pe  in  soh 

"^■r^^r-.T-  i:^  '•I  it:    *=-  *u%:  "S«3>irui  ^x:«rx2iicas  tribe*,' 

ii: .  -Ti^  '   :^  r:  i^>i  r-^  ^rr—i^rf^ii:  zioz.  ^xcCTiDT.  and 

r-  >>  ^«._-:  ^:r-t   :.r:-r  r^rtC-r  re  lTT»:cbc*ioalIv  in 

-  1 .-.  :.z-' r::!  ">:   A:~f  :•:  X  '»«".  Azjc^icaL  as  men 

■...■■..      "■    >  J". ■.."."  T  :■  'j^.1  ~i.';    Z  T-i'^'iT  Trices  of  th 

*  Ai:  I..:. .:_   ;r^  zr.-  >:i:l-  i*  Trir  -riri  one  anoihci 

*  "^ .  —  .  -  i-^  :»'. :  ."i   ■  -r*:»i :  r.  v-l  .  citT  Tr:  :ie<  for  marriasi 

::  .L_y  -.  ':^    i     :   ^-  fli-  :s.     ~v:    i.U-a  of  sla\"cr 

*  .   -'•:•:::•:  -v—L  .-  -  -._7^  i<  s;  :.  ili:v.  r_  thi:  a  free-bor 
■  A-:  -v.vi..:  1  .>:-i-:  v  "v,r^y  .:  v    rian  Mkon  in  ira 

ar.  i  H:-?.  ire  i\r.:IlT?n  ro   luirrv  t:x:v:^ti-j.r  within  tl 

-  i  na:-.}    f  ::.-  •  •   in-:x'  p.  :.I  •.       <  .-.  a.-^"  I.  :'...  p.  l^-*. 
ly.  '.'..  p.  I't'.  *  1»a1!ol'?  Iv*.  EtLa.  of  Beng: 


ENDOGAMY.  137 

Iribe.     The    latter  at  least,  however,  are   not   truly 

endogamous,  for,  as  already  mentioned,  they  are  divided 

into  *  keelis '  or  clans,  and  *  may  not  take  to  wife  a  girl 

*  of  their  own  keeli/  ^     Thus  they  are  in  fact  exoga- 

nxoas,  and  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  other  cases  of 

ezidogamy  might,  if  we  were  better  acquainted  with 

em,  present  the  same  duplex  phenomenon. 

Among  the  Yerkalas  ^  of  Southern  India  ^  a  custom 
prevails  by  which  the  first  two  daughters  of  a  family 
i^^y  be  claimed  by  the  maternal  uncle  as  wives  for  his 
'  sons.  The  value  of  a  wife  is  fixed  at  twenty  pagodas. 
'  The  maternal  uncle's  right  to  the  first  two  daughters 
^  is  valued  at  eight  out  of  twenty  pagodas,  and  is  carried 
'  out  thus  :  if  he  urges  his  preferential  claim,  and 
*"  marries  his  own  sons  to  his  nieces,  he  pays  for  each 
^^  only  twelve  pagodas  ;  and,  similarly,  if  he,  from  not 

*  having  sons,  or  any  other  cause,  forego   liis  claim, 

*  he  receives  eight   pagodas   of    the   twenty   paid  to 

*  the  girls*  parents  by  anybody  else  who  may  marry 

*  them/ 
The  Doingnaks,  a  branch  of  the  Chukmas,  appear 

also  to  have  been  endc^mous,  and  Captain  Lewin 
mentions  that  they  *  abandoned  the  parent  stem  during 
^the  chiefship  of  Jaunbux  Khan,  about   1782.     The 

*  reason  of  this  split  was  a  disagreement  on  the  subject 
*of  marriages.     The  chief  passed  an  order  that  the 

*  Doingnaks  should  intermarry  with  the  tribe  in  general. 
'  This  was  contrary  to  ancient  custom,  and  caused  dis- 
'content  and  eventually  a  break  in  the  tribe.''*     This 

»  Ants,  p.  05.  '  I^wiifs  Hill  Tract*  of  CbilU- 

•  Shortt,  Tnrns.  Ethn.  Soc,  N.S.,      gon^,  p.  (jo.  I 

voL  Til.  p.  167. 


:  -  IZI  MJLK'TIE. 

>   .:r    :::  zh.-  ^cr-  itT-  riLfe*  ^Lere  we  have  eviilenc 

T-TT  T.;.:Lr .:?  3:  T*iTi  iTr  ilsi;»  endogsimous,  aiu 
1  .:-:  i  Tnr  xs^z^  1  rri  i  r:::irrlaLge  he  must  prov( 
:.>  .  -*.-:.-  rr  tn  "iiitcr  jei'iliir  rixk.^  The  Mantchi 
~-r:..^   •  r:vi  ^v.ir-iLjz-i  itrwi^i  ilose  whose  fiimih 

:?«  «  :-       r:^ir  r:  tI-:  i-kzl  •  ci  his  cou>in; 


I  'iuama}:e: 

:- '  :r  ::LZt!rzLLzrT  ^iL  auv  otbe 
i:.  :r  c:i:>  tz^L  si<:rr?  c?i.-»J  to  initT 
:"-/:    <:ir-.'L  zinz  sill  urions  wer 

:.  *    :.:-:  jri-'i-t-i  ir.  iLe  Sandwicl 

r  J  -u-iii^L  x-iniTi-  i?  Y-:v  mentiou? 

-*    :...        *     iz"  c:    :.'.k::.j,  oxct|» 

-    ^.  :   *.    \  :r:— i:..:!.vr  iril^^ 

^  . :.     s.-,j:.r  i  r  .r  --s>  coinmoi 

^       ■-  J.  :.::::. viion  0: 

*   s:-.  ._>  -    :-j:.:r.iI  an«l 

•  1 

—       .        •*  •  -  -    -        y-  Itl        T     It 


THE  MILK^TIE.  139 

possibility  of  any  other  has  not  occurred.  The  facts 
already  recorded  will,  however,  have  prepared  us  for 
the  existence  of  peculiar  ideas  on  the  subject  of  relation- 
ship. The  strength  of  the  foster-feeling — the  milk-tie 
—among  the  Scotch  Highlanders  is  a  familiar  instance 
of  a  mode  of  regarding  relationship  very  diflferent  from 
that  prevalent  amongst  us. 

We  have  also  seen  that,  under  the  custom  of  com- 
munal marriage,  a  child  was  regarded  as  related  to  the 
tribe,  but  not  specially  to  any  particular  father  or 
mother.  Such  a  state  of  things,  indeed,  is  only 
possible  in  very  small  communities.  It  is  evident 
that  under  communal  marriage — and  little  less  so 
wherever  polygamy  prevailed,  and  men  had  many 
wives — the  tie  between  father  and  son  must  have 
been  very  slight.  Among  agricultural  tribes,  and 
^er  settled  forms  of  government,  the  chiefs  often 
b«ve  very  large  harems,  and  their  importance  even  is 
Pleasured  by  the  number  of  their  wives,  as  in  other 
ewes  by  that  of  their  cows  or  horses. 

This  state  of  things  is  in  many  ways  very  preju- 
dicial. It  checks,  of  course,  the  natural  affection  and 
friendly  intercourse  between  man  and  wife.  The  King 
^f  Ashantee,  for  instance,  always  has  3,333  wives, 
but  no  man  can  love  so  many  women,  nor  can  so 
'^ny  women  cherish  any  personal  affection  for  one 

Even  among  hunting  races,  though  men  were  un- 
able to  maintain  so  many  wives,  still,  as  changes  are  of 
frequent  occurrence,  the  tie  between  a  mother  and  child 
^  much  8tron«:er  than  that  which  binds  a  child  to  its 
fether.     Hence  we  find  that  among  many  of  the  lower 


UO  BELATI0N8HIP  THROUGH  FEMALES. 

races  relationship  through  females  is  the  prevale 
custom,  and  we  are  thus  able  to  understand  the  curio  U; 
practice  that  a  man's  heirs  are  not  his  own,  but  lii^ 
sister's  children. 

By  some  it  has  been  regarded  as  indicating  the  hig-Ii 
respect  paid  to  women.  Thus  Plutarch  tells  us  tba  * 
*when   Bellerophon   slew   a  certain  wild  boar,  whid* 

*  destroyed  the  cattle  and  fruits  in  the  province  of  th^ 

*  Xanthians,  and  received  no  due  reward  of  his  servicer  ^ 
'  he  prayed  to  Neptune  for  vengeance,  and  obtametl' 

*  that  all  the  fields  should  cast  forth  a  salt  dew  and  b^ 

*  universally  corrupted,  which  continued  till  he,  con- 

*  descendingly  regarduig  the  women  suppliants,  prayed 

*  to  Neptune  and  removed  his  wrath  from  them.    Hence 

*  there  was  a  law  among  the  Xanthians,  that  they  should 

*  derive  their  names  in  future,  not  from  the  fathers,  but 
^  from  the  mothers.'  ^ 

Montesquieu  '^  regarded  relationship  through  females 
as  intended  to  prevent  the  accumulation  of  landed  pro- 
perty in  few  hands — an  explanation  manifestly  in- 
applicable to  many,  nay,  the  majority,  of  cases  in  which 
tlic  custom  exists — and  the  explanation  above  suggested 
is,  I  have  no  doubt,  the  correct  one. 

Thus,  when  a  rich  man  dies  in  Guinea,  his  property, 
excepting  the  armour,  descended  to  the  sister's  son^ 
expressly,  according  to  Smith,  on  the  ground  that  he 
must  certainly  be  a  relative.*  Battel  mentions  that  the 
town  of  Longo  (Loango)  *  is  governed  by  four  chiefs. 


*  Plutnrch.  Concerning  the  Vir-  143,     Soo  nko  Pinlcerton's  Vovngec>y 

tues  of  Women.  vol.  xv.  pp.  417,  421,  628.    AsUcj'* 

'  Esprit  dcs  Lois,  vol.  i.  p.  70.  Collection  of  Voyagefli  voL  ii.   pp« 

'  Smith *8  Voyage  to  Guinea,  p.  63,  266. 


KELATIONSHIP  THROUGH  FEMALES.  141 

*  which  are  sons  of  the  king's  sisters;  for  the  king's 
'sons  never  come  to  be  kings.'  ^  Quatremere  mentions 
that* Chez  les  Nubiens,  dit  Abou  Selah,  lorsqu'un  roi 

*  vient  a  mourir  et  qu'il  laisse  un  fils  et  un  neveu  du 
'c6t^  de  sa  socur,  celui  monte  sur  le  trone  de  p'r6- 
*ference  a  I'h^ritier  nature!.'* 

In  Central  Africa,  Cailli^'  says  that  Hhe  sovereignty 

*  remains  always  in  the  same  family,  but  the  son  never 

*  succeeds  his  father ;  they  choose  in  preference  a  son  of 

*  the  king's  sister,  conceiving  that  by  this  method  the 

*  sovereign  power  is  more  sure  to  be  transmitted  to  one 

*  of  the  blood  royal;  a  precaution  which   shows  how 

*  little  fiuth  is  put  in  the  virtue  of  the  women  of  this 

*  country.'  In  South  Africa,  among  the  Bangalas  of  the 
Cassange  valley,  *  the  sons  of  a  sister  belong  to   her 

*  brother;  and  he  often  sells  his  nephews  to  pay  his 
'debts;'*  the  Banyai  *  choose  the  son  of  the  deceased 

chief's  sister  in  preference  to  his  own  offspring.'  In 
Northern  Africa  we  find  the  same  custom  among  the 
Berbers;*  Burton  records  it  as  existing  in  the  North- 
*^t ;  and  on  the  Congo,  according  to  Tucker,  the 
cbieftainships '  are  hereditary,  through  the  female  line,  as 

a  precaution  to  make  certain  of  the  blood  royal  in  the 
succession.'  ^  Sibree  mentions  that  the  same  is  the  case 
^^  Madagascar,  where  the  custom  is  defended  expressly 
^n  the  ground  'that  the  descent  can  be  pi-oved  from  the 

'  PiLkerloo*8  Voyages,  vol.  xvi.      Barth's  Travels,  toI.  i.  p.  337. 
p.  .*131.  *  Ijiving8tniie*8  Travels  in  South 

•  MiSna.  Oeogr.  sur  l'£gypte  ot      Africa,  pp.  43 1,  017. 

"tr     quelques    contr^eii     voisines,  ^  La  Mere  chez  certains  peuplcA 

^'■ris,  ISll.    Quoted  in  Bachofen'a  do  TAnliquite,  p.  4o. 

Katterrecht,  p.  108.  •  Tuckey's  Exp.   to  the    River 

*  Cailli^'s  TraTelf,  Tol  i.  p.  153.  Zaixe,  p.  305. 


142    CA  USES  AND  WIDE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  CUSTOM. 

'  mother,  while  it  is  often  impossible  to  know  the 
paternity  of  a  child.'  ^ 

Herodotus  ^  supposed  that  this  custom  was  peculiar 
to  the  Lycians  :  they  have,  he  says,  *  one  custom  peculiar 

*  to  themselves,  in  which  they  diflFer  from  all  other 
'  nations ;  for  they  take  their  name  from  their  mothers, 
'  and  not  from  their  fathers ;  so  that  if  anyone  asks 

*  another  who  he  is,  he  will  describe  hunself  by  his 

*  mother's  side,  and  reckon  up  his  maternal  ancestry  in 

*  the  female  line.'  Polybius  makes  the  same  statement 
as  regards  the  Locrians ;  and  on  Etruscan  tombs 
descent  is  stated  in  the  female  line. 

In  Athens,  also,  relationship  through  females  pre- 
vailed down  to  the  time  of  Cecrops. 

Tacitus,'  speaking  of  the  Germans,  says,  *  Children 
'are  regarded  with  equal  affection  by  their  maternal 
'  uncles  as  by  their  fathers ;  some  even  consider  this  as 
'  the  more  sacred  bond  of  consanguinity,  and  prefer  it 
'  in  the  requisition  of  hostages.'     He  adds,  *  a  person'^ 
'  own  children,  however,  are  his  heirs  and  successors  j 
'  no  wills  are  made.'     From  this  it  would  appear  as  ii 
female  inheritance  had  been  recently  and  not  universally 
abandoned.    Again,  '  In  the  Pictish  Kingdom,  until  tli€5 
'  close  of  the  eighth  century,  no  son  is  recorded  to  have 
'  succeeded  his  father.'  ^ 

In  India  the  Kasias,  the  Kocchs,  and  the  Nairs  have 
the  system  of  female  kinship.  Buchanan  ^  tells  us  that 
among  the  Bantar  in  Tulava  a  man's  proi)crty  does  not 
descend  to  his  own  children,  but  to  those  of  his  sister. 

*  Madagascar  and  its  People,  p.  '  De  Mor.  Qerra.,  xx. 

102.  *  Ciaiiia  Britannica. 

2  Clio,  173.  5  Vo).  iii.  p.  10. 


NEGLECT  OF  PATERNAL  RELATION  143 

Sir  W,  Elliot  states  that  the  people  of  Malabar  *  all 

*  agree  in  one  remarkable  usage — that  of  transmitting 

*  property  through  females  only.'  ^  He  adds,  on  the 
Hothority  of  Lieutenant  Conner,  that  the  same  is  the 
case  in  Travancore,  among  all  the  castes  except  the 
Ponans  and  the  Namburi  Brahmans. 

As  Latham  states,  'no  Nair  son  knows  his  own 
'&tlier  ;  and,  vice  versd^  no  Nair  father  knows  his  own 
'  son.  What  becomes  of  the  property  of  the  husband  ? 
'H  descends  to  the  children  of  his  sister.'  ^ 

Among  the  Limboos  (India),  a  tribe  near  Darjee- 
Hng,*  the  boys  become  the  property  of  the  father  on  his 
Paying  the  mother  a  small  sum  of  money,  when  the  child 
^  Darned  and  enters  his  father's  tribe :  girls  remain  with 
ttie  mother,  and  belong  to  her  tribe. 

Marsden  tells  us,*  that  among  the  Battas  of  Sumatra 
'  the  succession  to  the  chiefships  does  not  go,  in  the 

*  first  instance,  to  the  son  of  the  deceased,  but  to  the 

*  nephew  by  a  sister  ;  and  that  the  same  extraordinary 

*  rule,  with  resjiect  to  the  property  in  general,  prevails 

*  also  amongst  the  Malays  of  that  part  of  the  island, 
*and  even  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Padang.  The 
'  authorities  for  this  are  various  and  unconnected 
'with  each  other,  but  not  sufficiently  circumstantial 
'  to  induce  me  to  admit  it  as  a  generally  estabUshed 
'  practice.' 

Among  the  Kenaiyers  at  Cook's  Inlet,  according  to 
Sir  John  Richardson,  property  descends,  not  to  a  man's 

»  Trana.  Ethn.  Soc.,1800,  p.  119.  N.  S.,  vol,  vii.  p.  155. 

*  Descriptive  Ethnology,  vol.  ii.  *  Marsdcn's  History  of  Sumatra, 
p.  40;J.  p.  370. 

*  Campbell,  Trans.  EiLd.  Soc, 


144     OEtQiN  OF  RELATIONSHIP  IN  THE  MALE  LINE. 

own  children,  but  to  those  of  his  sister.^     The  same  is 

the  case  with  the  Kutchin.^ 

Carver^  mentions  that  among  the  Hudson's  Bay 

Indians  the  children  *  are  always  distinguished  by  the 
name  of  the  mother  ;  and  if  a  woman  marries  several 
husbands,  and  has  issue  by  each  of  them,  they  are  all 
called  after  her.  The  reason  they  give  for  this  is,  that 
as  their  offspring  are  indebted  to  tlie  father  for  their 
souls,  the  invisible  part  of  their  essence,  and  to  the 
mother  for  their  corporeal  and  apparent  part,  it  is 
more  rational  that  they  should  be  distinguished  by  the 
name  of  the  latter,  from  whom  they  indubitably  derive 
their  being,  than  by  that  of  the  father,  to  which  a 
doubt  might  sometimes  arise  whether  they  are  justly 
entitled/  *  Descent  amongst  the  Iroquois  is  in  the 
female  line,  both  as  to  the  tribe  and  as  to  nationality. 
The  children  are  of  the  tribe  of  the  mother.  If  a 
Cayuga  marries  a  Delaware  woman,  for  example,  his 
children  are  Delawares  and  aliens,  unless  formally 
naturalised  with  the  forms  of  adoption ;  but  if  a  Dela- 
ware marries  a  Cayuga  woman,  her  children  are 
Cayugas,  and  of  her  tribe  of  the  Cayugas.  It  is  the 
same  if  she  marries  a  Seneca.'^ 
In  fact,  among  the  North  American  Indians  gene- 

rail}',  as  we  shall  see  more  particularly  in  the  next 

chapter,  the  relationship  of  the  uncle,  that  is  to  say,  the 

mother's  brother,  is  more  important  than  any  other. 

He  is  practically  the  head  of  his  sister's  family.   Among 


^  nofit  Journey,  vol.  i.  p.  400.  ^  Morgan's  Sje.    of  Cods,    and 

'  Smithsonian  Ileport,  18GG,  p.  Aff.  of  the  Human  Family,  p.  105. 

32G.  Jlunter's  Cnptivity  amonfjr  the  Nortli 

'  Carver,  p.  378.     See  also  p.  American  Indians,  p.  240. 

2c>0 ;  also  ante,  p.  08. 


SUBORDINATION  OF  PATERNAL  RELATION     145 

the  Choctas,  for  instance,  even  now,  if  a  boy  is  to  be 
placed  at  school,  his  uncle,  and  not  his  father,  takes  him 
to  the  mission  and  makes  the  arrangement.^  A  similar 
lole  prevailed  in  Haiti  and  Mexico.' 

Ab  regards  Polynesia,  Mariner  states  that  in  the 
Friendly  or  Tonga  Islands  *  nobility  descends  by  the 
•female  line,  for  when  the  mother  is  not  a  noble,  the 

*  children  are  not  nobles.'*  The  same  custom,  or  traces 
of  it,  exist  throughout  Polynesia,  but  it  would  seem 
that  these  islanders  were  passing  the  stage  of  relation- 
ship through  females  to  that  through  males.  The 
existence  of  inheritance  through  females  is  clearly  indi- 
cated in  the  Feejeean  custom  known  as  Vasu.  In  some 
of  the  Carolines  and  Mariannes  the  highest  honour 
pwsed  in  the  female  line.* 

So,  also,  in  Western  Australia,  '  children  of  either 

*  Bex  always  take  the  family  name  of  their  mother.'  ^ 

Among  the  ancient  Jews,  Abraham  married  his 
Wf'siater,  Nahor  married  his  brother's  daughter,  and 
Ainram  his  father's  sister ;  this  was  permitted  because 
they  were  not  regarded  as  relations.  Tamar  also  evi- 
^tly  might  have  married  Amnon,  though  they  were 
J^h  children  of  David:  *  Speak  unto  the  king,'  she 
B^id,  *  for  he  will  not  withhold  me  from  thee ; '  for,  as 
their  mothers  were  not  the  same,  they  were  no  relations 
^  the  eye  of  the  law. 

^  Morgwi,  loe.  eif.,  p.  HyS.  p.    83.      Gerland,  Con.  of    Waitz' 

*  Miiller,    Gesch.    d.  American.      Anthr.,  vol.  v.  pt.  ii.  pp.  108,  114, 
^n^ligioncn,  pp.  107,  CJO.  1 1 7. 

'  Tonga  liUnda,  toI.  ii.  pp.  80,  *  Eyre,  ioc.  city  p.  3:30.    Ridley, 

^1.  Journal  Anthrop.   Institute,    1872, 

*  Ilale,  United  SUtes  Ex.  Exp.,      p.  204. 


14G    ORIGIN  OF  BELATI0N8HIF  Di  THE  MALE  LISL 

Solon  also  permitted  marriage  with  sisters  on  the 
father's  side,  but  not  on  the  mother's. 

Here,  therefore,  we  have  abundant  evidence  of  the 
second  stage,  in  which  the  child  is  related  to  the 
mother,  and  not  to  the  father ;  whence  a  man's  heir  is 
his  nephew  on  the  sister's  side — ^not  his  own  child, 
who  is  in  some  cases  regarded  as  no  relation  to  him 
at  all. 

\rhen,  however,  marriage  became  more  respected, 
and  the  family  affections  stronger,  it  is  easy  to  see  thil 
the  rule  under  which  a  man's  property  went  to  hifi 
sister's  children  would  become  unpopular,  both  with 
the  father,  who  would  naturally  wish  his  .children  to 
inherit  his  property,  and  not  less  so  with  the  children 
themselves. 

M.  Girard  Teulon,  indeed,  to  whom  we  are  indebted 
:or  a  very  interesting  memoir  on  this  subject,*  r^ards 
:ho  £r<i  ivoognition  of  his  parental  relationship  as  on 
ac:  of  Koble  sself-devotion  on  the  part  of  some  great 
CvViius  i::  ancient  times.     *Le  premier/  he  says, 'qui 

*  vvr.scr.:::  a  so  reoonnaitre  pere  fut  un  homme  de  genie 

•  c:  vie  v\ri:r.  un  dos  grands  bienfaiteurs  de  I'humanite 

*  l\\^::vc  c::  cffot  que  Tenfant  t'appartient.     Es-tu  sui 

•  or/:l  cs:  un  ainro  toi-meme  ton  fruit?   que  tu  fa 
^  .:/V,v.:v  :  lU  bien,  a  laide  dune  cencreusc  et  voloD 

•  :A:rc  crv\u:l::o,  r/.arohes-tu.  noble  inventeur,  a  la  con 

r.u'V.v^tV'V-  A4S0.  wi.ile  cliaraoterising  the  change  froi 
v../.;  ::  .'tn-.:-.\  rc-a::cy.>!.ip  as  the  '  wichtigstcn  Weudt 

*  "  :•  fv:  '::  ^\r  Oc>sL:.l::c  dvs  Gcsi-^Ucclits-vorhaltnlssCJ 


CEANQE  FROM  FEMALE  TO  MALE  KINSHIP.     147 

explains  it,  as  I  cannot  but  think,  in  an  altogether  erro- 
neous manner.  He  regards  it  as  a  liberation  of  the 
spirit  from  the  deceptive  appearances  of  nature,  an 
elevation  of  human  existence  above  the  laws  of  mere 
matter ;  as  a  recognition  that  the  creative  power  is  the 
mo6t  important ;  and,  in  short,  as  a  subordination  of  the 
material  to  the  spiritual  part  of  our  nature.  By  this 
step,  he  says,  *  Man  durchbricht  die  bander  des  Tellur- 
^  iamus  und  erhebt  seinen  Blick  zu  den  hohem  regionen 
*  des  Kosmos,'  ^ 

These  seem  to  me,  I  confess,  very  curious  notions, 
and  I  cannot  at  all  agree  with  them.  The  recog- 
nition of  paternal  responsibility  grew  up,  I  believe, 
gradually  and  from  the  force  of  circumstances,  aided  by 
the  impulses  of  natural  affection.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  adoption  of  relationship  through  the  father's  line, 
instead  of  through  the  mother's,  was  probably  effected 
by  the  natural  wish  which  every  one  would  feel  that  his 
property  should  go  to  his  own  children.  It  is  true  that 
we  have  very  few  cases  like  that  of  Athens,  in  which 
there  is  a  record  of  this  change ;  but  as  it  is  easy  to 
see  how  it  might  have  been  brought  about,  and  difficult 
to  suppose  that  the  opposite  step  can  ever  have  been 
niade;  as,  moreover,  we  find  relationship  through  the 
fether  very  general,  not  to  say  universal,  in  civilised 
races,  while  the  opposite  system  is  very  common  among 
savages,  it  is  evident  that  this  change  must  frequently 
have  been  effected. 

Taking  all  these  facts,  then,  into  consideration,  when- 
ever we  find  relationship  through  females  only,  I  think 

^  £achofeD|  Das  MutterrecLt;  p.  27. 

L  2 


5T?ZSr  vF  KnfSHIP  THEOVGH  MALS& 

msT  stsij  Iizck  i^ai  h  as  the  relic  of  an  anci 


i  iccn.  as  me  cfainae  w»  made,  the  lather  vio 
^  puice  isil  prtTioosIy  by  the  mother,  and 
zisceflii  a:  iiiii.  we<QM  be  negmrded  as  the  pare 
Hrsnx.  ott  zsut  birtk  rf  a  ^AIltL  the  frther  would  na 
ril-  ?e  very  care&I  w&ar  he  dii  and  what  he  3 
for  iscr  rse  :hild  be  mjared.  Thus,  I  believe,  ari 
^  ^mrircs  coacvm  of  the  Coorade  to  which  I  refen 

Ee!a:j>:n5f:?p  iro  the  fidier  at  first  excludes  that 
iiL-i.  &OQ1  having  been   regarded  as 
TO  the  rrmxaer.  children  came  to  be  looked  cm 
zj:ce  t:^  ihe  laricr. 

Iz.  ieor  parts  oc  Soa;h  America,  where  it  is  ci 
Tccsary  ;o  tr>a:  captiTes  well  in  every  respect  foi 
.^rriz:  r=K*  ^hing  them  clothes,  food,  a  wife,  &c.,  a 
ii-"  n  ro  ifll  acrd  cat  them,  any  children  they  may  h 
iT:  killei  iTsi  eiren  also.*  As  a  general  rule  inheritai 
ir.«i  r^LlirI-:csh:p  go  together,  but  in  some  parta 
A-:is:riI:i>  -srhile  lie  cM  rule  of  tracing  descent  thron 
:i£  ziccier  >::U  exists*  propeny  is  inherited  in  them 

l;rfc\'  v.v'V. jh  ::  :^pre&r5  that  the  division  is  made  duri 

«      •   •     •   » •  • 

H;w  vvn:pk:ely  the  idea  of  relationship  through 
r.^rlvr.  when  onot?  nx\>gniseJ,  might  replace  tl 
rhrv^uct:  :be  moiher  wo  may  see  in  the  very  curie 
:rls'  V :'  Orvstcs.  Apmumnoii,  having  been  murdei 
•  V  •::>  \v'::V  C!vto:nnostni.  w:is  avenired  bv  their  j 
i»rvs:c>.  ^^!.v^  kiIK\l  his  mother  for  the  murder  of 

•  OioY*  Au$tr?UiJ^  Tol.  ii.  p.  2ih.\,  iMa 


THE  PBE8ENT  SYSTEM.  149 

firther.  For  this  act  he  was  prosecuted  before  the 
tribunal  of  the  gods  by  the  Erinnyes,  whose  function  it 
was  to  punish  those  who  shed  the  blood  of  relatives. 
In  his  defence,  Orestes  asks  them  why  they  did  not 
pQnish  Clytemnestra  for  the  murder  of  Agamemnon; 
ttd  when  they  reply  that  marriage  does  not  constitute 
Hood  relationship, — '  She  was  not  the  kindred  of  the 
*man  whom  she  slew/ — he  pleads  that  by  the  same 
nde  they  cannot  touch  him,  because  a  man  is  a  relation 
to  his  £Either,  but  not  to  his  mother.  This  view,  which 
nems  to  us  so  unnatural,  was  supported  by  Apollo  and 
Mmerva,  and  being  adopted  by  the  majority  of  the 
fods,  led  to  the  acquittal  of  Orestes. 

Hence  we  see  that  the  views  prevalent  on  relation- 
ihip — ^views  by  which  the  whole  social  organisation  is 
•a  profoundly  affected — are  by  no  means  the  same 
ttoong  different  races,  nor  uniform  at  the  same  histori- 
ttl  period.  We  ourselves  still  confuse  affinity  and  con- 
ittgainity ;  but  into  this  part  of  the  question  it  is  not 
17  intention  to  enter:  the  evidence  brought  forward  in 
fte  preceding  pages  is,  however,  I  think  sufficient  to 
■kow  that  children  were  not  in  the  earliest  times  re- 
gttded  as  related  equally  to  their  father  and  their 
BKrther,  but  that  the  natural  progress  of  ideas  is,  first, 
tkat  a  child  is  related  to  his  tribe  generally;  secondly, 
to  his  mother,  and  not*  to  his  father;  thirdly,  to  his 
fcther,  and  not  to  his  mother ;  lastly,  and  lastly  only, 
4at  he  is  related  to  both.  * 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ON  THE   DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELATIONSHIPS. 

In  the  previous  chapter   I   have  discussed  the  ques- 
tion of  marriage  as  it  exists  among  the  lower  racea  of 
men,  and  the  relation  of  children  to  their  parents.    Ii* 
the  present  I  propose  to  discuss  the  question  of  relation- 
ships in  general,  and  to  endeavour  to  trace  up  the  idea* 
on  this  subject  from  their  rudest  form  to  the  more 
advanced  condition  in  which  they  exist  amongst  mor^ 
civilised  races. 

For  the  facts  on  which  this  chapter  is  based  we  ar^ 
mainly  indebted  to  Mr.  Morgan,  who  has  collected  a  great/ 
mass  of  information  on  the  subject,  which  has  recently 
been  published  by  the  Smithsonian  Institution.  Though 
I  dissent  from  Mr.  Morgan's  main  conclusions,  his  work 
appears  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  most  valuable  contributions 
to  ethnological  science  which  has  appeared-  for  many 
years.*  It  contains  schedules,  most  of  which  are  very  com- 
plete, giving  the  systems  of  relationships  of  no  less  than 
139  races  or  tribes  ;  and  we  have,  therefore  (though 
there  are  still  many  lamentable  deficiencies — the 
Siberians,  South  Americans,  and  true  Negroes,  being, 
for   instance,    as    yet    unrepresented),   a   great    bculy 

»  Systcma  of   (\insanguinitjr  and  Affinity  of  the  IIumAn   FamilT,  hj 
L.  11.  Morgau,  1870. 


ON  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELATIONSHIPS.    151 

of  evidence  illustrating  the  ideas  on  the  subject  of 
relationships  which  prevail  among  different  races 
of  men. 

Our  own  system  of  relationships  naturally  follows 
from  the  marriage  of  single  pairs;  and  it  is,  in  its  gene- 
ral nomenclature,  so  mere  a  description  of  the  actual 
facts,  that  most  persons  tacitly  regard  it  as  necessarily 
general  to  the  human  race,  with,  of  course,  verbal  and 
miimportant  differences  in  detail.     Hence  but  little  in- 
formation can  be  extracted  from  dictionaries  and  voca- 
bularies.    They  generally,  for  instance,  give  words  for 
uncle,  aunt,  and  cousin;  but  an  uncle  may  be  either  a 
fether's  brother  or  a  mother's  brother,  and  an  aunt  may 
be  either  a  father's  sister  or  a  mother's  sister ;  a  first 
couain,  again,  may  be  the  child  of  any  one  of  these  four 
uncles  and  aunts ;  but  practically,  as  we  shall  see,  these 
cases  are  in  many  races  distinguished  from  one  another; 
and  I  may  add,  in  passing,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that 
We  are  right  in  regarding  them  as  identical  and  equiva- 
lent.    Travellers   have,   on  various   occasions,  noticed 
with  surprise  some  special  peculiarity  of  nomenclature 
whichcame  under  their  notice  ;  but  Mr.  Morgan  was  the 
first  to  collect  complete  schedules  of  relationships.    The 
special  points  which  have  been  observed  have,  indeed, 
been  generally  regarded  as  mere  eccentricities;  but  this 
is  evidently  not  the  case,  because  the  principle  or  prin- 
ciples to  which  they  are  due  are  consistently  carried 
out,   and   the    nomenclature    is    reciprocal   generally, 
though   not   quite  without   exceptions.     Thus,  if  the 
Mohawks  call  a  father's  brother,  not  an  uncle,  but  a 
father,  they  not  only  call  his  son  a  brother  and  his 


152  DIFFERENT  8T8TEMB 

grandson  a  son,  but   these  descendants  also  use  the 
correlative  terms. 

We  must  remember  that  our  ideas  of  relationships 
are  founded  on  our  social  system,  and  that,  as  other 
races  have  very  different  habits  and  ideas  on  this  sub- 
ject, it  is  natural  to  expect  that  their  systems  of  rela- 
tionship would  also  differ  from  ours,  I  have  in  the 
previous  chapter  pointed  out  that  the  ideas  and  customs 
with  reference  to  marriage  are  very  dissimilar  in  differ- 
ent races,  and  we  may  say,  as  a  general  rule,  that,  as 
we  descend  in  the  scale  of  civilisation,  the  family 
diminishes,  and  the  tribe  increases,  in  importance. 
Words  have  a  profound  influence  over  thought,  and 
true  family -names  prevail  principally  among  the  highest 
races  of  men.  Even  in  the  less  advanced  portions  of 
our  own  country,  we  know  that  collective  names  were 
those  of  the  tribe,  rather  than  the  family. 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  among  the  Romans 
the  '  family  '  was  not  a  natural  family  in  our  sense  of 
tlie  term.  It  was  founded,^  not  on  marriage,  but  on 
power.  The  family  of  a  chief  consisted,  not  of  those 
allied  to  him  by  blood,  but  of  those  over  whom  he 
exercised  control.  Hence,  an  emancipated  son  ceased 
to  be  one  of  the  family,  and  did  not,  except  by  will, 
take  any  share  in  his  father's  property;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  wife  introduced  into  the  family  by  marriage, 
or  the  stranger  converted  into  a  son  by  adoption, 
became  regularly  recognised  members  of  the  family, 
though  no  blood  tie  existed. 

Marriage,  again,  in  Rome,  was  symbolised  by  cap- 

^  See  Ortolan*8  JostinioD,  p.  126,  et  seq. 


OF  RELAnOKSniPS.  153 

tuie  or  purchase,  as  among  so  many  of  the  lower  races 
It  the  present  day.  In  fact,  the  idea  of  marriage 
among  the  lower  races  of  men  generally  is  essentially 
of  a  different  character  from  ours;  it  is  material,  not 
spiritual ;  it  is  founded  on  force,  not  on  love :  the  wile 
18  not  united  with,  but  enslaved  to,  her  husband.  Of 
roch  a  sj'stem,  traces,  and  more  than  traces,  still  exist  in 
oar  own  country  :  our  customs,  indeed,  are  more  ad- 
vanced, and  wives  enjoy  a  very  different  status  in 
roJity,  to  that  which  they  occupy  in  law.  Among  the 
Kedskins,  however,  the  wife  is  a  mere  servant  to  her 
boaband,  and  there  are  cases  on  record,  in  which  hus- 
band and  wife,  belonging  originally  to  different  tribes, 
We  lived  together  for  years  without  either  caring  to 
Acquire  the  other's  language,  satisfied  to  communicate 
'^th  one  another  entirely  by  signs. 

It  must,  however,  be  observed  that,  though  the 
-^©dskin  family  is  constituted  in  a  manner  ver}-  imlike 
^Urs,  still  the  nomenclature  of  relationshii)s  is  founded 
^pon  it,  such  as  it  is,  and  has  no  relation  to  the  tribal 
System,  as  w^ill  presently  be  shown. 

Mr.  Morgan  divides  the  systems  of  relationship  into 
*Vo  great  classes,  the  descriptive  and  the  classificator\\ 
Xhe  first,  he  says  (p.  12),  *  which  is  that  of  the  Aryan, 

*  Semitic,  and  Uralian  families,  rejecting  the  classifica- 

*  tion  of  kindred,  except  so  far  as  it  is  in  accordance 

*  with  the  numerical  system,  describes  collateral  con- 

*  aanguinei,  for  the  most  part,  by  an  augmentation  or 

*  combination   of  the   primary   terms   of  relationship. 

*  These  terms,  which  are  those  for  husband  and  wife, 

*  father  and  mother,  brother  and  sister,  and  son  and 

*  daughter,  to  which  must  be  added,  in  such  language^ 


164  GLA8SIFI0ATI0N  OF  SYSTEMS. 

as  possess  them,  grandfather  and  grandmothe 
grandson  and  granddaughter,  are  thus  restric 
the  primary  sense  in  which  they  are  here  em] 
All  other  terms  are  secondary.  Each  relation 
thus  made  independent  and  distinct  from  every 
But  the  second,  which  is  that  of  the  Tui 
American  Indian,  and  Malayan  families,  re 
descriptive  phrases  in  every  instance,  and  re 
consanguinei  to  great  classes  by  a  series  of  app 
arbitrary  generalisations,  applies  the  same  term 
the  members  of  the  same  class.  It  thus  con 
relationships,  which,  imder  the  descriptive  syst^ 
distinct,  and  enlarges  the  signification  both 
primary  and  secondary  terms  beyond  tlieir  see 
appropriate  sense.' 
WTiile,  however,  I  fully  admit  the  radical  dif 
between,  say,  our  English  system  and  that  of  the 
mill  Islanders,  as  shown  in  Table  I.^  opposite 
seem  to  me  to  be  rather  the  extremes  of  a  serw 
founded  on  different  ideals. 

Mr.  Morgan  admits  that  systems  of  relati< 
have  undergone  a  gradual  development,  followii 
of  the  social  condition  ;  but  he  also  attributes  t 
great  value  iu  tlie  determination  of  etlinological 
ties.  I  am  not  sure  that  I  exactly  understa 
views,  as  to  the  precise  bearing  of  tliese  two  cone 
in  relation  to  one  another;  and  I  have  elscwhert 
my  reasons  for  dissenting  from  his  interpretation 

*  I  haye  constructed  this  tabic  in  a  manner  which   aeou 

from  Mr.  Morgan's  schedules,  select-  more  instructive  than  thai 

ing  the  relationships  which  are  the  by  Mr.  Morgan, 
most  significant,  and  arranging  them 


lEL. 


Um 


Am 


Fat; 


Mat 


on 
Ori 


The  Tel 


REl 


idchild 

ulchild 

iflchlM 

idchlUl 

irichUd 

her 

ler 

ler 


NATUBE  OF  THE  EVIDENCE.  155 

facts  in  reference  to  social  relations.  I  shall,  therefore, 
now  confine  myself  to  the  question  of  the  bearing  of 
systems  of  relationships  on  questions  of  ethnological 
affinity,  and  to  a  consideration  of  the  manner  in  which 
the  various  systems  have  arisen.  As  might  naturally 
have  been  expected,  Mr.  Morgan's  information  is  most 
full  and  complete  with  reference  to  the  North  American 
Indians.  Of  these,  he  gives  the  terms  for  no  less  than 
268  relationships  in  about  seventy  different  tribes.  Of 
these  relationships,  some  are,  for  our  present  purposes 
much  more  important  than  others.  The  most  signifi- 
cant are  the  following: — 

1.  Brother's  son  and  daughter. 

2.  Sister's  son  and  daughter. 

3.  Mother's  brother. 

4.  Mother's  brother's  son. 

5.  Father's  sister. 

6.  Father's  sister's  son. 

7.  Father's  brother. 

8.  Father's  brother's  son. 

9.  Mother's  sister. 

10.  Mother's  sister's  son. 

1 1 .  Grandfather's  brother. 

12.  Brothers'  and  sisters'  grandchildren. 

Now  let  me  call  attention  to  the  Wyandot  system  as 
shown  in  column  8  of  Table  I.  It  will  be  observed 
that  a  mother's  brother  is  called  an  uncle;  his  son  a 
cousin ;  his  grandson  a  son  when  a  male  is  speaking,  a 
nephew  when  a  female  is  speaking;  his  great-grandson 
a  grandson.  A  father's  sister  is  termed  an  aunt;  her 
son  a  cousin;  her  grandson  a  son;  her  great-grandson  a 
grandson.     A  father's  brother  is  a  father;  his  son   a 


156  CUSTOM. OF  ADDBESSINO  PERSONS 

brother,  distinguished,  however,  by  different  terms,  ac- 
cording as  he  is  older  or  younger  than  the  speaker;  Lia 
grandson   a  son;   his  great-grandson  a  grandson.    A 
mother's  sister  is  a  mother ;  ^  her  son  is  a  brother,  dis- 
tinguished as  before ;  her  grandson  a  son  when  a  male 
is  speaking,  a  nephew  when  a  female  is  speaking.    A 
grandfather's  brother  is  a  grandfather;   and  a  grand- 
father's sister  is  a  grandmother.     A  brother's  son  is  a 
son  when  a  male  is   speaking,  but  a  nephew  when  a 
female  is  speaking  ;   while  a  sister's  son  is  a  nephew 
when  a  male  is  speaking,  but  a  son  when  a  female  is 
speaking.     Lastly,  brothers'  grandchildren,  and  sisters' 
grandchildren,  are  called  grandchildren. 

This  system,  at  first,  strikes  one  as  illogical  and  in- 
consistent. How  can  a  person  have  more  than  one 
mother?  How  can  a  brother's  son  be  a  son,  or  an 
uncle's  great-grandson  a  grandson?  Again,  while 
classing  together  several  relationships  which  wc  justly 
separate,  it  distinguishes  between  elder  and  3'oun;:er 
brothers  and  sisters ;  and  in  several  cases  the  relation- 
ship depends  on  the  sex  of  the  speaker.  Since,  however,  a 
similar  system  ])revails  over  a  very  wide  area,  it  cannot 
be  dismissed  as  a  mere  arbitrary  or  accidental  arrange- 
ment. The  system  is,  moreover,  far  from  being  merely 
theoretical,  in  every-day  use.  Every  member  of  the  tribe 
knows  his  exact  relationship  to  each  other,  according  to 

^  In   Mndagascnr  '  fir^t   cousius  ^  that  we  loam  Uie  exact  degree  <4 

*are    usually    termed   brother  and  *  relationship.     These  secondary  fiii- 

'  siNter,  and  uncles  and  aunts  father  '  thers  and  mothers  seem  often  to  be 

'  and  mother  resp«»ctively  ;  and  it  is  '  re^rded  with   little  less  affection 

*  only  by  askinj;  distinctly  of  persons  'than   the  actual  pitrenU.* — ASthttt*i 

*  whether  they  sro  "  of  one  father  '*  Madaga$car  ami  its  VafpU^  p.  ll»2. 
'  or  are  *'  uterine  brother  and  sister/' 


BT  THEIB  BELATIONSmPS.  167 

this  system ;  and  this  knowledge  is  kept  up  by  the  habit, 
general  among  the  American  tribes,  and  occurring  also 
elsewhere — as,  for  instance,  among  the  Esquimaux,  the 
Tamils,  Telugus,  Chinese,  Japanese,  Feejeeans,  &c. — of 
addressing  a  person,  not  by  his  name,  but  by  his  rela- 
tionship. Among  the  Telugus  and  Tamils  an  elder  may 
address  a  younger  by  name,  but  a  younger  must  always 
use  the  term  for  relationship  in  speaking  to  an  elder. 
This  custom  is,  probably,  connected  with  the  curious 
superstitions  about  names;  but,  however  it  may  have 
arisen,  the  result  is  that  an  Indian  addresses  his  neigh- 
bour as  *my  father,"  'my  son,'  or  *  my  brother,'  as  the 
case  may  be :  if  not  related,  he  says,  *  my  friend.' 

Thus  the  system  is  kept  up  by  daily  use;  nor  is  it 
a  mere  mode  of  expression.  Although,  in  many 
respects,  opposed  to  the  existing  customs  and  ideas,  it 
is,  in  some,  entirely  consonant  with  them:  thus,  among 
many  of  the  Redskin  tribes,  if  a  man  marries  the  eldest 
girl  in  a  family,  he  can  claim  in  marriage  all  the 
others  as  they  successively  come  to  maturity;  this 
custom  exists  among  the  Shyenncs,  Omahas,  lowas, 
Kaws,  Osages,  Blackfeet,  Crees,  Minnitarees,  Crows, 
and  other  tribes.  I  have  already  mentioned  that  among 
the  Redskins,  generally,  the  mother's  brother  exercises 
a  more  than  paternal  authority  over  his  sister's  children. 
I  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  again  to  this  remarkable 
exaggeration  of  avuncular  authority. 

Mr.  Morgan  was  much  surprised  to  find  that  a  sys- 
tem, more  or  less  like  that  of  the  Wyandots,  was  very 
general  among  the  Redskins  of  North  America ;  but  he 
was  still  more  astonished  to  find  that  the  Tamil  races  of 
India  have  one  almost  identical.      A  comparison  of 


158  SIMILARJTIEa  OF  SYSTEM 

columns  8  and  9  in  Table  I.,  will  show  that  this  is  the  case, 
and  the  similarity  is  even  more  striking  in  Mr.  Morgan  s 
tables,  where  a  larger  number  of  relationships  is  given. 

How,  then,  did  this  system  arise  ?     How  is  it  to  be 
accounted  for?    It  is  by  no  means  consonant,  in  all 
respects,  to  the  present  social  conditions  of  the  races  in 
question ;  nor  does  it  agree  with  tribal  affinities.    The 
American    Indians    generally   follow  the    custom  of 
exogamy,  as  it  has  been  called  by  Mr.  McLennan,  that 
is  to  say,  no  one  is  permitted  to  marry  within  the  dan; 
and,  as  descent  goes  in  the  female  line,  a  man's  brother's 
son,  though  called  his  son,  belongs  to  a  different  clan; 
while  his  sister's  son  does  belong  to  the  clan,  though  he 
is  regarded  as   a  nephew,  and  consequently  as  less 
closely  connected.      Hence,  a  man's  nephew  belongs 
to  his  clan,  but  his  son  belongs  to  a  different  clan. 

Mr.  Morgan,  from  several  passages,  appears  to  regard 
the  system  as  ai'bitrary,  artificial,  and  intentional.^  He 
discusses,  at  some  length,  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn 
from  its  wide  extension  over  the  American  continent, 
and  its  presence  also  in  India.  *  The  several  hypotheses,' 
he  says,  '  of  accidental  concurrent  invention,  of  borrow- 
'  ing  from  each  other,  and  of  spontaneous  growth,  are 
'  entirely  inadequate.'*'^  With  reference  to  the  hypo- 
thesis of  independent  development  in  disconnected 
areas,  he  observes  that  it  possesses  '  both  plausibility 

*  and  force.'     It  has,  tlierefore,  he  adds,  *  been  made  a 
'  subject  of  nut  less  careful  study  and  reflection  than  the 

*  system  itself.     Not  until  after  a  patient  analysis  and 

»  »Seo  pp.  L>r,  tyO'J,  iiOl,  •h>l,  VjO,  etc. 
*  Loc,  ctV.,  p.  405. 


AMONG  THE  LOWER  BA0E8.  159 

compariBon*^^  «to  several  forms  upon  the  extended 
scale  in  which  they  are  given  in  the  tables,  and  not 
until  after  a  careful  consideration  of  the  functions  of 
the  system,  as  a  domestic  institution,  and  of  the  evi- 
dence of  its  mode  of  propagation  from  age  to  age,  did 
these  doubts  finally  give  way,  and  the  insufficiency  of 
this  hypothesis  to  account  for  the  origin  of  the  system 
many  times  over,  or  even  a  second  time,  became  fully 
apparent.' 

And  again,  ^  if  the  two  families — i.e.,  the  Redskin 
and  the  Tamil — commenced  on  separate  continents  in 
a  state  of  promiscuous  intercourse,  having  such  a 
system  of  consanguinity  as  this  state  would  beget,  of 
the  character  of  which  no  conception  can  be  formed, 
it  would  be  little  less  than  a  miracle  if  both  should 
develop  the  same  system  of  relationship.'  ^  He  con- 
fides, then,  that  it  must  be  due  to  ^  transmission  vnth 
the  blood  from  a  common  original  source.  If  the  four 
hypotheses  named  cover  and  exhaust  the  subject,  and 
the  first  three  are  incapable  of  explaining  the  present 
existence  of  the  system  in  the  two  families,  then  the 
fourth  and  last,  if  capable  of  accounting  for  its 
transmission,  becomes  transformed  into  an  established 
conclusion.'  ^ 

That  there  is  any  near  alliance  between  the  Redskin 
od  Tamil  races  would  be  an  ethnological  conclusion  of 
reat  importance.  It  docs  not,  hoAvever,  seem  to  me  to 
e  borne  out  by  the  evidence.  The  Feejeean  system, 
''ith  which  the  Tongan  is  almost  identical,  is  very 
istructive  in  this  respect,  and  scarcely  seems  to  have 

'  Loc,  citf  p.  505. 

*  Ibid.    8ee  also  p.  407. 


160  MALArANB—FBEJSEAN8—BED8KIN8. 

received  from  Mr.  Morgan  the  consideration  which  it    < 
merits.     Now,  colmnns  9,  10,  and  11  of  Table  I.  show 
that  the  Feejeean  and  Tongan  systems  are  identical 
with  the  Tamil.     If,  then,  this  similarity  is,  in  the  case 
of  the  Tamil,  proof  of  close  ethnological  affinity  between 
that  race  and  the  Redskin,  it  must  equally  be  so  in 
reference  to  the  Feejeeans  and  the  Tongans.     It  is, 
however,  well  known  that  these  races  belong  to  very 
distinct  divisions  of  mankind,  and  any  facts  which  prove 
similarity  between  these  races,  however  interesting  and 
important  they  may  be  as  proofs  of  identity  in  human 
character  and  history,  can  obviously  have  no  bearing 
on  special  ethnological  affinities.     Moreover,  it  seems 
clear,  as  I  shall  attempt  presently  to  show,  that  the 
Tongans  have  not  used  their  present  system  ever  since 
their  ancestors  first  landed  on  the  Pacific  Islands,  but 
that  it  has  subsequently  developed   itself  from  a  fiir 
ruder  system,  which  is  still  in  existence  in  many  of  the 
surrounding  islands. 

I  may  also  observe  that  the  Two- Mountain  Iroquois, 
whose  close  ethnological  affinity  with  the  Wyandots  no 
one  will  question,  actually  agree,  as  shown  by  columns  3 
and  4  of  Table  I.,  more  nearly  with  this  ruder  Pacific, 
or,  as  Morgan  calls  it,  '  Malayan '  system,  than  they  do 
with  tliat  of  the  neighbouring  American  tribes. 

For  these  and  other  reasons,  I  think  it  impossible 
to  adopt  Mr.  Morgan's  views,  either  on  the  causes  which 
have  led  to  the  existence  of  the  Tamil  svstem,  or  as  to 
the  ethnological  conclusions  which  follow  from  it. 

How,  then,  have  these  systems  arisen,  and  how  can 
we  account  for  such  remarkable  similai'ities  between  races 
so  distinct,  and  so  distant,  as  the  Wyandots,  Tamils, 


NOMENOLATUEE  OF  RELATIONSHIPS,  IGl 

Feejeeans,  and  ToDgans?  In  illustration  of  my  views 
on  this  subject,  I  have  constructed  the  preceding  table 
(Table  L),  in  which  I  have  given  the  translation  of  the 
native  words,  and,  following  Morgan,  when  one  word  is 
used  for  several  relationships,  have  translated  it  by  the 
simplest.  Thus,  in  Feejeean,  the  word  ^  Tamanngu ' — 
literally  '  Tama  my,'  the  suffix  '  nngu,*  meaning  '  my  ' 
—is  applied,  not  only  to  a  father,  but  to  a  father's 
brother  ;  hence,  as  the  father  is  the  more  important,  we 
Bay  that  they  call  a  father's  brother  a  father. 

In  many  cases  the  origins  of  the  terms  for  relation- 
ships are  undeterminable;  I  shall  discuss  some  in  a 
subsequent  chapter.  Others,  however,  have  so  far 
withstood  the  wear  and  t^ar  of  daily  use  as  to  be  still 
traceable. 

Thus,  in  Polish,  the  word  for  my  great-uncle  is, 
literally,  *  my  cold  grandfather ; '  the  word  for  '  wife  ' 
among  the  Crees  is  '  part  of  myself;'  that  for  husband, 
aniong  the  Choctas,  is  '  he  who  leads  me  ; '  a  daughter- 
in-law  among  the  Dela wares  is  called  '  Xah-hum,' 
literally,  'my  cook;'  for  which  ungracious  expression, 
however,  they  make  amends  by  their  word  for  husband 
or  wife,  *  Wee-chaa-oke,'  which  is,  literally,  '  my  aid 
'  through  life.' 

It  might,  a  priori^  be  supposed  that  the  nomencla- 
ture of  relationships  would  be  greatly  affected  by  the 
question  of  male  or  female  descent.  This,  however, 
^Ws  not  appear  to  be  the  case.  Under  a  system  of 
fenalc  descent,  combined  with  exogamy,  a  man  nnist 
^arry  out  of  his  tribe ;  and,  as  his  children  belong  to 
their  mother's  tribe,  it  follows  that  a  man's  children  do 
not  belonij  to  his  tribe.     On  the  other  hand,  a  wonuurs 

M 


162  EFFECT  OF  FEMALE  KINSHIP 

children,  whomsoever  she  may  marry,  belong  to  her 
tribe.  Hence,  while  neither  a  man's  nor  his  brother's 
children  belong  to  the  same  tribe  as  himself,  his  sister  i 
children  must  do  so,  and  are,  in  consequence,  often 
regarded  as  his  heirs.  In  fact,  for  all  practical  purposes, 
among  many  of  the  Redskin  and  other  tribes,  a  man^s 
sister's  sons  are  regarded  as  his  children. 

As  we  have  already  seen,  this  remarkable  custom 
prevails,  not  only  among  the  Redskins,  but  alec  in 
various  other  parts  of  the  world.  As  regards  the 
native  tribes  of  North  America,  it  may  almost  be  laid 
down  as  a  general  proposition  that  the  mother'B 
brother  exercises  a  more  than  paternal  authority  over 
his  sister's  children.  He  has  a  recognised  right  to 
any  property  they  may  acquire,  if  he  choose  to 
exercise  it;  he  can  give  orders  which  a  true  father 
would  not  venture  to  issue ;  he  arranges  the  marriages 
of  his  nieces,  and  is  entitled  to  share  in  the  price  paid 
for  them.  The  same  custom  prevails  even  among  the 
semi-civilised  races ;  for  instance,  among  the  Choctas  the 
uncle,  not  the  father,  sends  a  boy  to  school. 

Yet  among  these  very  tribes  a  man's  sister's  son  is 
called  his  nephew,  while  his  brother's  son  is  called  his 
son. 

Thus,  although  a  man's  mother's  brother  is  called 
an  uncle,  he  has,  in  reality,  more  jwwer  and  responsi- 
bility than  the  true  father.  The  true  father  is  classed 
with  the  father's  brother  and  the  mother's  sister ;  but 
the  mother's  brotlier  stands  by  liimself,  and,  although 
he  is  called  an  uncle,  he  exercises  the  real  parental 
power,  and  on  liim  rests  the  parentnl  responsibility.  In 
fact,  while  tlie  names  of  relationsliij)s  follow  the  mar- 


I 


ON  SYSTEMS  OF  BELATIONSHIP.  163 

riage  cuBtoms,  the  ideas  are  guided  by  the  tribal 
organisation.  Hence  we  see  that  not  only  do  the  ideas 
of  the  several  relationships,  among  the  lower  races  of 
men,  differ  from  ours  ;  but  the  idea  of  relationship,  as 
a  whole,  is,  so  to  say,  embryonic,  and  subsidiary  to  that 
of  the  tribe. 

In  fact,  the  idea  of  relationship,  like  that  of  mar- 
riage, was  founded,  not  upon  duty,  but  upon  power. 
Only  with  the  gradual  elevation  of  the  race  has  the 
latter  been  subordinated  to  the  former. 

I  have  endeavoured  to  illustrate  the  various  systems 
of  relationship  by  Table  I.  (opposite  p.  154),  which 
begins  with  the  Hawaiian,  or  Sandwich  Island  system. 

The  Hawaiian  language  is  rich  in  terms  for  relation- 
ihijw.     A  grandparent  is  *  Kupuna,'  a  parent  is  *  Makua,' 
ft  child   *  Eaikee,'  a  son-in-law,   or    daughter-law,   is 
'Hanona,'  a  grand- child  *  Moopuna ;  *  brothers  in  the 
plural  are  *  Hoahanau ; '   a  brother-in-law,  or    sister- 
in-law,  is  addressed  as  ^  Kaikoeke ; '  there  are  special 
words  for  brother  and  sister  according  to  age  and  sex  ; 
thus,  a  boy  speaking  of  an  elder  brother,  and  a  girl 
speaking  of  an  elder  sister,  use  the  term  ^  Kai-kuuana ; ' 
a  boy  speaking  of  a  younger  brother,  or  a  girl  of  a 
younger  sister,  uses  the  word  *  Kaikaina  ; '  a  boy  speak- 
ing of  a  sister  calls  her  Kaikuwahine,  while  a  sister  calls 
a  brother,   whether  older    or  younger,  '  Eai-kuaana.' 
They  also  recognise  some  relationships  for  which  we 
have  no  special  terms ;  thus,  an  adopted  son  is  ^  Hunai ;' 
the  parents  of  a  son-in-law,   or  daughter-in-law,   are 

*  Pulicna ; '  a  man  addresses  his  brother-in-law,  and  a 
woman  her  sister-law,  as  '  Punaloa  ; '    lastly,  the   word 

*  Kolai '  has  no  corresponding  term  in  l^ln^rlisli. 

M  2 


1G4  THE  HAWAITAN  SYSTEM. 

It  will  be  observed  that  these  relationships  are  con- 
ceived in  a  manner  entirely  unlike  ours  ;  we  make  no 
difference  between  an  elder  brother  and  a  younger 
brother,  nor  does  the  term  used  depend  on  the  sex  of 
the  speaker.  The  contrast  between  the  two  systems  is, 
however,  much  more  striking  when  we  come  to  con- 
sider the  deficiencies  of  the  Hawaiian  system,  as  indi- 
cated in  the  nomenclature.  Thus,  there  is  no  word  for 
cousin,  none  for  uncle  or  aunt,  nephew  or  niece,  son  or 
daughter ;  nay,  while  there  is  a  word  indicating  parent, 
there  is  said  to  be  none  for  father  or  even  for  mother. 

The  principal  features  of  this  remarkable  system, 
so  elaborate,  yet  so  rude,  are  indicated  in  the  second 
column  of  Table  I.      I  have  already  mentioned  that 
there  is  no  word  for  father  or  mother  ;  for  the  latter 
they  say  '  parent  female,'  for  the  former,  *  parent  male;' 
but  the  term  '  parent  male  '  is  not  confined  to  the  true 
parent,  but  is  applied  equally  to  the  father's  brotixer 
and  mother's  brother  ;  while  the  term  *  parent  female ' 
denotes  also  father's  sister  and  mother's  sister.     Thus, 
nnclcships  and  auntships  are  ignored,  and  a  child  may 
Htivc  several  fathers  and  several  mothers.     In  the  suc- 
ceeding generation,  as  a  man  calls  his  brother's  and 
sister's  children  his  children,  so  do  they  regard  him  aa 
their  father.  Again,  as  a  mother's  brother  and  a  father  s 
brother  are  termed  '  parents  male,'  a  mother's  sister  and 
father's  sister,  '  parents  female,'  their  sons  are  regarded 
as  brothers,  and  their  daughters  as  sisters.     Again,  t 
man  calls  the  children  of  these  constructive  brothers 
and  sisters,  equally  with  those  of  true  brothers  and 
sisters,   his  children  ;    and  their   children,   his  grand- 
children. 


THE  HAWAIIAN  SYSTEM.  1G5 

The  term  *  parent  male/  then,  denotes  not  only  a 
man's  father, 

but  also  his  father's  brother 

and  mother's  brother, 

while   the    term   *  parent  female'   in   the   same   way 
denotes  not  only  a  man's  mother, 

but  also  his  mother's  sister 

and  father's  sister. 

There  are,  in  fact,  six  classes  of  parents:  tliree  on  the 
male  side,  and  three  on  the  female. 

The  term,  my  elder  brother,  or  younger  brother,  as 
the  case  may  be,^  stands  also  for  my 

Mother's  brother's  son, 
Mother's  sister's  son. 
Father's  brother's  son. 
Father's  sister's  son, 
while  their  children,  again,  are  all  my  grandchildren. 
Here   there    is    a   succession    of  generations,  but    no 
family.     We  find  here  no  true  fathers   and  mothers, 
ancles  or  aunts,  nephews  or  nieces,  but  only 

Grandparents, 
Parents, 

Brothers  and  sisters, 
Children,  and 
Grandchildren. 
This  nomenclature  is  actually  in  use,  and,  so  far  from 
having  become  obsolete,  being  in  Feejee  combined  with 
inheritance  through  females,  and  the  custom  of  imme- 


'  Among  the  AustraliAiis,  near  for  brother  and  sibter  always  involve 

Sydney,  *  brothers  and  siaters  apeak  the  distinction  of  elder  or  youn^^cr.* 

of  one  another  by  UUca  that  indicate  — Kidley,  Jour.   Anthr,  lubi,,  ^ol« 

relatiTo  »g^ ;  that  ia,  their  words  xxvi.  p.  20(3, 


166  THE  HAWAIIAN  ST8TBM. 

diate  inheritance,  gives  a  nephew  the  right  to  take  \m 
mother's   brother's  property  :    a  right  which  Ib  fre- 
quently exercised,  and  never  questioned,  although  ap- 
parently   moderated  by  custom.     It  will  very  likely 
be  said  that  though  the  word  ^  son,'  for  instance,  is  used 
to   include  many  who  are  really  not  sons,  it  by  no 
means    follows  that  a  man  should  regard  lumself  as 
equally  related  to  all  his  so-called  *  sons.'     And  this 
is  true,  but  not  in  the  manner  which  might  have  been 
a  priori  expected.     For,  as  many  among  the  lower  mxxi 
of  men  have  the  system  of  inheritance  through  females, 
it  follows  that  they  consider  their  sister's  children  to  be  in 
reality  more  nearly  related  to  them,  not  only  than  their 
brother's  children,   but  even    than    their  very   own 
children.     Hence  we  see  that  these  terms,  son,  father, 
mother,  &c.,  which  to  us  imply  relationship,  have  not 
strictly,  in  all  cases,  this  significance,  but  rather  imply 
the  relative  position  in  the  tribe. 

Additional  evidence  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  re- 
strictions on  marriage  which  follow  the  tribe,  and  not 
the  terms.  Thus  the  customs  of  a  tribe  may,  and  con- 
stantly do,  forbid  marriage  with  one  set  of  constructive 
sisters  or  brothers,  but  not  with  another. 

The  system  sho^\Ti  in  column  2  is  not  apparently 
confined  to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  but  occurs  also  in 
other  islands  of  the  Pacific.  Thus,  the  KingsmiU 
system,  as  shown  in  column  H^  is  essentially  similar, 
though  they  have  made  one  step  in  advance,  having 
(Icvisod  words  for  fatlier  and  motlier.  Still,  however, 
the  sumo  term  is  apiJicd  to  a  father's  brother  and  a 
mother's  brother  as  to  a  father;  and  to  a  father's  sister 
and  a  mother's  sister  as  to  a  mother:    consequently, 


AMEBIOAN  SYSTEMS.  167 

first  cousins  are  still  called  brothers  and  sisters,  and 
■      thdr  children  and  grandchildren  are  called  children 
and  grandchildren. 

The  habit«  of  the  South  Sea  Islanders,  the  entire 
ibwnce  of  privacy  in  their  houses,  their  objection  to 
sociable  meals,  and  other  points  in  their  mode  of  life, 
have  probably  favoured  tlie  survival  of  this  very  rude 
system,  which  is  by  no  means  in  accordance  with  their 
present  social  and  family  relations,  but  hidicates  a  time 
when  these  were  less  developed  than  at  present.  We 
bow  as  yet  no  other  part  of  the  world  where  the 
nomenclature  of  relationships  is  so  primitive. 

Yet  a  near  approach  is  made  by  the  system  of  the 
Tvro-Mountain  Iroquois,  which  is,  perhaps,  the  lowest 
jet  observed  in  America.     In  this  tribe   a  brother's 
children  are  still  regarded  as  sons,  and  a  woman  calls 
her  sister's  children  her  sons;  a  man,  however,  does 
not  regard  his  sister's  children  as  his  children,  but  dis- 
tingaishes  them  by  a  special  term;   they  become  his 
nephews.     This  distinction  between  relationships,  which 
we  regard  as  identical,  has  its  basis  in,  and  is  in  accord- 
ance with,  American  marriage  customs.    Unfortunately, 
I  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  whether  these  rules 
prevail  among  the  tribe  in  question,  but  they  are  so 
general  among  the  Indians  of  North  America  that  in  all 
probability  it  is  the  case.     One  of  these  customs  is  that 
if  a  man  marries  a  girl  who  has  younger  sisters,  he 
thereby  acquires  a  right  to  those  younger  sisters  as 
they  successively  arrive  at  maturity.^      This  right  is 
widely  recognised,  and  frequently  acted  upon.     The 


^  Archaool.  Amer.i  vol  ii.  p.  109, 


168     IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  MOTHSB'S  BBOTBEB 


first  wife  makes  no  objection,  for  the  work  which  fell 
heavily  on  her  is  divided  with  another,  and  it  is  easy  to 
see  that,  when  polygamy  prevails,  it  would  be  uncom- 
plimentary to  refuse  a  wife  who  legally  belonged  to  toil 
Hence  a  woman  regards  her  sister's  sons  as  her  sons; 
they  may  be,  in  fact,  the  sons  of  her  husband :  any 
other  hypothesis  is  uncomplimentary  to  the  sister. 
Throughout  the  North  American  races,  therefore,  we 
shall  find  that  a  woman  calls  her  sister's  children  her 
children  ;  in  no  case  does  she  term  them  nephews  or 
nieces,  though  in  some  few  tribes  she  distinguishei 
them  from  her  own  children  by  calling  them  step- 
children. 

Another  general  rule  in  America,  as  elsewhere,  ii 
that  no  one  may  marry  within  his  own  clan  or  family. 
It  has  been  shown  in  the  pre\'ious  chapter  that  this  rule 
is  not  only  general  in  North  America,  but  widely  previ- 
lent  elsewhere.     The  result  is,  that  as  a  woman  and  her 
brother  belong  to   one  family,  her  husband  must  he 
chosen  from  another.     Hence  while   a  man's  father*! 
brother  and  sister  belong  to  his  clan,  and  his  mothers 
sister,  being  one  of  his  father's  wives,  is  a  member  of 
the  family — one  of  the  fire-circle,  if  1  may  so  say— the 
mother's    brother   is  necessarily  neither  a  member  of 
the  fire- circle  nor  even  of  the  clan.     Hence,  whiles 
father's  sister  and  mother's  sister  are  called  mother, 
and  a  father's  brother  father,  in  most  of  the   Kedskin 
tribes  the  marriage  rules  exclude  the  mother's  brother, 
who  is  accordingly  distinguished  by  a  special  tenn^  and 
in  fact  is  recognised  as  uncle.     Thus  we  can  understand 
how  it  is  that  of  the  six  classes  of  i)arents  njcntioiicd 
above,  the  mother's  brother  is  the  first  to  be   distin- 


m  TEE  FAMILY  SYSTEM.  169 

guished  from  the  rest  by  a  special  name.  It  will,  how- 
ever, be  seen  by  the  table  that  among  the  Two-Mountain 
Iroquois  a  mother's  brother's  son  is  called  brother,  his 
grandson  son,  and  so  on.  This  shows  that  he  also  was 
once  called  '  father/  as  in  Polynesia,  for  in  no  other  man- 
ner can  such  a  system  of  nomenclature  be  accounted 
for.  All  the  other  relationships,  as  given  in  the  table, 
are,  it  will  be  seen,  identical  with  those  recognised  in 
the  Hawaiian  and  Kingsmill  system.  Thus,  in  two  re- 
spects only,  and  two,  moreover,  which  can  be  satisfac- 
torily explained  by  their  marriage  regulations,  do  the 
Two-Mountain  Iroquois  differ  from  the  Pacific  system. 
It  is  tnie  that  these  two  points  of  difference  involve 
some  others  not  shown  in  the  table.  Thus,  while  a 
woman's  father's  sister's  daughter's  son  is  her  son,  a 
nian's  father's  sister's  daughter's  son  is  his  nephew, 
because  his  father's  sister's  daughter  is  his  sister,  and 
Ws  sister's  son,  as  already  explained,  is  his  nephew, 
^t  should  also  be  added  that  the  Two-Mountain  Iro- 
quois show  an  advance,  as  compared  with  the  Ha- 
^aiian  system,  in  the  terms  relating  to  relationships  by 
^arriao:e. 

The  Micmac  system,  as  shown  in  column  5,  is  in 

%ee  points  an  advance  on  that  of  the  Two-Mountain 

"'^oquois.     Not  only  does  a  man  call  his  sister's  son  his 

^ephew,  but  a  woman  applies  the  same  term  to  her 

'^i'other's   son.     Thus,  men  term  their   brother's  sons 

sons,'  and  their  sister's  sons  '  nephews  ; '  while  women, 

^n  the  contrarj',  call  their  brother's  sons  '  nephews,' 

^nd  their  sister's  sons  '  sons  ; '  obviously  because  there 

Avas  a  time  when,  though  brothers  and  sisters  could  not 

marry,  brothers  might  have  their  wives  in  common, 


170  TEE  MIOMAO  SYSTEM. 

while  sisters,  as  we  know,  habitually  married  the 
man.  It  is  remarkable  also  that  a  father's  brothe 
a  mother's  sister  are  also  distinguished  &om  the 
father  and  mother.  In  this  respect  the  Micmac  s; 
is  superior  to  that  prevailing  in  most  other  Re 
races.  For  the  same  reason,  not  only  is  a  mo 
brother  termed  an  uncle,  but  the  father's  sister 
longer  called  a  mother,  being  distinguished  by  a  s 
term,  and  thus  becomes  an  aunt.  The  social  hal 
the  Redskins,  which  have  already  been  briefly  al 
to,  sufficiently  explain  why  the  father's  sister  is 
distinguished,  wliile  the  father's  brother  and  mo 
sister  are  still  called  respectively  father  and  m< 
Moreover,  as  we  found  among  the  Two-Mountaii 
quois  that  although  the  mother's  brother  is  recog 
as  an  uncle,  his  son  is  still  called  brother,  thus  poi 
back  to  a  time  when  the  father's  brother  was  still  < 
fatlicr ;  so  here  we  see  that  though  the  father's  bu 
called  amit,  her  son  is  still  regarded  as  a  brc 
indicating  the  existence  of  a  time  when,  among  the 
macs,  as  among  the  Two-Mountain  Iroquois,  a  fa 
sister  was  termed  a  mother.  It  follows  as  a  conseq 
that,  as  a  father's  brother's  son,  a  mother's  brc 
son,  a  father's  sister's  son,  and  a  mother's  sister' 
are  considered  to  be  brothers,  their  children  are  t( 
sons  by  the  males  ;  but  as  a  woman  calls  her  brc 
son  a  nephew,  so  she  applies  the  same  term  to  the 
of  the  so-called  brothers. 

If  the  system  of  relationship  be  subject  to  gi 
growth,  and  approach  step  by  step  towards  perfecti< 
should  naturally  expect  that,  from  differences  of  ! 
and  customs,  the  various  advances  would  not  a 


BUBME8B  AND  JAPANESE  SYSTEMS.  171 

all  races  follow  one  another  in  precisely  the  same  order. 
Of  this  the  Micmacs  and  Wyandots  afford  us  an  illus- 
tration. While  the  latter  have,  on  the  whole,  made  most 
F  progress,  the  former  are  in  advance  on  one  point;  for 
though  the  Micmacs  have  distinguished  a  father's 
brother  from  a  father,  he  is  among  the  Wyandots  still 
termed  a  father ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  Wyandots  call 
a  mother's  brother's  son  a  cousin,  while  among  the  Mic- 
macs he  is  still  termed  a  brother. 

Here  we  may  conveniently  consider  two  Asiatic 
nations — ^the  Burmese  and  the  Japanese — which,  though 
on  the  whole  considerably  more  advanced  in  civilisation 
than  any  of  the  foregoing  races,  yet  appear  to  be  singu- 
larly backward  in  their  systems  of  family  nomenclature. 
I  will  commence  with  the  Burmese.   A  mother's  brother 
is  called  either  father  (great  or  little)  or  uncle ;  his  son 
is  r^rded  as  a  brother  ;  his  grandson  as  a  nephew  ; 
bis  great-grandson  as  a  grandson.     A  father's  sister  is 
fin  aunt ;   but  her  son  is  a  brother,  her  grandson  is  a 
^n,  and  her  great-grandson  a  grandson.     A  father's 
brother  is  still  a  father  (great  or  little)  ;  his  son  is  a 
'^^other ;  his  grandson  a  nephew  ;  and  his  great-grand- 
^^n  a  grandson.      A  mother's  sister  is  a  mother  (great 
^^  little)  ;  her  son  is  a  brother ;  her  grandson  a  nephew ; 
^lul  her  great-grandson   a  grandson.      Grandfathers' 
■brothers  and  sisters  are  grandfathers  and  grandmothers. 
lirothers'  and  sisters'  sons  and  daughters  are  recognised 
Us  nephews  and  nieces,  whether  the  speaker  is  a  male  or 
female ;   but  their  children  again  are  still  classed  as 
grandchildren. 

Among  the  Japanese  a  mother's  brother  is  called  a 
*  second  little  father  ; '  a  father's  sister  a  '  little  mother ' 


172  THE  WYANDOT  SYSTEM. 

or  '  aunt ; '  a  father's  brother  a '  little  father '  or  '  uncle/ 
and  a  mother's  sister  a  *  little  mother '  or  *  aunt.'    Tfe 
other  relationships  shoAvn  in  the  table   are  the  same 
as  among  the  Burmese. 

The  Wyandots,  descendants  of  the  ancient  Huron?, 
are  illustrated  in  the  eighth  column.     Their  system  is 
somewhat  more  advanced  than  that  of  the  Micmac?. 
While,  among  the  latter,  a  mother's  brother's  son,  and 
a  father's  sister's  son,  are  called  brothers,  among  the 
Wyandots  they  are  recognised  as  cousins.  The  children 
of  tliese  cousins,  however,  are  still  called  sons  by  male*, 
thus  reminding  us  that  there  was  a  time  when  these 
cousins  were   still   regarded   as  brothers.      A  second 
mark  of  progress  is,  that  women  regard  their  mother^s 
brother's  grandsons  as  nephews,  and  not  as  sons,  though 
the  great-grandsons  of  uncles  and  aunts  are  still,  in  all 
cases,  termed  grandsons. 

I  crave  particular  attention  to  this  system,  which 
may  be  regarded  as  the  typical  system  of  the  Redskins,* 
although,  as  we  have  seen,  some  tribes  have  a  ruder 
nomenclature,  and  we  shall  presently  allude  to  others 
which  are  rather  more  advanced.  A  mother's  brother 
is  termed  uncle  ;  his  son  is  a  cousin  ;  liis  grandson  is 
termed  nephew  when  a  woman  is  speaking,  son  in  the 
case  of  a  male.  In  either  case,  his  grandson  is  termed 
grandson.  A  father's  sister  is  an  aunt,  and  her  son  a 
cousin  ;  but  her  grandson  and  great-grandson  arc  termed, 
respectively,  son  and  grandson,  thus  reminding  us  that 


*  The  IVnivinn  system  appears,  btn-n    very   ^iinilar,  in   Fomo  of  it 

from     lh<»    vocabularies     ^iven     in  nu»8t    e.vMiJlial    fiuliin-.'*,  to  iLnt  ot 

Mr.  Clemeuts  Markhanrs   Quicliua  iLo  AVyainli>ti«. 
Grammar  and   Dictionary,  to  Lave 


THE  TAMIL  AND  FEEJEEAN  SYSTEMS.     '     173 

there  was  a  time  when  a  father's  sister  was  regarded 
as  a  mother.  A  father's  brother  is  called  father ;  his 
son  brother;  his  grandson,  son;  and  his  great-grandson, 
grandson. 

A  mother's  sister  is  a  mother,  her  son  is  a  brother, 
her  grandson  is  called  nephew  by  a  female,  son  by  a 
male;  her  great-grandson  is,  in  either  case,  called 
grandson.  A  grandfather's  brother  and  sister  are  called 
grandfather  and  grandmother  respectively. 

A  brother's  son  is  called  son  by  a  male,  and  nephew 
by  a  female,  while  a  sister's  son  is  called  nephew  by  a 
male,  and  son  by  a  female,  the  reasons  for  which  have 
been  already  explained. 

Lastly,  brothers'  son's  sons  and  daughters,  sisters' 
son's  sons  and  daughters,  are  all  called  grandsons  and 
granddaughters.  Thus  we  see  that  in  every  case  the 
third  generation  returns  to  the  direct  line. 

The  two  following  columns  represent  the  Tamil  and 
Feejeean  system,  with  which  also  that  of  the  Tonga 
Islands  very  closely  agrees.  I  have  already  called  at- 
tention to  this,  and  given  my  reasons  for  being  unable 
to  adopt  the  explanation  suggested  by  Mr.  Morgan. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  only  differences  shown 

Jn  the  table  between  the  system  of  these  races  and  that 

of  the  Wyandots,  are,  firstly,  that  the  mother's  brother's 

grandson  is  regarded  among  the  Wyandots  as  a  nephew 

by  males,  and  us  a  son  by  females  ;  while  in  the  Tamil 

«lnd  Feejeean  system  the  reverse  is  said  to  be  the  case, 

and  he  is  termed  son  by  males,  and  nephew  by  females. 

Secondly,  that  the  father's  sister's  grandson  is  regarded 

as  a  son  among  the  Wyandots,  while  in  the  TamU  and 

Feejeean  system   he  is,   when   an    uncle   is   speaking. 


174  REMABKABLE  TERMS  lY  USE. 

recognised  as  a  nephew.  The  latter  difference  merely 
indicates  that  the  Tamil  and  Fecjeean  systems  are 
slightly  more  advanced  than  the  Wyandot.  The  other 
difference  is  more  difficult  to  understand. 

But  though  the  Redskin,  Tamil,  and  Feejeean  sys- 
tems, differing  as  they  do  from  ours  in  many  ways, 
which  at  first   seem   altogether  arbitrary   and  unac- 
countable, agree  so  remarkably  with  one  another,  w 
find,  also,  in  some  cases,  remarkable  differences  among 
the  Redskin  races  themselves.     These  differences  affect 
principally  the  lines  of  the  mother's  brother  and  father's 
sister.     This  is  natural.     They  are  the  first  to  be  dis- 
tinguished from  true  parents,  and   new  means  have, 
therefore,  to  be  adopted  to  distinguish  the  relationsBips 
thus  recognised.     In  several  cases  other  old  terms  were 
tried,  with  very  comical  results.     These  modes  of  over- 
coming the  difficulty  were  so  unsatisfactory,  that,  by 
the  time  a  fiither's  sister's  son   was  recognised  as  a 
cousin,  the   necessity  for  the   creation   of  new   terms 
seems  to  have  been  generally  felt. 

Table  II.  shows,  as  regards  fourteen  tribes,  the  result 
of  the  attempt  to  distinguisli  these  relationships. 
Taking,  for  instance,  the  line  which  gives  the  terms 
in  use  for  a  mother's  brother's  grandson,  we  find  the 
following,  viz.  son,  stepbrother,  grandson,  and  grand- 
child, stepson,  and  uncle  ;  in  the  case  of  a  father's 
sister's  grandson  (male  speaking),  we  have  grandchild, 
son,  stepson,  brother,  and  fatlicr ;  when  a  female  is 
speaking,  grandcliild,  son,  n(^])hcw,  brother,  and  fatlier. 
Thus,  for  tliis  single  relationship  we  find  six  terms  in 
use,  an<l  a  difference  of  thn»e  generations,  viz.,  from 
grandfather  to  son.     At   first  tlie   use  of  sucli  tenns 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  TERMS.  175 

seems  altogether  arbitrary,  but  a  further  examination 
will  show  that  this  is  by  no  means  the  case. 

Column  2  gives  the  system  of  the  Redknives,  one  of 
the  most  backward  tribes  on  the  American  continent  as 
regards  their  nomenclature  of  relationships.  Here, 
though  a  mother's  brother  and  a  father's  sister  are, 
respectively,  uncle  and  aunt,  their  children  are  regarded 
as  brothers,  their  grandchildren  as  sons,  and  their 
great-grandchildren  as  grandsons.  The  Munsee  system 
shows  a  slight  advance.  Here,  though  the  women  call 
their  sister's  sons  their  sons,  the  males,  on  the  contrary, 
term  them  nephews,  and,  consequently,  apply  the  same 
term  to  their  mother's  brother's  daughter's  son,  and 
their  father's  sister's  daughter's  son ;  because,  as  in  the 
preceding  case,  mother's  brother's  daughters,  and  father's 
sister's  daughters,  are  termed  sisters.  The  Micmacs 
(column  3)  show  another  step  in  advance.  Here,  not 
only  does  a  man  call  his  sister's  son  nephew,  but,  in  ad- 
dition, a  woman  applies  the  same  term  to  her  brother's 
son's ;  consequently,  not  only  a  mother's  brother's 
daughter's  sons,  if  a  male  is  speaking,  but  a  mother's 
brother's  son's  son,  if  a  female  is  speaking,  and  tlic 
corresponding  relations,  on  the  side  of  the  father's 
sister,  are  termed  nephews. 

Among  the  Delawares  a  mother's  brother's  son,  and 
father's  sister's  son,  are  distinguished  from  true  brothers 
by  a  term  corresponding  to  '  stepbrother.'  They  appear 
to  have  also  felt  the  necessity  of  distinguishing  a  step- 
brother's son  from  a  true  son  ;  but,  having  no  special 
term,  they  retain  the  same  word,  thus  calling  a  step- 
brother's son  a  stepbrother.  This  princii)le,  as  we  shall 
see,  is  followed  by  several  other  tribes,  and  has  produced 


176  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  TERMS. 

the  most  striking  inconsistencies  shown  in  the  table. 
We  find  it  again  among  the  Crows,  where  a  father's 
sister  is  called  mother,  her  daughter  again,  mother ;  but 
as  her  son  cannot  of  course  be  a  mother,  he  is  called 
'  father/    The  same  system  is  followed  by  the  Pawnees, 
as  shown  in  columns  7  and  8 ;  and  the  Grand  Pawnees 
carry  it  a   generation   lower,  and    call    their    father's 
sister's  grandson  on  the  male  side  *  father ; '  a  father  s 
sister's   daughter's   son  is,  however,  called  a  brother. 
Among    the   Cherokees   we   find  this  principle  most 
thoroughly  carried  out,  and  a  father's  sister's  grandson 
is  also  called  a  father.  This  case  is  the  more  interesting, 
because  the  circumstance  which  produced  the  system  is 
no  longer  in  existence ;  for,  as  will  be  seen,  a  fathered 
sister  is  called  an  aunt.     It  is  not  at  first  obvious  that 
a  father's  sister  being  called  a  mother  would  account 
for  her  son  being  called  a  father;   but,  with  the  Croir 
and  Pawnee  systems  before  us,  Ave  see  that  the  Chero- 
kees could  not  call  their  father's  sister's  sons  ^  fathers/ 
unless  there  had  been  a  time  when  a  father's  sister  was 
regarded  as  a  mother. 

The  Hare  Indians  supply  us  with  a  case  in  which 
motlier's  brothers  and  father's  ^^iste^s  boincc  distin«nusheJ 
from  fathers  and  mothers,  their  children  are  no  longer 
termed  brotliers,  l)ut  are  distinguished  as  cousins;  wliile 
their  grandchildren  and  great-grandchildren,  on  the 
contrary,  are  still  termed  sons  and  grandsons. 

So  far  as  the  relationships  shown  in  the  table  arc 
concerned,  the  system  of  the  Oniahas,  and  of  the  Sawks 
and  Foxus,  is  identical.  A  mother's  brother  is  an 
uncle,  and,  for  the  reason  already  i)ointed  out,  in  the 
case  of  the  Delawares,  his  sons  and  son's  sons,  and  even 
son's   gnuidsons,    are    also    termed    grandsons.      His 


SYSTEM  OF  THE  0NEIDA8.     OTAWAS.  177 

daughter's  sons,  on  the  contrary,  retain  the  old  name 
of  brother.  A  father's  sister  is  an  aunt,  her  children 
&re  nephews,  and  the  descendants  of  these  nephews  are 
grandchildren. 

Among  the  Oneidas,  a  father's  brother  is  an  uncle, 
and  his  son  is  a  cousin;  his  son's  sons,  however,  are 
Mill  sons.  His  daughter's  son  is  a  son,  when  a  female  is 
speaking ;  but,  for  the  reason  already  explained  in  the 
case  of  the  Munsees,  males  term  them  nephews.  The 
relationships  connected  with  a  father's  sister  are  dealt 
nith  in  a  similar  manner,  except  that  a  father's  sister  is 
still  called  mother. 

The  Otawa  system  resembles  the  Micmac,  and  is 
£}rmed  on  the  same  plan,  being,  however,  somewhat 
more  advanced,  inasmuch  as  the  children  of  uncles  and 
aunts  are  recognised  as  cousins,  and  a  man  calls  his 
cousin's  son,  not  his  son,  but  his  stepson.  The  Ojibwa 
system  is  the  same,,  except  that  a  woman  also  calls  her 
mother's  brDther's  daughter's  son,  and  father's  sister's 
daughter's  son,  her  stepson,  instead  of  her  son.  In 
some  of  the  relationships  by  marriage  the  same  causes 
have  led  to  even  more  striking  differences.  Thus,  a 
woman  generally  calls  her  father's  sister's  daughter's 
husband  her  brother-in-law;  but  among  the  Missouri 
and  Mississippi  nations,  her  son-in-law  ;  among  the 
Minnitarees,  the  Crows,  and  some  of  the  Chocta  clans, 
her  father;  among  the  Cherokees,  her  stepparent;  the 
Republican  Pawnees,  and  some  of  the  Choctas,  her 
grandfather;  and  among  the  Tukuthes,  her  grandson! 

Having  thus  pointed  out  the  curious  results  to 
which  some  of  the  lower  races  have  been  led  in  their 
attempts  tx)  distinguish  relationships,  and  endeavoured 

N 


178  TEE  KAFFIR  SYSTEM. 

to  explain  those  shown  in  Table  11.,  I  will  now  return 
to  the  main  argument. 

The  Kaffir  (Amazulu)  system  is  given  in  column 
12,    Table  I.     Here,  for  the  first  time,  we  find  the 
father's  brother  regarded  as  an  uncle,  and  the  mother's 
sister   as   an  aunt.     In  other   respects,   however,  the 
system  is  not  more  advanced  than  the  Tamil,  Feejeean, 
or  W^'yandot.     The  mother's  brother  is  called  uncle ;  * 
his  son,  cousin ;  his  grandson,  son ;  and  his  great-graud- 
son,  grandchild.     A  father's  sister,  quaintly  enough,  is 
called  father,  the  Kaffir  word  for  which,  vbaba,  closely 
resembles  ours.     His  son,  however,  is  called  brother; 
his  grandson,    accordingly,    son ;    his   great-grandson, 
grandchild.     A  father's  brother,  as  already  mentioned, 
is  uncle;  but,  as  before,  his  son  is  called  brother;  his 
grandson,  son ;  and  his  great-grandson,  grandson.     So, 
also,  a  mother's   sister  is  an  aunt,  but   her   son  is  a 
brother  ;  her  grandson,  a  son ;  and  her  great-grandson, 
a  grandson.     As  in   all   the   preceding   cases,  grand- 
father's  brothers   and   sisters   are   considered    a?,   re- 
spectively, grandfathers  and  grandmothers.     Brothers' 
sons  and  sisters'  sons  are  called  sons,  and,  lastly,  their 
sons  acrain  are  fifrandsons. 

l^xccpting  in  the  case  of  n(»phews,  this  system, 
therefore,  closely  resembles  the  Tamil,  Fivjeean,  and 
Wyandot ;  the  other  princii)al  difFerences  being,  oddly 
enough,  a  more  correct  nomenclature  of  uncles  and 
aunts. 

Column  1.*},  Table  T.,^  exhibits  the  nomenclature  in 
use  among  the  Mohogans,  whose  name  signifies  *sca- 

'  It  is,  bowever,  H^fnilirniit  that  be  cnlla  his  >Ljitor*ii  Hi>ni^  'sons,*  uhl 
not  ncphewp. 


MOHEOANS.    CBEE8.    CHIPPEWAS.  179 

side  people,'  from  their  geographical  position  on  the 
Hudson  and  the  Connecticut.  They  belong  to  the 
great  Algonkin  stock.  Here,  for  the  first  time,  a  dis- 
tinction is  introduced  between  a  father  and  a  father's 
brother.  The  latter,  however,  is  not  recognised  as  an 
ancle  ;  that  is  to  say,  a  father's  brother  and  a  mother's 
brother  are  not  regarded  as  equivalent  relationships, 
but  the  former  is  termed  stepfather.  This  distinguish- 
ing prefix  is  the  characteristic  feature  ;  and,  as  will  be 
seen,  we  find  the  terms,  stepmother,  stepbrother,  and 
stepchild  (to  the  exclusion  of  cousin),  as  natural  con- 
sequences of  the  stepfathership.  Still,  the  mother's 
sister  remains  a  mother,  and  her  son  a  brother ;  and  the 
derivation  of  this  system  from  one  similar  to  those 
already  considered  is,  moreover,  indicated  by  the  fact 
that  the  members  of  the  third  generation  are  still 
r^rded  as  grandchildren. 

The  Crees  and  Ojibwas,  or  Chippewas  (of  Lake 
Michigan),  who  also  belong  to  the  great  Algonkin 
stock,  resemble  the  Mohegan  in  the  use,  though  with 
some  minor  differences,  of  the  prefix  '  step-',  a  device 
which  occurs  also  in  a  more  complicated  form  among 
the  Chinese.  In  some  points,  however,  they  are  rather 
more  advanced,  and,  in  fact,  these  tribes  possess  the 
highest  system  of  relationship  yet  recorded  among  the 
Redskins  of  North  America.  A  mother's  brother  is  an 
uncle,  and  his  son  is  a  cousin;  as  regards  his  grandson, 
the  tendency  to  the  use  of  different  terms,  according  as 
the  speaker  is  a  male  or  female,  sliows  itself  in  the  use 
by  the  former  of  the  term  stepson,  where  the  latter  say 
nephew,  as  in  some  of  the  ruder  tribes.  In  both  cases, 
mothers'  brothers*  great  grandchildren  are  called  grand- 

N  2 


1^>  SUMMARY  OF  BEDSKIX  SYSTEMS. 

chilJreii-  A  father's  sister  is  an  aunt,  and  the  nomen- 
clanire  with  reference  to  her  descendants  is  the  same  as 
in  the  case  of  the  mother's  brother.  A  father's  brother 
is  a  stepbrother ;  his  son  is  still  called  a  brother  by 
males  amz^ng  the  Crees,  but  is  called  stepson  by  the 
Ojibwas ;  the  other  relationships  in  this  line  being  the 
same  as  in  the  case  of  the  mother's  brother  and  fathers 
sister. 

No  Redskin  regards  his  mother's  sister  as  an  aunt, 
but  the  Crees  and  Ojibwas  distinguish  her  from  a  true 
mother  by  the  term  stepmother,  and  her  descendants 
arc  addressed  by  the  same  terms  as  those  of  the  father's 
brother.  The  grandfather's  brothers  and  sisters  are 
callevl  grandfathers  and  grandmothers.  As  before, 
brothers'  sons«  when  a  female  is  speaking,  and  sisters' 
scms.  when  a  male  is  speaking,  are  called  nephews; 
while  brothers'  sons,  when  a  male  is  speaking,  and 
sisters'  sons,  when  a  female  is  speaking,  are  no  longer 
roiran.k\l  as  true  sons,  but  are  distinguished  as  ste{)sons. 
The  gnmdchildren  of  these  nephews  and  stepsons  are, 
however,  all  termed  grandchildren. 

If,  now,  we  compare  this  system  with  that  of  the 
Two-]Mountain  Iroquois.  Ave  find  that  out  of  twenty- 
eight  relationships  given  in  the  table,  only  ten  have 
remamed  the  same.  Of  these,  two  arc  indicative  of 
pi'ogress  maile  by  the  Two-Mountain  Iroquois,  namely, 
the  term  for  mother's  brother  and  sister's  son ;  the  other 
eight  arc  marks  of  imperfection  still  remaining  in  the 
(^jibwa  nonieuchiture  :  points,  moreover,  not  by  any 
means  characteristic  of  American  races,  but  conunon, 
also,  as  Ave  have  seen,  to  the  Hawaiian,  Kingsmill, 
IJurnicse,    Japanese,    Tongsm,     Feejeean,    Katiir,   and 


BINDOO  SYSTEMS.  181 

Tamil  systems;  as  we  shall  also  find,  to  the  Hindi, 
Karen,  and  Esquimaux;  in  fact,  to  almost  all,  if  not  all 
barbarous  peoples,  and  to  some  of  the  most  advanced 
races. 

Column  14  (Table  I.)  shows  the  system  of  nomen- 
dature  as  it  exists  in  Hindi,  and  it  may  be  added  that 
the  Bengali,  Marathi,  and  Gujerathi  are  essentially  the 
same,  although  the  words  differ.  All  these  languages 
are  said  to  be  Sanskrit  as  regards  their  words  ;  aborigi- 
nal, on  the  contrary,  in  their  grammar.  Hindi  contains 
90%  of  Sanskrit  words,  Guzerathi  as  much  as  95%. 
^ith  three  or  four  exceptions,  it  appears  that  the  terms 
for  relationships  may  be  all  of  Sanskrit  origin. 

Here,  for  the  first  time,  we  find  that  a  brother's  son 
and  a  sister's  son  are  termed  nephews,    whether  the 
speaker  is  a  male  or  a  female.     Yet  nephews'  children 
^  still  termed  grandchildren.     Again,  for  the   first 
^'nae,  the  mother's  brother,  father's  brother,  mother's 
Ulster,  and  father's  sister  are  regarded  as  equivalent, 
^nd  the  terms  for  their  descendants  are  similar.     The 
'^0  former — i.e.^  mother's  brother  and  father's  brother, 
^l*e  termed  *  uncles  ; '  the  two  latter — i.e.^  mother's  sister 
^iid  father's  sister,  are  called  aunts.     Yet,  as  regards 
'^he  next  generations,  the  system  is  less  advanced  than 
the  Ojibwa,  for  uncles'  sons  and  aunts'  sons  are  termed 
V)rothers ;   their   grandsons,  nephews  ;  and  their  great 
grandsons,  grandsons.     It  should,  however,  be  observed 
that,  in  the  first  three  languages,  viz.  the  Hindi,  Ben- 
gali, and  Marathi,  besides  the  simple  term  'brother,' 
the  terms  'brother  through  paternal  uncle,'   'brother 
through   paternal   aunt,'    '  brother    through    maternal 
uncle,'  and  '  brother  through  maternal  aunt,'  are  also  in 


182  KARENS.    ESQUIMAUX. 

use,  and  are  less  cumbersome  than  our  English  literal 
translation  would  indicate.  The  system,  therefore,  is 
transitional  on  this  point.  Lastly,  a  grandfather's 
brother  is  called  '  grandfather  ; '  a  grand&ther's  sister, 
*  grandmother.' 

The  Karens  are  a  rude,  but  peaceable  and  teachable 
race,  inhabiting  parts  of  Tenasserim,  Burmah,  Siam, 
and  extending  into  the  southern  parts  of  China.  They 
have  been  encroached  upon  and  subjected  by  more 
powerful  races,  and  are  now  divided  into  different 
tribes,  npeaking  distinct  dialects,  of  which  three  are 
given  in  Mr.  Morgan's  tables.  Though  rude  and 
savage  in  their  mode  of  life,  they  are  described  as 
extremely  moral  in  their  social  relations — upraise  which 
seems  to  be  fully  borne  out  by  their  system  of  relation- 
ships, as  sliown  in  column  17,  Table  I. 

Column  18  shows  the  system  of  another  rude 
people,  belonging  to  a  distinct  family  of  the  human 
race,  and  inhabiting  a  distant  and  very  different  part  of 
tlie  world.  I-.ike  the  Karens,  the  Esquimaux  are  a 
rude  people,  but,  like  them,  they  are  a  quiet,  peaceable, 
and  moral  race.  No  doubt,  on  some  points  their  ideas 
differ  from  ours;  their  condition  does  not  admit  of  much 
refinement — of  any  great  advance  in  science  or  art. 
Tlicy  cannot  be  said  to  have  any  religion  worthy  of  the 
name,  yet  there  is  perhaps  no  more  moral  i^eople  on  the 
face  of  the  earth ;  none  among  whom  there  is  less  crime ; 
and  it  is,  perhaps,  not  going  too  far  to  say  that  there  is, 
as  far  as  I  can  judge,  no  race  of  men  which  has  more 
fully  availed  itself  of  its  opportunities. 

It  is  most  remarkable  to  find  these  two  races  of 
men,  so  distinct,  so  distant,  so  dissimilar  in  their  modes 


BEMAEKABLE  SIMILARITIES.  183 

of  life,  without  a  word  in  common,  yet  using  systems 
of  relationship  which,  in  their  essential  features,  are 
identical,  although  by  no  means  in  harmony  with  the 
easting  social  condition:    in  both,   uncles  and  aunts 
are  correctly  recognised,  and  their  children  regarded 
as  cousiQS ;  their  grandchildren,  however,  are  termed 
nephews,  and  the  children  of  these  so-called  nephews 
are  classed,   as   in  all  the  previous   cases,  as  grand- 
children.    Thus,  out  of  the  twenty- eight  relationships 
indicated  in  the  table,  the  Karens  and  Esquimaux  agree 
with  us  in  twelve,  and  differ  in  sixteen.     As  regards 
every  one,  however,,  of  these  sixteen  they  agree  with 
one  another,  while  in  eight  they  follow  the  same  system 
as  every  other  race  which  we  have  been  considering. 

These  facts  cannot  be  the  result  of  chance ;  there  is 
one  way,  and  as  it  seems  to  me,  one  way  only,  of 
accounting  for  them,  and  that  is  by  regarding  them  as 
the  outcome  of  a  progressive  development,  such  as  that 
which  I  have  endeavoured  to  sketch.  An  examination 
of  the  several  cases  will,  I  think,  confirm  this  view. 

The  Karen-Esquimaux  system  is  inconsistent  with 
iteelf  in  tliree  respects,  and  precisely  where  it  differs 
from  ours.  The  children  of  cousins  are  termed  nephews, 
which  they  are  not ;  the  children  of  nephews  are  re- 
garded as  grandchildren,  and  a  grandfather's  brothers 
and  sisters  are  termed,  respectively,  grandfathers  and 
grandmothers. 

The  first  fact,  namely,  that  a  mother's  brother's 
grandsons,  and  a  mother's  sister's  grandsons;  a  father's 
sister's  grandsons,  and  a  father's  brother's  grandsons, 
are  all  termed  '  nephews,'  clearly  points  to  the  existence 
of  a  time  when  a  mother's  brother  and  a  father's  brother 


184^  INDICATIONS  OF  PBOOSESS.      . 

vrcre  regarded  as  fathers,  a  mother's  sister  and  a  fathers 
sister  as  mothers,  and  their  children,  consequently,  as 
brothers.     The  second,  namely,  that  the  great-grand- 
children of  uncles  and  aunts  are  regarded  as  grand- 
children, similarly  points  to  a  time  when  nephews  and 
nieces  were  termed,  and  regarded  as,  sons  and  daughters, 
and   their    children,   consequently,   as    grandchildren. 
Lastly,  why  should  grandfathers   brothers  and  grand- 
father.)' sisters  be  called  grandfathers  and  grandmothers, 
unless  there  was  a  time  when  fathers'  brothers  and  sisters 
were  respectively  called  ^fathers'  and  *  mothers :'  unless 
the  Karens  and  Esquimaux  once  had  a  system  of  rc« 
lationship  similar  to  that  which  still  prevails  among  so 
many  barbarous  tribes,  and  which,  to  all  appearance, 
has  been    gradually  modified?     Hence,   though    the 
Karens  and  Esquimaux  have  now  a  far  more  correct 
system  of  nomenclature  than  that  of  many  other  races, 
we  find,  even  in  this,  clear  traces  of  a  time  when  these 
peoples  had  not  advanced  in  this  respect  beyond  the 
lowest  stage. 

As  already  mentioned,  the  European  nations  follow, 
almost  without  exception,  a  strictly  descriptive  system, 
founded  on  the  marriage  of  single  pairs.  The  principle 
is,  however,  departed  from  in  a  few  very  rare  cases,  and 
in  tliem  we  find  an  approach  to  the  Karen-Esquimaux 
system.  Tlius,  in  Spanish,  a  brother  s  great-grandson 
is  called  '  grandson.'  Again,  in  Bulgarian,  a  brother's 
gmn(ls(m  and  sister  s  grandson  are  called  '  Mai  \*nook 
mi,'  literally  '  little  gi-andson  my.'  A  father's  fathers 
sister  is  termed  a  grandmother,  and  a  father's  fathers 
brother  a  grandfather,  as  is  also  the  case  in  Russian. 
The  French  and  Sanskrit,  alone,   so  far   as    I    know. 


INCOMPLETENESS  OF  SYSTEMS.  185 

among  the  Aryan  languages,  have  special  words  for 
elder  and  younger  brother.  Among  Aryan  races  the 
Romans  and  the  Germans  alone  developed  a  term  for 
cousin,^  and  we,  ourselves,  have,  even  now,  no  word  for 
a  cousin's  son.  The  history  of  the  term  *  nepliew '  is 
also  instructive.  The  word  ^nepos,'  says  Morgan,^ 
among  the  Romans,  as  late  as  the  fourth  century,  was 
applied  to  a  nephew  as  well  as  a  grandson,  although 
both  "avus"  and  "avunculus"  had  come  into  use. 
Eutropius,  in  speaking  of  Octavianus,  calls  him  the 
nephew  of  Casar,  "  Ca^saris  nepos."  (Lib.  vii.  c.  i.) 
Suetonius  speaks  of  him  as  "  sororis  nepos  "  (Cajsar, 
c.  lxxxiii),and  afterwards  ( Octavianus, c.  vii.)  describes 
Csesar  as  his  greater  uncle,  **  major  avunculus,"  in 
which  he  contradicts  himself.  When  "  nepos  *'  Avas 
finally  restricted  to  grandson,  and  thus  became  a 
strict  correlative  of  "  avus,"  the  Latin  language  was 
without  a  term  for  nephew,  whence  the  descriptive 
phrase,  "Fratris  vel  sororis  filius."  In  English, 
*' nephew"  was  applied  to  grandson,  as  well  as 
nephew,  as  late  as  1611,  the  period  of  King  James's 
translation  of  the  Bible.  Niece  is  so  used  by  Shak- 
gpearc  in  his  will,  in  which  he  describes  his  grand- 
daughter, Susannah  Hall,  as  "  my  niece." ' 

So  that  even  among  the  most  advanced  races  we  fiud 
some  lingering  confusion  about  nepliews,  nieces,  and 
grandchildren. 

Thus,  then,  we  have  traced  these  systems  of  relation- 
sliips  from  the  simple  and  rude  nomenclature  of  the 


*  So  that  of  many  nations  it  may  bo  said;  litcrnlly  as  irell  na  (igura- 
tively,  that '  lea  nations  n'ont  pas  de  cousins.' 

*  Loc,  cii.f  p.  35. 


18t>  EXISTING  SYSTEMS  INCOMPATIBLE 

Sandwich  Islanders  up  to  the  far  purer  and  more  correct 
tcrinmology  of  the  Karens  and  Esquimaux.  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show  that  the  systems  indicated  are 
explicable  only  on  the  theory  of  a  gradual  improvement 
and  elevation,  and  are  incompatible  with  degradation; 
that  as  tlie  valves  indicate  the  course  of  the  blooil  in  our 
veins,  so  do  the  terms  applied  to  relationships  point  out 
the  course  of  past  history.  In  the  first  place,  the  moral 
condition  of  tlie  lower  races,  wherever  we  can  ascertain 
it,  is  actually  liigher  than  that  indicated  by  the  phraseo- 
logy in  use;  and,  secondly,  the  systems  themselves  are, 
in  almost  all  cases,  inexplicable,  except  on  the  hypo- 
thesis that  they  were  themselves  preceded  by  still 
ruder  ones. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  case  of  the  Two-Mountain 
Iroquois :  they  call  a  mother's  brother  an  uncle,  but  his 
son  tliey  regard  as  a  brother.  This  is  no  accident,  for 
the  idea  is  carried  out  in  the  other  relationships,  and 
occurs  also  in  other  races.  On  the  theory  of  [)ri^ess 
it  is  (?asily  accounted  for:  if  a  father's  brother  was  pro* 
viously  called  a  father,  his  son  would,  of  course,  l)c  a 
brother;  and  when  the  father's  brother  came  to  bo  dis- 
tiniruished  as  an  uncle,  some  time  would,  no  doubt, 
often  elapj^e  before  the  other  changes,  consequent  on 
this  step,  wouM  be  eftected.  Hut  how  could  such  a 
system  be  accounted  for  on  the  opposite  theory?  How 
could  a  father's  brother's  son  come  to  be  regarded  as  a 
l>rother,  if  a  father's  brother  had  always  been  tenned 
an  uncle?  The  sequence  of  terms  for  the  rt'Iationshi|)S 
connected  with  a  father's  sister,  on  the  two  hyjM)theses 
of  progress  on  the  one  hand,  and  degradation  on  the 
other,  may  Ik*  illustrated  as  in  the  Table  II L  (p.  l{)2). 


WITH  THE  THEORY  OF  DEGBADATION.         187 

In  the  first,  or  lowest  stage,  the  sequence  is  mother, 
brother,  son,  grandson,  as  m  the  Sandwich  and  Two- 
Mountain  Iroquois  system.  In  the  next  stage,  the 
mother's  sister  being  recognised  as  an  aunt,  and  the 
other  relationships  remaining  the  same,  we  have  the 
sequence,  aunt,  brother,  son,  grandson,  as  among  the 
Micmacs.  When  a  brother's  son  becomes  a  nephew, 
we  have  aunt,  brother,  nephew,  grandson,  as  in  the 
Burmese,  Japanese,  and  Hindi  systems.  In  the  next 
stage,  an  aunt's  son  being  distinguished  as  a  cousin,  we 
have  aunt,  cousin,  nephew,  grandson,  as  among  the 
Tamils  and  Feejees.  The  last  two  stages  would  be 
aunt,  cousin,  aunt's  grandson,  grandson ;  and,  lastly, 
aunt,  cousin,  aunt's  grandson,  aunt's  great-grandson. 
Thus,  out  of  these  six  stages,  five  at  least  actually  exist. 

On  the  other  hand,  on  the  theory  of  retrogression, 
we  should  commence  with  the  highest  system ;  namelj", 
aunt,  cousin,  aunt's  grandson,  and  aunt's  great-grandson. 
The  second  stage  would  be,  mother,  cousin,  aunt's  grand- 
son, aunt's  great-grandson.  The  third,  mother,  brother, 
aunt*s  grandson,  aunt's  great-grandson.  The  fourth, 
mother,  brother,  nephew,  aunt's  great-grandson.  The 
fifth,  mother,  brother,  son,  aunt's  great-grandson.  And 
the  last,  mother,  brother,  son,  grandson.  Tims,  it  will 
be  observed  that,  except,  of  course,  the  first  and  hist, 
they  have  not  a  stage  in  common  ;  and,  though  there 
may  be  some  doubt  whether  the  sequence  suggested  on 
the  second  hypothesis  is  the  one  which  would  be  fol- 
lowed, it  cannot  be  maintained  that  we  could  ever  have 
the  systems  which  would  occur  in  the  case  of  progress, 
aa  shown  in  Table  III.,  and  the  first  four  of  which  are 
actually  in  existence. 


1^^  rrrzy-fz  of  pbogeess. 

'^riii-i-r-r.  -ifc  zzx  5«>ii  or  daughter  of  an  uncle, 
:r  izzj'.  i.f  Ttr^iei  2.  :To:ier.  as  in  the  case  of  seven  of 
zzk  Tic-z-r  ri:fer7«-£  1:  hi  ^e  taUe,  we  may  be  sure  that 
rh.K^  TTi^i  :t.:o  ^  '£:22-?  when  that  uncle,  or  aunt,  wm 
tir::!'!'!  i  dtil-fr  :r  n-r^cher:  whenever  a  cousin's  son  is 
•ifiTT^eL  i  ?*:l:.  if  irslr:  ia  5*ven  race?,  we  must  infer, 
z.*:"  -dj  zlsz  zh:-^  c:u^:r.>  were  once  regarded 
J-?  rrrriiierf*  ':a:  :2:i:  rT>L>:hr^^'  son?  were  once  termed 
src-?.  A^iii.  wbrz.  grear-uncles  and  aunts  arc  termed 
zri.z.'iiL'ZKT^  mi  CTir^lmothers — when  great-nephews 
azfi  ni-fC'fs  ±re  rersitil  grandchildren,  as  in  the  case 
oc  ill  rLe  ri:«  tnt^  have  been  considering — ^we  have, 
I  sm:ci:t.  ip:*:*!  r^sis^ra  to  infer  that  those  races  must 
once  Live  hi»l  1  >v5:eni  of  nomenclature  as  rude  as  that 
of  rhe  Hiwa::Ar.s  or  King^mill  Islanders. 

But  it  may  be  asked:  admitting  that  the  seventeen 
races,  iKustrared  in  Table  I.,  are  reallv  advancinc:,  arc 
there  not  oases  of  the  contrarv?     The  answer  is  clear: 
ou:  of  the  133  noes  whose  systems  of  relationship  arc 
m'>re  <  -r  less  ccmpletely  given  by  Mr.  Morgan,  there  is 
not  one  in  which  evidence  of  dejrradarion  is  thus  iiuli- 
catt'd.     To  show  this  clearly  and  concisely,  I  have  pre- 
pared the  following  table  (p.  ISOV  It  will  be  seen  that, 
takins:  merelv  the  relation  of  uncles  and  aunts  with 
reference  to  their  children,  there  are  207  cases  indicntinf; 
progress.     On  the  other  hand,  there  arc  four  cases,  the 
Cayuda,  Onondaga,  Oneida,  and  Mohawks,  among  whom, 
while  a  fathers  sister  is  called  a  mother,  her  son  is 
calhrd  a  cousin.     These  cases,  however,  arc  neutralisetl 
bv  the  fact  that  the  sons  of  these  cousins  are  called 
sons.   We  have,  therefore,  a  very  large  body  of  evidince 
in<licating  progress,  and  collected  among  very  different 


SVIDENCB  OF  PROGRESS. 


I    14 

I  I      I     If    I     If    1      If 

Eg  I  III  I    ■  >  11 

II  ^      4       4       4      4       £ 

^"  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  a  i  i  i  i  i  i  i 
s=       a       "       "       "       "       °i*j 


I     i     i     I     I     I     i     1    ! 
^     ■      I      ■      I      I     t      I    ' 

l"|     I     I     I     I     I     I 

I       I       6,       I       I       I       I       I 

i  *j  o"  d  4  £  '^  £  £  £  £  £  °"  £  £  £ 

-1IO  i-i  •*  ■*  O  -*  OCi- 


J  J         .  .  .  • 

Mil    I  .  I  .  I  /i    I  .  I  ■ 

f  I  I  i  *  1 .1  ■  I  i  .1  i  f  1 .1  5  • 

"ii|9lgJi-£=3=is»«E£eSsSlllS.|l|i;.5  I 

0-»''-=  K-*^-"   a'S^S   S-S''-Z   oi''j3  01^''*   rj   "r*   S  at   •"*   "  t^ 

S-:  -rs-:  -:s-:  -:S.:  -zs.-  -:s.;  .:i-:  -:|-:  -: 

--i    i='i    i''-     •  =  £    |S|    ^aj    |"|    |0|    I 


190  NO  EVIDENCE  OF  DEGRADATION. 

races  of  men,  while  there  appear   to  be  none  which 
favour  the  opposite  hypothesis. 

In  the  preceding  chapter,  I  have  endeavoured  to 
sliow  that  relationship  is,  at  first,  a  matter,  not  of  blood, 
but  of  tribal  organisation;  that  it  is,  in  the  second 
place,  traced  through  the  mother ;  in  tlie  third,  through 
the  father  ;  and  that  only  in  the  fourth  stage  is  the  idea 
of  family  constituted  as  amongst  ourselves.  To  obtain 
clear  and  corredt  ideas  on  this  subject,  it  is  necessary  to 
know  the  laws  and  customs  of  various  races.  The 
nomenclature  alone,  would,  in  many  cases,  lead  us  into 
error,  and,  in  fact,  has  often  done  so.  When  checked 
by  a  knowledge  of  the  tribal  rules  and  customs,  it  is. 
however,  most  interesting  and  instructive.  From  this 
point  of  view  especially,  Mr.  Morgan's  work  is  of  great 
value.  It  has  been  seen,  however,  that  I  differ  greatly 
from  him  as  to  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  the 
facts  which  he  has  so  diligently  collected. 

Of  course,  I  do  not  deny  that  these  facts  may,  in 
some  cases,  indicate  ethnological  affinities ;  but  they 
have  not,  I  tliink,  so  great  an  importance  in  solving 
questions  of  ethnological  relationships  as  he  suppoi^es. 
I  do  not,  however,  in  any  way,  undervalue  their  import- 
ance ;  they  afford  a  striking  evidence  in  favour  of  the 
doctrine  of  development,  and  are  thus  a  very  interesting 
and  important  contribution  to  the  great  problem  of 
human  history. 

From  the  materials  which  ho  has  so  laboriously 
collected,  and  for  which  ethnologists  owe  him  an  immense 
debt  of  gratitude,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  : 

Firstly,  that  the  terms  for,  what  we  call,  relation- 
ships,  are,   among    the    lower    races   of    men,   mere 


CONCLUSION.  191 

expressions  for  the  results  of  marriage  customs,  and  do 
not  comprise  the  idea  of  relationship  as  we  understand 
it;  that,  in  fact,  the  connection  of  individuals  iyiter  se, 
their  duties  to  one  another,  their  rights,  and  the  descent 
of  their  property,  are  all  regulated  more  by  the  rela- 
tion to  the  tribe  than  by  that  to  the  family;  that  when 
the  two  conflict,  the  latter  must  give  way. 

Secondly,  that  the  nomenclature  of  relationships  is, 
in  all  the  cases  yet  collected,  explainable  in  a  clear  and 
simple  manner  on  the  hypothesis  of  progress. 

Thirdly,  that  while  two  races  in  the  same  state  of 
social  condition,  but  of  which  the  one  has  risen  from 
the  lowest  known  system,  the  other  sunk  from  the 
lughest,  would,  necessarily,  have  a  totally  diflferent 
Bystem  of  nomenclature  for  relationships,  we  have  not 
a  single  instance  of  such  a  system  as  would  result  from 
the  latter  hypothesis. 

Fourthly,  that  some  of  those  races  which  approxi- 
mate most  nearly  to  our  European  system  differ  from 
it  upon  points  only  explainable  on  the  hypotliesis  that 
they  were  once  in  a  much  lower  social  condition  than 
they  are  at  present. 


192 


STSTEUa  OF  RELATIONSHIP. 


• 
GO 

H 

O 

o 

en 

o 

o 

H 

H 

o 
P 


X 

CO 

O 
H 

Ph 


u^ 


H 
CO 


c: 
H 


M 

O 

I 


OQ 


I 


O 

I 


o 


*f1 


o 


<3 


»4 

■JU 

• 


.s 


o 


a 

s 
o 

O 


'O  2 

o 


<3 


^'     •§ 


OB 

S 

o 


a 

Iz;    o 


** 

Cd 

O 

1 

i 

c 

0 

■s 

2 

Grandson. 

^ 

K 

a 

<< 

• 

• 

4) 

V. 

• 

^ 

'O 

O 

a 

9 

2 

• 

o 

1 

CO 

^ 

« 

CQ 

O 

'4 

a 

§ 

s 

.  s- 

§  g 

n 
-•  » 

S  'B 

►5  -*3  5 
^  H  O 


r, 


♦•f 


a 
e 


J2        S 


o 


2 

PS 


B 

O 

CO 


c 
o 

g 

O 


a 

s 


i 


a 
c 

«0 


0) 
OB 


o  B  9 

«  ©  08 

^  o  5 

•  S  .2 

•^  CO  "a 

H  a  H 

•  ••-  «^ 


Szs 

C 
h^ 

H 

-< 
P 

n 

o 
o 

o 

P 


GO 

o 

H 

1-9 

U 

Pi 

c 

CO 

u 

H 
cc 

>^ 

CO 


M 

o 


00 


I 


I 


H 
O 


o 


a 
o 


N 
O 

g 


Pi 


O 


8 


^ 

o 


M 

O 

I 

s 


o 


I 


M 
O 


•3 

O 
>5 


pa 

■      < 
I 


•s 

o 


a 

9 
O 


'  IP 


U 

-•1     8 


r* 


a 
2 


a 
S 


a 

s 


4 
! 

to 
o 

«• 

8 

M 
&3 


CHAPTER  V. 


RELIGION. 


T^HE  religion  of  savages,  though  of  peculiar  interest, 
•*"    is  in  many  respects,  perhaps,  the  most  difficult 
PW  of  my  whole  subject.     I  shall  endeavour  to  avoid, 
•8  for  as  possible,  anything  which  might  justly  give  pain 
to  any  of  my  readers.     Many  ideas,  however,  which 
hire  been,  or  are,  prevalent  on  religious  matters,  are  so 
Utterly  opposed  to  our  own  that  it  is  impossible  to  dis- 
cuss the  subject  without  mentioning  some  things  which 
arc  very  repugnant  to  our  feelings.    Yet,  while  savages 
show  us  a  melancholy  spectacle  of  gross  superstitions 
and  ferocious  forms  of  worship,  the  religious  mind  can- 
not but  feel  a  peculiar  satisfaction  in  tracing  up  the 
gradual  evolution  of  more  correct  ideas  and  of  nobler 
creeds. 

M.  Arbrousset  quotes  the  following  touching  re- 
marks made  to  him  by  Sekesa,  a  very  respectable 
Kaffir:^  *  Your  tidings,'  he  said,  *arc  what  I  want ;  and 

*  I  was  seeking  before  I  knew  you,  as  you  shall  hear 

*  and  judge  for  yourselves.     Twelve  years  ago  I  went 
*to  feed  my  flocks.     The  weather  was  hazy.     I  sat 

*  down  upon  a  rock  and  asked  myself  sorrowful  qucs- 
^  tions  ;  yes,  sorrowful,  because  I  was  unable  to  answer 

■  Tour  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  p.  120. 

O 


194  MENTAL  INACTIVITY  OF  8AVAGE8. 

them.     "  Who  has  touched  the  stars  with  his  hantU  ? 
"On   what   pillars   do  they  rest?"  I  asked  myself. 
"The  waters  are  never  weary:  they  know  no  other 
"  law  than  to  flow,  without  ceasing,  from  mommg  till 
"  night,  and  from  night  till  morning ;   but  where  do 
"  they  stop  ?  and  who  makes  them  flow  thus  ?    The 
"  clouds  also  come  and  go,  and  burst  in  water  over 
"  the  earth.     Whence  come  they?     Who  sends  them? 
"  The  diviners  certainly  do  not  give  us  rain,  for  how 
"  could  they  do  it  ?   and  why  do  I  not  see  them  with 
"  my  own  eyes  when  they  go  up  to  heaven  to  fetch  it? 
"  I  cannot  see  the  wind,  but  what  is  it  ?     Who  brings 
"  it,  makes  it  blow,  and  roar  and  terrify  us  ?    Do  I 
"  know  how  the  com  sprouts  ?     Yesterday  there  was 
"  not  a  blade  in  my  field ;  to-day  I  returned  to  the 
''  field  and  found  some.      Who  can  have  given  to  the 
"  earth  the  wisdom  and  the  power  to  produce  it  ?" 
Then  I  buried  ray  face  in  both  my  hands.' 

This,  however,  was  an  exceptional  case.  As  a 
general  rule  savages  do  not  set  themselves  to  think  out 
such  questions,  but  adopt  the  ideas  which  suggest  them- 
selves most  naturally ;  so  that,  as  I  shall  attem]»t  to 
show,  races  in  a  similar  state  of  mental  development, 
however  distinct  their  origin  may  be,  and  however 
distant  the  regions  they  inhabit,  have  very  similar 
religious  conceptions.  ilost  of  those  who  have  en- 
deavoured to  account  for  the  various  superstitionn  of 
savage  races  have  done  so  by  crediting  them  with  a 
much  more  elaborate  system  of  ideas  than  they  in 
reality  possess.  Thus  Lafitau  supposes  that  fire  was 
worshipped  Ix.'caust*  it  so  well  repri^scMits  'irtte  supivine 
'  intelligence  dt'gagre  dc  la  nature,  doiit  la  puissance  est 


RELIGIOUS  CEABAGTEBISTIGS  OF  SAVAGES.    195 

'  toujours  active/  ^    Again,  with  reference  to  idols,  he 
'observes*  that  *La  d^pendance  que  nous  avons  de 

*  Tiinagination  et  des  sens  ne  nous  permettant  pas  de 

*  voir  Dieu  autrement  qu'en  c^nigme,  comme  parle  Saint 
^  Paul,  a  caused  une  esp6ce  de  n^cessite  de  nous  le 
^  montrer  sous  des  images  sensibles,  lesquelles  fussent 
^  autant  de  symboles,  qui  nous  ^levassent  jusqu'a  lui, 

*  comme  le  portrait  nous  remet  dans  Tidee  de  celui 
^  dent  il  est  la  peinture.'  Plutarch,  again,  supposed  that 
the  crocodile  was  worshipped  by  Egypt  because,  having 
no  tongue,  it  was  a  type  of  the  Deity  who  made  laws 
for  nature  by  his  mere  will !  Explanations,  however, 
such  as  these  are  radically  wrong. 

I  have  felt  doubtful  whether  this  chapter  should  not 
be  entitled  *the  superstitions'  rather  than  *the  re- 
'  ligion '  of  savages ;  but  have  preferred  the  latter, 
partly  because  many  of  the  superstitious  ideas  pass 
gradually  into  nobler  conceptions,  and  partly  from  a 
reluctance  to  condemn  any  honest  belief,  however 
absurd  and  imperfect  it  may  be.  It  must,  however,  be 
admitted  that  religion,  as  understood  by  the  lower 
savage  races,  differs  essentially  from  ours ;  nay,  it  is 
not  only  different,  but  even  opposite.  Thus,  their 
deities  are  evil,  not  good;  they  may  be  forced  into 
compliance  with  the  wishes  of  man ;  they  require 
bloody,  and  rejoice  in  human,  sacrifices;  they  are 
mortal,  not  immortal;  a  part,  not  the  author,  of 
nature ;  they  are  to  be  approached  by  dances  rather 
than  by  prayers ;  and  often  approve  what  we  call  vice, 
rather  than  what  we  esteem  as  virtue. 

'  AfoBun  dot  SiiuTAges  Amdricainfl,  vol.  i.  p.  1^2. 
*  £oe.  ci<.,  p.  121. 

o2 


196  BELlGtOUB  GHARACTEBISTICS  OF 

In  fact,  the  so-called  religion  of  the  lower  races 
bears  somewhat  the  same  relation  to  religion  in  its 
higher  forms  that  astrology  does  to  astronomy,  or 
alchemy  to  chemistry.  Astronomy  is  derived  from 
astrology,  yet  their  spirit  is  in  entire  opposition ;  and 
we  shall  find  the  same  difference  between  the  religions 
of  backward  and  of  advanced  races.  We  regard  the 
Deity  as  good ;  they  look  upon  him  as  evil ;  we  submit 
ourselves  to  him  ;  they  endeavour  to  obtain  the  control 
of  him ;  we  feel  the  necessity  of  accounting  for  the 
blessings  by  which  we  are  surrounded  ;  they  think  the 
blessings  come  of  themselves,  and  attribute  all  evil  to 
the  interference  of  malignant  beings. 

These  characteristics  are  not  exceptional  and  rare. 
On  the  contrary,  I  shall  attempt  to  show  that,  though 
the  religions  of  the  lower  races  have  received  diflferent 
names,  they  agree  in  their  general  characteristics,  and 
are  but  phases  of  one  sequence,  having  the  same  origin, 
and  passing  through  similar,   if  not   identical,  stages. 
This  will  explain  the  great  similarities  which  occur  in 
the  most  distinct  and  distant  races,  which  have  puzzled 
many   ethnologists,  and   in  some   cases   led   them  to 
utterly    untenable    theories.      Thus,  even    Robertson. 
though  in  many  respects  he  held  very  correct  views  as 
to  the  religious  condition  of  savages,  remarks  that  Sun- 
worship  prevailed  among  the  Xatchez  and  the  Persian*. 
and  observes :  ^  '  This  surprising  coincidence  in  senti- 

*  mcnt  between  two  nations  in  such  different  states  of 

*  improvement  is  one  of  the  many  singular  and  unac- 
'  countable  circumstances  which  occur  in  the  historv  of 

m 

'  human  affairs.' 

*  Ilidtory  of  AniciicA,  book  iv.  p.  li>r. 


THE  LOWER  BAGE8  OF  MAN.  107 

Although,  however,  we  find  the  most  remarkable 
coincidences  between  the  religions  of  distinct  races,  one 
of  the  peculiar  difficulties  in  the  study  of  religion  arises 
from  the  fisujt  that,  while  each  nation  has  generally  but 
one  language,  we  may  almost  say  that  in  religious 
matters,  quot  homines  tot  sententicv ;  no  two  men  having 
exactly  the  same  views,  however  much  they  may  wish 
to  agree. 

Many  travellers  have  pointed  out  this  difficulty. 
Thus,  Captain  Cook,  speaking  of  the  South  Sea 
Islanders,^  says :  *  Of  the  religion  of  these  people  we 
'were  not  able  to  acquire  any  clear  and  consistent 
'knowledge;  we  found  it  like  the  religion  of  most  other 

*  countries — ^involved  in  mystery  and   perplexed  with 

*  apparent  inconsistencies.'     Many  also  of  those  to  whom 

we  are  indebted  for  information  on  the  subject,  fully 

expecting  to  find  among  savages  ideas  like  our  own, 

obscured  only  by  errors   and  superstition,   have   put 

leading  questions,  and  thus  got   misleading   answers. 

^Ve  constantly  hear,  for  instance,  of  a  Devil ;  but,  in  fact, 

no  spiritual  being  in  the  mythology  of  any  savage  races 

possesses  the  characteristics  of  Satan.    Again,  it  is  often 

very  difficult  to  determine  in  what  sense  an  object  is 

worshipped.     A  mountain,  or  a  river,  for  instance,  may 

be  held  sacred  either  as  an  actual  Deity  or  merely  as 

his  abode;    and   in  the   same  way  a   statue    may  be 

actually  worshipped  as  a  god,  or  merely  reverenced  as 

representing  the  Divinity. 

To  a  great  extent,  moreover,  these  difficulties  arise 
from  the  fact  that  when  man,  either  by  natural  progress 
or  the  influence  of  a  more  advanced  race,  rises  to  the 

'  Ilftwkesworth'B  Voyages,  vol.  ii.  p.  237, 


198  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  LOWER  BBLIOIONS. 

conception  of  a  higher  religion,  he  still  retains  his  old 
beliefs,  which  long  linger  on,  side  by  side  with,  and  yd 
in  utter  opposition  to,  the  higher  creed.     The  new  and 
more  powerful  Spirit  is  an  addition  to  the  ojd  Pantheon, 
and  diminishes  the  importance  of  the  older  deities; 
gradually  the  worship  of  the  latter  sinks  in  the  social 
scale,  and  becomes  confined  to  tlie  ignorant  and  the 
young.      Thus,  a  belief  in   witchcraft   still  flourishea 
among  our  agricultural  labourers  and  the  lowest  classes 
in  our  great  cities ;  and  the  deities  of  our  ancestors  sur- 
vive in  the  nursery  tales  of  our  children.     We  must 
therefore  expect  to  find  in  each  race  traces — ^nay,  more 
than  traces — of  lower  religions.     Even  if  this  were  not 
the  case,  we  should  still  be  met  by  the  difficulty  that 
there  are  few  really  sharp  lines  in  religious  systems. 
It  might  be  supposed  that  a  belief  in  the  immortality 
of  the  soul,  or  in  the  efficacy  of  sacrifices,  would  give 
us  good  lines  of  division;  but  it  is  not  so:  these  and 
many  other  ideas  rise  gradually,  and  even  often  apjiear 
at  first  in  a  form  very  diflx^rent  from  that  M'liich  they 
ultimately  assume. 

Hitherto  it  has  been  usual  to  classify  religions 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  object  worshipped:  Feti- 
chism,  for  instance,  being  the  worship  of  inanimate 
objects,  Sabji?ism  that  of  the  heavenly  Inxlies.  The  true 
test,  however,  seems  to  me  to  be  the  estimate  in  which 
the  Deity  is  held.  The  first  great  stages  in  religious 
thought  may,  I  think,  be  regarded  as — 

Atheism;  understanding  by  this  term  not  a  denial  of 
the  existence  of  a  Deity,  but  an  absence  of  any  definite 
ideas  on  the  subject. 


EELIOIONB  ACOOBDma  TO  8ANGH0NIATE0.    199 

Fetichism ;  the  Btage  in  which  man  supposes  he  can 
force  the  deities  to  comply  with  his  desires. 

Nature-worshipj  or  Totemism ;  in  which  natural 
objects,  trees,  lakes,  stones,  animals,  &c.,  are  wor- 
shipped. 

Shamanism ;  in  which  the  superior  deities  are  far 
more  powerful  than  man,  and  of  a  different  nature. 
Their  place  of  abode  also  is  far  away,  and  accessible 
only  to  Shamans. 

Idolatry^  or  Anthropomorphism ;  in  which  the  gods 
take  still  more  completely  the  nature  of  men,  being, 
however,  more  powerful.  They  are  still  amenable  to 
persuasion ;  they  are  a  part  of  nature,  and  not  creators. 
They  are  represented  by  images  or  idols. 

In  the  next  stage  the  Deity  is  regarded  as  the  author, 
not  merely  a  part,  of  natiure.  He  becomes  for  the  first 
time  a  really  supernatural  being. 

The  last  stage  to  which  I  will  refer  is  that  in  which 
morality  is  associated  with  religion. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  my  attention  was  called 
by  De  Brosse's  *  Culte  des  Dieux  fetiches '  to  a  passage 
in  Sanchoniatho,  quoted  by  Eusebius.  From  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  first  thirteen  generations  of  men  I  extract 
the  following  passages : — 

Generation  1. — The  '  first  men  consecrated  the 
^  plants  shooting  out  of  the  earth,  and  judged  them 

*  gods,  and  worshipped  them,  upon  whom  they  them- 

*  selves  lived.' 

Gen.  2. — The  second  generation  of  men  *  were  called 

*  Genus  and  Genea,  and  dwelt  in  PhoBuicia ;  but  when 
^  great  droughts  came,  they  stretched  their  hands  up  to 


200    RELiaiONS  ACCOEDINO  TO  8ANCHONIATE0. 

*  heaven  towards  the  Sun,  for  him  they  thought  the  only 

*  Lord  of  Heaven/ 

Gen.  3. — Afterwards  other  mortal  issue  was  begotten, 
whose  names  were  Phos,  Pur,  and  Phlox  (t.^.  Light, 
Fire,  and  Flame).  These  found  out  the  way  of  gene- 
rating fire  by  the  rubbing  of  pieces  of  wood  against  each 
other,  and  taught  men  the  use  thereof. 

Gen.  4. — The  fourth  generation  consists  of  giants. 

Gen.  5. — ^With  reference  to  the  fifth  he  mentions 
the  existence  of  communal  marriage,  and  that  Usous 

*  consecrated  two  pillars  to  Fire  and  Wind,  and  bowed 

*  down  to  them,  and  poured  out  to  them  the  blood  of 
^  such  wild  beasts  as  had  been  caught  in  hunting.' 

Ge7i.  6. — Hunting  and  fishing  are  invented ;  which 
seems  rather  inconsistent  with  the  preceding  state- 
ment. 

Gen.  7. — Chrysor,  whom  he  affirms  to  be  Vulcan, 
discovered  iron  and  the  art  of  forging.  *  Wherefore  he 
'  also  was  worshipped  after  his  death  for  a  god,  and  they 

*  called  him  Diamichius  (or  Zeus  Michius).' 

Gai.  8. — Pottery  was  discovered. 

Ge7}.  9. — Now  comes  Agrus,  *  who  had   a   much- 

*  worshipped  statue,  and  a  temple  carried  about  by  one 

*  or  more  yoke  of  oxen  in  Phoenicia.' 

Gen.  10. — Villages  were  fonned,  and  men  kcj>t 
flocks. 

Gin.  11. — Salt  was  discovered. 

Gen.  12. — Taautus  or  Hermes  discovered  letters. 
The  Cnbiri  ])elong  to  this  generation. 

Thus,  then,  we  find  mentioned  in  order  the  worship 
of  plants,  heavenly  bodies,  pillars,  and  men;  later  still 
comes    Idolatry   coupled   with    Temples.       It    will   be 


BELIGI0U8  CONDITION  OF  TEE  LOWEST  RACES.    201 

observed  that  Sanchoniatho  makes  no  special  mention 
of  Shamanism,  and  that  he  regards  the  worship  of 
plants  as  aboriginal. 

The  opinion  that  religion  is  general  and  universal 
has  been  entertained  by  many  high  authorities.     Yet  it 
is  opposed  to  the  evidence  of  numerous  trustworthy 
observers.     Sailors,  traders,  and  philosophers,  Roman 
Catholic  priests  and  Protestant  missionaries,  in  ancient 
and  in  modem  times,  in  every  part  of  the  glolje,  have 
concurred  in  stating  that  there  are  races  of  men  alto- 
gether devoid  of  religion.      The  case  is  the  stronger 
because  in  several  instances  the  fact  has  greatly  sur- 
prised him  who  records  it,  and  has  been  entirely  in 
opposition  to  all  his  preconceived  views.     On  the  other 
band,  it  must  be  confessed  that  in  some  cases  travellers 
denied  the  existence   of  religion  merely  because  the 
tenets  were  unlike  ours.   The  question  as  to  the  general 
existence  of  religion  among  men  is,  indeed,  to  a  great 
extent  a  matter  of  definition.     If  the  mere  sensation  of 
fear,  and  the  recognition  that  there  are  probably  other 
beings  more  powerful  than  oneself,  are  sufficient  alone 
to  constitute  a  religion,  then  we  must,  I  think,  admit 
that  religion  is  general  to  the  human  race.     But  when  a 
child  dreads  the  darkness,  and  shrinks  from  a  lightless 
room,  we  never  regard  that  as  an  evidence  of  religion. 
Moreover,   if   this   definition    be   adopted,  we   cannot 
longer  regard  religion  as  peculiar  to  man.     We  must 
admit  that  the  feeling   of  a   dog  or  a  horse  towards 
its  master  is  of  the  same  character;    and  the  baying 
of  a  dog  to  the  moon  is  as  much  an  act  of  worship 
as  some  ceremonies  which  have  been  so  described  by 
travellers. 


202  ABSENCE  OF  BELIOION. 

In  '  Prehistoric  Times,'  ^  I  have  quoted  the  following 
writers  as  witnesses  to  the  existence  of  tribes  without 
religion.     For  some  of  the  Esquimaux  tribes,  Captain 
Ross;^  for  some  of  the  Canadians,  Heame;  for  theCali- 
fornians,   Baegert,  who  lived  among  them    seventeen 
years,  and   La   Perouse;    for  many  of   the  Brazilian 
tribes,  Spix  and  Martins,  Bates  and  Wallace;  for  Para- 
guay, Dobritzhoffer  ;  for  some  of  the  Polynesians,  Wil- 
liams's Missionary  Enterprises,  theVoyage  of  the  Xovara, 
and  Dieffenbach;   for  Damood  Island  (North  of  Aus- 
tralia), Jukes  (Voyage  of  the  Fly)  ;   for  the  Pellew 
Islands,  Wilson;  for  the  Aru  Islands,  Wallace;  for  the 
Andaraaners,  Mouatt ;  for  certain  tribes  of  Hindostan, 
Hooker  and  Shortt ;    for  some  of  the  Eastern  African 
nations.  Burton  and  Grant ;  for  the  Bachapin  KaflSrs, 
Burchell ;  and  for  the  Hottentots,  Le  Vaillant.     I  will 
here  only  give  a  few  additional  instiinces. 

The  natives  of  Queensland,  says  Mr.  Lang,  '  have  no 
'  idea  of  a  Supreme  Divinity,  the  creator  and  governor 
'  of  the  world,  the  witness   of  their  actions,  and  their 
'  future  judge.     They  have  no  object  of  worship,  even 
^  of  a  subordinate  and  inferior  rank.     They  have  no 
*  idols,  no  temples,  no  sacrifices.      In  short,  they  liavc 
'  nothing  whatever  of  the  character  of  religion,  or  of 
'  religious  observance,  to   distinguish  them   from  the 
^  beasts  that  jxTisli.     They  live  ''  without  (lod  in  the 
'  '' world.*^'^     He  quotes,  also,  in  sup[)ort  of  this,  the 
opinion  of  Mr.   Schmidt,   who  lived  as   a   missionary 
among  the  natives  of  Moreton  Bay  for  seven  years,  and 
was  well  acquainted  with  their  language. 

*  Prehistoric  Timcp,  iJrd  edition,      tho  lV)lnr  Sea,  voL  ii.  p.  205. 

p.  ^J"^'  '  I-Qnjj's  Queensland,  p.  374. 

•  See  also  Frankliirs  Journey  to 


ABSENCE  OF  RELIGION.  203 

*  It  is  evident/  says  M.  Bik,^  *  that  the  Arafuras  of 
*  Vorkay  (one  of  the  Southern  Arus)  possess  no  religion 

whatever.  ...  Of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  they 
have  not  the  least  conception.  To  all  my  enquiries  on 
this  subject  they  answered,  "No  Arafura  has  ever 
**  returned  to  us  after  death,  therefore  we  know 
"  nothing  of  a  future  state,  and  this  is  the  first  time 
"  we  have  heard  of  it."  Their  idea  was  Mati,  Mati 
sudah  (When  you  are  dead  there  is  an  end  of  you). 
Neither  have  they  any  notion  of  the  creation  of  the 
world.  To  convince  myself  more  fully  respecting 
their  want  of  knowledge  of  a  Supreme  Being,  I 
demanded  of  them  on  whom  they  called  for  help  in 
their  need,  when  their  vessels  were  overtaken  by 
violent  tempests.  The  eldest  among  them,  after 
having  consulted  the  others,  answered  that  they 
knew  not  on  whom  they  could  call  for  assistance, 
but  begged  me,  if  I  knew,  to  be  so  good  as  to  inform 
them.' 

*  The  wilder  Bedouins,'  *^  says  Burton,  ^  will  inquire 
where  Allah  is  to  be  found :  when  asked  the  object  of 
the  question,  they  reply,  *'  If  the  Kesa  could  but  catch 
*'  liim  they  would  spear  him  upon  the  spot;  who  but 
"  he  lays  waste  their  homes  and  kills  their  cattle  and 
"wives?"'  He  also  considers  that  atheism  is  'the 
natural  condition  of  the  savage  and  uninstructcd  mind, 
the  night  of  spiritual  existence,  which  disappears 
before  the  dawn  of  a  belief  in  things  unseen.  A 
Creator  is  to  creation  what  the  cause  of  any  event 
in  life  is  to  its  effect ;  those  familiar  to  the  sequence 

^  Quoted  in  KolflTs  Voyages  of  '  First  Footbteps  in  Kfn^t  Africn, 

the  Doiirga,  p.  159.  p.  02. 


204  ABSENCE  OF  RELIGION. 

*  will    hardly    credit  its  absence   from   the  minds  of 

*  others.'  ^ 

Among   the  Koossa  Kaffirs,  Lichtenstein '  aflSrms 
that  '  there  is  no  appearance  of  any  religious  worsWp 

*  Avhatever.' 

*  It  might  be  the  proper   time  now,'  says  Father 
Baegert,  '  to  speak  of  the  form  of  government  and  the 

*  religion  of  the  Californians  previous  to  their  conver- 

*  sion  to  Christianity  ;  but  neither  the  one  nor  the 
^  other  existed  among  them.     They  had  no  magistrates, 

*  no  police,  and  no  laws  ;  idols,  temples,  religious 
'  worship  or  ceremonies,  were  unknown  to  them,  and 
'  they  neither  believed  in  the  true  and  only  God,  nor 

*  adored  false  deities.     ...     I    made   diligent  en- 

*  quiries,  among  those  with  whom  I  lived,  to  ascertain 

*  whether  they  had  any  conception  of  God,  a  future  life, 
'  and  their  own  souls,  but  I  never  could  discover  tlic 

*  sliojhtest  trace  of  such  a  knowledge.     Their  lan^i^ua^^e 

*  has  no  words  for  "  God  "  and  "  soul."  '  ^  Indeed,  the 
missionaries  found  no  word  which  they  could  use  fur 
'  God '  in  any  of  the  Oregon  languages.* 

Although,  as  Captain  John  Smith*  quaintly  puts  it, 
there  was  'in  Virginia  no  place  discovered  to  be  so 

*  savage  in  whicli  they  had  not  a  religion,  Deere,  and 
'  l:)ows  and  arrows,'  still  the  ruder  tribes  in  tlie  far 
North,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Hearne,  who  knew 
thoni  intimately,  liad  no  religion. 

Several    tribes,    says    Robertson,*^  '  have  been   dis- 

*  Abeokutn,  vol.  i.  p.  171).  T.  S.  Expl.  Kxped.,  p.  i*<X). 

*  Lichtendtein,  vol.  i.  p.  l*.").'?.  ^  Vuya;;*'H  iu  Vir^'iiiiii,  p.  1:><. 

^  naejrert.      Smitlisoiiiiiu  trans.,  •  History  of  AnnTu*a,   l»i»«»k  iv. 

m«-4,  p.  :^JK).  p.   lL>L>.     See  nlw   PriUlinrtl**   Nat 

*  Unless    Ethnojrrnpliy     «>f    the      History  (»f  Man,  vol.  ii.  p.  (KV*. 


BUDIMENTABY  RELIGIONS,  205 

*  covered  in  America,  which  have  no  idea  whatever  of  a 
'  Supreme  Being,  and  no  rites  of  religious  worship.  .  .  . 

*  Some  rude  tribes  have  not  in  their  language  any  name 

*  for  the  Deity,  nor  have  the  most  accurate  observers 

*  been  able  to  discover  any  practice  or  institution  which 

*  seemed  to  imply  that  they  recognised  his  authority, 

*  or  were  solicitous  to  obtain  his  favour.' 

In  the  face  of  such  a  crowd  of  witnesses  it  may  at 
first  sight  seem  extraordinary  that  there  can  still  be 
any  diflTerence  of  opinion  on  the  subject.  This,  how- 
ever, arises  partly  from  the  fact  that  the  term'  *  Re- 
ligion '  has  not  always  been  used  in  the  same  sense, 
and  partly  from  a  belief  that,  as  has  no  doubt  happened 
in  several  cases,  travellers  may,  from  ignorance  of  the 
language,  or  from  shortness  of  residence,  have  over- 
looked a  religion  which  really  existed. 

For  instance,  the  first  describe rs  of  Tahiti  asserted 
that  the  natives  had  no  religion,  which  subsequently 
proved  to  be  a  complete  mistake  ;  and  several  other 
fiimilar  cases  might  be  quoted.  As  regards  the  lowest 
races  of  men,  however,  it  seems  to  me,  even  a  priori^ 
very  difiicult  to  suppose  that  a  people  so  backward  as 
to  be  unable  to  count  their  own  fingers  should  be  suffi- 
ciently advanced  in  their  intellectual  conceptions  as  to 
have  any  system  of  belief  worthy  of  the  name  of  a 
religion. 

We  shall,  however,  obtain  a  clearer  view  of  the 
question  if  we  consider  the  superstitions  of  those  races 
which  have  a  rudimentary  religion,  and  endeavour  to 
trace  these  ideas  up  into  a  more  developed  condition. 

Here,  again,  we  shall  perhaps  be  met  by  the  doubt 
whether   travellers  have  correctly  understood  the  ac- 


206    RELIGIOUS  IDEAS  AS  SUGGESTED  BY  SLEEP. 

counts  given  to  them.  In  many  cases,  however,  when 
the  narrator  liad  lived  for  months,  or  years,  among 
those  whom  he  Avas  describing,  we  need  certainly  feel 
no  suspicion,  and  in  others  we  shall  obtain  a  satisCictory 
result  by  comparing  together  the  statements  of  difFercnt 
observers  and  using  them  as  a  check  one  upon  the 
other. 

The  religious  theories  of  savages  are  certainly  not 
the  result  of  deep  thought,  nor  must  they  be  reganled 
as  constituting  any  elaborate  or  continuous  theory.  A 
Zulu  candidly  said  to  Mr.  Callaway:  ^  *  Our  knowledge 
'  does  not  urge  us  to  search  out  the  roots  of  it  ;  we  do 
'  not  try  to  see  them ;  if  any  one  thinks  ever  so  little, 

*  he  soon  gives  it  up,  and  passes  on  to  what  he  sees 

*  with  his  eves  ;  and  he  does  not  understand  the  real 
'  state  of  even  what  he  sees.'  Dulaure  ^  truly  observes, 
that  the  savage  'aime  mieux  soumettre  sa  raison. 
^  souvent  r^voltee,  a  ce  que  ses  institutions  ont  dc  plus 
'  absurdo,  que  de  se  livrer  a  Texamen,  parce  que  co 
'  travail  est  toujours  penible  pour  celui  qui  nc  sV  est 
'  point  oxcrce/  With  this  statement  I  entirely  concur, 
and  I  believe  that  throu":h  all  the  various  reli«riou3 
systems  of  the  lower  races  may  be  traced  a  natural  and 
unconscious  process  of  development. 

The  ideas  of  religion  among  the  lower  races  of  man 
arc  intimately  associated  with,  if  indeed  they  have  not 
orijiinated  from,  the  ccmdition  of  man  during  sleep,  and 
esi)ecially  from  dreams.  Sleep  and  death  have  always 
Ih'cu  regarded  as  nearly  related  to  one  another.  Thus, 
in  classical  mythology,  Somnus,  the  go<l  of  sleep,  and 

*  Tlio  Koli^rious  Systom  of  tlio  '  Histoin.'  (lo«  <'ult«'',  v*»\  i.  ju 

Amnxulu,  p.  *22.  '22, 


EEM6I0U8  IDEAS  A8  8UG0E8TED  BY  DBEAM8.    207 

Mors,  the  god  of  death,  were  both  fabled  to  have  been 
the  chQdren  of  Nox,  the  goddess  of  night.  So,  also, 
the  savage  would  naturally  look  on  death  as  a  kind  of 
sleep,  and  would  expect — hoping  on  even  against  hope 
—to  see  his  friend  awake  from  the  one  as  he  had  so 
often  done  from  the  other. 

Hence,  probably,  one  reason  for  the  great  import- 
ance ascribed  to  the  treatment  of  the  body  after  death. 
Bat  what  happens  to  the  spirit  during  sleep  ?     The 
body  lies  lifeless,  and  the  savage  not  unnaturally  con- 
clodes  that  the  spirit  has  left  it.     In  this  he  is  con- 
finned  by   the  phenomena    of  dreams,  which  conse- 
qnentlj  to  the  savage  have  a  reality  and  an  importance 
which  we  can  scarcely  appreciate.     During  sleep  the 
spirit  seems  to  desert  the  body;  and  as  in   dreams  we 
visit  other  localities  and  even  other  worlds,  living,  as 
it  were,  a  separate  and  different  life,  the  two  phenomena 
are  not  unnaturally  regarded  as  the  complements  of 
one  another.     Hence  the  savage  considers  the  events 
in  his  dreams  to  be  as  real  as  those  of  his  waking 
honrs^  and  hence  he  naturally  feels  that  he  has  a  spirit 
which  can  quit  the  body.     '  Dreams,'  says  Burton,  '  ac- 

*  cording  to  the  Yorubans  (West  Africa)  and  to  many 

*  of  our   fetichists,    are  not   an  irregular  action    and 

*  partial  activity  of  the  brain,  but  so  many  revelations 
'  brought  by  the  manes  of  the  departed.'  ^  So  strong 
was  the  North  American  faith  in  dreams  that  on  one 
occasion,  when  an  Indian  dreamt  he  was  taken  captive, 
he  induced  his  friends  to  make  a  mock  attack  on  him, 
to  bind  him  and  treat  him  as  a  captive,  actually  sub- 
mitting to  a  considerable  amount  of  torture,  in  the  hope 

*  Abeokuta,  toI.  i.  p.  204. 


208    RELIGIOUS  IDEAS  AS  SUOGESTEB  BY  DBEAMS. 

thus   to  fulfil   his   dream.^     The   Grecnlandera '   also 
believe  in  the  reality  of  dreams,  and  think  that  at  night 
they  go  hunting,  visiting,  courting,  and  so  on.     It  is  of 
course  obvious  that  the  body  takes  no  part  in  these 
nocturnal  adventures,  and  hence  it  is  natural  to  con^ 
elude  that  they  have  a  spirit  which  can  quit  the  body. 
In  Madagascar  ^  ^  the  people  throughout  the  whole 
'  island  pay  a  religious  regard  to  dreams,  and  imagine 
'  that  their  good  demons  (for  I  cannot  tell  what  other 

*  name  to  give  their  inferior  deities,  which,  as  they  say, 
'  attend  on  their  owleys,)  tell  them  in  their  dreams 

*  what  ought  to  be  done,  or  warn  them  of  what  ought 

*  to  be  avoided.' 

Lastly,  when  they  dream  of  their  departed  friends 
or  relatives,  savages  firmly  believe  themselves  to  be 
visited  by  their  spirits,  and  hence  believe,  not  indeed 
in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  in  its  survival  of  the 
body.  Tlius  the  Veddahs  of  Ceylon  believe  in  spirits, 
l)ecause  their  deceased  relatives  visit  them  in  dreams,^ 
and  the  ]Manganjas  (South  Africa)  expressly  ground 
their  belief  in  a  future  life  on  the  same  fact.  *  Persons 
'  who  are  pursued  in  their  sleep  by  the  image  of  a 
'  deceased  relation,  are  often  known  to  sacrifice  a  vic- 

*  tini  on  the  tomb  of  the  defunct,  in  order,  as  they  say, 

*  to  cahn  his  disquietude/^  Again:®  *  If  during  sleep 
'  you  dream  of  returning  to  your  people  from  whom 
'  you  separated  a  long  time  ago ;  and  see  that  so-and-so 

*  Lafitau,  loc,  cit,,  toI.  i.  p.  306,       voL  ii.  p.  301. 

"^  Cmntz,  he.  cit,  vol.  i.  p.  200.  ^  The  Baautos,  Rev.  R  Casaliis 

'  The    Adventures    of    Robert  p.  245. 
Drury,  p.  171.    See  also  pp.  170^  ^  Unkulunkulu;  or,  the  Tradition 

272.  of  Creation  as  existing  among  tha 

*  BuileVy  in  Trans.  Eth.  Soc.  N.S.  AmazulU|  p.  228. 


MUQIOVB  IDEAS  AB  BVGQESTEI)  BY  DREAMS.    209 

*  and  so-and-so  are  unhappy ;  and  when  you  wake  your 

*  body  is  unstrung ;  you  know  that  the  Itongo  has 

*  taken  you  to  your  people,  that  you  might  see  the 

*  trouble  in  which  they  are ;  and  that  if  you  go  to  them 
*you  will  find  out  the  cause  of  their  unhappiness.' 
Indeed,  the  whole  chapter  on  dreams  in  Dean  Callaway's 
treatise  on  the  religion  of  the  Kaffirs  is  most  interesting 
and  instructive. 

Speaking  of  the  Peruvians,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega 
says,^  'for  ordinary  omens  they  made  use  of  dreams.' 
The  Tongans  thought  that  the  souls  of  chiefs — ^for  those 
of  the  common  people  were  considered  to  die  with  their 
bodies — *  had  the  power  of  returning  to  Tonga  to  inspire 

*  priests,  relations,  or  others,  or  to  appear  in  dreams.^ 
The  Feejeeans  *  also  believe  *  that  the  spirit  of  a  man 
'who  still  lives  will  leave  the  body  to  trouble  other 

*  people  whenasleep.  When  anyone  faints  or  dies,  their 
'spirit,  it  is  said,  may  sometimes  be  brought  back  by 

*  calling  after  it.'  Herodotus,  speaking  of  the  Nasamones, 
says  that  when  they  wish  to  divine,  they  go  '  to  the 

*  tombs  of  their  ancestors,  and  after  having  prayed, 
'  they  lie  down  to  sleep,  and  whatever  dream  they  have, 

*  this  they  avail  themselves  of.'  ^ 

Again,  savages  are  rarely  ill ;  their  sufferings  generally 
arise  from  wounds;  their  deaths  are  generally  violent. 
As  an  external  injury  received  in  war  causes  pain,  so 
when  they  suffer  internally  they  attribute  it  to  some  in- 
ternal enemy.  Hence  when  the  Australian,  perhaps  after 
too  heavy  a  meal,  has  his  slumbers  disturbed,  he  never 

*  The  Royal  Commentaries  of  p.  138. 
the  Incas,  vol.  i.  p.  183.    See  also  '  Williams'  Fiji  and  the  Fijiana, 

Wuttke,  loc.  cU,,  Tol.  i.  p.  310.  vol.  i.  p.  242. 

^  Atariner*8  Tonga  Islands,  vol.  ii.  ^  Melpomene,  p.  172. 

P 


i 


210  NIOHTMABE. 

doubts  the  reality  of  what  is  passing,  but  considers  that 
he  is  attacked  by  some  being  whom  his  companions 
cannot  see. 

This  is  well  illustrated  in  the  following  passage  from 
the  '  United  States  Exploring  Expedition : '  ^  *  Some- 
times, when  the  Australians  are  asleep,  Koin  makes 
his  appearance,  seizes  upon  one  of  them  and  carries 
him  off.  The  person  seized  endeavours  in  vain  to  cry 
out,  being  almost  strangled.  At  daylight,  however, 
he  disappears,  and  the  man  finds  himself  conveyed 
safely  to  his  o^vn  fireside.  From  this  it  would  appear 
that  the  demon  is  here  a  sort  of  personification  of  the 
nightmare — ^a  visitation  to  which  the  natives,  (rom 
their  habits  of  gorging  themselves  to  the  utmost  when 
they  obtain  a  supply  of  food,  must  be  very  subject.* 
Speaking  of  the  North-Westem  Americans,  Mr. 
Sproat  says :  '^  *  The  apparition  of  ghosts  is  especially  in 
occasion  on  which  the  services  of  the  sorcerers,  the 
old  women,  and  all  the  friends  of  the  ghost-scer  arc 
in  great  request.  Owing  to  the  quantity  of  indiges- 
tible food  eaten  by  the  natives,  they  often  dream  that 
they  are  visited  by  ghosts.  After  a  supjxjr  of  blubber, 
followed  by  one  of  the  long  talks  about  departed 
friends,  which  take  place  round  the  fire,  some  nervous 
and  timid  person  may  fancy,  in  the  night-time,  that 
he  sees  a  ghost.' 

In  some  cases  the  belief  that  man  possesses  a  spirit 
seems  to  have  been  suggested  ])y  the  shadow.  Thus, 
among  the  Foejccans,^  *  some  speak  of  man  as  linving 
'  two  spirits.      II is  shadow  is  called  *'  the  dark  spirit,'' 

*  Loc.  cU.y  vol.  vi.  p.  110. 

'*  Scenes  and  Studies  of  Savngo  Lifo,  p.  172. 

'  Williftnis*  Fiji  and  the  Kijianfi,  toI.  i.  p.  241. 


SHADOWS.  211 

*  which  they  say  goes  to  Hades.     The  other  is  his  like- 

*  ness  reflected  in  water  or  a  looking-glass,  and  is  sup- 

*  posed  to  stay  near  the  place  in  which  a  man  dies. 

*  Probably  this  doctrine  of  shadows  has  to  do  with  the 

*  notion  of  inanimate  objects  havhig  spirits.     I  once 

*  placed  a  good-looking  native  suddenly  before  a  mirror. 

*  He  stood  delighted.     "  Now,"  said  he,  softly,  "I  can 

*  "  see  into  the  world  of  spirits."  ' 

The  North  American  Indians  also  consider  a  man's 
shadow  as  his  soul  or  life.     ^  I  have,'  says  Tanner, 

*  heard  them  reproach  a  sick  person  for  what  they 

*  considered  imprudent  exposure  in  convalescence,  tell- 

*  ing  him  that  his  shadow  was  not  well  settled  down  in 
'  him.'  ^ 

The  natives  of  Benin  *  call  a  man's  shadow  his  pass- 

*  adoor,  or  conductor,  and  believe  it  will  witness  if  he 

*  lived  well  or  ill.     If  well,  he  is  raised  to  great  happi- 

*  ness  and  dignity  in  the  place  before  mentioned;  if  ill, 
^  he  is  to  perish  with  hunger  and  poverty.'  ^  They  are 
indeed  a  most  superstitious  race;  and  Lander  mentions 
a  case  in  which  an  echo  was  taken  for  the  voice  of  a 
Fetich.'  The  Basutos  when  walking  along  a  river  arc 
very  careful  not  to  let  their  shadow  fall  on  the  water. 
The  crocodile,  they  think,  '  has  the  power  of  seizing  the 

*  shadow  of  a  man  passing  by,  and  by  it  dragging  him 

*  into  the  river,  where  it  will  certainly  kill  him,  though 

*  it  will  not  cat  a  morsel  of  his  flesh.'  In  Micronesia 
the  usual  word  for  soul  ^tamune'  or  'tamre,'  means 


'  TanDers  Cuptivity,  p.  201.  ndigioua  System  of  the  Aniazulu, 

•  AntlGy^sCullpction  of  Voyages,  p.  01. 
ToL  KL  p.  JK).     Pinkerton,  toI.  xvi.  '  Niger  Expedition,  toL  iii.  p. 

p,  631.    See  aUo  Callaway  on  the  242. 

p  2 


212  SPIRITS  BEGABDED  AS  EVIL. 

properly   shadow,^   and    the    same    was   the   case  in 
Tasmania.^ 

Thunder,  also,  was  often  regarded  either  as  an 
actual  deity  or  as  a  heavenly  voice.  *  One  night,*  says 
Tanner,  *  Picheto  (a  North  American  chief),  becoming 

*  much  alarmed  at  the  violence  of  the  storm,  got  up  and 

*  offered  some  tobacco  to  the  thunder,  entreating  it  to 
'  stop.'  3 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  savages  almast 
always  regard  spirits  as  evil  beings.  We  can,  I  think, 
easily  understand  why  this  should  be.  Amongst  the 
very  lowest  races  every  other  man — amongst  those 
slightly  more  advanced,  every  man — of  a  different  tribe 
is  regarded  as  naturally,  and  almost  necessarily  hostile. 
A  stranger  is  synonymous  with  an  enemy,  and  a  spirit 
is  but  a  member  of  an  invisible  tribe. 

The  Hottentots,  according  to  Thunberg,  have  very 
vague  ideas  about  a  good  Deity.  *  They  have  much 
'  clearer  notions  about  an  evil  spirit,  whom  they  fear, 
'  believing  him  to  be  the  occasion  of  sickness,  death, 

*  thunder,  and  every  calamity  tliat  befalls  them.'  *  Tbe 
Bcchuanas  attribute  all  evil  to  an  invisible  go<l,  whom 
they  call  Murinio,  and  '  never  hesitate  to  show  their 

*  indignation  at  any  ill  experienced,  or  any  wish  unac- 
'  coniplished,  by  the  most  bitter  curses.  They  have  no 
'  religions  worship,  and  could  never  be  persuaded  bv 
'  the  missionaries  that  this  was  a  thing  displeasing  to 
'  God.'* 

'  Hales    Kthnojrrnphy    of    Uie  tlvity  nmonfi  the  Indiang,  p.  l.'itV 
United  Suites  Kxpl.  Kxp.,*p.  08.  ^Thunberg.     Pinkertous    Voy- 

'  Honv/ick's   Daily    Life   of  the  npros,  vol.  xv.  p.  142.      Astler,  ht, 

Tasnianians,  p.  lM2.  ciV.,  p.  3(J(5. 

»  Tanner'a  Narrative  of  a  Cap-  *  LichtonaUin,  vol  ii.  p.  332. 


SPIBrrS  BEOAEDED  A8  EVIL.  213 

Among  the  Bongos  of  Central  Africa  '  good  spirits 
'  are  quite  unrecognised,  and,  according  to  the  gene- 

*  ral   negro  idea,   no  benefit  can   ever  come  from  a 
'  spirit;  1 

The  Abipones  of  South  America,  so  well  described 
by  DobritzhofFer,  had  some  vague  notions  of  an  evil 
spirit,  but  none  of  a  good  one.^  The  Coroados^  of 
Brazil  *  acknowledge  no  cause  of  good,  or  no  God,  but 

*  only  an  evil  principle,  which  ....  leads  him  astray, 
^  vexes  him,  brings  him  into  difficulty  and  danger,  and 
^  even  kills  him.' 

In  Virginia  and  Florida  the  evil  spirit  was  wor- 
shipped and  not  the  good,  because  the  former  might  be 
propitiated,  while  the  latter  was  sure  to  do  all  the  good 
he  could.*  So  also  the  *  Cemis '  of  the  West  Indian 
Islands  were  regarded  as  evil,  and  '  reputed  to  be  the 
^authors   of  every   calamity   that   affects  the   human    • 

*  race/  *    The  Redskin,  says  Carver,^ '  lives  in  continual 

*  apprehension  of  the  unkind  attacks  of  spirits,  and  to 

*  avert  them  has  recourse  to  charms,  to  the  fantastic 
^ceremonies  of  his  priest,  or  the  powerful  influence  of 

*  his  manitous.      Fear  has  of  course  a  greater  share  in 

*  his  devotions  than  gratitude,  and  he  pays  more  atten- 

*  tion  to  deprecating  the  wrath  of  the  evil  than  securing 

*  the  favour  of  the  good  beings.'  The  Tartars  of  Kats- 
chiutzi  also  considered  the  evil  spirit  to  be  more  powerful 
than  the  good.^    The  West  Coast  negroes,  according  to 

'  Schireiofurth*8  Heart  of  Africa,  *  Miillur^s  Gcsch.  d.  AmcricaD. 

Tol.  i.  p.  300.  Urreligionen,  p.  lo], 

•  DobritzbofTer,  toe,  cit.,  vol.  ii.  *  Ki^bertson's  America,  bo'^k  iv. 
pp..V»,  (U.  p.  124. 

*  Spix  and  MartiuB|  vol.  11.  p.  ^  Travels,  p.  388. 

242.  '  Pallaa,  vol  ill.  p.  43.3. 


214     SPIRITS  BEOABDED  AS  OAUSINO  DISEASE. 

Artus/  represent  their  deities  as  *  black  and  mischievous, 
'  delighting  to  torment  tliem  in  various  ways/  They  said 
'  that  the  Europeans'  God  was  very  good,  who  gave  them 

*  such  blessings,  and  treated  them  like  his  children. 
'  Others  asked,  murmuring,  why  God  was  not  as  kind  to 
'  them  ?    Why  did  not  he  supply  them  with  woollen 

*  and  linen  cloth,  iron,  brass,  and  such  things,  as  well  as 

*  the  Dutch  ?     The  Dutch  answered,  that  God  had  not 

*  neglected  them,  since  he  had  sent  them  gold,  palm- 

*  wine,  fruits,  corn,  oxen,  goats,  hens,  and  many  other 
'  things  necessary  to  life,  as  tokens  of  his  bounty.  But 
'  there  was  no  persuading  them  these  things  came  from 
'  God.     They  said  the  earth,  and  not  God,  gave  them 

*  gold,  which  was  dug  out  of  its  bowels ;  that  the  earth 

*  yielded  them  maize  and  rice,   and  that  not  without 

*  the  help  of  their  own  labour ;  that  for  fruits  they  were 
'  obliged  to  the  Portuguese,  who  had  planted  the  trees ; 

*  that  their  cattle  brought  them  young  ones,  and  the 

*  sea  furnished  them  with  fish ;  that,  however,  in  all 

*  these  their  own  industry  and  labour  were  required, 
'  without  which  they  must  starve ;  so  that  they  could 

*  not  see  how  they  were  obliged  to  God  for  any  of  those 
'  benefits/  When  Burton  spoke  to  the  Eastern  negroes 
about  the  Deity,  they  eagerly  asked  where  he  was  to  be 
found,  in  order  that  they  might  kill  him  ;  for  they  said, 
'Who  but  he  lays  waste  our  homes,  and  kills  our  wives 
'  and  cattle  ? '  The  following  expression  of  Eesa  feelingn, 
overheard  by  Burton,  gives  a  dreadful  illustration  of 
this  idea.  An  old  woman,  belonging  to  that  Arab  tribe, 
having  a  toothache,  offered  up  the  following  prayer: 
'  Oh,  Allah,  may  thy  teeth  ache  like  mine  I     Oh,  Allah, 

>  Astley's  CoUection  of  Vojages,  vol.  ii.  p.  604. 


SPIBITS  BEOABDED  A8  CAUSINO  DISEASE.     215 

may  thy  gums  be  as  sore  as  mine ! '    Can  this  be  called 
religion'  ?     Surely  in  spirit  it  is  the  very  reverse. 
Dr.  Nixon,  first  Bishop  of  Tasmania,  tells  ^  us  that 

among  the  natives  of  that  country  '  no  trace  can  be 
found  of  the  existence  of  any  religious  usage,  or  even 
sentiment  amongst  them ;  unless,  indeed,  we  may  call  by 
that  name  the  dread  of  a  mahgnant  and  destructive 
spirit,  which  seems  to  have  been  their  predominant,  if 
not  their  only,  feeling  on  the  subject.' 

In  New  Zealand,^  each  disease  was  regarded  as  being 

caused  by  a  particular  god ;  thus  '  Tonga  was  the  god 
who  caused  headache  and  sickness  :  he  took  up  his 
abode  in  the  forehead.  Mako-Tiki,  a  lizard  god,  was 
the  source  of  all  pains  in  the  breast ;  Tu-tangata-kino 
was  the  god  of  the  stomach ;  Titi-hai  occasioned  pains 
in  the  ancles  and  feet;  Rongomai  and  Tuparitapu 
were  the  gods  of  consumption ;  Koro-kio  presided  over 
cliildbirth/ 

In  North  America,  among  the  Carolina  tribes,  *  the 
theory  was  that  all  distempers  were  caused  by  evil 
spirits/  ^ 

*  Sickness,'  says  Yate,*  *is  brought  on  by  the 
"Atiia,"  who,  when  he  is  angry,  comes  to  them  in  the 
form  of  a  lizard,  enters  their  inside,  and  preys  upon 
their  vitals  till  tliey  die.  Hence  they  use  incantations 
over  the  sick,  with  the  expectation  of  cither  pro- 
pitiating the  angry  deity  or  of  driving  him  away ;  for 
the  latter  of  which  purposes  they  make  use  of  the 


*  Bonwick*8  Daily  Life  of  the  ciV.,  p.  114. 

Tasmaniansy  p.  172.  '  June8*8     Antiquities    uf    the 

*  Taylor's  New  Zealaud  and  its  Southern  Indians,  p.  .'jl. 
Inhabitants,  p.  34.      Shortlaud,  loc,  ^  Y'ate's  Nuw  Zealund|  p.  141. 


216  MADNE88  BBVEBENCED. 

*most  threatening  and  outrageous  language.*  The 
Stiens  of  Cambodia  believe  '  in   an   evil   genius,  and 

*  attribute  all  disease  to  him.     If  anyone  be  suflFering 

*  from  illness,  they  say  it  is  the  demon  tormenting 
'  him ;  and,  with  this  idea,  make,  night  and  day,  an 

*  insupportable  noise  around  the  patient.'  ^ 

The  Koussa  Kaffirs,^  says  Lichtenstein,  ascribe  all 
their  diseases  '  to  one  of  three  causes :  either  to  being 
'  enchanted  by  an  enemy ;  to  the  anger  of  certain  beings, 
'  whose  abode  appears  to  be  in  the  rivers ;   or  to  the 

*  power  of  evil  spirits.'  Among  the  Kols  of  Nagpore, 
as  Colonel  E.  T.  Dalton  tells  us,  *all  disease  in  men 

*  and  in  cattle  is  attributed  to  one  of  two  causes:  the 

*  >yrath  of  some  evil  spirit  who  has  to  be  appeased,  or 
'  the  spell  of  some  witch  or  sorcerer.'  ^  The  same,  in- 
deed, is  the  case  with  the  aboriginal  races  of  India 
generally.  '  Of  a  supreme  and  beneficent  God,'  says 
Hunter,*  '  the  Santal  has  no  conception.  His  religion 
'  is  a  religion  of  terror  and  degradation.  Hunted  and 
'  driven  from  country  to  country  by  a  superior  race,  he 
^  cannot  understand  how  a  Being  can  be  more  powerful 
^  than  himself  without  Avishing  to  harm  him.'  The 
Circassians^  and  some  of  the  Chinese**  have  also  the 
same  belief. 

Hence  it  is  that  mad  people  are  in  many  countries 
looked  on  with  so  much  reverence,  smce  they  are  re- 
garded as  the  special  abode  of  some  deity."      Savages 

^  Mouhot*.s  Travels  in  the  Cen-  *  Kleram,Allpr.  Cult.  d.  MoDsch., 

tral  Parts  of  Imlo-China,  vol.  i.  p.  vol.  iv.  p.  .%. 
L^.'iO.  «  Tniiis.    Eihn.    Soc.    l'??©,   p. 

-  Lichtenstein,  vol.  ii.  p.  2o'\  21. 

•■♦  Trans.   IHhn.  Soc.,  X.S.,  16»;8,  '  See     Cook,     Voyage     to    the 

p.  -50.  Pacific,  vol.  ii.  p.  18. 

*  Annals  of  Rural  Bengal,  p.  IS  J. 


BELIEF  IN  WITCHCBAFT.  217 

who  believe  that  diseases  are  owing  to  magic  naturally 
conclude  that  death  is  so  too.  Far  from  having  realised 
to  themselves  the  idea  of  a  future  life,  they  have  not  even 
learut  that  death  is  the  natural  end  of  this  one.  We 
find  a  very  general  conviction  among  savages  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  natural  death,  and  that  when  a  man 
dies  without  being  wounded  he  must  be  the  victim  of 
magic. 

Thus  Mr.  Lang,  ^  speaking  of  the  Australians,  says 
that  whenever  a  native  dies,  *  no  matter  how  evident  it 
^may  be  that  death  has   been  the  result  of  natural 

*  causes,  it  is  at  once  set  down  that  the  defunct  was 

*  bewitched  by  the  sorcerers  of  some  neighbouring  tribe.' 
Among  the  natives  of  Southern  Africa  no  one  is  sup- 
posed to  die  naturally.^  The  Bechuanas,  says  Philip, 
^  and  all  the  Kaffir  tribes,  have  no  idea  of  any  man 

*  dying  except  from  hunger,  violence,  or   witchcraft. 

*  If  a  man  die  even  at  the  age  of  ninety,  if  he  do  not  die 
*of  hunger  or  by  violence,  his  death  is  imputed   to 

*  sorcery   or  to   witchcraft,  and  blood   is   required   to 

*  expiate  or  avenge  it.' '  So  also  Battel  tells  us  that 
on  the  Guinea  Coast  *none  on  any  account  dieth, 
*but  that  some  other  has  bewitched  them  to  death.'* 
DobritzhoflTcr^  mentions  that,  *  even  if  an  Abipon  die 

*  from  being  pierced  with  many  wounds,  or  from  having 
*hi8  bones  broken,  or  his  strength  exhausted  by  ex- 

*  treme  old  age,  his  countrymen  all  deny  that  wounds 

•  *  Lecture  on  the  Aborigines  of  '  Philip's  South  Africa,  vol.  i.  p. 

AnttnliA,  p.  14.    See  also  Oldfield's  118. 

Trant.  Ethn.  Soc.,  N.S.,  vol.  iii.  p.  *  Adventures  of  Andrew  Battel, 

236.  Pinkerton,  vol.  xvi.  p.  334.   See  also 

*  Cbapmaa'a  Travela  in  Africa,  Astley,  vol.  ii.  p.  300. 
Tol.  i.  p.  47.  *  Loc.  cH,,  vol.  ii.  p.  84. 


218  DISBELIEF  OF  NATURAL  DEATH. 

'  or  weakness  occasioned  his  death,  and  anxiously  try  to 
^  discover  by  which  of  the  jugglers,  and  for  what  reason, 
^  he  was  killed.'  Stevenson  ^  states  that  in  South 
America  ^  the  Indians  never  believe  that  death  is 
^  owing  to  natural  causes,  but  that  it  is  the  effect  of 

*  sorcery  and  witchcraft.  Thus  on  the  death  of  an  in- 
'dividual  one  or  more  diviners  are  consulted,  who 
'  generally  name  the  enchanter,  and  are  so  implicitly 

*  believed,  that  the  unfortunate  object  of  their  caprice 
^  or  malice  is  certain  to  fall  a  sacrifice.'  Wallace  '  found 
the  same  idea  among  the  tribes  of  the  Amazons ;  Miiller' 
mentions  it  as  prevalent  among  the  Dacotahs;  Heame^ 
among  the  Hudson's  Bay  Indians. 

But  though  spirits  are  naturally  much  to  be  dreaded 
on  various  accounts,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  they 
should  be  conceived  as  necessarily  wiser  or  more  power 
ful  than  men.  Of  this  our  table-turners  and  spirit- 
rappers  give  a  modern  illustration.  So  also  the  natives 
of  the  Nicobar  Islands  were  in  the  habit  of  putting  up 
scarecrows  to  frighten  the  *  Eewees '  away  from  their 
villages.^  The  inhabitants  of  Eamtschatka,  according 
to  Kotzebue,^  insult  their  deities  if  their  wishes  are 
unfulfilled.  They  even  feel  a  contempt  for  them.  If 
Kutka,  they  say,  had  not  been  so  stupid,  would  he 
have  made  inaccessible  rocks,  and  too  rapid  rivers?' 
The  Lapps,  according  to  Klemm,  made  idols  for  their 
deities,  and  placed  each  in  a  separate  box,  on  which 

*  Travels  in  South  America,  vol.      p.  00. 

i.  p.  ^^.  6  T^'C,  n't.,  vol.  ii.  p.  1.1. 

'^  L^fc,  ci'f.y  p.  500.  7  Klemm,   C'ult.    d.    Menschen, 

*  Amer.  rrreli>,nonen,  p.  82.  vol.   ii.   p.   ;jl8.     Mullcr'a   I>o«.  de 

*  Loc.  cXf  p.  338.  toutes    lea    Nations    do     THmpiro 

*  Voyage  of  the  Nov.irft,  toI.  ii.      Kiwse,  pi,  iii.  p.  l>2. 


LOW  WEAB  OF  SPIRITS.  219 

they  indicated  the  name  of  the  deity,  so  that  each 
might  know  its  own  box.^ 

Vancouver*  mentions  that  the  inhabitants  of  Owhy- 
hee  were  seriously  offended  with  their  deity  for  per- 
mitting the  death  of  a  popular  young  chief  named 
Whokaa.  Yate  observes®  that  the  New  Zealanders, 
attributing  certain  diseases  to  the  attacks  of  the  Atua, 
endeavour  either  to  propitiate  or  drive  him  away ;  in 
the  latter  case  *  they  make  use  of  the  most  threatening 

*  and  outrageous  language,  sometimes  telling  their  deity 

*  that  they  will  kill  and  eat  him.' 

In  India  the  seven  great  *  Rishis '  or  penitents  are 
described  in  some  of  the  popular  tales  as  even  superior 
to  the  gods.     One  of  them  is  said  to  have  '  paid  a  visit 

*  to  each  of  the  three  principal  divinities  of  India,  and 

*  began  his  interview  by  giving  each  of  them  a  kick ! 

*  His  object  was  to  know  how  they  would  demean  them* 

*  selves,  and  to  find  out  their  temper,  by  the  conduct 

*  which  they  would  adopt  upon  such  a  salutation.    The 

*  penitents  always  maintained  a  kind  of  superiority  over 

*  the  godsy  and  punished  them  severely  when  they  found 
'  them  in  fault/  ^ 

The  negro  of  Guinea  beats  his  Fetich  if  his  wishes 
are  not  complied  with,  and  hides  him  in  his  waist-cloth, 
if  about  to  do  anything  of  which  he  is  ashamed,  so 
that  the  Fetich  may  not  be  able  to  see  what  is  going 
on.* 

During  a  storm  the  Bechuanas  cursed  the  Deity  for 

«  Loe.  at.,  Tol.  iu.  p.  81.  lubo,  vol.  iii.  pp.  24/5,  440,  470. 

•  Voyage  of  Discovery,  vol.  iii.  *  Diiboi:*,  loc,  cit,,  p.  804, 

p.  14.  *  Aatley'a  Collection  of  Voyngea, 

*  Account  of  New  Zealand,  p.      vol.  ii.  p.  (j08.   Tuckey's  Exp.  to  the 
141.    D'UrTille*8  Voyage  de  TAstro-     Zaire,  p.  377. 


220  LOW  IDEAS  OF  8PIBIT8. 

sending  thunder;^  tlie  Mincopies^  and  the  XamaquaB 
shot  poisoned  arrows  at  storms  to  drive  them  away.^ 
When  the  Basuto  (Kaffir)  is  on  a  marauding  expedition 
he  *  gives  utterance  to  those  cries  and  hisses  in  which 
'  cattle-drivers  indulge  when  they  drive  a  herd  before 
*them;  thinking  in  this  manner  to  persuade  the  poor 
'  divinities  (of  the  country  they  are  attacking)  that  he 
4s  bringing  cattle  to  their  worshippers,  instead  of 
^  coming  to  take  it  from  them.'  * 

According  to  Thomson,^  the  natives  of  Cambodia 
assumed  that  the  Deity  did  not  understand  foreign 
languages.  Franklin^  says  that  the  Cree  Indians  treat 
their  deity,  whom  they  call  Kepoochikawn,  *  with  con- 

*  siderablc  familiarity,  interlarding  their  most  solemn 
'  speeches  with  expostulations  and  threats  of  neglect  if 

*  he  fails  in  complymg  with  their  requests.'  The  North 
Australian  native  ^  will  not  go  near  graves  *  at  night  by 
'  himself;  but  when  they  are  obliged  to  pass  them  they 
'  carry  a  firc-stick  to  keep  off  the  spirit  of  darkness.' 

The  Kyoun<rtha  of  Chittagong  are  Buddhists.  Their 
villatre  temples  contain  a  small  stand  of  bells  and  an 
image  of  IJoodh,  which  the  villagers  generally  worship 
morning  and  evening, '  first  ringing  the  bells  to  let  him 
'  know  that  tliey  are  there.'®  The  Sinto  temples  of  the 
Sun  ( Joddoss  in  Japan  also  contain  a  bell,  '  intended  to 

*  iirouse  the  goddess  and  to  awaken  her  attention  to  the 


^  (.'linpmairs  Travtl.s  iu   Africa,  2oO. 
Vol.  i.  p.  io.  ^-  N'i.sit  to  tlie  Polar  Soas,  vol.  iv. 

-  l).iy,  p.  17 '2.  p.  1  ICi. 

'  Wood's    Natural     History    of  "   Koppcl's   Visit  to   the   Indian 

Mill),  vol.  i.  p.  .*J07.  Arcliipi'Ia^^o,  vol.  ii.  p.  l"^!*. 

*  Casalis*  BaMito?.,  p.  iV>.].  »  J.o\vin*a  Hill  Tracts  of  ChittA- 


*  Trana.  ICtlin.  8oc.,  vol.  vi.  p.      gonp,  p.  ;«», 


OBEEK  AND  SOMAN  CONGEPTtONS.  221 

*  prayers  of  her  worshippers.'  ^  According  to  the 
Brahmans,^  'two   things   are  indispensably  necessary 

*  to  the  sacrificer  in  performing  the  ceremony  :  several 
^  lighted  lamps  and  a  bell.' 

The  Shamans  among  the  Tonguses  and  Buracts,  ac- 
cording to  Miiller,  *  font  resonner  le  tambour  magique 

*  pour  convoquer  les  Dieux,  les  Diables,  et  les  Esprits, 
*etpourleur8  rendre  atteiitifs.' ^  The  Tartars  of  the 
Altai  picture  to  themselves  the  Deity  as  an  old  man, 
with  a  long  beard,  and  dressed  in  the  uniform  of  a 
Russian  officer  of  dragoons.* 

Even  the  Greeks  and  Romans  believed  stories  very 
derogatory,  not  only  to  the  moral  character  but  to  the 
intellect  and  power  of  their  deities.  Thus  they  were 
liable  to  defeat  from  mortals ;  Mars,  though  the  God  of 
War,  was  wounded  by  Diomed  and  fled  away  howling 
with  pain.  They  had  little  or  no  power  over  the  ele- 
ments; they  had  no  foreknowledge,  and  were  often 
represented  as  inferior,  both  morally  and  mentally,  to 
men.  Even  Homer  does  not  seem  to  have  embraced 
the  idea  of  omnipotence.^ 

Again,  Diomed  not  only  wounds  Venus  in  the  hand 
but  addresses  her  in  most  insulting  terms :  — 

Daughter  of  Jove,  from  battlefields  retire ; 
Enough  for  thee  weak  women  to  delude ; 
If  war  thou  seek'st,  the  lesscm  thou  ahalt  learn 
Shall  cause  thee  shudder  but  to  hear  it  named.^ 


>  Smithes  Ten  Weeks  in  Japan,  ^  Miiller^s  l)es.  de  toutes  les  Nat. 

pu  40.    See    also  Gutzlaft^s  Three  do  TKinp.  Russe,  pt.  ill.  p.  142. 
Voyages  to  China,  p.  273.  ^  Gladstone's  Juventus    Mundi, 

•  Duboia,  The  People  of  India,  pp.  108,  228.    See  also  Muller*s  Sci. 
p.  400.  System  of  Mythology,  p.  292. 

*  Dea.  de  toutes  les  Nations  de  °  Iliad,  Lord  Derby's  translation, 
l*Eapire  Ruase,  pt  iiL  p.  lo9.  t.  007. 


222  SAVAGE  IDEAS  AS  TO  ECLIPSES. 

Venus  flies  to  Dione,  who  says  : — 

Have  patience,  dearest  cbild ;  thongh  much  enforced, 

Restrain  thine  anger ;  we,  in  heaven  who  dwell. 

Have  much  to  bear  from  mortals ;  and  ourselves 

Too  oft  upon  each  other  sufferings  lay. 

Mars  had  his  sufferings ;  by  Aloeus'  sons, 

Otus  and  Ephialtes,  strongly  bound, 

He  thirteen  months  in  brazen  fetters  lay : 

And  there  had  pined  away  the  God  of  War, 

Insatiate  Mars,  had  not  their  stepmother. 

The  beauteous  Eriboea,  sought  the  aid 

Of  Hermes ;  he  by  stealth  released  the  god, 

Sore  worn  and  wasted  by  his  galling  chains. 

Juno  too  suffered,  when  Amphitryon's  son  ' 

Through  her  right  breast  a  tiiree-barbed  arrow  sent 

Dire,  and  unheard  of,  were  the  pangs  she  bore. 

Great  Pluto's  self  the  stinging  arrow  felt, 

AVhen  that  same  son  of  eegis-bearing  Jove 

Assailed  him  in  the  very  gates  of  hell. 

And  wrought  him  keenest  anguish ;  pierced  with  pun 

To  high  Olympus,  to  the  courts  of  Jove, 

Groaning,  he  came ;  the  bitter  shaft  remained 

Deep  in  his  shoulder  fixed,  and  grieved  his  soul ; 

But  Prcon's  hand  with  soothing  anodynes 

(For  death  on  him  was  powerless)  healed  the  wound. 

In  fact,  it  may  truly  be  said  that  the  savage  has  a 
much  greater  respect  for  his  chief  than  for  his  god.* 
This  low  estimate  of  spirits  is  shown  in  a  very  striking 
manner  by  the  behaviour  of  savages  during  eclipses.  All 
over  the  world  we  find  races  of  men  who  believe  that 
the  sun  and  moon  are  alive,  and  who  consider  that 
during  eclipses  they  are  either  quarrelling  witli  each 
other,  or  attacked  by  the  evil  spirits  of  the  air.  Hence 
it  naturally  follows,  although  to  us  it  seems  absurd, 
that  the  savage  endeavours  to  assist  the  sun  or  moon. 
The  Grecnlanders*^  regard  the  sun  and  moon  as  sister 
and  brother ;  the  former  being  the  female,  and  being 

'  Sec  Burton's  Abbeokuta,  toI.  i.  p.  180.    Dubois,  loc,  cU.,  pp.  S04, 430, 
«  Cmntz,  vol.  i.  p.  232. 


SAVAQE  IDEAS  AS  TO  ECLIPSES.  223 

constantly  pursued  by  the  latter.  During  an  eclipse 
they  think  the  moon  ^  goes  about  among  the  houses  to 
^  pilfer  their  skins  and  eatables,  and  even  to  kill  those 

*  people  that  have  not  duly  observed  the  rules  of  absti- 

*  ncnce.    At  such  times  they  hide  away  everything,  and 

*  the  men  carry  chests  and  kettles  on  the  top  of  the 
^  house,  and  rattle  and  beat  upon  them  to  frighten  away 
^  the  moon,  and  make  him  return  to  his  place.     At  an 

*  eclipse  of  the  sun  the  women  pinch  the  dogs  by  the 

*  ears ;  if  they  cry,  'tis  a  sign  that  the  end  of  the  world 

*  is  not  yet  come.' 

The  Iroquois,  says  Dr.  Mitchill,^  believe  that 
eclipses  are  caused  by  a  bad  spirit,  '  who  mischievously 
intercepts  the  light  intended  to  be  shed  upon  the  earth 
and  its  inhabitants.  Upon  such  occasions  the  greatest 
solicitude  exists.  All  the  individuals  of  the  tribe  feel 
a  strong  desire  to  drive  away  the  demon,  and  to  re- 
move thereby  the  impediment  to  the  transmission  of 
luminous  rays.  For  this  purpose  they  go  forth,  and, 
by  crying,  shouting,  drumming,  and  the  firing  of  guns, 
endeavour  to  frighten  him.  They  never  fail  in  their 
object;  for  by  courage  and  perseverance,  they  infal- 
libly drive  him  off.  His  retreat  is  succeeded  by  a  re- 
turn of  the  obstructed  light.' 
The  Caribs,  says  Lafitau,  accounted  for  eclipses  by 
supposing  either  that  the  moon  was  ill,  or  that  she  was 
attacked  by  enemies;  these  they  endeavoured  to  drive 
away  by  dances,  by  cries,  and  by  the  sacred  rattle.* 
The  Chiquito  Indians,®  according  to  Dobritzhofier,  think 

>  Archieol.  Americana,  vol.  L  p.  Islands,  p.  272.    Depons'  Tray,  in 

851.  S.  America,  toI.  i.  p.  107. 

*  Lafitau,  Tol  L  pp.  2^8,  252.  *  Loc.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  84. 

Tertie,    History    of  the    Caribby 


224  VARIOUS  NOTIONS  AS  TO  ECLIPSES. 

that  the  sun  and  moon  during  eclipses  are  ^  cruelly  torn 
'  by  dogs,  with  which  they  think  that  the  air  abounds, 

*  when  tliey  see  their  light  fail;  attributing  their  blood- 
'  red  colour  to  the  bites  of  these  animals.  Accordingly, 
'  to  defend  their  dear  planets  from  those  aerial  mastiffs, 

*  they  send  a  shower  of  arrows  up  into  the  sky,  amid 

*  loud  vociferations,  at  the  time  of  the  eclipse.'  When 
the  Guaycurus,  says  Charlevoix,  *  think  themselves 
'  threatened  with  a  storm,  they  sally  out  of  their  towns, 

*  the  men  armed  with  their  mancanas,  and  the  women 
'  and  children  howling  with  all  their  might ;  for  they 

*  believe  that,  by  so  doing,  they  put  to  flight  the  devil 
'  that  intended  to  excite  it.'  ^  The  ancient  Peruvians, 
also,  during  eclipses  of  the  moon,  used  to  beat  their 
dogs  in  order  that  by  their  bowlings  they  might  awaken ' 
her  out  of  the  swoon  into  which  she  was  supposed  to 
have  fallen.^ 

The  Chinese  of  Kiatka  thought  that  eclipses  were 
caused  by  the  evil  spirit  placing  his  hand  on  the  moon, 
in  whose  defence  they  immediately  made  as  much  noise 
as  possible.^  The  Stiens  of  Cambodia,*  like  the  Cam- 
bodians themselves,  account  for  eclipses  by  the  hy- 
pothesis '  that  some  being  has  swallowed  up  the  sun 
'  and  the  moon;  and,  in  order  to  deliver  them,  they 
'  made  a  frightful   noise,   beat  the   tam-tam,    uttered 

*  savage  cries,  and  shot  arrows  into  the  air,  until  the 
'  sun  reappeared.' 

During  an  eclipse  the  Sumatrans  *  also  '  make  a  loud 

*  History  of  Paragufty,  vol.  i.  p.  *  Mouhot^s    Travels    in    Indo- 

02.    See  also  p.  r>03.  China,  vol.  i.  p.  263. 

'^  G.  de  la  Vega,  vol.  i.  p.  181 ;  ^  Marsden^s  Ilistory  of  Sumatra, 

Martius,  ^.  c/V.y  p.  32.  p.    104.     Anderson's    Mis^on    to 

'  Pallas,  vol.  iv.  p.  220.  Sumatra,  p.  70. 


VARIOUS  MOTIONS  A8  TO  ECLIPSES.  2*25 

*  noise   with    sounding    instruments,   to  prevent  one 

*  luminary  firom  devouring  the  other,  as  the  Chinese,  to 

*  frighten  away  the  dragon;  a  superstition  that  has  its 

*  source  in  the  ancient  systems  of  astronomy  (particu- 

*  larly  the  Hindu),  where  the  nodes  of  the  moon  are 

*  identified  with  the  dragon's  head  and  tail.     They  tell 

*  of  a  man  in  the  moon  who  is  continually  employed  in 

*  spinning  cotton,  but  that  every  night  a  rat  gnaws  his 
'  thread,  and  obliges  him  to  begin  his  work  afresh.' 

*  In  Eastern  Africa/  Speke  ^  mentions  that  on  one 
occasion,  ^  as  there  was  a  partial  eclipse  of  the  moon,  all 
^  the  Wanguana  marched  up  and  down  from  Rumanika's 

*  to  Nnanagi's  huts,  singing  and  beating  our  tin  cook- 

*  ing-pots  to  frighten  oflF  the  spirit  of  the  sun  from  con- 

*  suming  entirely  the  chief  object  of  reverence,   the 

*  moon.'  Lander  *  mentions  that  at  Boussa,  in  Central 
Afnca,  an  eclipse  was  attributed  to  an  attack  made  by 
the  sun  on  the  moon.  During  the  whole  time  the 
eclipse  lasted  the  natives  made  as  much  noise  as  pos- 
sible, '  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  frighten  away  the  sun 

*  to  his  proper  sphere,  and  leave  the  moon  to  enlighten 
'  the  world  as  at  other  times.' 

I  was  myself  at  Darhoot,  in  Upper  Egypt,  last  year, 
during  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,  and  the  natives  fired 
guns,  either  to  frighten  away  the  moon's  assailants,  or, 
as  some  said,  out  of  joy  at  her  escape  from  danger, 
though  it  may  be  observed  that  the  firing  began  during 
the  eclipse. 

I  reserve  to  a  future  chapter  the  consideration  of 
the  ideas  which  prevail  among  the  lower  races  on  the 

>  Speke,  p.  243. 

'  It.  and  I.  Lnnden'  Niger  Expedition,  vol.  ii.  pp.  180, 18.3. 


226  BELIEF  IN  OHOSTa. 

subject  of  the  soul ;  but  I  must  here  remark  that  one  of 
the  difficulties  in  arriving  at  any  clear  conception  of  the 
religious  system  of  the  lower  races  arises  from  a  coofa- 
sion  between  a  belief  in  ghosts  and  that  in  an  immortal 
spirit.  Yet  the  two  are  essentially  distinct;  and  the 
spirit  is  not  necessarily  regarded  as  immortal,  becaiue 
it  does  not  perish  with  the  body.  The  negroeSi  for  in- 
stance, says  one  of  our  keenest  observers,  Captain 
Burton,  ^  believe  in  a  ghost,  but  not  in  a  spirit;  in  a 
^  present  immaterial,  but  not  in  a  future/^  Counting 
on  nothing  after  the  present  life,  there  is  for  them 
no  hope  beyond  the  grave.  They  wail  and  sorpow 
with   a  burden    of   despair.      ^Amekwisha' — ^'he  is 

*  finished '- — is  the  East  African's  last  word  concern- 
ing parent  or  friend*  '  All  is  done  for  ever,'  sing  the 
West  Africans.  The  least  allusion  to  loss  of  life  makes 
their  black  skins  pale.  *  Ah ! '  they  exclaim,  *  it  is  bad 
^  to  die ;  to  leave  house  and  home,  wife  and  children ; 

*  no  more  to  wear  soft  cloth,  nor  eat  meat,  nor  smoke 
'  tobacco.'  The  Bongos  of  Soudan  have,  says  Schwein- 
furth,^  not  the  remotest  conception  of  immortality. 
Tliey  have  no  more  idea  of  the  transmigration  of  soula, 
or  any  doctrine  of  the  kind,  than  they  have  of  the 
existence  of  an  ocean.  The  Hudson's  Bay  Indians, 
according  to  Hearne,^  a  good  observer,  and  one  who  had 
ample  means  of  judging,  had  no  idea  of  any  life  after 
death. 

In  other  cases  the  spirit  is  supposed  to  survive  the 
body  for  a  certain  time,  and   to   linger  about  its  old 

'  Burton,     Trans.     Kihu.     Si>c.,  ^  Li»c.   cit.j   p.   :{44,       iscc  alao 

N.S.,  vt>l.  i.  p.  Ii2:i.  mdv,  p.  UO. 

^  llcait  of  Africft,  vol.  i.  p.  a04. 


BELIEF  IN  0H0ST8.  227 

abode.  Ask  the  negro,  says  M.  Du  Chaillu,^  '  where  is 
*  the  spirit  of  his  great-grandfather  ?  he  says  he  does 
'  not  know ;  it  is  done.     Ask  him  about  the  spirit  of  his 

*  father  or  brother  who  died  yesterday,  then  he  is  full 

*  of  fear  and  terror;  he  believes  it  to  be  generally  near 
'  the  place  where  the  body  has  been  buried,  and  among 
'  many  tribes  the  village  is  removed  immediately  after 

*  the  death  of  one  of  the  inhabitants/  The  same  belief 
prevalU  among  the  Amazulu  Eaflirs,  as  has  been  well 
Bhown  by  Mr.  Callaway.^  They  believe  that  the  spirits 
of  their  deceased  fathers  and  brothers  still  live,  because 
they  appear  in  dreams ;  by  inverse  reasoning,  however, 
grandfathers  are  generally  regarded  as  having  ceased  to 
exist. 

Bosman  mentions  that  on  the  Guinea  Coast,  when 

*  any  considerable  person  dies,  they  perplex  one  another 

*  with  horrid  fears,  proceeding  from  an  opinion  that  he 
^appears  for  several  nights  successively  near  his  late 

*  dwelling.'  ^  Thus  it  seems  that  the  power  of  a  ghost 
after  death  bears  some  relation  to  that  which  the  man 
possessed  when  alive. 

For  the  dead,  also,  the  prospect  is  cheerless  enough. 
For  instance,  according  to  Livingstone,  the  natives  of 
Angola  fancy  that  when  dead  they  will  be  '  completely 

*  in  the  power  of  the  disembodied  spirits,  and  look  upon 
'  the  prospect  of  following  them  as  the  greatest  of  mis- 
'  fortunes.'  * 

Other  negroes  think  that  after  death  they  become 
white  men  ^ — a  curious  idea,  which  also  occurs  in  Aus- 

^  Trans,  Ethn,  Soc,  N.S.,  toL  i.  '  Bosman,  ioc,  city  p.  402. 

p.  300.  *  Travels  in  S.  Africa,  p.  440. 

'  The  Religious  System  of  the  *  Bosman,  Ioc,  cU.j  p.  401. 

Amazulu,  1800. 

q2 


228    FUTURE  LIFE  DEPENDENT  ON  MODE  OF  DEATH. 

tralia/  in  Tasmania,-  in  Tanna,'  New  Guinea,*  and  New 
Caledonia,^  that  is  to  say,  in  at  least  four  of  the  most 
distinct  human  races.     Among  the  Tipperahs  of  Chitta- 
gong,  if  a   man  dies  away  from  home,  his  relatives 
stretch  a  thread  over  all  the  intermediate  streamfijSo 
that  the  spirit  of  the  dead  man  may  return  to  his  ovn 
village ;   it   being   supposed   that   '  without   assistance 

*  spirits  are  unable  to  cross  running  water ;  therefwe 

*  the  stream  here  had  been  bridged  in  the  manner  afore- 
'  said.'®  We  know  that  a  somewhat  similar  idea  existed  in 
Iilurope,  and  it  occurs  also  in  the  Feejee  Islands. 

Again,  some  modes  of  death  are  suj^posed  to  kill  not 
only  the  body,  but  the  spirit  also.     Thus  a  Bushman^ 
having  put  to  death  a  woman,  who  was  a  magidan, 
dashed  the  head   of  the   corpse   to  pieces  with  large 
stones,  buried  her,  and  made  a  large  fire  over  the  grave, 
for  fear,  as  he  explained  to  Lichtenstein,  lest  she  should 
rise  again  and   *  trouble  him.'  ^     Even  the  New  Zea- 
landers    believed    that    a  man   who   was    eaten  vm 
destroyed,  both  body  and  spirit.     The  same  idea  evi- 
dently influenced  the  Galifornian  who,  as  recorded  by 
Mr.  Gibbs,  did  not  dispute  the  immortality  of  the  whites 
who  buried  their  dead,  but  could  not  believe  the  same 
of  his  own  people,  because  they  were  in  the  habit  of 
burning  them.® 

In  these  cases  it  will  be  observed  that  the  existence 

*  Lung's  Queensland,    pp.  348,  *  Brcnchley's    Cniise     of    the 
354.                                                           'OiirR9oa,'  p.  342.     See  rL«k)  Biuf- 

'  Bonwick's  Daily   Life  of    the      ton's  Dahome,  vol.  ii.  p.  165. 
Tasmanians,  p.  184.  «  Lewin's  IliU  Tracts  of  ChitU- 

*  Turner's   Nineteen    Years    in      gong,  p.  84. 

Polynesifl,  p.  424.  "  Lichtenfltein,  vol.  ii.  p.  61. 

*  ( lill,  Journ.  H.  Geog.  Soc.  1873,  ^  Schoolcraft's  Indian  Tribes,  Pi. 
p.  J3*{.                                                        HI.  p.  107, 


BELIEF  IN  THE  PLURALITY  OF  SOULS.        229 

of  the  ghost  depends  upon  the  manner  of  death,  and 
the  mode  of  burial.  This  is  no  doubt  absurd,  but  it  is 
not  illogical.  The  savage's  idea  of  a  spirit  is  something 
ethereal  indeed,  but  not  altogether  immaterial,  and  con- 
aeqaently  it  may  be  injured  by  violence.  Some  races 
^  believe  in  ghosts  of  the  living,  as  well  as  of  the  dead. 
For  inBtance,  the  Feejeeans  ^  believe  *  that  the  spirit  of 

*  a  man  who  still  lives  will  leave  the  body  to  trouble 

*  other  people  when  asleep.     When  anyone  faints  or 
'  dies,  their  spirit,  it  is  said,  may  sometimes  be  brought 

*  back  by  calling  after  it.' 

Even  when  the  ideas  of  a  soul  and  of  future  life  are 
more  developed,  they  are  far  from  always  taking  the 
direction  of  our  beliefs.  Thus  the  Carlbs  and  Redskins 
believe  that  a  man  has  more  than  one  soul;  to  this 
they  are  probably  led  by  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  and 
the  arteries,  which  they  regard  as  evidences  of  indepen- 
dent  life.  Thus  also  they  account  for  inconsistencies  of 
behaviour. 

The  belief  in  ghosts,  then,  is  essentially  different 
frcHn  our  notions  of  a  future  life.  Ghosts  are  mortal, 
they  haunt  burial-grounds  and  hover  round  their  own 
graves.  Even  when  a  higher  stage  has  been  gained,  the 
place  of  departed  souls  is  not  a  heaven,  but  merely  a 
better  earth. 

Divination  and  sorcery  are  so  widely  distributed 
that  they  may  almost  be  said  to  be  universal.  Their 
characteristics  are  so  well  known  and  so  similar  all 
over  the  world,  that  I  shall  only  give  a  few  suggestive 
Qlustrations. 

^  fiji  and  the  Fijians^  toL  i.  p.  242. 


230  DIVINATION. 

Whipple  ^  thus  describes  a  scene  of  divination  among 
the  Cherokees.  The  priest,  having  concluded  an  elo- 
quent address,  took  '  a  curiously  wrought  bowl,  alleged 
to  be  of  great  antiquity ;  he  filled  it  with  water  and 
placed  the  black  substance  within,  causing  it  to  move 
from  one  side  to  the  other,  and  from  bottom  to  top, 
by  a  word.  Alluding,  then,  to  danger  and  foes,  the 
enchanted  mineral  fled  from  the  point  of  his  knife; 
but  as  he  began  to  speak  of  peace  and  security,  it 
turned  toward  and  clung  to  it,  till  lifted  entirely  from 
the  water.  The  priest  finally  interpreted  the  omen  by 
informing  the  people  that  peace  was  in  the  ascendant, 
no  enemy  being  near.'  In  West  AMca*  they  have  a 
mode  of  divination  with  nuts,  *  which  they  pretend  to 
take  up  by  guess,  and  let  fall  again ;  after  which  they 
tell  them,  and  form  their  answers  according  as  the 
numbers  are  even  or  odd.'  The  negroes  of  Egba' 
consult  Shango  by  *  throwing  sixteen  pierced  cowries: 
if  eight  fall  upwards  and  eight  downwards,  it  is  peace; 
if  all  are  upwards,  it  is  also  a  good  sign ;  and  vice 
versd^  if  all  fall  with  their  teeth  to  the  ground,  it 
is  war.' 

The  Lapps  have  a  curious  mode  of  divination.  They 
put  a  shoulder-blade  in  the  fire,  and  then  foretell  the 
future  by  the  aiTangement  of  the  cracks  (figs.  15-17)' 
The  same  custom  exists  among  the  Mongols*  and  Ton- 
guses  ^  of  Siberia,  the  Afighans,*  the  Bedouins,  and  even 


^  Keport  on  tho  Indian  Tribes,  p.  iii.  p.  100. 
35.  »  MiUler's    Des.    de    toutes  1* 

'  Aetley's  Collection  of  Voyages,  Nat  de  TEmp.  Rusae.,  Pt.  ffl*  ^ 

vol  ii.  p.  674.  163. 

'  Abbeokuta,  toI.  i.  p.  188.  *  Masson's  Jouraejs  in  BeloO' 

^  Klemm,  Cult.  derMonsch.,  vol.  chistan,  yol.  iii.  p.  334. 


DIVINATION.  281 

in  our  own  country.'  The  lines  vary  of  course  greatly, 
still  there  are  certain  principal  cracks  which  usually 
occur.  The  following  figures  of  Kalmuck  specimens 
•re  copied  &om  Klemm,  who  explains,  after  Pallas,  the 
;  of  the  Tarioufi  lines. 


■  tHOVLDKB-BUDBtl  PBEFABSD  FOE  BITINiTIOII.      (KlemtD,  CuUwg.  del 

Menschlieit,  toL  iil  p.  200.) 

Other  Yakuts  profess  to  foretell  the  future  by  the 
Imes  of  the  palm  of  the  hand.' 

The  ChipewyauB  of  North  America  also  make  their 
mag^c  drawings  on  shoulder-blades,  which  they  then 


•  Tyloi'B  PrimitiTe  Culture,  vol.      de  I'Empire  de  Russe,  Pt  III.  p. 
H.  PL  113.  les. 

*  MullN't  Dm  de  tout  lea  N«t. 


232  BWINATIOlf. 

throw  into  the  fire.^  Williams'  describes  various  modes 
of  divination  practised  in  Feejee. 

Canon  Callaway  gives  an  interesting  account  of 
divination  as  practised  among  the  Zulus,  and  mentions 
one  case  in  which  the  persons  enquiring  of  the  magician 
gave  him  no  clue  to  the  answer  they  expected,  upon 
which  he  gravely  told  them  that  *  they  did  not  know 

*  how  to  enquire  of  a  diviner/  so  he  would  send  his 
servant  to  hear  their  case,  and  put  the  enquiries  for 
them.  An  amusing  illustration  of  the  manner  in 
which  people  allow  themselves  to  be  deceived.' 

Dr.  Anderson  mentions  a  similar  illustration  firom 
West  Yunan.*     *  Three  men  had  gone  to  the  Kakhycn 

*  hills,  and  a  report  having  reached  their  families  that 

*  one  of  them  had  died,  the  old  hags  were  deciding 

*  upon  the  truth  of  the  rumour,  and  determining  which 

*  of  the  men  it  was  who  had  passed  into  N&tland.    To 

*  arrive  at  this,  they  had  taken,  for  each  of  the  men 

*  whose  fates  were  to  be  determined,  a  small  piece  of 

*  cotton -wool,  and  strung  it  through  the  eye  of  a  needle; 

*  and  giving  to  each  a  special  mark  and  the  name  of  a 

*  man,  they  had  let  the  needles  gently  into  the  water  in 

*  which  they  were  suspended  by  the  cotton  float.     It 
'  takes  some  time  before  the  cotton  is  so  thoroughly 

*  wetted  as  to  sink,  but  the  needle  which  first  drops  to 

*  the   bottom  consigns  the  unfortunate  whose  name  it 
'bears  to  the  land  of  forgetfulness.' 

In  New  Zealand,  before  a  warlike   expedition  is 

*  Tanner*8  Narrative,  p.  192.  •  Rt^li^oua  System  of  the  Am*- 

'  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  vol.  i.  p.  zulu,  Pi,  III.  p.  328. 

228.    See  also  Mariner's  Tonga  li-  *  Exped.  to  Western  Yunan,  p. 

lands,  vol.  ii.  p.  230.  230. 


80R0EBY.  2SS 

undertaken)  the  natives  sometimes  plant  sticks  in  the 
ground  in  two  rows,  one  of  which  denotes  their  own 
party,  the  other  that  of  the  enemy.  If  the  wind  blows 
the  enemy's  sticks  backwards,  they  will  be  defeated  ; 
if  forwards,  they  will  be  victorious ;  if  obliquely,  the 
expedition  will  be  indecisive.  The  same  criterion  is 
applied  to  their  own  sticks.^ 

This  is  a  case  of  divination,  but  from  it  to  sorcery  is 
a  short  and  obvious  step.  When  once  it  is  granted 
that  the  &11  of  a  stick  certainly  preludes  that  of  the 
person  it  represents,  it  follows  that  by  upsetting  the 
■tick  his  death  can  be  caused. 

We  find  a  very  similar  idea  in  the  Western  High- 
Ifliids  of  Scotland.  In  the  ^  Sea  Maiden '  a  mermaid 
appears  to  a  fisherman,  and  gives  him  three  seeds, 
which  are  to  produce  three  trees,  which  *  will  be  a  sign, 

*  when  one  of  the  sons  dies,   one  of  the  trees   will 

*  wither  ; '  and  this  accordingly  took  place.^  A  sup- 
posed prophet  of  the  Shawnees  (North  America)  sent 
word  to  Tanner  that  the  fire  in  his  lodge  was  inti- 
mately connected  with  his  life.     *  Henceforth,'  said  he, 

*  the    fire  must    never   be   suffered    to    go    out   in 

*  your  lodge.     Summer  and  winter,  day  and  night,  in 

*  the  storm,  or  when  it  is  calm,  you  must  remember 

*  that  the  life  in  your  body  and  the  fire  in  your  lodge 

*  are  the  same.     If  you  suffer  your  fire  to  be  extin- 

*  guished,  at  that  moment  your  life  will  be  at  an  end .'  ^ 

When  the  Zulu  soldiers  go  to  battle,  their  wives 
hang  up  against  the  walls  of  their  huts  ^  a  simple  mat 
*of  rushes  which   they  have  themselves  plaited.     As 

>  Yate*8  New  Zealand,  p.  91.  HighlandB,  toI.  i.  p.  71. 

*  Campbell*a  Tales  of  the  West  '  Tanner's  Narratiye,  p.  15C. 


^34  80BGEBT. 

^  long  as  that  casts  a  little  shade  upon  the  wall,  the 

*  credulous  woman  believes  that  her  husband  is  safe ; 

*  but  when  it  ceases  to  do  so  the  sight  of  it  is  produc- 

*  tive  only  of  grief/  ^ 

Father  Merolla  mentions  a  case  in  which  a  Congo 
(negro)  witch  tried  to  destroy  him.  With  this  object 
she  dug  a  hole  in  the  ground,  *  and  I  resolved,'  says  the 
Worthy  Father,*  *  not  to  staiKl  long  in  one  place,  thereby 
to  avoid  the  design  she  had  upon  me  to  bewitch  me 
to  death,  that  having  been  the  reason  of  her  making  a 
hole  in  the  earth.  It  seems  their  custom  is,  that  when 
they  have  a  mind  to  bewitch  anyone  mortally,  they 
put  a  certain  herb  or  plant  into  the  hole  they  have  so 
dug;  which,  as  it  perishes  or  decays,  so  the  vigour 
and  spirits  of  the  person  they  have  a  design  upon 
will  fail  and  decay.'  In  Feejee  *  *  one  mode  of  operat- 
ing is  to  bury  a  cocoa-nut,  with  the  eye  upwards, 
beneath  the  temple  hearth,  on  which  a  fire  is  kept 
constantly  burning  ;  and  as  the  life  of  the  nut  is 
destroyed,  so  the  health  of  the  person  it  represents 
will  feil,  till  death  ensues.  At  Matuku  there  is  a 
grove  sacred  to  the  god  Tokalau,  the  wind.  The 
priest  promises  the  destruction  of  any  hated  person  in 
four  days  if  those  who  wish  his  death  bring  a  portion 
of  his  hair,  dress,  or  food  which  he  has  left.  This 
priest  keeps  a  fire  burning,  and  approaches  the  place 
on  his  hands  and  knees.  If  the  victim  bathe  before 
the  fourth  day  the  spell  is  broken.  The  most  common 
method,  however,  is  the  Vakadranikau,  or  compound- 

*  Arbou88et*8  Tour  to  the  Capo  »  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  toL  L  p. 

of  Good  Hope,  p.  145.  248, 

»  Pinkerton,  vol.  xvi.  p.  290. 


80B0EBT.  235 

ing  of  certain  leaves  supposed  to  possess  a  magical 

power,  and  which  are  wrapped  in  other  leaves,  or  put 

into  a  small  bamboo  case,  and  buried  in  the  garden 

of  the  person  to  be  bewitched,  or  hidden  in  the  thatch 

of  his  house.     The  native  imagination  is  so  absolutely 

under  the  control  of  the  fear  of  these  charms,  that 

persons,  hearing  that  they  were  the  objects  of  such 

spells,  have  lain  down  on  their  mats,  and  died  through 

fear.     Those  who  have  reason  to  suspect  others  of 

plotting  against  them  avoid  eating  in  their  presence, 

or  are  careful  to  leave  no  fragment  of  food  behind  ; 

they  also  dispose  their  garments  so  that  no  part  can 

be  removed.     Most  natives  on  cutting  their  hair  hide 

what  is  cut  off  in  the  thatch  of  their  own  houses. 

Some  build  themselves  a  small  house,  and  surround 

it   with  a  moat,  believing  that  a  little   water  will 

neutralise  the  charms  which  are  dh^cted  against  them.' 

In  North  America,  to  ensure  a  successful  war,  court- 

ahip,  or  hunt,  the  Indians  make  a  rude  drawing,  or  a 

little  image  to  represent  the  man,  woman,  or  animal; 

then  medicine  is  applied  to  it ;  or,  if  the  design  is  to 

cause  death,  the  heart  is  pierced.^     The  Romans,  when 

sacrifices  were  forbidden,  used  as  a  substitute  to  throw 

dolls  into  the  Tiber,  and  in  India  the  magicians  make 

small  figures  of  mud,  on  the  breasts  of  which  they 

write  the  names  of  those  whom  they  wish  to  annoy. 

They  then  *  pierce  the  images  with  thorns,  or  mutilate 

^  them,  so  as  to  communicate  a  corresponding  injury 

*  to  the  person  represented.'  ^ 

In  other  cases,  the  possession  of  a  person's  name  is 

*  Tanner's  Narrati?e,  p.  174. 

*  Duboia,  The  People  of  India,  p.  347. 


23G  CONFUSION  OF  NAME  AND  THING. 

sufficient ;  and,  indeed,  all  over  the  world  we  find  more 
or  less  confusion  between  a  thing  or  a  person,  and  its' 
or  his  name.  Hence  the  importance  attached  in  North 
America,  Polynesia,  and  South  Africa  to  an  exchange 
of  names.  Hence,  as  for  instance  among  the  Negroes ' 
and  Australians,^  we  often  find  a  person's  real  name  con- 
cealed, lest  a  knowledge  of  it  should  give  a  power  over 
the  person. 

In  one  of  the  despatches  intercepted  during  our  war 
with  Nepaul,  Gouree  Sah  sent  orders  to  *  find  out  the 
'  name  of  the  Commander  of  the  British  Army;  write 
'  it  upon  a  piece  of  paper ;  take  it,  and  some  rice  and 

*  turmeric,    say   the    great    incantation    three   times ; 

*  having  said  it,  send  for  some  plum-tree  wood  and 
'  therewith  burn  it.' ' 

Even  the  Romans,  when  they  besieged  a  town, 
had  a  curious  ceremony  founded  on  the  same  idea. 
They  invoked  the  tutelar  deity  of  the  city,  and 
tempted  him  by  the  offer  of  rewards  and  sacrifices 
'  to  betray  his  friends  and  votaries.  In  that  cere- 
'  mony  the  name  of  the  tutelar  deity  was  thought  of 
'  importance,  and  for  that  reason  the  tutelar  deity  of 
'  Rome  was  a  profound  secret.'  *  Valerius  Soranus  \a 
'  said  to  have  been  put  to  death  for  daring  to  di- 
'  vulge  it.'  ^ 

Sumatra  gives  us  a  curious  instance  of  long  survival 
of  this  idea  in  a  somewhat  advanced  community.  *  A 
'  Sumatran  ®  ever  scrupulously  abstains  from  pronounc- 

*  Burton's    Dahome,   vol.  ii.  p.  •  I^ord  Karnes*  History  of  Man, 

2H4,  ToK  Iv.  p.  226.     Ortolan's  Justinian, 

'  Prichard's  Nat  His.  of  Man,  vol.  i.  p.  8. 
vol.  ii.  p.  402.  »  Pliny,  Bk.  III.  ch.  ix. 

'  Fraser's  Tour  to  the  Ilimalas,  ^  Marsden's  iiutory  of  Sumatra^ 

p.  530.  p.  280. 


CONFUSION  OF  PART  AND  WHOLE,  237 

ing  his  own  name  ;  not,  as  I  understand,  from  any 
motive  of  superstition,  but  merely  as  a  punctilio  in 
manners.  It  occasions  him  infinite  embarrassment 
when  a  stranger,  unacquainted  with  their  customs, 
requires  it  of  him.  As  soon  as  he  recovers  from  his 
confusion  he  solicits  the  interposition  of  his  neigh- 
bour. He  is  never  addressed,  except  in  the  case  of  a 
superior  dictating  to  his  dependant,  in  the  second 
person,  but  always  in  the  third  ;  using  his  name  or 
title  instead  of  the  pronoun  ;  and  when  these  are  un- 
known, a  general  title  of  respect  is  substituted,  and 
they  say,  for  instance,  "  apa  orang  kaya  punia  suka," 
'*  what  IS  his  honour's  pleasure,''  for  **  what  is  your, 
"  or  your  honour's  pleasure."  When  criminals  or 
other  ignominious  persons  are  spoken  to,  use  is  made 
of  the  pronoun  personal  kau  (a  contraction  of  angkau), 
particularly  expressive  of  contempt.' 
Generally,  however,  it  was  considered  indispensable 
that  the  sorcerer  should  possess  '  something  connected 
with  the  body  of  the  object  of  vengeance.  The  parings 
of  the  nails,  a  lock  of  the  hair,  the  saliva  from  the 
moutlu  or  other  secretions  from  the  body,  or  else  a 
portion  of  the  food  which  the  person  was  to  eat.  This 
was  considered  as  the  vehicle  by  which  the  demon 
entered  the  person,  who  afterwards  became  possessed. 
It  was  called  the  tubu,  growing  or  causing  to  grow. 
When  procured,  the  tara  was  performed;  the  sorcerer 
took  the  hair,  saliva,  or  other  substance  that  hud 
belonged  to  his  victim  to  his  house,  or  marae,  performed 
his  incantations  over  it,  and  offered  his  prayers;  the 
demon  was  then  supposed  to  enter  the  tubu,  and  through 
it  the  individual,  who  afterwards  became  possessed.'  ^ 

*  Williams'  Poljnesian  KcsearclicB;  vol.  ii.  p.  228. 


238 


SIMILAEITT  OF  WITCHOBAFT. 


m 


Speaking  of  New  Zealand,  Taylor^  says  that  a  *  per- 
son who  wished  to  bewitch  another  sought  to  obtain 
something  belonging  to  him — a  lock  of  hair,  a  portion 
of  his  garment,  or  even  some  of  his  food;  this  being 
possessed,  he  uttered  certain  karakias  over  it,  and  then 
buried  it ;  as  the  article  decayed,  the  individual  also 
was  supposed  to  waste  away.  This  was  sure  to  be 
the  case  if  the  victim  heard  of  it;  fear  quickly  accom- 
plishing his  enemy's  wish.  The  person  who  be- 
witched another  remained  three  days  without  eating; 
on  the  fourth  he  ate,  and  his  victim  died.' 

So  also  Seemann  ^  tells  us  that  *  if  a  Feejeean  wishes 
to  cause  the  destruction  of  an  individual   by  other 
means  than  open  violence  or  secret  poison,  the  case  \b 
put  in  the  hands  of  one  of  these  sorcerers,  care  being 
taken  to  let  this  fact  be  generally  and  widely  known. 
The  sorcerer  now  proceeds  to  obtain  any  article  that 
has  once  been  in  the  possession  of  the  person  to  be 
operated  upon.     These  articles  are  then  burnt  with 
certain  leaves,  and  if  the  reputation  of  the  sorcerer  be 
sufficiently  powerful,  in  nine   cases  out  of  ten  the 
nervous  fears  of  the  individual  to  be  punished   will 
bring  on  disease,  if  not  death:  a  similar   process  is 
applied  to  discover  thieves.' 
Mr.  Turner  gives  a  very  similar  account  of  disease- 
making  as  practised  in  Tanna.®     Sir  G.  Grey  thus  de- 
scribes a  scene  of  witchcraft   in  New  Zealand:  '  The 
*  priests  ^  then  dug  a  long  pit,  termed  the  pit  of  wrath, 


*  New  Zealand  and  its  Inhabit- 
ants, pp.  89,  107.  »See  nl^^o  Short- 
land's  Traditions  of  the  New  Zen- 
landers,  p.  117. 


•  A  Mission  to  Viti,  p.  180. 

'  Nineteen  Years  in  Polynesia, 
p.  90. 

*  IMlyneaian  Mytholo^,  p.  108. 


SIMILAEITT  OF  WITOHCBAFT.  239 

*  into  which  by  their  long  enchantments  they  might 

*  bring  the  spirits  of  their  enemies,  and  hang  them  and 

*  destroy  them  there ;  and  when  they  had  dug  the  pit, 
^  muttering  the  necessary  incantations,  they  took  large 

*  shellB  in  their  hands  to  scrape  the   spirits  of  their 

*  enemies  into  the  pit  with,  whilst  they  muttered  en- 
^  chantments;    and    when    they  had   done   this  they 

*  scraped  the  earth  into  the  pit  again  to  cover  them  up, 
^  and  beat  down  the  earth  with  their  hands,  and  crossed 

*  the  pit  with  enchanted  cloths,  and  wove  baskets  of 

*  flax-leaves  to  hold  the  spirits  of  the  foes  which  they 
^  had  thus  destroyed,   and   each  of  these  acts   they 

*  accompanied  with  proper  spells.' 

The  Tasmanians  ^  *  procured  something  belonging  to 

*  the  unfortunate  object  of  their  wrath,  wrapped  it  in 

*  fat,  placed  it  before  the  fire,  and  expected  that  as  the 

*  fiett  dissolved  before  the  heat,  so  would  the  health  of 

*  the  party  decline/ 

In  North  America,  also,  ^a  hair  firom  the  head  of 

*  the  victim '  is  supposed  to  increase  greatly  the  efficacy 
of  charms,  and  the  same  idea  occurs  at  the  Cape  thus 
Livingstone  tells  ^  us  that  among  the  Makololo  ^  when  a 
^  man  has  his  hair  cut,  he  is  careful  to  burn  it,  or  bury 

*  it  secretly,  lest,  falling  into  the  hands  of  one  who  has 
^  an  evil  eye,  or  is  a  witch,  it  should  be  used  as  a  charm 
to  afflict  him  with  headache;'  indeed,  no  one  can  read 
a  book  of  Afirican  travels  without  being  struck  by  the 
great  dread  of  witchcraft  felt  by  the  natives  of  that 
continent. 

We  cannot  wonder  that  savages  believe  in  witch- 

>  Bonwick*8  Daily  Life  of   the  '  Expedition  to  the  Zambeai,  p. 

TMiDiuiianSy  p.  17S.  40. 


240  WIZABD8. 

craft,  since  even  the  most  civilised  races  have  not  long, 

nor  entirely,  ceased  to  do  so. 

Like  our  spirit-rappers  and  table-turners,  the  Chinese 

magicians,^  '  though  they  have  never  seen  the  person 
who  consults  tliem,  tell  his  name,  and  all  the  cir- 
cumstances of  his  family ;  in  what  manner  his  house  is 
situated,  how  many  children  he  has,  their  names  and 
age ;  with  a  hundred  other  particulars,  which  may  be 
naturally  enough  supposed  known  to  the  demons,  and 
are  strangely  surprising  to  weak  and  credulous  minds 
among  the  vulgar. 

*  Some  of  these  conjurors,  after  invoking  the  demons, 
cause  the  figures  of  the  chief  of  their  sect,  and  of  their 
idols,  to  appear  in  the  air.  Formerly  they  could  make 
a  pencil  write  of  itself,  without  anybody  touching  it, 
upon  paper  or  sand,  the  answers  to  questions.  They 
likewise  cause  all  people  of  any  house  to  pass  in  review 
in  a  large  vessel  of  water  ;  wherein  they  also  show  the 
changes  that  shall  happen  in  the  empire,  and  the  ima- 
ginary dignities  to  which  those  shall  be  advanced  who 
embrace  their  sect.' 

In  all  parts  of  India,  says  De  Faira,^  *  there  are  pro- 
digious wizards.  When  Vasco  de  Gama  was  sailing 
upon  that  discovery,  some  of  them  at  Kalekfit  showed 
people,  in  basins  of  water,  the  three  ships  he  had  with 
him.  When  Don  Francisco  de  Almeyda,  the  first 
viceroy  of  India,  was  returning  to  Portugal,  some 
witclies  of  Kochin  told  him  he  should  not  pass  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  and  there  he  was  buried.'     (This 

is  strained  a  little ;   for  he  did  pass  the  Cajie,  and  was 

'  Astley's  Collection  of  Voyages,  '  (Quoted  in  Aflloy's  Collection 

Tol.  iv.  p.  205.  of  Vovagt'8,  voL  L  p.  03. 


EtmOPEANS'  BELIEF  IN  WFIOEOEAFT,         241 

buried  at  the  bay  of  Saldanna,  some  leagues  beyond,  as 
will  be  seen  hereafter.)     *What  follows  is  still  more 

*  extraordinary.    At  Maskat  there  are  such  sorcerers 

*  that  they  eat  the  inside  of  a  thing,  only  fixing  their 

*  eyes  upon  it.    With  their  sight  they  draw  out  the 

*  entrails  of  any  human  body,  and  so  kill  many  people. 
^  One  of  these  fascinators,  fixing  his  eyes  on  a  bateka, 
'  or  water-melon,  sucked  out  the  inside ;  for,  being  cut 

*  open  to  try  the  experiment,  it  was  found  empty ;  and 
'  the  wizard,  to  satisfy  the  spectators,  vomited  it  up 
^  again.' 

Father  MeroUa,^  a  Capuchin  *  raissioner,'  tells  quite 
gravely  the  following  story.  The  army  of  Sogno  having 
captured  a  neighbouring  town,  found  in  it  a  large  cock 
with  a  ring  of  iron  round  one  leg.  This  they  killed, 
cut  in  pieces,  and  put  into  a  pot  to  boil ;  when,  however, 
they  thought  to  eat  it,  *  the  boiled  pieces  of  the  cock, 

*  though  sodden,  and  near  dissolved,  began  to  move 

*  about,  and  unite  into  the  form  they  were  in  before, 
^and  being  so  united,  the  restored  cock  immediately 

*  raised  himself  up,  and  jumped  out  of  the  platter  upon 
'  the  ground,  where  he  walked  about  as  well  as  when  he 

*  was  first  taken.     Afterwards  he  leaped  upon  an  ad- 

*  joining  wall,  where  he  became  new-feathered  all  of  a 

*  sudden,  and  then  took  his  flight  to  a  tree  hard  by, 

*  where,  fixing  himself,  he,  after  three  claps  of  his  wings, 
^  made  a  most  hideous  noise,  and  then  disappeared. 

*  Everyone  may  easily  imagine  what  a  terrible  fright 

*  the  spectators  were  in  at  this  sight,  who,  leaping  with 

*  a  thousand  Ave-Marias  in  their  mouths  from  the  place 

*  Voyage  to  Congo,  Pinkorton,  vol.  xv.  p.  220. 


242         EUROTEANS'  BELIEF  IN  WITCHORAFT. 

where  this  had  happened,  were  contented  to  observe 
most  of  the  particular  at  a  distance/ 

To  doubt  the  reality  of  witchcraft,  says  Lafitau,^ 
est  une  Industrie  des  ath^es,  et  un  effet  de  cet  esprit 
d'irreligion  qui  fait  aujourd'hui  des  progrfes  si  sensibles 
dans  le  monde,  d'avoir  detruit  en  quelque  sorte  dans 
rid<5e  de  ceux  mfemes  qui  se  piquent  d'avoir  de  la 
religion,  qu'il  se  trouve  des  hommes  qui  ayent  com- 
merce avec  les  demons  par  la  voye  des  enchantemens 
et  de  la  magie.  On  a  attach^  k  cette  opinion  une 
certaine  faiblesse  d'esprit  k  la  croire,  qui  fait  qu'on  ne 
la  tolere  plus  que  dans  les  femmelettes  et  dans  le  bas 
peuple,  ou  dans  les  prStres  et  dans  les  religieuX|  qu'on 
suppose  avoir  intdret  a  entretenir  ces  visions  popu- 
laires  qu'on  liomme  de  sens  auroit  honte  d'avouer. 
Pour  6tablir  cependant  cet  esprit  d'incrddulit^  il  &ut 
que  ces  pretendus  esprits  forts  veuillent  s'aveugler  au 
milieu  de  la  lumi{;re,  qu'ils  renversent  I'Ancien  et  le 
Nouveau  Testament,  qu'ils  contredisent  toute  Tanti- 
quit6,  riiistoire  sacr^e  et  la  profane.  On  trouve  par- 
tout  des  t^moignages  de  ce  commerce  des  hommes 
avec  les  divinitds  du  paganisme,  ou  pour  mieux  dire 
avec  les  demons.' 

Lafitau  does  not,  indeed,  deny  that  some  wizards  were 
impostors,  but  he  maintains  that  *  ce  seroit  rendre  le 

*  monde  trop  sot,  que  de  vouloir  le  supposer  pendant 
'  plusieurs  siecles  la  dupe  de  quelques  mis^rables  joueurs 

*  de  gobelcts.'  Nay,  he  even  maintained  ^  that  America 
was,  for  some  mysterious  reason,  handed  over  to  the 
devil,  and  accounted  for  the  remarkable  similarity 
between  some  of  the  religious  ceremonies,  &c.,  in  the 

«  Zoc,  ctt.,  vol.  i.  p.  874.  <  Vol.  i.  p.  366. 


S0BCEBEB8  NOT  NE0E88ABILY  IMP08T0B8.    243 

new  and  old  worlds,  by  the  hjrpothesis  that  *  le  d^mon, 
jaloux  de  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  et  du  bonheur  de  rhomme, 
a  toujours  ^t^  attentif  a  d^rober  k  I'un  le  culte  qui  lui 
est  dii,  et  &  perdre  Tautre,  en  le  rendant  son  adorateur. 
Pour  cela  il  a  ^rig6  autel  contre  autel,  et  a  aflfiect^  de 
maintenir  le  culte  qu'il  vouloit  se  faire  rendre  par  les 
eflfets  d'une  puissance  surhumaine,  qui  imposassent  par 
le  menreiileux,  et  qui  fassent  imit^s  et  copies  d'apr^s 
ceux  dont  Dieu  donnoit  k  son  peuple  des  t^moignages 
si  authentiques  par  I'evidence  des  miracles  qu'il  faisoit 
en  sa  faveur.' 

Father  Labat  *  also  observes,  *  Qu'on  exagfere  souvent 
dans  ce  qu'on  en  dit ;  mais  je  crois  qu'il  faiit  convenir 
que  tout  ce  qu'on  dit  n'est  pas  enti^rement  faux,  quoi- 
qu'il  ne  soit  peut-6tre  pas  entiferement  vrai.  Je  suis 
anssi  persuade  qu'il  y  a  des  faits  d'une  v^rit^  tres-con- 
stante ; '  and  after  mentioning  four  of  these  supposed 
facts,  he  concludes,  ^  II  me  semble  que  ces  quatre  faits 
Buffisent  pour  prouver  qu'il  y  a  v^ritablement  des  gens 
qui  ont  commerce  avec  le  diable,  et  qui  se  servent  de 
Ini  en  bien  des  choses.' 
Even  among  our  recent  missionaries  some,  according 
to  Williams,  believed  that  the  Polynesian  wizards  really 
possessed  supernatural  powers,  and  were  '  agents  of  the 
*  infernal  powers.'  *  Nay,  Williams  himself  thought  it 
^  not  impossible.' 

We  may  well  be  surprised  that  Europeans  should 
believe  in  such  things,  and  missionaries  so  credulous 
aod  ignorant  ought,  one  might  suppose,  rather  to  learn 
than  to  teach ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  surprising 

1  Voyage  ftnz  lies  derAm^rique,  '  PolyDesian  Researcheti  vol.  ii. 

ToL  ii.  p.  67.  p.  226. 

b2 


244    80B0EBEBS  NOT  NE0E88ABILY  BfPOBTOBS. 

that  savages  should  believe  in  witchcraft,  nor  even  that 
the  wizards  should  believe  in  themselves. 

We  must  indeed  by  no  means  suppose  that  sorcerers 
are  always,  or  indeed  generally,  impostors. 

The  Shamans  of  Siberia  are,  says  Wrangel,^  by  no 
means  '  ordinary  deceivers,  but  a  pyschological  pheno- 
'  menon,  well  deserving  of  attention.  Whenever  I  have 
'  seen  them  operate  they  have  left  me  with  a  long-con- 
'  tinued  and  gloomy  impression.     The  wild  look,  the 

*  bloodshot  eyes,  the  labouring  breast  and  convulsive 

*  utterance,  the  seemingly  involuntary  distortion  of  the 

*  face  and  the  whole  body,  the  streaming  hair,  even  the 

*  hollow  sound  of  the  drum,  all  contributed  to  the  effect; 
^  and  I  can  well  understand  that  the  whole  should  ap- 

*  pear  to  the  uncivilised  spectator  as  the  work  of  evil 

*  spirits.' 

Speaking  of  the  Ahts,  in  North- West  America,  it  is 
undoubtedly  a  fact,  says  Mr.  Sproat,*  *  that  many  of 
'  the  sorcerers  themselves  thoroughly  believe  in  their 

*  own  supernatural  powers,  and  are  able,  in  their  pre- 

*  parations  and  practices,  to  endure  excessive  fatigue, 

*  want  of  food,  and  intense  prolonged  mental  excite- 
'  ment.' 

DobritzhoflFer  also  concludes  that  the  sorcerers  of 
the  Abipones  ^  themselves  '  imagine  that  they  are  gifted 
'  with  superior  wisdom  ; '  and  Miiller  also  is  convinced 
that  they  honestly  believe  in  themselves.'* 

We  should,  says  Martins,''  *  do  them  an  injustice  if 
'  we  regarded  the  Brazilian  sorcerers  as  mere  impostors,' 

*  Sibcrin,  p.  121.  *  Oesch.  d.  Araer.  Urrelig.  p.  W. 

'  Scones  and  Studies  of  Savage  *  Von  d.  Hechtszus.   uater  dea 

Life,  p,  170.  It.  Bnutilions,  p.  30. 
'  Loc,  ciLf  vol.  ii.  p.  (J8. 


FASTING.  245 

though,  he  adds,  '  they  do  not  scruple  to  cheat  where 
they  can/ 

Williams,  also,  who  was  by  no  means  disposed  to 
take  a  favourable  view  of  the  native  sorcerers,  admits 
that  they  believed  in  themselves,  a  fact  which  it  is  only 
&ir  to  bear  in  mind/  Turner  also  says  the  same  of  the 
sorcerers  in  Tanna.^ 

This  self-deception  was  much  facilitated  by,  if  not 
mainly  due  to,  the  very  general  practice  of  fasting  by 
those  who  aspired  to  the  position  of  wizards.  The 
Greenlander,  says  Cranz,*  who  would  be  an  angekok, 
^most  retire  from  all  mankind  for  a  while  into  some 
^  solitary  recess  or  hermitage,  must  spend  the  time  in 
^profound  meditation,  and  call  upon  Tomgarsuk  to 
^send  him  a  torngak.     At  length,  by  abandoning  the 

*  converse  of  men,  by  fasting  and  emaciating  the  body, 
'  and  by  a  strenuous  intenseness  of  thought,  the  man^s 
'  imagination  grows  distracted,  so  that  blended  images 
^  of  men,  beasts,  and  monsters  appear  before  him.     He 

*  readily  thinks  these  are  real  spirits,  because  his 
-  thoughts  are  full  of  spirits,  and  this  throws  his  body 
*into  great  irregularities  and  convulsions,  which  he 
^  labours  to  cherish  and  augment.' 

Among  the  North  American  Indians,*  when  a  boy 
reaches  maturity,  he  leaves  home  and  absents  himself 
for  some  days,  during  which  he  eats  nothing,  but  lies 
on  the  ground  thinking.  When  at  length  he  falls  asleep, 
the  first  animal  about  which  he  dreams  is,  he  thinks, 

'  PolynesiAii  Reeearches,  vol.  ii.  '  History  of  GreenlaDd,  vol.  i.  p. 

p.  226.  210. 

'  Nineteen  Yean  in  Polynesia,  ^  Catlin's  North    American  In* 

p.  S)l.  dianSy  vol.  i.  p.  3(5. 


246  FASTINO. 

ordained  to  be  his  special  protector  through  life.*  The 
dream  itself  he  looks  on  as  a  revelation.  Indeed,  the 
Redskins  fast  before  any  great  expedition,  thinking  that 
during  their  dreams  they  receive  indications  as  to  the 
course  of  action  which  they  should  pursue.*  Among 
the  Cherokees  also  fasting  is  very  prevalent,  *  and  an 

*  abstinence  of  seven  days  renders  the  devotee  fiMnoQs/' 
The  Flatheads  of  Oregon  have  a  very  similar  custom. 
Here,  however,  a  number  of  youths  retire  together. 
^  They  spend  three  days  and  nights  in  the  performance 

*  of  these  rites,  without  eating  or  drinking.  By  the 
Manguor  of  the  body  and  the  high  excitement  of  the 
^imagination  produced  during  this  time,  their  sleqp 
^  must  be   broken  and  visited  by  visions  adapted  to 

*  their  views.'  *  These,  therefore,  they  not  unnaturally 
look  on  as  the  visits  of  spirits. 

Those  who  by  continued  &ists  have  thus  purified 
and  cleared  their  minds  from  gross  ideas,  are  sup- 
posed to  be  capable  of  a  clearer  insight  into  the  future 
than  that  which  is  accorded  to  ordinary  men,  and 
were  called  *  Saiotkatta '  by  the  Huron  s,  and  *  Agotsin* 

*  naclien '  by  the  Iroquois,  terms  which  mean  literally 

*  seers.'  ^ 

In  Brazil,  a  young  man  who  wished  to  be  a  paji 
went  alone  to  some  mountain,  or  to  some  lone  place,  and 
fasted  for  two  years,  after  which  he  was  admitted  with 
certain  ceremonies  into  the  order  of  pajes.*     Among 


*  LafitaUy  loc.  cit.^  vol.  i.  pp.  207,  Tribes,  p.  36. 

200,  3.*U,  8nd  especially  pp.  336  and  ♦  Dunnes  Oregon,  p.  829. 

370.     Prichard's  Nat.  Ilist.  of  Man,  *  Lafitau,  vol.  i.  p.  371. 

vol.  ii.  p.  572.  «  Martiua,    Ilecht.  unter  d.  \2f> 

•  Carver's  Travels,  p.  286.  Bras.  p.  30. 
'  Whipple's  Report    on  Indian 


BELIGIOUa  DANCES.  247 

the  Abipones^  and  Caribs*  those  who  aspired  to  be 

*  keebet '  proceeded  in  a  similar  manner.  Among  the 
South  American  Indians  of  the  Rio  de  la  Plata  the 
Medicine-men  were  prepared  for  their  office  by  a  long 
fast.'  Among  the  Lapps,  also,  would-be  wizards  pre- 
pare themselves  by  a  strict  fast.^ 

At  first  sight  the  introduction  of  the  *  dance  '  may 
seem  oat  of  place  here.  Among  savages,  however,  it  is 
no  mere  amusement.  It  is,  says  Robertson,'^  ^  a  serious 
^and  important  occupation,  which  mingles  in  every 

*  occurrence  of  public  br  private  life.  If  any  intercourse 
^  be  necessary  between  two  American  tribes  the  ambas- 

*  sadors  of  the  one  approach  in  a  solemn  dance  and 
'  present  the  calumet  or  emblem  of  peace ;  the  sachems 

*  of  the  other  receive  it  with  the  same  ceremony.  If 
^  war  is  denoimced  against  an  enemy,  it  is  by  a  dance, 
'  expressive  of  the  resentment  which  they  feel,  and  of 

*  the  vengeance  which  they  meditate.     If  the  wrath  of 

*  their  gods  is  to  be  appeased,  or  their  beneficence  to  be 

*  celebrated — ^if  they  rejoice  at  the  birth  of  a  child,  or 

*  mourn  the  death  of  a  friend — ^they  have  dances  appro- 

*  priated  to  each  of  these  situations,  and  suited  to  the 
'different  sentiments  with  which  they  are  then  ani- 
^  mated.  If  a  person  is  indisposed  a  dance  is  prescribed 
^  as  the  most  effectual  means  to  restore  him  to  health  ; 

*  and  if  he  himself  cannot  endure  the  fatigue  of  such  an 
^  exercise,  the  physician  or  conjuror  performs  it  in  his 


*  Dubritihofferi  vol.  ii.  p.  67.  iii.  p.  85. 

*  Da   Tertre,    IBstorj    of    the  *  '  liobertMD's  America,  bk.  iv.  p. 
Ciiribby  laUmdsy  p.  342.  133.    See  also  Schoolcraft,  /oc.  ct/., 

'  Lafitaui  vol.  i.  p.  335.  toI.  iii.  p.  488,  od  the  Sacred  Danced 

*  Klemm,  Colt,  der  Mens.,  Tol.  of  the  IledskinB. 


RELWIOm  DAKCES. 


SMOKING  A8  A  RELIGIOUS  CEREMONY,        249 

'  name,  as  if  the  virtue  of  his  activity  could  be  trans- 
'  feiTed  to  his  patient.' 

Among  the  Kols  of  Nagpore  Colonel  Dalton  ^  de- 
scribes several  dances  which,  he  says,  '  are  all  more  or 
^  less  connected  with  some  religious  ceremony.' 

The  Ostyaks  also  perform  sacred  sword  dances  in 
honour  of  their  god  Yelan.^ 

Fig.  18  represents  a  sacred  dance  as  practised  by  the 
natives  of  Virginia.  It  is  very  interesting  to  see  here 
a  circle  of  upright  stones,  which,  except  that  they  are 
rudely  carved  at  the  upper  end  into  the  form  of  a  head, 
exactly  resemble  our  so-called  Druidical  temples. 

In  Brazil,  again,  '  some  of  the  tribes  had  no  other 
^worship  than  dancing  to  the  sound  of  very  noisy 
*  instruments.' '  Bonwick,  speaking  of  the  Tasmanians, 
tells  us  that  ^  among  their  superstitious  rites  dancing 
was  conspicuous.'  ^ 

The  idea  is  by  no  means  confined  to  mere  savages. 
Even  Socrates  ^  regarded  the  dance  as  a  part  of  religion, 
and  David,  we  know,  did  so  too.^ 

As  sacrificial  feasts  so  generally  enter  into  religious 
ceremonials,  we  need  not  wonder  that  smoking  is 
throughout  America  closely  connected  with  all  religious 
ceremonies,  just  as  incense  is  used  for  the  same  purpose 
in  the  Old  World.^ 

The   Zulus  also,    when   sacrificing,   burn   incense, 


>  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  toI.  vi.  p.  p.  180. 
30.  *  Soc.  apud  Atlu-n.  lib.  14.   p. 

'  Eniuui,  Tol.  ii.  p.  i>2.  C2-S.    (Quoted  in  Laiitau,  vul.  i.  p. 

'  l)epoD0y  Tr.  in  8.  Amcricai  toI.  200. 
i.  p.  11»8.    See  abo  Zcit.  f.  Ethnolo-  ^  2  Snm.  vi.  14,  22. 

Uie,  1><70,  p  276.  ^  Latitnu,  vol.  ii.  p.  l.'i-'J. 

*  Daily  Life  of  the  TftsmanionB, 


250         JNTOXIOATION  A8  A  BSLIQI0XT8  BXTB, 

thinking  that  ^  they  are  giving  the  spirits  of  their  people 
a  sweet  savour.'  ^ 

Among  the  Sonthals,  one  of  the  aboriginal  tribes  of 
India,  the  whole  of  their  religious  observances  ^are 

*  generally  performed  and  attended  to  by  the  votaries 

*  whilst  in  a  state  of  intoxication  ;   a  custom  which  re- 

*  minds  us  of  tl^e  worship  of  Bacchus  among  the  Greefa 

*  and  Romans.'  * 


>  Callaway's  Religiona  Syatem      Watson  and  J.  W.  Kaje,  foL  i 
of  the  Amazulu,  p.  141.  p.  1. 

*  The  People  of  India,  by  J.  F. 


251 


CHAPTER  VI. 
BELiGiON  {continued). 

I  HAVE  already  observed  that  any  rational  classifica- 
tion of  religions  should  be  founded,  not  so  much 
on  the  nature  of  the  object  worshipped,  as  on  the  con- 
ception formed  of  the  nature  of  the  Deity.  In  support 
of  this  view  I  will  now  quote  some  illustrations  to  show 
how  widely  distributed  is  the  worship  of  various  mate- 
rial objects,  and  how  much  they  are  interwoven  with 
one  another. 

How  ready  savages  are  to  deify  objects,  both  ani- 
mate and  inanimate,  is  well  shown  in  the  following  story 
from  Lander's  '  Niger  Expedition.' 

In  most  African  towns  and  villages,  says  Lander,^ 
*I  was  treated  as  a  demigod.'  He  mentions  that  on 
one  occasion,  having  landed  at  a  village  which  white 
men  had  never  visited  before,  his  party  caused  great 
astonishment  and  terror.  When  at  length  they  suc- 
ceeded in  establishing  a  communication  with  the  natives, 
the  chief  of  the  village  gave  the  following  account  of 
what  had  taken  place.  ^  A  few  minutes,'  ^  he  said, '  after 
'  you  first  landed,  one  of  my  people  came  to  me  and 
^  said,  that  a  number  of  strange  people  had  arrived  at 

>  R.  and  J.  Lander's  Niger  Expedition,  toI.  ili.  p.  108. 
'  Loc  cU.j  ToL  iiL  p.  78. 


252  ANIMAL^WOBSHIP. 

'  the  market-place.  I  sent  him  back  again  to  get  as  near 
'  to  you  as  he  could,  to  hear  what  you  intended  doing. 
'  lie  soon  after  returned  to  me  and  said  that  you  spoke 
'  a  language  which  he  could  not  understand.  Xot 
'  doubting  it  was  your  intention  to  attack  my  village  at 
'  night  and  carry  off  my  people,  I  desired  them  to  get 

*  ready  to  fight But  when  you  came  to 

'  meet  us  unarmed,  and  we  saw  your  white  faces,  we 
'  were  all  so  frightened  that  we  could  not  pull  oor 

*  l)ows,  nor  move  hand  or  foot ;  and  when  you  drew 
^  near  me,  and  extended  your  hands  towards  me,  I  fek 

*  my  heart  faint  within  me,  and  believed  that  you  were 
"  "  children  of  Heaven,"  and   had  dropped   from  the 

*  skies.' 

The  wonship  of  animals  is  very  prevalent  among 
races  of  men  in  a  somewhat  higher  stage  of  dvilisidoii 
than  that  characterised  by  Fetichism.*  Plutarch,  kng 
ajro,  suggested  that  it  arose  from  the  custom  of  repre- 
senting animals  U[x>n  standards :  and  it  is  possible  that 
some  tow  cases  mav  be  due  to  this  cause,  thou<:h  it  i* 
manifestly  inapplicable  to  the  majority,  because-,  in  the 
scale  of  human  development,  animal- worship  much  pnt- 
cedes  the  use  of  standards^  which,  for  instance,  do  dl< 
appear  to  have  been  used  in  the  Trojan  war.*  L^>ionK 
explains  it  bv  the  mvih  that  the  <rod>,  be:n;i  ai  coe 
time  hanl  pressed  by  the  giants,  conceale\i  iheras^ves 
for  a  while  under  the  form  of  aiiinia!>^  wr.x:.  in  ccc- 
scqueiKV  lH:-oame  sacred,  and  were  worsb:;»f*ra  ly  zins^ 

Ar.o:her  ancien  suiTirestion  was  ii.iiz  iLe  E^vr-riir 


A- -lI-W  ^^i.: 

• 

Kr...T.  :^«-"*' 

A    j*nt*    v«c     tic>:Ucc:     pAj^r?      r 

•    • »   -J-irt,    ',•-. 

ORIGIN  OF  ANIMAL^WOBSEIP.  253 

chiefs  wore  helmets  in  the  form  of  animals'  heads,  and 
that  hence  these  animals  were  worshipped.  This  theory, 
however,  will  not  apply  generally,  because  the  other 
races  which  worship  animals  do  not  use  such  helmets," 
and  even  in  Egypt  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
worship  of  animals  preceded  the  use  of  helmets. 

Plutarch,  as  ah^eady  mentioned,  supposed  that  the 
crocodile  was  worshipped  because,  having  no  tongue, 
it  was  a  type  of  the  Deity,  who  makes  laws  for  nature 
by  his  mere  will !  This  far-fetched  explanation  shows 
in  entire  misconception  of  savage  nature. 

The  worship  of  animals  is,  however,  susceptible  of 
a  very  simple  explanation,  and  perhaps,  as  I  have  ven- 
tured to  suggest,*  may  have  originated  from  the  practice 
of  naming,  first  individuals,  and  then  their  families, 
after  particular  animals.  A  family,  for  instance,  which 
was  called  after  the  bear,  would  come  to  look  on  that 
animal  first  with  interest,  then  with  respect,  and  at 
length  with  a  sort  of  awe. 

The  habit  of  calling  children  after  some  animal  or 
plant  is  very  common,  which  amongst  the  lowest  races 
might  naturally  be  expected  from  the  poverty  of  their 
language.  The  Issinese  of  Guinea  named  their  chil- 
dren  *  after  some   beast,  tree,  or  fruit,  according  to 

*  their  fancy.  Sometimes  they  call  it  after  their  fetich  or 
^  some  white,  who  is  a  Mingo  ;  that  is,  friend  to  them.'  ^ 

The  Hottentots  also  generally  named  their  children 
after  some  animal.*    In  Congo  *  '  some  form  of  food 

*  is  forbidden  to  everyone :  in  some  it  is  a  fish,  in  others 

«  Prehiatoric  Times,  1S09,  p. 508.  »  Ihitl.,  toI.  iii.  p.  .V>7. 

•  AiUey'ii  CoUection  ef  Voyages,  *  Ibid.,  p.  282. 

ToL  ii.  p.  436. 


254        THE  KOBONG.    THE  TOTEM. 

'  a  bird,  and  bo  on.      This  is  not,  however,  expressly 

*  stated  to  be  connected  with  the  totem/ 

In  Southern  Africa  the  Bechuanas  are  subdivided 
into  men  of  the  crocodile,  men  of  the  fish,  of  the  mon- 
key, of  the  buflfialo,  of  the  elephant,  porcupine,  lion, 
vine,  and  so  on.  No  one  dares  to  eat  the  flesh  or  wear 
the  skin  of  the  animal  to  the  tribe  of  which  he  belongs ; 
and  although  in  this  case  the  totems  are  not  wor- 
shipped,^ each  tribe  has  a  superstitious  dread  of  the 
animal  after  which  it  is  named. 

In  China  also  the  name  is  frequently  '  that  of  a 

*  flower,  animal,  or  such-like  thing.'  *  In  Australia  we 
seem  to  find  the  totem,  or,  as  it  is  there  called,  kobong, 
almost  in  the  very  moment  of  deification.  Each  family, 
says  Sir  G.  Grey,*  *  adopts  some  animal  or  vegetable, 
'  as  their  crest  or  sign,  or  kobong,  as  they  call  it.    I 

*  imagine  it  more  likely  that  these  have  been  named 

*  after  the  families,  than  that  the  families  have  been 

*  named  after  them.'  This,  however,  does  not  seem  to 
me  at  all  probable. 

'A  certain  mysterious  connection  exists  between 
'  the  family  and  its  kobong,  so  that  a  member  of  the 
'  family  will  never  kill  an  animal  of  the  species  to  which 
'  his  kobong  belongs,  should  he  find  it  asleep ;    indeed, 

*  he  always  kills  it  reluctantly,  and  never  without  afford- 
'  ing  it  a  chance  of  escape.  This  arises  from  the  family 
'  belief,  that  some  one  indi\ddual  of  the  species  is  their 

*  nearest  friend,  to  kill  whom  would  be  a  great  crime. 


*  The  Ra»uto9,  Rev.  E.  Casalis,  vol.  iv.  p.  01. 
p.  211.     Livingstone's  Travels  in  S.  »  Two  Expeditions  in  .\ustralia, 

Africii,  p.  13.  vol.  ii.  p.  228. 

'  Astley's  Collection  of  Voyages, 


T0TEMI8M  IN  AMERICA.  265 

'  and  to  be  carefully  avoided.  Similarly  a  native  who 
'  has  a  vegetable  for  his  kobong,  may  not  gather  it 
^  under  certain  circumstances,  and  at  a  particular  period 
*  of  the  year/ 

Here  we  see  a  certain  feeling  for  the  kobong  or 
totem,  though  it  does  not  amount  to  worship,  and  is 
apparently  confined  to  certain  districts.^  In  America, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  has  developed  into  a  veritable 
religion. 

The  totem  of  the  Redskins,  says  Schoolcraft,^  ^  is  a 
symbol  of  the  name  of  the  progenitor — generally  some 
quadruped,  or  bird,  or  other  object  in  the  animal 
kingdom,  which  stands,  if  we  may  so  express  it,  as 
the  surname  of  the  family.  It  is  always  some  animated 
object,  and  seldom  or  never  derived  from  the  inani- 
mate class  of  nature.  Its  significant  importance  is 
derived  from  the  h^i  that  individuals  unhesitatingly 
trace  their  lineage  from  it.  By  whatever  names  they 
may  be  called  during  their  lifetime,  it  is  the  totem, 
and  not  their  personal  name,  that  is  recorded  on  the 
tcmb,  or  adjedatig,  that  makes  the  place  of  burial. 
Families  are  thus  traced  when  expanded  into  bands  or 
tribes,  the  multiplication  of  which,  in  North  America, 
has  been  very  great,  and  has  increased,  in  like  ratio, 
the  labours  of  the  ethnologist.  The  turtle,  the  bear, 
and  the  wolf  appear  to  have  been  primary  and  honoured 
totems  in  most  of  the  tribes,  and  bear  a  significant 
rank  to  the  traditions  of  the  Iroquois  and  Lenapis,  or 
Delawares ;  and  they  are  believed  to  have  more  or  Icbs 
prominency  in  the  genealogies  of  all  the  tribes  who 

'  See  Ejre,  voL  ii.  p.  328.  vol.  ii.  p.  40.    See  aluo  LaBtaUi  vol. 

•  Schoolcraft's    Indian    Tribes,      i.  pp.  404,  407. 


256  TOTEMS  IN  DWIA  AND  POLYNESIA. 

'  are  organised  on  the  totemic  principle.'     The  Osages  ^ 
believe  themselves  to  be  descended  from  a  beaver,  and 
consequently  will  not  kill  that  animal.     In  Peru,  again, 
many  of  the  Indian  families  believed  themselves  to  be 
descended  from  animals.^     So,  also,  among  the  Ehonds 
of  India,  the  diflferent  tribes  'take  their  designation 
'  from  various  animals,  as  the  bear  tribe,  owl  tribe,  deer 
'  tribe,'  &c.,  &c.* 

The  Kols  of  Nagpore  also  are  divided  into  *  keelis' 
or  clans,  generally  called  after  animals,  which,  in  conse- 
quence, they  do  not  eat.  Thus  the  eel,  hawk,  and  heron 
tribe  abstain  respectively  from  the  flesh  of  these  ani- 
mals,* The  Oraons  also  are  divided  into  tribes,  usoally 
named  after  some  animal  or  plant,  which  is  not  eaten 
by  the  tribe  after  which  it  is  named.^ 

Among  the  Samoans,  '  one  saw  his  god  in  the  eel, 
^  another  in  the  shark,  another  in  the  turtle,  another  in 

*  the  dog,  another  in  the  owl,  another  in  the  lizard,  and 

*  so  on.    .    .    .    A  man  would  eat  freely  of  what  was 

*  regarded  as  the  incarnation  of  the  god  of  another  man, 
'  but  the  incarnation  of  his  own  particular  god  he 
'  would  consider  it  death  to  injure  or  to  eat.'  ^  In 
Northern  Asia,  among  the  Yakuts,  '  each  tribe  looks 
^  on  some  particular  animal  as  sacred,  and  abstainB 
'  from  eating  it.'  ^ 

If,  moreover,  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  deity  of  a 


>  Schoolcraft,  toI.  i.  p.  320.  *  Dftlton's  Des.  Ethn.  of  Bengil, 

'^  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  vol.  i.  p.  2''>4.     See  also  CampbeU*s  Wild 

p.  75.  Tribes  of  Khondistan,  p.  20. 

*  Early  Races  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  •Turner's    Nineteen    Ye«n    in 
p.  4t>r).  Polynesia,  p.  2.'W. 

*  Dalton,  Trans,  Ethn.  Sue.,  N.S.,  ^  Latham,  De**.  Ethnol.,  vol.  i. 
vol.  vi.  p.  30.  p.  304. 


SEBPENT^WOBSUIP.  257 

savage  is  merely  a  being  of  a  slightly  different  nature 
from — though  generally  somewhat  more  powerful  than — 
himself,  we  shall  at  once  see  that  many  animals,  such  as 
the  bear  or  elephant,  fulfil  in  a  great  measure  his  con- 
ception of  a  deity. 

This  is  still  more  completely  the  case  with  nocturnal 

animals,  such  as  the  lion  and  tiger,  where  the  effect  is 

heightened  by  a  certain  amount  of  mystery.     As  the 

savage,  crouching  at  night  by  his  camp-fire,  listens  to 

the  cries  and  roars  of  the  animals  prowling  about,  or 

TTstches  them  stealing  like  shadows  round  and  round 

among  the  trees,  what  wonder  if  he  weaves  mysterious 

stories  about  them?     And  if  in  his  estimate  of  animals 

he  errs  in  one  direction,  we  perhaps  have  fallen  into 

the  opposite  extreme. 

As  an  object  of  worship,  however,  the  serpent  is 
pre-eminent  among  animals.^  Not  only  is  it  malevolent 
and  mysterious,  but  its  bite — so  trifling  in  appearance 
and  yet  so  deadly,  producing  fatal  effects  rapidly,  and 
apparently  by  no  adequate  means— suggests  to  the 
savage  almost  irresistibly  the  notion  of  something 
divine,  according  to  his  notions  of  divinity.  There  were 
also  some  lower,  but  powerful,  considerations  which 
tended  greatly  to  the  development  of  serpent-worship. 
The  animal  is  long-lived  and  easily  kept  in  captivity ; 
hence  the  same  individual  might  be  preserved  for  a  long 
time,  and  easily  exhibited  at  intervals  to  the  multitude. 
In  other  respects,  the  serpent  is  a  convenient  god.  Thus 
in  Guinea,  where  the  sea  and  the  serpent  were  tlie  prin- 
cipal deities,  the  priests,  as  Bosman  expressly  tells  us, 
encouraged  offerings  to  the  serpent  rather  than  to  the 

*  Deane's  Worship  of  the  Sei-pent  traced  throughout  the  World. 

S 


258  SEBPENT'WOBSEIP. 

sea,   because,  in  the  latter  case,    *  there  happens  tio 
'  remainder  to  be  left  for  them/  ^ 

Mr.  Fergusson,  in  his  work  on  Tree  and  Serpent- 
wors^hip,  has  suggested  that  the  beauty  of  the  serpenf, 
or  the  brilliancy  of  its  eye,  had  a  part  among  the 
causes  of  its  original  deification.  I  cannot,  however, 
agree  with  him  in  this.  Nor  do  I  believe  that  serpeot- 
worship  is  to  be  traced  up  to  any  common  local  origin ; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  sprang  up  spontaneously  ia 
many  places,  and  at  very  different  times.  In  considering 
the  wide  distribution  of  serpent-worship,  we  must  re- 
member that  in  the  case  of  (he  serpent  we  apply  one 
name  to  a  whole  order  of  animals ;  and  that  serpents 
occur  all  over  the  world,  except  in  very  cold  regions. 
On  the  contrary,  the  lion,  the  bear,  the  bull,  have  less 
extensive  areas,  and  consequently,  their  worship  could 
never  be  so  general.  If,  however,  we  compare,  as  we 
ought,  serpent-worship  with  quadruped-worship,  or 
bird- worship,  or  sun- worship,  we  shall  find  that  it  lias 
no  exceptionally  wide  area. 

Mr*  Fergusson,  like  previous  writers,  is  surprised  to 
find  that  the  serpent-god  is  frequently  regarded  as  a 
beneficent  being.     Midler,  in  his  Scientific  Mythology, 
has  endeavoured  to  account  for  this  by  the  statement 
tliat   the   serpent   typified    not    oidy   barren,    impure 
nature,   but   also   youth   and   health.     This  is  not,  1 
think,  the  true  explanation.    It  may  be  that  the  serpent- 
god  connnenced  as  a  malevolent  being,  who  was  flat- 
tered, as  cruel  rulers  always  are,  and  that,  in  process  of 
time,  this  flattery,  wliich  was  at  first  the  mere  expression 

*  Piiikerton,  vol.  xvi.  p.  •'500. 


ASIA.    AFRICA.  259 

of  fear,  came  to  be  an  article  of  faith.  If,  however,  the 
totemic  origin  of  serpent- worship,  as  above  suggested, 
be  the  correct  one,  the  serpent,  like  other  totemic  deities, 
would,  from  its  origin,  have  a  benevolent  character. 

As  mentioned  in  Mr.  Fergusson's  work,  the  serpent 
was  worshipped  anciently  in  Egypt,  ^  in  India,^  Phoe- 
meia,*  Babylonia,*  Greece,^  as  well  as  in  Italy,®  where, 
however,  it  seems  not  to  have  prevailed  much.  Among 
the  Lithuanians  *  every  fiunily  entertained  a  real  serpent 
*  as  a  household  god.'  ^ 

Passing  on  to  those  cases  in  which  the  serpent  is 
even  now  worshipped,  or  was  so  until  lately,  we  find  in 
Asia  evidence  of  serpent- worship,  in  Persia,®  Cashmere,^ 
Cambodia,  Thibet,^®  India,ii  China  (traces),^^  Ceylon,^* 
and  among  the  Kalmucks.^* 

In  Africa  the  serpent  was  worshipped  in  some  parts 
of  Upper  Egypt, ^^  and  in  Abyssinia.^®  Among  the 
negroes  on  the  Guinea  Coast  it  used  to  be  the  principal 


*  HeiodotiiB;  Euterpe^  p«  74<  lation,  p.  14/ 

>  TertuUian,  de  PreBcript.  Here-  *  Asiatic  He8.,To1.  xt.  pp.  24,  25. 

tieomm,  e.  xlviL    EpiphaniuB,  lib.  Ayeen    Akbaree,  Gladwin's  trane., 

1,  HmtMy  xxxTii.  p.  207,  et  seq.  p.  137. 

*  Eutelniui,  Pne.  Evao.,  yoI.  i.  p.  ^^  Iliouen-TbsaDg,  yol.  i.  p.  4. 

9.    IfAurice,  Ind.  Antiq.,  yol.  yi.  p.  "  Fergusson's  Tree  and  Serpent 

173.  Worsbip,  p.  5Q. 

«  Ben  and  Dragon,  v.  23.  "  Ibid.,  p.  51. 

*  Paoaaniaa,  yol.  11.  pp.  137,  175.  ^'  History  and  Doctrine  of  Budd- 
iEUao  de  Animal,  xvi.  ^.    Herodo-  bism  in  Ceylon,  Upbam. 

tm^  yiii.  p.  41,  "  Klemm,  Cult  der  Mens.,  yol. 

*  iElian,  Var.  Hist.,  ix.  p.  10.  iii.  p.  202. 

Propenius,  Eleg.  yiii.  p.  4.     Deane,  '*  Pococke,  Pinkerton's  Voyages, 

fee  €a.y  p.  253.  vol.  xv.  p.  209. 

'  Lord  Karnes*  History  of  Man,  '^  Dillmann  in  Zeitscb.  der  Mor- 

ToL  It.  p.    103.     Deane,  loc,  cit.^  genlandiscben  Oesells.,   vol.   vii   p. 

p,  246.  338.      Ludolf.     Comment,  yol.  iii. 

»  Mogruil,  156,  Windiscbmann,  p.  284 ;  Bruce's  Travels,  vol.  iy.  p. 

87 ;  SbiUi  N4meh,  Atkinson's  trans-  35. 

B  2 


260  GUINEA.     WEYDAH, 

deity.^     Smith,  in  his  Voyage   to  Guinea,*  says  that 
the  natives  *  are  all  pagans,  and  worship  tliree  sorts  of 

*  deities.     The  first  is  a  large,  beautiful  kind  of  snake, 

*  which  is  inoflTensive  in  its  nature.     These  are  kept  in 

*  fittish-houses,  or  churches,  built  for  that  purpose  in  a 

*  grove,  to  whom  they  sacrifice  great  store  of  hogs, 

*  sheep,  fowls,  and  goats,  &c.,  and  if  not  devoured  by 

*  the  snake,  are  sure  to  be  taken  care  of  by  the  fetish- 

*  men  or  pagan  priests.'  From  Liberia  to  Benzuela,  if 
not  farther,  the  serpent  was  the  principal  deity,*  and, 
as  elsewhere,  is  regarded  as  being  on  the  whole  bene- 
ficent. To  it  the  natives  resort  in  times  of  drought  and . 
sickness,  or  other  calamities.  No  negro  would  intention- 
ally injure  a  serpent,  and  anyone  doing  so  by  accident 
would  assuredly  be  put  to  death.  All  over  the  country 
are  small  huts,  built  on  purpose  for  the  snakes,^  wUch 
are  attended  and  fed  by  old  women.  These  snakes  are 
frequently  consulted  as  oracles. 

In  addition  to  those  small  huts  were  temples, wliich, 
judged  by  a  negro  standard,  were  of  considerable  mag- 
nificence,^ with  large  courts,  spacious  apartments,  and 
numerous  attendants.  Each  of  these  temples  had  a 
special  snake.  That  of  Whydah  was  supposed  to  have 
appeared  to  the  army  during  an  attack  on  Ardra.  It 
was  regarded  as  a  presage  of  victory,  which  so  encour- 
aged the  soldiers  that  they  wei^e  }>erfectly  successful. 
Hence  this  fetich  was   reverenced    beyond  all  others, 

'  Afttley'a   Voja^s,   vol.   iii.  p.  Voyages,  vol.  xvi.  p,  184,  f^  Mf. 
48});  Burton,  vol.  ii.  p.  1.30;  Smith,  ''  lV>smiin,  loc.  cii.,  pp.  4lM-ll«. 

ioc.  n't.  p.  llKj,     Burtoirs  Daliome,  8uiilh,  ioc.  «V.,  p.  U»o. 
vol.  i.  p.  lU.  4  Asiloy,  loc.  cit.,  pp.  27,  3i 

'  Smith's  Voyage  to  Guinea,  p.  *  Ihid.y  p.  20. 

105.     See  also  Bosman,  l^ukertou'a 


AGOYE,   TEE  FETICH  OF  WSTDAH.  2fil 

i   an   annual  pilgrimage  was   made   to   its  temple 
th  much  ceremony.     It  is  rather  suspicious  that  any 


AOOTK,  AX  I90L  OF  WHTVAS.    (Astlej's  CollectioD  of  Voyage*.) 

Qng  women  who  may  be  ill  are  taken  off  to  the  snake's 
ose  to  be  cured.  For  this  questionable  serrice  the 
tendants  charge  a  high  price  to  the  parents. 


262  KAFFBABIA.    MADAOASCAB. 

It  is  observable  that  the  harmlesB  snakes  only  sc>^ 
thus   worshipped.      *  Agoye,'   the  fetich   of  Whydcxb 
which  has  serpents  and  lizards  coming  out  of  its  he^^  / 
(fig.  19),  presents  a  remarkable  similarity  to  som^  ^f 
the  Hindoo  idols. 

Snakes,  says  Schweinfurth,  *  are  the  only  creatures 
'  to  which  either  Dinka  or  Shillooks  (Upper  Nile  Re- 

*  gion)  pay  any  sort  of  reverence.'  ^ 

The  Kaffirs  of  South  Africa  have  a  general  belief 
that  the  spirits  of  their  ancestors  appear  to  them  in  the 
form  of  serpents.^ 

Ellis  mentions  that  in  Madagascar  the  natives  re- 
gard serpents  '  with  a  sort  of  superstition.'  * 

In  Fcejee,   'the  god*  most    generally  known  is 
'  Ndengei,  who  seems  to  be  an  impersonation  of  tbe 
'  abstract  idea  of  eternal  existence.     He  is  the  subject 
'  of  no  emotion  or  sensation,  nor  any  appetite  except 
'  hunger.      The   serpent — ^the   world-wide    symbol  of 
'  eternity — is   his    adopted    shrine.      Some    traditions 
'  represent  him  with  the  head  and  part  of  the  body  of 
'  that  reptile,  the  rest  of  his  form  being  stone,  emblem- 
'  atic  of  everlasting  and  unchangeable  duration.    He 
'  passes  a  monotonous  existence  in  a  gloomy  cavern; 

*  evincing  no  interest  in  anyone  but  his  attendant,  Uto, 
'  and  giving  no  signs  of  life  beyond  eating,  answering 
'  liis  priest,  and  changing  his  position  from  one  side  to 
'  the  other.' 


*  Astley,  he,  cit.j  vol.  iii.  p.  50.  Livingstone's  Exp    to  the  Zamh&a, 

'  Heart  of  Africa,  vol.  i.  p.  158.  p.  46. 

'  Casalis' Basutos,  p.  246.  Chap-  *  Three  Visits  to  Madagaacftr,  p. 

man's  Tnivela,  vol.  i.  p.  195.     Calla-  143. 

way'a  Keligious  System  of  the  Ama-  *  Fiji  aud  the  Fijians,  toL  IL  p. 

Zulu.     Arbousset,  he,    cit.,   p.   138.  217. 


POLYNESIA.    AMEEIGA.  263 

in  the  Friendly  Islands  the  water  snake  was  much 
respected.^ 

In  America  serpents  were  worshipped  by  the  Aztecs,^ 
Peruvians,*  Natchez,*  Caribs,^  Monitarris,*  Mandans,^ 
Pueblo  Indians,®  &c. 

Alvarez,  during  his  attempt  to  reach  Peru  from 
Paraguay,  is  reported  *  to  have  seen  the  '  temple  and 

*  residence  of  a  monstrous  serpent,  whom  the  inhabit- 

*  ants   had  chosen  for   their    divinity,   and  fed  with 
^  human  flesh.     He  was  as  thick  as  an  ox,  and  seven- 

*  and-twenty  feet  long,  with  a  very  large  head,  and 

*  very  fierce  though  small  eyes.     His  jaws,  when  ex- 

*  tended,  displayed  two  ranks  of  crooked  fiangs.  The 
^  whole  body,  except  the  tail,  which  was  smooth,  was 

*  covered  with  round  scales  of  a-  great  thickness.     The 

*  Spaniards,  though  they  could  not  be  persuaded  by 

*  the  Indians  that  this  monster  delivered  oracles,  were 

*  exceedingly  terrified  at  the  first  sight  of  him  ;  and 
'  their  terror  was  greatly  increased,  when,  on  one  of 
'  them  having  fired  a  blunderbuss  at  him,  he  gave  a 
'  roar  like  that  of  a  lion,  and  with  a  stroke  of  his  tail 
'  shook  the  whole  tower.' 

The  worship  of  serpents  being  so  widely  distributed, 
and  presenting  so  many  similar  features,  we  cannot 
wonder  that  it  has  been  regarded  as  something  special, 

*  Mariner,  vol.  ii.  p.  106.  *  Ihid.,  p.  62. 
'  Squier's    Serpent    Symbol    in  *  Ihid,,  p.  221. 

America,  p.  162.  Gama,  Descripcion  •  Klemm,  vol.  ii.  p.  162. 

Historica  y  Cronologica  de  las  Pe-  '  Ihid,j  p.  163. 

dras  de  Mexico,  1832,  p.  39 ;  Bernal  ^  Molhausen,  Tour  to  the  Pacificy 

Diaz,  p.  125.  vol.  i.  p.  264. 

•  Miiller,  Ges.  d.  Amer.  Urreligi-  •  Charlevoix's  History  of  Para- 
cnen,  p.  366.   Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  guay,  vol.  i.  p.  110. 

V.  L  p.  48. 


264     TEE  WORSHIP  OF  OTEEB  ANTMALS. 

that  attempts  have  been  made  to  trace  it  up  to  o>^^ 
source,  and  that  it  has  been  regarded  by  some  as  tXj^ 
primitive  religion  of  man. 

I  will  now,  however,  proceed  to  mention  other  ca^es 
of  zoolatry. 

Animal- worship  was  very  prevalent  in   America.' 
The   Redskins   reverenced   the  bear,^   the  bison,  the 
liare,^  and  the  wolf,*  and  some  species  of  birds.*    The 
jaguar  was  worshipped  in  some  parts  of  Brazil,  and 
especially  in  La  Plata.^     In  South  America  birds  and 
jaguars  seem  to  have  been  the  specially  sacred  animals- 
The  owl  in  Mexico  was  regarded  as  an  evil  spirit;^  in 
South  America  toads,®  eagles,  and  goatsuckers  were 
much  venerated.^     The  Abipones  *®  think  that  certidn 
little  ducks  *  which  fly  about  at  night,  uttering  a  mourn- 
^  ful  hiss,  are  the  souls  of  the  departed.' 

In  Yucatan  it  was  customary  to  leave  an  infant 
alone  in  a  place  sprinkled  with  ashes.  Next  morning 
the  ashes  were  examined,  and  if  the  footprints  of  any 
animals  were  found  on  them,  that  animal  was  chosen 
as  the  deity  of  the  infant.^^ 

The  semi-civilised  races  of  Mexico  *^  and  Peru  were 
more  advanced  in  their  religious  conceptions.  In  the 
latter  the  sun  was  the  great  deity.^^     Yet  in  Peru,** 

'  Miiller,  Am.  Urr.,  p.  60,  et  seq,  •  Miiller,  Amer.  Urr.,  p.  237. 

2  Rid,  p.  61.  >o  Dobritzhoffer,    Hist    of  the 

'  Schoolcraft,  toL  i.  p.  316.  Abipones,  yol.  ii.  p.  74. 

*  Muller,  he.  cit,,  p.  267.  "  De   Brosees,  Du    Culte    dc« 

^  IhitLf  p.  134.    Klemni,  loc.  cit.f  Dieux  Fetiches,  p.  46. 
vol.  ii.  p.  164.  "  MiUler,./oc.  at,,  p.  4S1. 

«  Miiller,  he,  eif,,  p.  256.  >'  Prescott's  History  of  Peru,  p. 

'  Prescott,  vol.  i.  p.  48.  88. 

"  Depons,  Tr.  in  South  America,  '^  Miiller,  p.  366.   Garcikaso  de 

vol.  i.  p.  108.  la  Vega,  vol.  i.  pp.  47,  168. 


POLYNESIA.    SANDWICH  ISLANDS.  265 

even  at  the  time  of  the  conquest,  many  species  of 
animals  were  still  much  reverenced,  including  the  fox, 
dog,  llama,  condor,  eagle,  and  puma,  besides  the  serpent, 
and  various  species  of  fish.  From  these  animals  the 
various  fitmilies  of  Indians  were  considered  to  be 
descended,^  and  each  species  was  supposed  to  have  a 
representative,  or  archetype,  in  heaven.^  In  Mexico  a 
similar  feeling  prevailed,  but  neither  here  nor  in 
Pern  can  it  truly  be  said  that  animals  at  the  time 
of  the  conquest  were  nationally  regarded  as  actual 
deities. 

The  Polynesians,  also,  had  generally  advanced  be- 
yond the  stage  of  totemism.  The  heavenly  bodies 
were  not  worshipped,  and,  when  animals  were  regarded 
with  veneration,  it  was  rather  as  representatives  of  the 
deities,  than  with  the  idea  that  they  were  really  deities. 
Still  the  Tahitians*  had  a  superstitious  reverence  for 
fwious  kinds  of  fish  and  birds,  such  as  the  heron, 
kingfisher,  and  woodpecker;  the  latter  apparently 
because  they  firequented  the  temples. 

The  Sandwich  Islanders  *  seem  to  have  regarded  the 
raven  as  sacred,^  and  the  New  Zealanders,  according  to 
Forster,  regarded  a  species  of  tree-creeper  as  the  *  bird 

*  of  the  divinity.'  *     The  Tongans  considered  that  the 
deities  *  sometimes  come  into  the  living  bodies  of  lizards, 

*  porpoises,  and  a  species  of  water-snake ;  hence  these 

•  GaicilaMo  de  la  Vega,  vol.  i.  *  Cook's  Third  Voyage,  toI.  iii. 
pu  76.  p.  100. 

•  Prescott'a  Hiatory  of  Peru,  p.  *  Cook's  Voyage  to  the  Pacific, 
87.    Oarcilasso  de  la  Vega,  toI.  i.  p.  toI.  iii.  p.  101. 

176L  •  Voyage  round  the  World,  vol. 

'  PolyDesian  Reaearchea,  vol.  ii.      i.  p.  519. 
p.  203. 


2G6 


FEEJEE  ISLANDS.    SIBERIA. 


animals  are  much  respected.'  ^     The  Eingsmill  Island^ 
ers  also  worshipped  certain  kinds  of  fish.* 

The  Bishop  of  Wellington  informs  us  that  *  spid< 
were  special  objects  of  reverence  to  Maoris;  and,  as  tl 
priests  further  told  them  that  the  souls  of  the  faithf^ 
went  to  heaven  on  gossamer  threads,  they  were  Y^^ry 
careful  not  to  break  any  spiders'  webs,  or  gossamen^. 
Lizards  were  also  supposed  to  be  chosen  by  the  Maori 
gods  as  favourite  abodes.'  * 

In  the  Feejee  Islands,*  besides  the  serpent,  *  certain 
birds,  iish,  and  plants,  and  some  men,  are  supposed  to 
have  deities  closely   connected  with  or   residing  in 
them.     At  Lakemba,  Tui  Lakemba,  and  on   Vanua 
Levu,  Ravuravu,    claim  the   hawk  as  their   abode; 
\"iavia,  and  other  gods,  the  shark.     One  is  supposed  to 
inhabit  the  eel,  and  another  the  common  fowl,  and  so 
on,  until  nearly  every  animal  becomes  the  shrine  of 
some  deity.     He  who  worships  the  god  dwelling  in 
the  eel  must  never  eat  of  that  fish,  and  thus  of  the 
rest ;  so  that  some  are  tabu  from  eatmg  human  flesh, 
because  the  shrine  of  their  god  is  a  man.' 

In  Siberia  Erman  mentions  that  *  the  Polar  bear,  aa 
the  strongest  of  God's  creatures,  and  that  which  seems 
to  come  nearest  to  the  human  being,  is  as  much  vene- 
rated by  the  Samoyedes  as  his  black  congener  by  the 
Ostyaks.  They  even  swear  by  the  throat  of  this 
strong  animal,  whom  they  kill  and  eat;  but  when  it  is 


*  Mariner,  loc.  ciL,  vol.  ii.  p.  106. 
8  Ilnle,    Ethn.    of    the    U.    S. 
Expl.  Exp.,  p.  97. 

^  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc,  1870,  p.  307. 


^  Williama'  Fiji  and  the  Fijiana, 
Tol.  i.  p.  210.  Seemann,  Mission  to 
Viti,  p.  302. 


CHINA.    INDIA.  26T 

*  once  killed,  they  show  their  respect  for  it  in  various 
'  ways/  ^ 

Each  tribe  of  the  Jakuts  *  look  on  some  particular 

*  creature  as  sacred,  e.g.  a  swan,  goose,  raven,  &c.,  and 

*  such  is  not  eaten  by  that  tribe,  though  the  others  may 

*  eat  it.*  *  The  same  feeling  extends  even  to  plants;  and 
in  China,  when  the  sacred  apricot  tree  is  broken  to 
make  the  spirit-pen,  it  is  customary  to  write  an  apology 
on  the  bark.^ 

The  Hindus,  says  Dubois,*  'in  all  things  extrava- 

*  gant,  pay  honour  and  worship,  less  or  more  solemn,  to 

*  almost  every  living  creature,  whether  quadruped,  bird, 

*  or  reptile.'  The  cow,  the  ape,  the  eagle  (known  as 
gamda),  and  the  serpent,  receive  the  highest  honours; 
but  the  tiger,  elephant,  horse,  stag,  sheep,  hog,  dog,  cat, 
rat,  peacock,  cock,  chameleon,  lizard,  tortoise,  fish,  and 
even  insects,  have  been  made  objects  of  worship.  The 
ox  IB  held  especially  sacred  throughout  most  of  India 
and  Ceylon.   Among  the  Todas  *  the  '  buffaloes  and  bell 

*  are  fused  into  an  incomprehensible  mystic  whole,  or 

*  unity,  and  constitute  their  prime  object  of  adoration 

*  and  worship.'   .    .    .   .    '  Towards  evening  the  herd  is 

*  driven  back  to  the  tuel,  when  such  of  the  male  and 

*  female  members  of  the  family  as  are  present  assemble, 
^  and  make  obeisance  to  the  animals.' 

Dr.  Anderson  found  the  worship  of  the  horse  and 
the  snake  interwoven  with  the  Buddhism  of  the  Shans 


*  Emuuii  vol.  ii.  p.  65.    Muller,  p.  627. 

De«.  de  toutes  lea  Nat  de  TEuip.  ^  Loc.  cit.y  p.  446. 

IloMe,  Pt.  I.  p.  107.  *  Trane.  Ethn.  8oc.,  N.S.,  roL 

*  Strahlenberg,  p.  383.  yii.  pp.  260,  263.    See  also  Ethn. 
»  Tylor,  Roy.  Inst  Jouni.,  vol.  t.  Journ.,  1869,  p.  07. 


268  CEYLON,    THE  PHILIPPINES.    AFRICA. 

of  West  Yunan.^     The  goose  is  worshipped  in  Ceylon,- 
and  the  alligator  in  the  Philippines, 

The   ancient   Egyptians  were  greatly  addicted  to 
animal- worship,  and  even  now  Sir  S,  Baker  states  that 
on  the  White  Nile  the  natives  will  not  eat  the  ox.' 
The  common  fowl  also  is  connected  with  superstitious 
ceremonies  among  the  Obbo  and  other  Nile  tribes.* 

The  King  of  Ardra,  on  the  Guinea  Coast,  had  cer- 
tain black  birds  for  his  fetiches,*  and  the  negroes  of 
Benin   also  reverence   several   kinds  of  birds.     The 
negroes   of  Guinea   regard*  *the  Bword-fish  and  the 
'  bonito  as  deities,  and  such  is  their  veneration  for  them 

*  that  they  never  catch  either  sort  designedly.    If  a 

*  sword-fish  happen  to  be  taken  by  chance,  they  will 
'  not  eat  it  till  the  sword  be  cut  off,  which,  when  dried, 

*  they  regard  as  Sifetisso.^  They  also  regard  the  croco- 
dile as  a  deity.  On  the  Guinea  Coast,  says  Bosman,  'a 
'  great  part  of  the  negroes  believe  that  man  was  made 
'  by  Anansie ;  that  is,  a  great  spider.' '  In  South  Africa 
the  Malekutus  and  some  Baperis  worship  the  porcupuie, 
while  other  Baperis  regard  a  monkey  as  their  tutelary 
deity.® 

In  Madagascar,  Ellis'  tells  us  that  the  natives  regard 
crocodiles  *  as  possessed  of  supernatural  power,  invoke 
'  their  forbearance  with  prayers,  or  seek  protection  by 

*  charms,  rather  than  attack  them ;  even  the  shaking  of 

*  Expedition  to  Western  Yunan  *  Astley,  vol.  ii.  p.  067.    Bn- 
vid  Bhnmo,  p.  115.                                    ton's  Dahome,  v.  ii.  pp.  l4o,  148. 

^  Tennent'a   Cejlon,   vol.    i.    p.  '  Pinkerton,  ioc,  cit^   vol.  xvl  f 

484.  300. 

'  Albert  N'yanra,  vol.  i.  p.  OJ).  *  Arbousset,  Ioc.  cit„  p.  ITtl. 

*  Baker,  Ice,  cit.,  vol.  i.  p.  327.  •  Three  Visits  to  Madagascar,  p^ 

*  Asiley'a  Collection  of  Voyages,  297.     See  also  Sibree,  he,  cd.,  p. 
vol.  iii.  pp.  72,  Oi>.  im. 


MADA0A80AB.    EUROPE.  269 

*  a  spear  over  the  waters  would  be  regarded  as  an  act 

*  of  sacrilegious  insult  to  the  sovereign  of  the  flood,  ira- 

*  perilling  the  life  of  the  offender  the  next  time  he 

*  should  venture  on  the  water.' 

The  nations  of  Southern  Europe  had  for  the  most 
part  advanced  beyond  animal-worship  even  in  the 
earliest  historical  times.  The  extraordinary  sanctity 
attributed,  in  the  Twelfth  Odyssey,  to  the  oxen  of  the 
sun,  stands  almost  alone  in  Greek  mythology,  and  is 
regarded  by  Mr.  Gladstone  as  of  Phoenician  origin.  It 
is  true  that  the  horse  is  spoken  of  with  mysterious 
respect,  and  that  deities  on  several  occasions  assumed 
the  form  of  birds ;  but  this  does  not  amount  to  actual 
worship. 

The  deification  of  animals  explains  probably  the 
curious  fact  that  various  savage  races  habitually  apolo- 
pse  to  the  animals  which  they  kill  in  the  chase;  thus, 
the  Vogulitzi  ^  of  Siberia,  when  they  have  killed  a  bear, 
address  it  formally,  and  maintain  ^  that  the  blame  is  to 

*  be  laid  on  the  arrows  and  iron,  which  were  made  and 

*  forged  by  the  Russians.'  The  same  custom  exists 
among  the  Ostyaks,*'^  the  Samoyeds,'  and  the  Ainos  of 
Yesso.*  Schoolcraft  *  mentions  a  case  of  an  Indian  on 
the  shores  of  Lake  Superior  begging  pardon  of  a  bear 
which  he  had  shot. 

Before  engaging  in  a  hunt  the  Chippeways  have  a 

*  medicine '  dance  in  order  to  propitiate  the  spirits  of 
the  bears  or  other  game/     So  also  in  British  Columbia,' 

>  Stiahlenber^s  Vojage  to   Si-  p.  30. 
berM,  p.  07.  ^  Schoolcraft's    Indian     TribeB, 

'  Vojagcs,  vol.  ir.  p.  85.  vol.  iii.  p.  22U. 

*  1^  Broases,  Dieux  Feticbes,  p.  ^  Catliu^s  Aiuer.  lud.,  vol.  ii.  p. 
61.  248. 

*  Trans.  Ethn.Soc.,N.S.,vol.  iv.  '  Metlabkatlah,  p.  96. 


270  TEE  0UST03J:  OF  APOLOGISING 

when  the  fishing  season  commences,  and  the  fish  he^. 

coming  up  the  rivers,  the  Indians  used  to  meet  thei 

and  '  speak  to  them.     They  paid  court  to  them,  a^ 
would  address  them  thus:  "You  fish,  you  fish;  y^i^ 
"  are  all  chiefs,  you  are;   you  are  all  chiefs."  ' 

The   Koussa  Kaflirs  ^  had  a  very   similar  custom. 
Before  a  party  goes  out  hunting,  a  very  odd  ceremony 
or  sport  takes  place,  which  they  consider  as  absolutely 
necessary  to  ensure  success  to  the  undertaking.    One 
of  them  takes  a  handful  of  grass  into  his  mouth,  and 
crawls  about  upon  all -fours  to  represent  some  sort  of 
game.     The  rest  advance  as  if  they  would  run  him 
through  with  their  spears,  raising  the  hunting  cry,  till 
at  length  he  falls  upon  the  ground  as  if  dead.     If  this 
man  afterwards  kills  a  head  of  game,  he  hangs  a  claw 
upon  his  arm  as  a  trophy,  but  the  animal  must  be 
sliared  with  the  rest.'     Lichtenstein   also    mentions 

that  ^  if  an  elephant  is  killed  after  a  very  long  and 
wearisome  chase,  as  is  commonly  the  case,  they  seek 
to  exculpate  themselves  towards  the  dead  animal,  by 
declaring  to  him  solemnly,  that  the  thing  happened 
entirely  by  accident,  not  by  design.'  *     To  make  the 

apology  more  complete,  they  cut  off^  the  trunk  and  bury 
t  carefully  with  much  flattery. 

Speaking  of  a  Mandingo  who  had  killed  a  lion,  Gray 

says :  ^  '  As  I  was  not  a  little  surprised  at  seeing  the 
man,  whom  I  conceived  ought  to  be  rewarded  for 
having  first  so  disabled  the  animal  as  to  prevent  it 
from  attacking  us,  thus  treated,  I  requested  an  ex- 

*  LicLtenstuiirs  Tmvels,  vol.  i.  *  Gray's    Travels     in.  Western 

p.  '2(^0,  Africa,  p."  143. 

»  Ibid.  p.  254. 


TO  ANIMALS  FOB  KILLING  THEM.  271 

planation  ;  and  was  informed  that,  being  a  subject 
only,  he  was  guilty  of  a  great  crime  in  killing  or 
shooting  a  sovereign,  and  must  suffer  this  punishment 
until  released  by  the  chiefs  of  the  village,  who,  know- 
ing the  deceased  to  have  been  their  enemy,  would  not 
only  do  so  immediately,  but  commend  the  man  for  his 
good  conduct.  I  endeavoured  to  no  purpose  to  find 
out  the  origin  of  this  extraordinary  mock  ceremony, 
but  could  only  gain  the  answer,  frequently  given 
by  an  African,  "  that  his  forefathers  had  always 
«  done  so." ' 

The  Steins  of  Cambodia  ^  believe  that  *  animals  also 
have  souls  which  wander  about  after  their  death;  thus, 
when  they  have  killed  one,  fearing  lest  its  soul  should 
come  and  torment  them,  they  ask  pardon  for  the  evil 
they  have  done  to  it,  and  offer  sacrifices  proportioned 
to  the  strength  and  size  of  the  animal/ 

The  Sumatrans  speak  of  tigers^  with  a  degrep  of 
awe,  and  hesitate  to  call  them  by  their  common  name 
(rimau  or  machang),  terming  them  respectfully  satwa 
(the  wild  animals),  or  even  nenek  (ancestors) ;  as 
really  believing  them  such,  or  by  way  of  soothing  and 
coaxing  them.  When  an  European  procures  traps  to 
be  set,  by  means  of  persons  less  superstitious,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  neighbourhood  have  been  known  to 
go  at  night  to  the  place,  and  practise  some  forms,  in 
order  to  persuade  the  animals  that  it  was  not  laid  by 
them,  or  with  their  consent.' 

The  deification  of  inanimate  objects  seems  at  first 

>  Mouhot'i  Travels  in  the  Cen-  ^  Marsden's   Hist,   of  SumatrA, 

tftl  Parta  of  Indo-China,  yoL  i.  p.      p.  21^.    See  also  Depons,  Travels  in 
S63.  8.  America^  vol.  i.  p.  190. 


272         WORSHIP  OF  THE  CELESTIAL  BODIES. 

somewhat   more  difficult   to  understand  than  that  of 
animals.     The  names  of  individuals,  however,  would  be 
taken  not  only  from  animals,  but  also  from  inanimate 
objects,  and  would  thus,  as  suggested  at  p.  253,  lead  to 
the  worship  of  the  latter  as  well  as  of  the  former.    Some, 
moreover,  are  singularly  lifelike.     No  one,  I  think,  can 
wonder  that  rivers  should  have  been  regarded  as  living. 
The  constant  movement,  the  ripples  and  eddies  on  their 
surface,  vibrations  of  the  reeds  and  other  water  plants, 
the  murmuring  and  gurgling  sounds,  the  clearness  and 
transparency  of  the  water,  combine  to  produce  a  singular 
effect  on  the  mind  even  of  civilised  man. 

Seneca  long  ago  observed,  that  '  if  you  walk  in  a 
'  grove,  thick  planted  with  ancient  trees  of  unusual 
^  grow^th,  the  interwoven  boughs  of  which  exclude  the 
'  light  of  heaven ;  the  vast  height  of  the  wood,  the 
'  retired  secrecy  of  the  place,  the  deep  unbroken  gloom 

*  of  shade,  impress  your  mind  >vith  the  conviction  of  a 

*  present  deity.' 

The  savage  also  is  susceptible  to  such  influences,  and 
is  naturally  prone  to  personify  not  only  rivers  but  also 
other  inanimate  objects. 

Who  can  wonder  at  that  worship  of  the  sun,  moon, 
and  stars,  which  has  been  regarded  as  a  special  form  of 
religion,  and  is  known  as  Sabajism?  It  does  not,  how- 
ever, in  its  original  form,  essentially  differ  from  moun- 
tiiin  or  river  worship.  To  us,  w^itli  our  knowledge  of 
astronomy,  the  sun-worsliip  naturally  seems  a  more 
sublime  form  of  religion,  but  we  must  remember  that 
the  lower  races  wlio  worship  the  heavenly  bodies  liave 
no  idea  of  their  distance  nor,  consequently,  of  their  mag- 
nitude.    Kay,  the  very  distance  and  magnitude  of  the 


8AVA0E  TENDENCY  TO  DEIFICATION.  273 

Bun,  combined  with  the  regularity  of  its  course,  rendered 
it  the  less  likely  to  be  selected  by  the  lowest  races  of 
men  as  an  object  of  worship.  Religion  is  not  with  them 
a  deep  feeling  of  the  soul,  but  a  profound  fear  of 
some  immediate  evil,  a  desire  for  some  immediate 
good.  Hence  the  savage  worships  something  which  is 
clofie  to  him,  something  which  he  can  see  and  hear;  and 
the  lawless,  turbulent  action  of  the  sea  gives  him  more 
the  impression  of  life  and  energy  than  the  regular  and 
steady  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Even  when 
these  are  worshipped,  it  is  in  entire  ignorance  of  their 
real  magnitude  and  grandeur.  The  people  of  Chincha, 
in  Peru,  worshipped  the  sea  rather  than  the  sun,  *  which 

*  did  them  no  good  at  all,  but  rather  annoyed  them  by 

*  its  excessive  heat.'  ^  Hence  the  curious  ideas  with 
reference  to  eclipses  which  I  have  already  mentioned 
(p.  223).  Again,  in  illustration  of  the  same  fact,  the 
New  Zealanders  believed  that  Mawe,  their  ancestor, 
caught  the  sun  in  a  noose,  and  wounded  it  so  severely 
that  its  movements  have  been  slower,  and  the  days  con- 
sequently longer,  ever  since.^  According  to  another 
account,  Mawe  ^  tied  a  string  to  the  sun  and  fastened 

*  it  to  the  moon,  that  as  the  former  went  down,  the 

*  other,  being  pulled  after  it  by  the  superior  power  of 

*  the  sun,  may  rise  and  give  light  during  his  absence.'  • 
A  very  similar  stoiy  also  occurs  in  Samoa.* 

We  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  savage 
notion  of  a  deity  is  essentially  different  from  that  enter- 
tained by  higher  races.  Instead  of  being  supernatural,  he 


•  GndltMo  de  In  Vega,  toI.  i.  '  Yate,  he.  cU.j  p.  143. 

B.  149.  ^  Tamer's   Nineteen    Yems   in 

•  Poljnesiiui  Mythology,  p.  36.         Polynesia,  p.  248. 

T 


274    DEITIES  NOT  SUPPOSED  TO  BB  BUFBBNATURAL. 

is  merely  a  part  of  nature.     This  goes  far  to  explain  the 
tendency  to  deification  which  at  first  seems  so  strange. 

A  good  illustration,  and  one  which  shows  how  easily 
deities  are  created  by  men  in  this  firame  of  mind,  is 
mentioned  by  Lichtenstein.     The  king  of  the  Eoasn 
Kaffirs  having  broken  off  a  piece  of  a  stranded  anchcx*, 
died  soon  afterwards,  upon  which  all  the  Kaffirs  looked 
upon  the  anchor  as  alive,  and  saluted  it  respectfiillj 
whenever  they  passed  near  it.^     Again,  the  natives 
near  Sydney  made  it  an  invariable  rule  never  to  whutle 
when  beneath  a  particular  diff,  because  on  one  occaatMi 
a  rock  fell  from  it,  and  crushed  some  natives  who  were 
whistling  underneath  it.^ 

A  very  interesting  case  is  recorded  by  Mr.  Fer 
gusson.^     '  The  following  instance  of  tree- worship,'  he 
says,  '  which  I  myself  witnessed,  is  amusing,  even  if  not 
instructive.     While  residing  in  Tessore,  I  observed  at 
one  time  considerable  crowds  passing  near  the  factory 
I  then  had  charge  of.     As  it  might  be  merely  an  ordi- 
nary fair  they  were  going  to  attend,  I  took  no  notice; 
but  as  the  crowd  grew  daily  larger,  and  assumed  a 
more  religious  character,  "I  inquired,  and  was  told  that 
a  god  had  appeared  in  a  tree  at  a  place  about  six  milea 
off.     Next  morning  I  rode  over,  and  found  a  large 
space  cleared  in  a  village  I  knew  well,  in  the  centre  of 
which  stood  an  old  decayed  date  tree,  hung  with  gir* 
lands  and  offerings.     Around  it  houses  were  erected 
for  the  attendant  Brahmins,  and  a  great  deal  of  busi- 
ness was  going  on  in  offerings  and  Pftjfiu     On  my 

>  Travels,  toI.  i.  p.  2o4.  *  Tree  and  Serpent  Worehip,  p^ 

•  Collina'    Englwh     Colony     in      74. 
N.S.  Wah's,  p.  382. 


LIFE  ATTRIBUTBD  TO  INANIMATE  OBJECTS.    275 

inquiring  how  the  god  manifested  his  presence,  I  was 
informed  that  soon  after  the  sun  rose  in  the  morning 
the  tree  raised  its  head  to  welcome  him,  and  bowed  it 
down  again  when  he  departed.  As  this  was  a  miracle 
easily  tested,  I  returned  at  noon  and  found  it  was  so ! 
After  a  little  study  and  investigation,  the  mystery  did 
not  seem  difficult  of  explanation.  The  tree  had 
origiimUy  grown  across  the  principal  patiiway  through 
the  village,  but  at  last  hung  so  low,  that  in  order  to 
enable  people  to  pass  under  it,  it  had  been  turned 
aside  and  &stened  parallel  to  the  road.  In  the  opera- 
tion  the  bundle  of  fibres  which  composed  the  root  had 
become  twisted  like  the  strands  of  a  rope.  When  the 
morning  sun  struck  on  the  upper  surface  of  these,  they 
contracted  in  drying,  and  hence  a  tendency  to  un- 
twist, which  raised  the  head  of  the  tree.  With  the 
evening  dews  they  relaxed,  and  the  head  of  the  tree 
declined,  thus  proving  to  the  man  of  science  as  to  the 
credulous  Hindu  that  it  was  due  to  the  direct  action 
of  the  Sun  God.' 

The  savage,  indeed,  accounts  for  all  movement  by 
Hence  the  wind  is  a  living  being.  Nay,  even 
motionless  objects  are  regarded  in  a  particular  stage  of 
mental  progress  as  possessing  spirits.  The  chief  of 
Teah  could  hardly  be  persuaded  but  that  Lander's 
watch  was  alive  and  had  the  power  of  moving.^  It  is 
probably  for  this  reason  that  in  most  languages  inani- 
mate objects  are  distinguished  by  genders,  being  at  first 
regarded  as  either  male  or  female.  Hence  also  the 
practice  of  breaking  or  burning  the  weapons,  &c..  buried 

*  Niger  Expedition,  vol.  ii.  p.  220. 

T  2 


276  80UL8  ATTRIBUTED  TO 

with  the  dead.^     It  has  been  generally  supposed  that 
this  was  merely  to  prevent  them  from  being  a  tempta- 
tion to  robbers.     This  is  not  so,  however ;  savages  do 
not  invade  the  sanctity  of  the  tomb.     Just,  however,  as 
they  kill  a  man's  wives  and  slaves,  his  &vourite  horse 
or  dog,  that  they  may  accompany  him  to  the  other 
world,  so  do  they  '  kill '  the  weapons,  that  the  Bpirito 
of  the  bows,  &c.,  may  also  go  with  their  master,  and 
that  he  may  enter  the  other  world  armed  as  a  chief 
should  be.      Thus  the  Tahitians^  believed  'that  not 
'only   all    other   animals,  but  trees,   fruit,  and  even 
'  stones,  have  souls  which  at  death,  or  upon  being  con- 
^  sumed  or  broken,  ascend  to  the  divinity,  with  whom 
'  they  first  mix,  and  afterwards  pass  into  the  mansioii 
'  allotted  to  each.' 

The  Feejeeans  ^  considered  that  '  if  an  animal  or  a 
'  plant  die,  its  soul  immediately  goes  to  Bolotoo ;  if  a 
'  stone  or  any  other  substance  is  broken,  immortality  is 
'  equally  its  reward ;  nay,  artificial  bodies  have  equal 
'  good  luck  with  men,  and  hogs,  and  yams.     If  an  axe 
^  or  a  chisel  is  worn  out  or  broken  up,  away  flies  its 
'  soul  for  the  service  of  the  gods.     If  a  house  is  taken 
'  down ,  or  any  way  destroyed,  its  immortal  part  will 
find  ^  a  situation  on  the  plains  of  Bolotoo.' 

The  Finns  believed  that  all  inanimate  objects  had 
their  '  haltia,'  or  soul.* 

Sproat,^  speaking    of   N.  W.  America,    says  that 

'  liivingstone's  Zambesi,  p.  522  Seemann's  Mission  to  Mti,  pp.  .^03, 

St.  John's  imi  Tribes  of  Aracan.  J.  398. 
Anthrop.  Inst.,  vol.  ii.  p.  2:38.  *  Castren.  Finn.  Myth.,  pp.  170, 

«  Cook's  Third  Voyage,  vol.   ii.  182. 
p.  100.  »  Sproat  8  Scenes  and  Studiet  ol 

'  Mariner,  loc,  rt/.,vol.  ii.  p.  137.  Savage  Life,  p.  213. 


INANIMATE  OBJECTS,  277 

*when  the  dead  are  buried,  the  friends  often  bum 

*  blankets  Tvith  them,  for  by  destroying  the  blankets  in 

*  this  upper  world,  they  send  them  also  with  the  de- 

*  parted  soul  to  the  world  below.' 

Among  the  Hill  tribes  of  India  the  Garos  break  the 
objects  buried  with  the  dead,  who  '  would  not  benefit 

*  by  them  if  they  were  given  unbroken.'  ^ 

In  China,*  ^  if  the  dead  man  was  a  person  of  note, 
^the  Bonzes  make  great  processions;    the  mourners 

*  following  them  with  candles  and  perfumes  burning  in 

*  their  hands.     They  offer  sacrifices  at  certain  distances, 

*  and  perform  the  obsequies ;  in  which  they  bum  statues 
*of  men,  women,  horses,  saddles,  and  other  things,  and 

*  abundance  of  paper  money ;  all  which,  they  believe,  in 
*the  next  life,  are  converted  into  real  ones,  for  the 
^  use  of  the  party  deceased,  or  in  some  cases  forwarded, 
*in  his  care,  to  friends  who  had  gone  before.' « 

Thus,  then,  by  man  in  this  stage  of  progress  every- 
thing  was  regarded  as  'having  life,  and  being  more  or 
less  a  deity. 

'  Africans,  as  a  rule,'  says  Captain  Burton,  '  wor- 

*  ship  everything  except  the  Creator.'  * 

In  India,  says  Dubois,^  ^  a  woman  adores  the  basket 

*  which  serves  to  bring  or  to  hold  her  necessaries,  and 

*  offers  sacrifices  to  it ;  as  well  as  to  the  rice-mill,  and 
^  other  implements  that  assist  her  in  her  household 
^  labours.  A  carpenter  does  the  like  homage  to  his 
^  hatchet,  his  adze,  and  other  tools ;  and  likewise  offers 
^  sacrifices  to  them.     A  Brahman  does  so  to  the  style 

^  Dalton's  Des.  Ethn.  of  Bengal,  ^  Burton's   Dahome,  Tol.   ii.  p. 

p.  07.  134. 

*  Aatley,  voL  iv.  p.  04.  *  People  of  India,  p.  373.    See 

t  Primitife  Culture,  toL  i.  p.  445.  also  pp.  383, 380. 


278  TBEE^WOBSEIP. 

*  with  which  he  is  going  to  write  ;  a  soldier  to  the  arms 
^  he  is  to  use  in  the  field ;  a  mason  to  his  trowel,  and  a 
'  labourer  to  his  plough.' 

The  popular  religion  of  the  Andean  people,  says 
Mr.  Clement  Markham,^  ^  consisted  in  the  belief  that 
^  all  things  in  nature  had  an  ideal  or  soul  which  ruled 

*  and  guided  them,  and  to  which  men  might  pray  for 
'  help.* 

Sir  S.  Baker  ^  says :  *  Should  the  present  history  of 
'  the  country  be  written  by  an  Arab  scribe,  the  style  of 
'  the  description  would  be  purely  that  of  the  Old  Tes- 
^  tament,  and  the  various  calamities  or  the  good  fortunes 
^  that  have  in  the  course  of  nature  befallen  both  the 

*  tribes  and  the  individuals  would  be  recoimted  either 
'  aa  special  visitations  of  Divine  wrath,  or  blessings  tat 
^good  deeds  performed.     If  in  a  dream  a   particular 

*  course  of  action  is  suggested,  the  Arab  believes  that 

*  God  has  spoken  and  directed  him.  The  Arab  scribe 
'  or  historian  would  describe  the  event  as  the  "  voice  of 
' "  the  Lord ''  (Kallam  el  Allah)  having  spoken  unto 
'  the  person ;  or,  that  God  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream 

*  and  "  said^  &c."      Thus,  much  allowance   would  be 

*  necessary,  on  the  part  of  a  European  reader,  for  the 
'  figurative  ideas  and  expressions  of  the  people/ 

Mr.  Fergusson,  indeed,  regards  tree-worship  in  as* 
sociation  with  serpent- worship  as  the  primitive  faith  of 
mankind.  Mr.  Wake  ^  also  says :  '  How  are  we  to  ac- 
'  count  for  the  Polynesians  also  affixing  a  sacred  charac- 
'  ter  to  a  species  of  the  banyan,  called  by  them  the  ava 

*  tree,  and  for  the  same  phenomenon  being  found  among 

^  Rites  nnd  Laws  of  the  Incas,  p.      sinia,  by  Sir.  S.  W.  Baker,  p.  190. 
11-  '  Chapters  on  BCnn,  p.  350. 

'  The  Nile  Tributaries  of  Abys- 


EUBOPE.    EOTPT.  2;^9 

^  the  African  tribes  on  the   Zambesi  and  the   Shire, 

*  among  the  negroes  of  Western  equatorial  Africa,  and 

*  even  in  Northern  Australia  ?    Such  a  fact  as  this  can- 

*  not  be  accounted  for  as  a  mere  coincidence.' 

Since,  however,  tree-worship  equally  prevails  in 
America,  we  cannot  regard  it  as  any  '  evidence  of  the 
^  common  origin  of  the  various  races  which  practise '  it. 
It  is,  however,  one  among  many  illustrations  that  the 
human  mind,  m  its  upward  progress,  everywhere  passes 
through  the  same  or  very  similar  phases. 

Tree-worship  formerly  existed  in  Assyria,  Greece,^ 
Poland,^  and  France.  In  Persia  the  Homa  or  Soma 
wcMTship  was  perhaps  a  case  in  point ;  Tacitus  ^  men- 
tions the  sacred  groves  of  Germany,  and  those  of 
England  are  femiliar  to  everyone.  In  the  eighA  cen- 
tory,  St.  Boniface  found  it  necessary  to  cut  down  a 
sacred  oak ;  even  recently  an  oak  copse  at  Loch  Siant, 
in  the  Isle  of  Skye,  was  held  so  sacred  that  no  person 
would  venture  to  cut  the  smallest  branch  from  it ;  *  and 
it  is  said  that  oak- worship  is  still  practised  in  Livonia.^ 

Trees  were  worshipped  by  the  ancient  Celts,  and 
De  Brosses  •  even  derives  the  word  kirk,  now  softened 
into  church,  from  quercusj  an  oak ;  that  species  being  pe- 
culiarly sacred.     The  Lapps  also  used  to  worship  trees.^ 

At  the  present  day  tree- worship  prevails  throughout 
Central  Africa,  south  of  Egypt,  and  the  Sahara.  The 
l^angallas  in  Bruce's  time  worshipped  '  trees,  serpents, 
'  the  moon,  planets,  and  stars.'  ^ 

^  Bftoni  coitus    der    Hellenen,  *  Joar.  Anthr.   Inst,    1873,  p. 

Botticher.    1856.  275. 

*  Glaus  Magnus,  Bk.  TIL  ch.  i.  '  Loc,  cU,,  p.  175. 

*  Tadtas,  GenDania,  iz.  ^  De  Brosses,  loc,  cU,,  p.  IGO. 

^  Early  Raees  of  Scotland,  toL  i.  '  TiuTels,  voL  iv.  p.  85.  See  also 

p.  171.  ToL  Ti.  p.  344. 


280  ARABIA.     GUINEA.    OONQO. 

The  date  tree,  says  Burckhardt,  *  was  worshipped  by 
^  the  tribe  Ehozaa  ;  and  the  Beni  Thekyf  adored  the 
'  rock  called  £1  Lat ;  a  large  tree,  called  Zat  Arowat, 

*  was  revered  by  the  Koreysh."  * 

The  negroes  of  Guinea  ^  worshipped  three  deities, 
— serpents,  trees,  and  the  sea.  Park  •  observed  a  tree 
on  the  confines  of  Bondou  hung  with  innumerable 
offerings,  principally  rags.  '  It  had,^  he  says,  '  a  very 
^  smgular  appearance,  being  decorated  with  innumerable- 
'  rags  or  strips  of  cloth,  which  persons  travelling 

*  the  wilderness  had  tied  to  the  branches.' 

The  necrroes  of  Conoro  ^  ^  adored  a  sacred  tree  caUec 


'  "  Mirroue."   One  is  generally  planted  near  the  house^^ 

*  as  if  it  were  the  tutelar  god   of  the  dwelling,  th e 

'  Gentiles  adoring  it  as  one  of  their  idols.'     They  plai     ^c 
calabashes  of  palm  wine  at  the  feet  of  these  trees,  i  j3s 
case  they  should  be  thirsty.     Bosman  also  states  thaft  t 
along  the  Guinea  Coast  almost   every  village  has  ifcs 
sacred  grove.^     At  Addacoodah,  Oldfield  •  saw  a  *  gi- 
'  gantic  tree,  twelve  yards  and  eight  inches  in  circum- 
^  fcreuce.     I  soon  found  it  was  considered  sacred,  and 
'  had  several  arrows  stuck  in  it,  from  which  were  sm- 
^  pended  fowls,  several  sorts  of  birds,  and  many  other 
^  things,  which  had  been  offered  by  the  natives  to  it  as 
'  a  deity.' 

• 

^  Travels  in  Arabia,  vol.  i.    p.  ^  Merolla's    Voyage  to    Conga 

290.  Pinkerton,  ToL  xvi.  p.  230.  Aadej*! 

^  Voyage  to    Guiuea,    p.    105.  Collection  of  VoyageSi  voL  iL  pp. 

Bosnian;  Pinkerton's  Voyages,  toI.  96,  97, 

xvL  p.  404.      Merolla,  Pinkerton*s  *  Loc.  cU.y'p,  390.    Sea  also  Ait- 

Voyagcsy  vol.  xvi.  p.  230.  ley's  Collection  of  Voyagecp  toL  iL 

'  Travels,  1817,  vol  L  pp.  64,  p.  20.    Tuckey'a  Narrative,  p.  181. 

106.      See  also  Cidllld,  vol,  i,  p.  Livingstone's  South  Afiica,  pi  495. 
160.  •  Expedition,  vol.  ii.  p.  117. 


INDIA.    OETLON.  281 

Chapman  mentions  a  sacred  tree  among  the  Kaffirs, 
which  was  hung  with  numerous  offerings.^ 

The  Bo  tree  is  much  worshipped  in  India  ^  and 
Ceylon.*  *  The  planting  of  the  R&j&yatana  tree  by 
Buddha,'  says  Fergusson,  ^has  already  been  alluded 
to,  but  the  history  of  the  transference  of  a  branch  of 
the  Bo  tree  from  the  Buddh-gy&  to  Anurddhapura  is 
as  authentic  and  as  important  as  any  event  recorded 
in  the  Ceylonese  annals.  Sent  by  As6ka  (250  B.C.), 
it  was  received  with  the  utmost  reverence  by  Devanam- 
piyatisso,  and  planted  in  the  most  conspicuous  spot  in 
the  centre  of  his  capital  There  it  has  been  reverenced 
as  the  chief  and  most  important  ^^  numen  "  of  Ceylon 
for  more  than  2,000  years,  and  it,  or  its  lineal  de- 
scendant, sprung  at  least  from  the  old  root,  is  there 
worshipped  at  this  hour.  The  city  is  in  ruins ;  its 
great  dagobas  have  fallen  to  decay ;  its  monasteries 
have  disappeared  ;  but  the  great  Bo  tree  still 
flourishes  according  to  the  legend — ever  green,  never 
growing  or  decreasing,  but  living  on  for  ever  for  the 
delight  and  worship  of  mankind.  Annually  thou- 
sands repair  to  the  sacred  precincts  within  which 
it  stands,  to  do  it  honour,  and  to  offer  up  those 
prayers  for  health  and  prosperity  which  are  more 
likely  to  be  answered  if  uttered  in  its  presence.  There 
is  probably  no  older  idol  in  the  world,  certainly  none 
more  venerated.' 

Some  of  the   Chittagong  Hill  tribes   worship  the 

«  TimTeU,  Tol.  ii  p.  fiO.    Klemm  •  Tree  and  Serpent  Worship,  p. 

qnolet  alw  ViUault,  Bel  des  Coates  56,  et  $eq, 
d'Afriqne  a,  pp.  203, 267.    Arboua-  '  Ibid.,  p.  66, 

Ml,  &>&  dr.,  p.  104. 


282  HILL  TRIBES  OF  INDIA. 

bamboo,^  and  in  the  Simla  Hills  Cupreasua  tondosa  is 
res^arded  as  a  sacred  tree.^ 

In  Beerbhoom,  tree-worship  is  very  general,  and 
^  once  a  year  the  whole  capital  repairs  to  a  shrine  in 
*  the  jungle/  *  This  shrine  consists  of  three  trees,  but 
it  would  appear  that  they  are  now  venerated  rather  as 
the  abodes  of  deities,  than  as  the  actual  deities  them- 
selves. The  Khyens  also  worship  a  thick  bushy  tree 
called  Subri.* 

In  Siberia  the  Jakuts  have  sacred  trees  on  which 
they  '  hang  all  manner  of  nickna<;ks,  as  iron,  brass, 
^  copper,  &c.'  ^  The  Ostyaks  also,  as  Pallas  informs  us, 
used  to  worship  trees.*  '  There  was  pointed  out  to  us,' 
says  Erman,^  '  as  an  important  monument  of  an  early 
epoch  in  the  history  of  Beresov,  a  larch  about  fifty 
feet  high,  and  now,  through  age,  flourishing  only  at 
the  top,  which  has  been  preserved  in  the  churchyard. 
In  former  times,  when  the  Ostyak  rulers  dwelt  in 
Beresov,  this  tree  was  the  particular  object  of  their 
adoration.  In  this,  as  in  many  other  instances,  ob- 
served by  the  Russians,  the  peculiar  sacredness  of  the 
tree  was  due  to  the  singularity  of  its  form  and  growth, 
for  about  six  feet  from  the  ground  the  trunk  separated 
into  two  equal  parts,  and  again  united.  It  was  the 
custom  of  the  superstitious  natives  to  place  costly 
offerings  of  every  kind  in  the  opening  of  the  trunk; 

»  Irwin's  Hill  Tracts  of  Ohitto-  p.  116. 
gong,  p.  10.    Dalton  8  Tians.  Ethn.  *  Strahlenberg*8  Travels  in  Si- 

Soc,  vol.  vi.  p.  34.  beria,  p.  381. 

'  Thomson's    Travels     in    W.  •  Loc  citf  voL  iy.  p.  70. 

Himalaya,  p.  19.  '  Erman's  Travels  in  Siberia,  toI. 

'  Hunter's   Annals    of     Rural  i.  p.  464.    See  also  Des.  de  toutes 

Bengal,  1868,  p.  131.  les  Nat  de  TEmp.  Riiaae,  Pt  XL  p. 

♦  Palton's  Des.  Ethn.  of  Bengal,  43. 


BIBERIA.    SUMATRA.  288 

nor  have  they  yet  abandoned  the  usage  ;  a  &ct  well 
known  to  the  enlightened  Kosaks,  who  enrich  them- 
selves by  canying  off  secretly  the  sacrificial  gifts.* 
Hanway,^  in  his  Travels  in  Persia,  mentions  a  tree  ^  to 
which  were  affixed  a  number  of  rags  left  there  as 
health-offerings  by  persons  afflicted  with  ague.  This 
was  beside  a  desolate  caravanserai  where  the  traveller 
found  nothing  but  water.' 

In  some  parts «  of  Sumatra  likewise  'they  super- 
stitiously  believe  that  certain  trees,  particularly  those 
of  venerable  appearance  (as  an  old  jawi-jawi,  or  banian 
tree),  are  the  residence,  or  rather  the  material  fi*ame 
of  spirits  of  the  woods  ;  an  opinion  which  exactly 
answers  to  the  idea  entertained  by  the  ancients  of  the 
dryades  and  hamadryades.  At  Benkunat,  in  the  Lam* 
pong  country,  there  is  a  long  stone,  standing  on  a  flat 
one,  supposed  by  the  people  to  possess  extraordinary 
power  of  virtue.  It  is  reported  to  have  been  once 
thrown  down  into  the  water,  and  to  have  raised  itself 
again  into  its  original  position,  agitating  the  elements 
at  the  same  time  with  a  prodigious  storm.  To  ap- 
{MX)ach  it  without  respect  they  believe  to  be  the  source 
of  misfortune  to  the  offender.' 
Among  the  natives  of  the  Philippines  also  we  find 
the  worship  of  trees.*  They  '  believed  that  the  world 
'  at  first  consisted  only  of  sky  and  water,  and  between 
'  these  two  a  glede ;  which,  weary  with  flying  about, 
'  and  finding  no  place  to  rest,  set  the  water  at  variance 
^  with  the  sky,  which,  in  order  to  keep  it  in  bounds, 

I  Quoted  in  the  Early  Races  of  *  Manden's  HiBtory  of  Somatitt, 

Scotland,  toL  L  p.  163.    See  alao  De     p.  301. 

loc  eU.,  pp.  144, 145.  *  JOnd.,  p.  303. 


284    PHILIPPINES.    FSEJEBANB.    NOBTH  AMBBIGA, 

« and  that  it  should  not  get  uppermost,  loaded  the  water 

*  with  a  number  of  islands,  in  which  the  glede  might 

*  settle  and  leave  them  at  peace.     Mankind,  they  said, 

*  sprang  out  of  a  large  cane  with  two  joints ;  that  floating 
^  about  in  the  water  was  at  length  thrown  by  the  waves 

*  against  the  feet  of  the  glede,  as  it  stood  on  shore, 
'  which  opened  it  with  its  bill;  the  man  came  out  of  one 

*  joint,  the  woman  out  of  the  other.     These  were  soon 

*  after  married  by  the  consent  of  their  god,  Bathala 

*  Meycapal,  which  caused  the  first  trembling  of  the 
'  earth :  and  from  thence  are  descended  the  differait 
'  nations  of  the  world.' 

The  Feejeeans  also  worshipped  certain  plants.^ 
Tree-worship  was  less  prevalent  in  America.  Trees 
and  plants  were  worshipped  by  the  Mandans  and 
Monitarees.^  A  large  ash  was  venerated  by  the  Indians 
of  Lake  Superior.* 

In  Xorth  America,  Franklin  ^  describes  a  sacred  tree 
on  which  the  Crees  '  had  hung  strips  of  buffalo  flesh 

*  and  pieces  of  cloth.'     They  complained  to  him  of  some 

*  Stone  Indians,  who,  two  nights  before,  had  stripped 
'  their  revered  tree  of  many  of  its  offerings.'  In  Mexico 
3Ir.  Ty lor  *  observed  an  ancient  cypress  of  remarkable 
size:  '  all  over  its  branches  were  fastened  votive  offer- 

*  ings  of  the  Indians,  hundreds  of  locks  of  coarse  black 
'  hair,  teeth,  bits  of  coloured  cloth,  rags  and  morsels  of 

*  ribbon.  The  tree  was  many  centuries  old,  and  had 
'  probably  had  some  mysterious  influence  ascribed  to  it, 

»  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  toI.  i.  p.  i.  p.  221. 

219.  *  Anfthuac,  p.  215.      He  men- 

*  Miiller,  Amer.  UrreL,  p.  69.  tions  a  Bccond  case  of  the  tame  »ori 

*  Muller,  loc,  cii.,  p.  125.  an  p.  265. 
«  Journeja  to  the  Polar  Sea,  vol 


MEXICO.    PERU.    PATAGONIA.  285 

*  and  been  decorated  with  such  simple  offerings  long 

*  before  the  discovery  of  America.'  In  Nicaragua,  not 
only  large  trees,  but  even  maize  and  beans,  were  wor- 
ahipped.^  Maize  was  also  worshipped  in  the  Peruvian 
province  of  Huanca.* 

In  Patagonia,  Mr.  Darwin  •  mentions  a  sacred  tree 
which  the  Indians  reverence  as  the  altar  of  Walleechu. 
It  is  situated  on  a  high  part  of  the  plain,  and  hence  is 
a  landmark  visible  at  a  great  distance.  As  soon  as  a 
tribe  of  Indians  come  in  sight  of  it  they  offer  their 

adorations  by  loud  shouts It  stands  by  itself 

without  any  neighbour,  and  was  indeed  the  first  tree 
we  saw ;  afterwards  we  met  with  a  few  others  of  the 
same  kind,  but  they  were  far  from  common.  Being 
winter,  the  tree  had  no  leaves,  but  in  their  place  num- 
berless threads,  by  which  the  various  offerings,  such  as 
cigars,  bread,  meat,  pieces  of  cloth,  &c.,  had  been  sus- 
pended. Poor  people,  not  having  anything  better,  only 
pulled  a  thread  out  of  their  ponchoo,  and  fastened  it 
to  the  tree.  The  Indians,  moreover,  were  accustomed 
to  pour  spirits  and  mat^  into  a  certain  hole,  and  like- 
wise to  smoke  upwards,  thinking  thus  to  afford  all 
possible  gratification  to  Walleechu.  To  complete  the 
scene,  the  tree  was  surrounded  by  the  bleached  bones 
of  the  horses  which  had  been  slaughtered  as  sacrifices. 
All  Indians,  of  every  age  and  sex,  made  their  offerings ; 
they  then  thought  that  their  horses  would  not  tire, 
and  that  they  themselves  should  be  prosperous.     The 


«  Mtiller,  loc.  cU.,  p.  494.    See  i.  pp.  47,  331. 
also  p.  491.  '  Researches   in   Geology    and 

•  llartitia,  loe,  ek.,  p.  80.    O.  de  Natural  History,  p.  79. 
la  Vega,  Commen.  of  the  Incas,  toI. 


286  WATEE^WOBSHIP. 

^  Gaucho  who  told  me  this  said  that  in  the  time  of  peace 
^  he  had  witnessed  this  scene,  and  that  he  and  othere 
^  used  to  wait  till  the  Indians  had  passed  by,  for  the 
'  sake  of  stealing  their  offerings  from  Walleechu.  The 
^  Gauchos  think  that  the  Indians  consider  the  tree  as 
^  the  god  itself;  but  it  seems  far  more  probable  that 
^  they  regard  it  as  the  altar  ' — a  distinction,  however, 
which  a  Patagonian  Indian  would  hardly  perceive. 

The  Abenaquis  also  had  a  sacred  tree.^ 

Thus,  then,  this  form  of  reUgion  can  be  shown  to  be 
general  to  most  of  the  great  races  of  men  at  a  certain 
stage  of  mental  development.^ 

We  will  now  pass  to  the  worship  of  lakes,  rivers, 
and  springs,  which  we  shall  find  to  have  been  not  less 
widely  distributed.  It  was  at  one  time  very  prevalent 
in  Western  Europe.  Herodotus  mentions  the  exist- 
ence of  sacred  lakes  among  the  Libyans.*  According 
to  Cicero,  Justin,  and  Strabo,  there  was  a  lake  near 
Toulouse  in  which  the  neighbouring  tribes  used  to  de- 
posit offerings  of  gold  and  silver.  Tacitus,  Pliny,  and 
Virgil  also  allude  to  sacred  lakes.  In  the  sixth  century, 
Gregory  of  Tours  mentions  a  sacred  lake  on  Mount 
Helanus. 

In  Brittany  there  is  the  celebrated  well  of  St.  Anne 
of  Auray,  and  the  sacred  fountain  at  Lanmeur,  in  the 
crypt  of  the  church  of  St.  Melars,  to  which  crowds  of 
pilgrims  still  resort.* 

In  our  own  country  traces  of  water-worship  are 
also  abundant.     It  is  expressly  mentioned  by  Gildas,* 

^  De    Brosses,    Da     Culte    des  i.  p.  158. 
Dieux  Fetiches,  p.  51.    Lafitau,  voL  '  Melpomene,  clTiii.  clxxxL 

i.  p.  146.  *  Mon.  Hist  Brit  vii. 

"  Early  lUces  of  Scotland,  vol. 


EUBOPE.  287 

and  is  said  to  be  denounced  in  a  Saxon  homily  pre- 
served in  Cambridge/    '  At  St.  FiUan's  ^  weU,  at  Comrie, 

*  in  Perthshire,  numbers  of  persons  in  search  of  health, 

*  80  late  as  1791,  came  or  were  brought  to  drink  of  the 
^  waters  and  bathe  in  it.  All  these  walked  or  were 
'  carried  three  times  deasU  (sunwise)  round  the  well. 
^  They  also  threw  each  a  white  stone  on  an  adjacent 
\  cairn,  and  left  behind  a  scrap  of  their  clothmg  as  an 
^  offering  to  the  genius  of  the  place.'  In  the  Scotch 
islands  also  are  many  sacred  wells,  and  I  have  myself 
seen  the  holy  well  in  one  of  the  islands  of  Loch  Maree, 
surrounded  by  the  little  offerings  of  the  peasantry,  con- 
aisting  principally  of  rags  and  balance. 

Colonel  Forbes  Leslie*  observes  that  in  Scotland 

*  there  are  few  parishes  without  a  holy  well ; '  nor  was 
it  much  less  general  in  Ireland.  The  kelpie,  or  spirit 
of  the  waters,  assumed  various  forms,  that  of  a  man, 
woman,  horse,  or  bull  being  the  most  common.  Scot- 
land and  Ireland  are  full  of  legends  about  this  spirit,  a 
firm  belief  in  the  existence  of  which  was  general  in  the 
laat  century,  and  is  even  now  &r  from  abandoned. 

Of  river-worship  we  have  many  cases  recorded  in 
Greek  history.*  Peleus  dedicated  a  lock  of  Achilles' 
hair  to  the  river  Spercheios.  The  Pulians  sacrificed  a 
boll  to  Alpheios ;  Themis  summoned  the  rivers  to  the 
great  Olympian  assembly.  Okeanos  the  Ocean,  and 
various  fountains,  were  regarded  as  divinities.  Water- 
worship  in  the  time  of  Homer  was,  however,  gradually 

*  Wright's  Supentitions  of  Eog-      Races  of  Scotland,  toI.  i.  p.  146. 
land.  CampbelFs  Tales  of  the  West  High- 

'  Early  Raoet  of  Scotland,  toI.  L      lands. 
p.  156.  ^  JuTontus  Mondi,  p.  190. 

*  See    Forbes     Leslie's    Early 


288  SIBERIA.    INDIA. 

ebbing  away ;  and  belonged  rather,  I  think,  to  an  earlier 
stage  in  development,  than,  as  Mr.  Gladstone  believes, 
to  a  different  race.^ 

In  Northern  Asia,  the  Tunguses*  and  Votyaks* 
worship  various  springs.  De  Brosses  mentions  that  the 
'  River  Sogd  was  worshipped  at  Samarcand.^  In  *  the 
'  tenth  century  a  schism  took  place  in  Persia  among 
'  the  Armenians,  one  party  being  accused  of  despising 
*  the  holy  well  of  Vagarschiebat.' 

The  Bouriat«  also,  though  Buddhists,  have  sacred 
lakes.  Atkinson  thus  describes  one.  In  an  after-dinner 
ramble,  he  says,^  '  I  came  upon  the  small  and  pictu- 
resque lake  of  Ikeougoun,  which  lies  in  the  mountiuns 
to  the  north  of  San-ghin-dalai,  and  is  held  in  venera- 
tion. They  have  erected  a  small  wooden  temple  on 
the  shore,  and  here  they  come  to  sacrifice,  offering  up 
milk,  butter,  and  the  fat  of  the  animals,  which  they 
burn  on  the  little  altars.  The  large  rock  in  the  lake 
is  with  them  a  sacred  stone,  on  which  some  rude 
figures  are  traced ;  and  on  the  bank  opposite  they 
place  rods  with  small  silk  flags,  having  inscriptions 
printed  on  them.'  Lake  Ahoosh  also  is  accounted 
sacred  among  the  Baskhirs/ 

The  divinity  of  water,  says  Dubois,  is  recognised  by 
'  all  the  people  of  India.'  ^  Besides  the  well-known 
worship  of  the  holy  Ganges,  the  tribes  of  the  Neilgherry 
Hills  ^  worship  rivers  under  the  name  of  Graugamma, 

^  Juveotus  Mundi,  pp.  177, 187.  °  Siberia,  p.  445. 

*  Pallas,  vol.  iv.  p.  641.  ^  Atkinson's  Oriental  and  West* 
'  Des.  de    toutes  les   Nat.    de      em  Siberia,  p.  141. 

TEmp.  Kusse,  Pt  II.  p.  80.  «  The  People  of  India,  p.  135. 

*  Loc,  cit.,  p.  146.  See  also  pp.  876,  410. 

^  Whipple,  Report  on  the  Indian  *  The  Tribes  of  the  Neilgheny 

TribeB,  p.  44.  Hills,  p.  68. 


AFRICA.  289 

and  in  crossing  them  it  is  usual  to  drop  a  coin  into  the 
water  as  an  offering,  and  the  price  of  a  safe  passage. 
In  the  Deccan  and  in  Ceylon  trees  and  bushes  near 
springs  may  often  be  seen  covered  with  votive  offerings.^ 
The  worship  of  rivers  also  prevails  among  many  of  the 
Hill  tribes,  as,  for  instance,  the  Earrias,  Santhals, 
Khonds,  &c.^  The  people  of  Sumatra  ^  are  said  to  pay 
^  a  kind  of  adoration  to  the  sea,  and  to  make  it  an 

*  oflfering  of  cakes  and  sweetmeats  on  their  beholding 

*  it  for  the  first  time,  deprecating  its  power  of  doing 

*  them  harm.'* 

In  the  Ashantee  country,  Bosman  mentions  'the 

*  Ghamascian  river,  or  Rio  de  San  Juan,  called  by  the 

*  negroes  Bossum  Pra,  which  they  adore  as  a  god,  as 

*  the  word  Bossum  signifies.'*  The  Eufrates,  the  prin- 
eipal  river  of  Whydah,  is  also  looked  on  as  sacred,  and 
s  yearly  procession  is  made  to  it.^  Phillips^  mentions, 
tiiat  on  one  occasion,  in  1693,  when  the  sea  was  un- 
Qsoally  rough,  the  Kabosheers  complained  to  the  king, 
who  *  desired  them  to  be  easy,  and  he  would  make  the 

*  sea  quiet  next  day.  Accordingly  he  sent  his  fetish- 
^  man  with  a  jar  of  palm  oil,  a  bag  of  rice  and  corn,  a 

*  jar  of  pittOy  a  bottle  of  brandy,  a  piece  of  painted  calico, 

*  and  several  other  things  to  present  to  the  sea.  Being 
'  come  to  the  seaside  (as  the  author  was  informed  by 
'  his  men,  who  saw  the  ceremony),  he  made  a  speech  to 
'  it,  assuring  it  that  his  king  was  its  friend,  and  loved 

1  Early  lUoea  of  SooUand,  toI.      494.    Smithes  Voyage  to  Guioea,  p. 
L  p.  103.  107. 

*  IbitL,  vol.  it  p.  407.     Dalton's  *  Astley,  loc.  eit.,  p.  26. 

Bel.  Etho.  of  Bengal,  p.  159.  "  Astluy's  Collection  of  Voyaget, 

*  Manden,  ^.  ct^.,  p.  ^1.  vul.  ii.  p.  411. 

*  Loc.  eU.j  p.  348.    See  also  p. 

U 


290  AFBIOA. 

'  the  white  men ;   that  they  were  honest  fellows,  and 

*  came  to  trade  with  him  for  what  he  wanted ;  and  that 
'  lie  requested  the  sea  not  to  be  angry,  nor  hinder  them 

^  to  land  their  goods ;  he  told  it,  that  if  it  wanted  palm^^ 
^  oil,  his  king  had  sent  it  some ;  and  so  threw  the  jai^ 

*  mth  the  oil  into  the  sea,  as  he  did,  with  the  sam**^ 
'  compliment,  the  rice,  com,  pittOy  brandy,  calico,  &fc  ^ 
Again,  Villault^  mentions  that  lakes,  rivers,  and  pon^^ 
come  in  also  for  their  share  of  worship.   He  was  prese^^ 
at  a  singular  ceremony  near  Akkra.     A  great  number 
of  blacks  assembled  about  a  pond,  bringing  with  them  a 
sheep  and  some  gallipots,  which  they  oflFered  to  the 
pond,  M.  Villault  being  informed  '  that  this  lake,  or 

*  pond,  being  one  of  their  deities,  and  the  common 
'  messenger  of  all  the  rivers  of  their  country,  they  threw 
'  in  the  gallipots  with  these  ceremonies  to  implore  his 
^  assistance ;  and  to  beg  him  to  carry  immediately  that 
'  pot,  in  their  name,  to  the  other  rivers  and  lakes  to  buy 

*  water  for  them,  and  hoped,  at  his  return,  he  would 
^  pour  the  pot-full  on  their  corn,  that  they  might  have 
'  a  good  crop.' 

Some  of  the  negroes  on  the  Guinea  Coast  *  *  looked 
'  on  the  whites  as  the  gods  of  the  sea ;  that  the  mast 
'  was  a  divinity  that  made  the  ship  walk,  and  the  pump 

*  was  a  miracle,  since  it  could  make  water  rise  up,  whose 
^  natural  property  is  to  descend.' 

Mr.  Crcswick,  in  his  description  of  the  Veys,  says,* 
'  there  is  a  dangerous  rock  in  the  Mafa  river,  which  is 
'  never  passed  without  giving  tribute,  either  a  leaf  of 

*  Afltley's  Collection  of  Voyages,  '  Trans.  Etlm.  Soc.,  vol.  vi.  p. 

p.  668.  369. 

^  Astley,  vol.  ii.  p.  105. 


NORTH  AMERICA.  291 

*  tobacco,  a  handful  of  rice,  or  drink  of  rum,  as  a  peace- 

*  offering  to  the  spirit  of  the  flood.' 

On  the  Zambesi,  the  natives  place  ofierings  on  the 
rocks  in  dangerous  places,  to  propitiate  the  spirits  of 
the  waters.^ 

In  North  America  the  Dacotahs^  worship  a  god  of 
the  waters  under  the  name  of  Unktahe.    They  say  that 

*  this  god  and  its  associates  are  seen  in  their  dreams.  It 

*  is  the  master-spirit  of  all  their  juggling  and  supersti- 

*  tious  belief.    From  it  the  medicine-men  obtain  their 

*  supernatural  powers,  and  a  great  part  of  their  reUgion 

*  springs  from  this  god.'  Franklin*  mentions  that,  the 
wife  of  one  of  his  Indian  guides  being  ill,  her  husband 

*  made  an  offering  to  the  water-spirits,  whose  wrath  he 

*  apprehended  to  be  the  cause  of  her  malady.     It  con- 

*  sisted  of  a  knife,  a  piece  of  tobacco,  and  some  other 

*  trifling  articles,  which  were  tied  up  in  a  small  bundle, 

*  and  committed  to  the  rapid.'  Carver  *  observes  that 
when  the  Redskins  'arrive  on  the  borders  of  Lake 

*  Superior,  on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  or  any  other 

*  great  body  of  water,  they  present  to  the  spirit  who 

*  resides  there  some  kind  of  offering,  as  the  prince  of 

*  the  Winnebagoes  did  when  he  attended  me  to  the  Falls 

*  of  St.  Anthony.'  Tanner  also  gives  instances  of  this 
custom.*  On  one  occasion  a  Redskin,  addressing  the 
spirit  of  the  waters,  *  told  him  that  he  had  come  a  long 

*  way  to  pay  his  adorations  to  him,  and  now  would 

*  make    him    the   best  offerings  in  his    power.     Ho 

>  Livingstone's  Zambesi,  p.  41.         Polar  Sea,  1819-22,  vol.  ii.  p.  245. 

•  Schoolcraft's  Indian  Tribes,  Pt.  *  Carver's  Travels,  p.  383. 

III.  p.  486.  *  Narrative  of  the  Captivity  of 

*  Journey  to  the  Shores  of  the      John  Tanner,  p.  46. 

u2 


292  CENTRAL  AMEBIOA. 

'  accordingly  first  threw  his  pipe  into  the  stream ;  then 

*  the  roll  that  contained  his  tobacco ;    after  these,  the 

*  bracelets  he  wore  on  his  arms  and  wrists ;  next  an 
'  ornament  that  encircled  his  neck,  composed  of  beads 
'  and  wires ;  and  at  last  the  earrings  from  his  ears ;  in 

*  short,  he  presented  to  his  god  every  part  of  his  dress 

*  that  was  valuable.'  ^ 

The  Mandans  also  were  in  the  habit  of  sacrificing  to 
the  spirit  of  the  waters.* 

In  North  Mexico,  near  the  35th  Parallel,  Lieutenant:^: 
Whipple  found  a  sacred  spring  which  from  time  imme — 
morial  '  had  been  held  sacred  to  the  rain-god.'  •  N< 
animal  may  drink  of  its  waters.  It  must  be  annuall] 
cleansed  vnth  ancient  vases,  which,  having  been  tranfr  - 
mitted  from  generation  to  generation  by  the  caciques, 
are  then  placed  upon  the  walls,  never  to  be  removed. 
The  frog,  the  tortoise,  and  the  rattlesnake,  represented 
upon  them,  are  sacred  to  Montezuma,  the  patron  of  the 
place,  who  would  consume  by  lightning  any  sacrilegious 
hand  that  should  dare  to  take  the  relics  away.  In  Ni- 
caragua rain  was  worshipped  under  the  name  of 
Quiateot.  The  principal  water-god  of  Mexico,  how- 
ever, was  Tlaloc,  who  was  worshipped  by  the  Toltecs, 
Chichimecs,  and  Aztecs.*  In  New  Mexico,  not  far  from 
Zuni,  Dr.  Bell^  describes  a  sacred  spring  'about  eight 
'  feet  in  diameter,  walled  round  with  stones,  of  which 
'  neither  cattle  nor  men  may  drink:  the  animals  sacred 
'  to  water  (frogs,   tortoises,  and   snakes)    alone  must 


^  Narrative  of  the  Captivity  of  ^  Report  on  the  Indian  Tribes,  p. 

John  Tanner,  p.  07.  40. 

*  Catlin'H  North  American  In-  ^  Miiller,  Amer.  Urrel.,  p.  486w 

diaiis,  vol.  i.  p.  1(K).  *  Ethn.  Joum.,  1860,  p.  227. 


TBS  W0B8BIP  OF  STQUEB.  293 

*  enter  the  pool.  Once  a  year  the  cacique  and  hia 
'attendants  perform  certain  religious  rites  at  the 
'  spring :  it  is  thoroughly  cleared  out ;  water -pots  are 

*  brought  as  an  offering  to  the  spirit  of  Montezuma,  and 
'  are  placed  bottom  upwards  on  the  top  of  the  wall  of 
'  atones.     Many  of  these  have  been  removed  j  but  some 

*  still  remain,  while  the  ground  around  is  strewn  with 

*  fragments  of  vases  which  have  crumbled  into  decay 

*  from  age.'  In  Peru  the  sea,  under  the  name  of  Mama 
Cocba,  was  the  principal  deity  of  the  Chinchas.'  The 
Indians  of  the  Coast,  says  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  '  firom 

*  Tmxillo  to  Tarapaca,  which  are  at  the  northern  and 

*  Boathern  extremities  of  Peru,  worshipped  the  sea  in 

*  tlw  shape  of  a  Ash.' '  One  branch  of  the  Collas  de- 
daccd  their  origin  from  a  river,  the  others  irom  a 
spring; '  there  was  also  a  special  rain-goddess.  In 
Paraj^ay  *  also  the  rivers  are  propitiated  by  oflFeringa 
of  tolmcoo. 

"We  will  now  pass  to  the  worship  of  stones  and 
motinluing,  a  form  of  religion  not  less  general  than 
thotic  already  described. 

M.  Diiljiure,  in  his  *  Histoire  Abr^g^e  des  CuUes,' 
explains  tlic  origin  of  stone- worship  as  arising  from  the 
resjiect  paid  to  bomidary-stones.  I  do  not  doubt  that 
the  wontttip  of  some  particular  stones  may  thus  have 
i^i^nated.  Hermes,  or  Termes,  was  evidently  of  this 
character,  and  hence  we  may  perhaps  explain  the  pecu- 
liar charftcterieticB  of  Hermes,  or  Mercury,  whose  symbol 
uprigiit  stone. 

^m,  Amn.  UmL,  p.  868,      p.  108. 

It.  148.  *  Loc.  cit.,  p.  268. 

'-  U  Veg^  Tol  i. 


294  ATTRIBUTES  OF  THE   OOD  MEBOUBT. 

Mercury,  or  Hermes,  says  Lempri^re,  *  was  the  mes- 

*  senger  of  the  gods.  He  was  the  patron  of  travellers 
^  and  shepherds ;  he  conducted  the  souls  of  the  dead 

*  into  the  infernal  regions,  and  not  only  presided  over 
'  orators,  merchants,  and  declaimers,  but  he  was  also  the 
^  god  of  thieves,  pickpockets,  and  all  dishonest  persons/ 
He  invented  letters  and  the  lyre,  and  was  the  originator 
of  arts  and  sciences. 

It  is  difficult  at  first  to  see  the  connection  between 
these  various  offices,  characterised  as  they  are  by  such 
opposite  peculiarities.  Yet  they  all  follow,  I  think,  from 
the  custom  of  marking  boundaries  by  upright  stones. 
Hence  the  name  Hermes,  or  Termes,  the  boundary.  In 
the  troublous  times  of  old,  it  was  usual,  in  order  to  avoid 
disputes,  to  leave  a  tract  of  neutral  territory  between 
the  possessions  of  different  nations.  These  were  called 
marches  ;  hence  the  title  of  Marquis,  which  means  an 
officer  appointed  to  watch  the  frontier  or  *  march.' 
These  marches,  not  being  cultivated,  served  as  grazing 
grounds.  To  them  came  merchants  in  order  to  ex- 
change on  neutral  ground  the  products  of  their  respec- 
tive countries  ;  here  also  for  the  same  reason  treaties 
were  negotiated.  Here  again  international  games  and 
sports  were  held.  Upright  stones  were  used  to  indi- 
cate places  of  burial ;  and  lastly,  on  them  were  engraved 
laws  and  decrees,  records  of  remarkable  events,  and  the 
praises  of  the  deceased. 

Hence  Mercury,  represented  by  a  plain  upright 
stone,  was  the  god  of  travellers,  because  he  was  a  land- 
mark ;  of  shepherds,  as  presiding  over  tlie  pastures;  he 
conducted  the  souls  of  the  dead  into  the  infernal  regions, 
because  even  in  very  early  dayn  upright  stones  were 


8IBEBLL    EINDOBTAN.  296 

used  as  tombstones ;  he  was  the  god  of  merchants, 
because  commerce  was  carried  on  principally  at  the 
frontiers ;  and  of  thieves,  out  of  sarcasm.  He  was  the 
messenger  of  the  gods,  because  ambassadors  met  at  the 
fix>ntiers ;  and  of  eloquence  for  the  same  reason.  He 
invented  the  lyre,  and  presided  over  games,  because 
contests  in  music,  &c.  were  held  on  neutral  ground; 
and  he  was  regarded  as  the  author  of  letters,  because 
inscriptions  were  engraved  on  upright  pillars. 

Stone-worship,  however,  in  its  simpler  forms  has,  I 
think,  a  different  origin  from  this,  and  is  merely  a  form 
of  that  indiscriminate  worship  which  characterises  the 
human  mind  in  a  particular  phase  of  development. 

Pallas  states  that  the  Ostyaks^  and  Tunguses 
w<Nrship  mountains,^  and  the  Tartars  stones.^  Near 
Lake  Baikal  ^  is  a  sacred  rock  which  is  regarded  as  the 
special  abode  of  an  evil  spirit,  and  is  consequently  much 
feared  by  the  natives.  In  India  stone-worship  is  very 
prevalent,  especially  among  the  aboriginal  tribes.  The 
Asagas  of  Mysore  ^  worship  a  god  called  Bhuma  Devam, 

*  who  is  represented  by  a  shapeless   stone.'  ^     *  One 

*  thing  is  certain,'  says  Mr.  Hislop,  '  the  worship  (of 

*  stones)  is  spread  over  all  parts  of  the  country,  from 

*  Berar  to  the  extreme  east  of  Bustar,  and  that  not 

*  merely  among  the  Hinduised  aborigines,  who  had 
'  begun  to  honour  Khandova,  &c.,  but  among  the  rudest 
^  and  most  savage  tribes.     He  is  generally  adored  in 

*  the  form  of  an  unshapely  stone  covered   with  ver- 

'  Voyages  de  Pallas,  rol.  It.  p.  ii.  p.  142. 
79.  '  Buchanan's  Journey,  voL  i.  p. 

•  Ihid,  pp.  4.34,  048.  338.     Quoted  in  Ethnol.  Journ.,  toI. 

»  Ibid,,  pp.  614,  sua  viii.  p.  W). 
«  lJiU*s  TiETels  in  Siberia,  toI. 


296  HIND08TAN. 

*  milion.'  ^     '  Two  rude  slave  castes  in  Tulava  (Southern 

*  India),  the  Bakadara  and  Betaddra,  worship  a  benevo- 

*  lent  deity  named  Buta,  represented  by  a  stone  kept 
'  in  every  house.'  *^  Indeed,  *in  every  part  of  Southern 
'  India,  four  or  five  stones  may  often  be  seen  in  the 

*  ryots'  field,  placed  in  a  row  and  daubed  with  red  paint, 
'  which  they  consider  as  guardians  of  the  field  and  call 

*  the  five  Pandus.'  ^  Colonel  Forbes  Leslie  supposes 
that  this  red  paint  is  intended  to  represent  blood/ 
The  god  of  each  Ehond  village  is  represented  by  three 
stones.^  PI.  III.  represents  a  group  of  sacred  stones, 
near  Delgaum,  in  the  Dekkan,  from  a  figure  given  by 
Colonel  Forbes  Leslie  in  his  interesting  work,^  The 
three  largest  stood  ^  in  fi^ont  of  the  centre  of  two  straight 

lines,  each  of  which  consisted  of  thirteen  stones. 
These  lines  were  close  together,  and  the  edges  of  the 
stones  were  placed  as  near  to  each  other  as  it  wa« 
possible  to  do  with  slabs  which,  although  selected,  had 
never  been  artificially  shaped.  The  stone  in  the 
centre  of  each  line  was  nearly  as  high  as  the  highest 
of  the  three  that  stood  in  front ;  but  the  others  gradually 
decreased  in  size  from  the  centre,  until  those  at  the 
ends  were  less  than  a  foot  above  the  ground,  into 
which  they  were  all  secured.  Three  stones,  not  fixed, 
were  placed  in  fi-ont  of  the  centre  of  the  group  ;  they 
occupied  the  same  position,  and  were  intended  for  the 
same  purposes,  as  those  in  the  circular  temple  just 
described.     All  the  stones  had  been  selected  of  an 

*  Aboripinal      Tribes,      p.     10.  '  Ibid.,  vol.  ix.  p.  126. 
Quoted  in  Ethnol.  Joum.,  vol.  viii.            *  Early  Kaces  of  ScotUnd,   voL 
p.  JX5.  ii.  p.  4i\±' 

*  Journ.  Ethnol.  Soc.,  vol.  viii.  *  L<>c.  n't.,  vol.  ii.  p.  407. 
p.  11  ♦5.  *  L<)r,  cit.f  vol.  ii.  p.  404. 


'■^:. 


■..■..-<' 


>  r  - 


.      I' 


4.: 


*, 


¥-!►■ 


^*^ 


^•"^*."*. 


r 


^ 


•^^     *^.- 


V 


if 


f.. 


V! 


l'^H- 


s 


I 

J- 


.« 


;y 


.  I 


^^. 


'« 


'  ■     "■  I 


■",  I 


I    ♦    ..  ■ 

I 


IV 


11 


\h\A 


I  ■  • 


1  • 


I 
1 1 

i 


i:l      ■ 


at*  a*' 


f  , 


f  _ 


I  • 


I 


I  ■ 


■   .r 


•  ■        .      I  '  "  .11  .   .        1       ,  • 


•  i  '  ■  I  I  ■  I 


■  .''.. 


I      V  .  ■  .  I  ■  I    ^  t   _ 


•  t 


■      I 


l» 


.  ■    J 

4 


l^W  ZEALAND.  297 

*  angular  shape,  with  somewhat  of  an  obelisk  form  in 
'  general  appearance.  The  central  group  and  double 
^  lines  faced  nearly  east,  and  on  that  side  were  white- 

*  washed.  On  the  white,  near,  although  not  reaching 
'  quite  to  the  apex  of  each  stone,  nor  extending  alto- 

*  gether  to  the  sides,  was  a  large  spot  of  red  paint, 
'  two-thirds  of  which  from  the  centre  were  blacked  over, 
'  leaving  only  a  circular  external  belt  of  red.  This 
^  gave,  as  I  believe  it  was  intended  to  do,  a  good  repre- 

*  sentation  of  a  large  spot  of  blood.' 

In  connection  with  these  painted  stones  it  is  remark- 
able that  in  New  Zealand  red  is  a  sacred  coloiu*,  and 
the  way  of  rendering  anything  tapu  was  by  making  it 
red.  When  a  person  died,  his  house  was  thus  painted  ; 
when  the  tapu  was  laid  on  anything,  the  chief  erected 
a  post  and  painted  it  with  the  kura;  wherever  a  corpse 
rested,  some  memorial  was  set  up ;  oftentimes  the 
nearest  stone,  rock,  or  tree  served  as  a  monument; 
but  whatever  object  was  selected,  it  was  sure  to  be 
painted  red.  If  the  corpse  was  conveyed  by  water, 
wherever  they  landed  a  similar  token  was  left;  and 
when  it  reached  its  destination,  the  canoe  was  dragged 
on  shore,  painted  red,  and  abandoned.  When  the 
hahunga  took  place,  the  scraped  bones  of  the  chief 
thus  ornamented,  and  wrapped  in  a  red-stained  mat, 
were  deposited  in  a  box  or  bowl  smeared  with  the 
sacred  colour,  and  placed  in  a  painted  tomb.  Near 
his  final  resting-place  a  lofty  and  elaborately  carved 
monument  was  erected  to  his  memory ;  this  was  called 
the  tiki,  which  was  also  thus  coloured.'*  Red  was 
also  a  sacred  colour  in  Congo.* 

'  Taylor's  New  Zealand  and  tbe  '  Merolla,  Pinkerton,  vol.  xvi  p. 

New  Zealandeniy  p.  MS.  273. 


300  AFRICA, 

In  Ireland,  in  the  fifth  century,  King  Laogh^e  wor- 
shipped a  stone  pillar  called  the  Crom-Cruach,  which 
was  overthrown  by   St.    Patrick.     Another   stone  at 
Clogher  was  worshipped  by  the  Irish  under  the  name 
of  Kermand-Kelstach.^     There  was  a  sacred  stone  in 
Jura  ^  round  which  the  people  used  to  move  *  deasii,' 
i.e.  sunwise.     '  In   some  of  the  Hebrides  *  the  people 
*  attributed  oracular  power  to  a  large  black  stone/    In 
the  island  of  Skye  *  in  every  district  there  is  to  be  met 
with  a  rude  stone  consecrated  to  Gruagach,  or  Apollo. 
The  Rev.  Mr.  McQueen  of  Skye  says  that  in  almost 
every  village  the  sun,  called  Grugach,  or  the  Fair- 
haired,  is  represented  by  a  rude  stone;  and  he  further 
states  that  libations  of  milk  Avere  poured  on  the  gruiuch- 
stones.'   'Finn  Magnusen,'  says  Prof.  Nilsson,  'relates 
that  the  peasants  in  certain  mountain  districts  in  Nor- 
way, even  as  late  as  the  close  of  the  last  century,  used 
to  preserve  stones  of  a  round  form,  and  reverence  them 
in  the  same  manner  as  their  pagan  ancestors  used  to 
worship  their  idols.     They  washed  them  every  Thurs- 
day evening,  smeared  them  before  the  fire  with  butter, 
or  some  other  grease,  then  dried  them  and  laid  them  in 
the  seat  of  honour  upon  fresh  straw ;  at  certain  times  of 
the  year  they  were  steeped  in  ale,  and  all  this  under 
the  supposition  that  they  would  bring  luck  and  com- 
fort to  the  house.'  ^ 

Passing  to  Africa,  Cailli^  observed  near  the  negro 
village  of  N'pal  a  sacred  stone,  on  which  everyone  as 
he  passed  threw  a  thread  out  of  his  *  pagne,'  or  breech- 

'  Dr.  Todd's  St.  Patrick,  p.  127.       2o7. 

*  Martin's  Western  Jsles,  p.  241.  *  Xilsson  on  the   Stone  Age,  p. 

'  Forbes  Leslie,  loc,  cit.j  vol.  i.  p.      241. 


POLYNESIA.    FEEJEE  ISLANDS.  301 

cloth,  as  a  sort  of  offering.  The  natives  firmly  believe 
that  when  any  danger  threatens  the  village  this  stone 
leaves  its  place  and  *  moves  thrice  round  it  in  the  pre- 
ceding night,  by  way  of  warning.'^ 

Bruce  observes  that  the  pagan  Abyssinians  '  worship 
a  tree,  and  likewise  a  stone.'  ^ 

The  Tahitians  believed  in  two  principal  gods  ;  *  the 
Supreme  Deity,  one  of  these  two  first  beings,  they  call 
Taroataihetoomoo,  and  the  other,  whom  they  suppose 
to  have  been  a  rock,  Tepapa.'  *  The  volcanic  moun- 
tain Tongariro  was  '  held  in  traditional  veneration  by 
the  New  Zealanders. '  * 

In  the  Feejee  ^  Islands  '  rude  consecrated  stones  (fig. 
20)  are  to  be  seen  near  Vuna,  where  offerings  of  food 
are  sometimes  made.     Another  stands  on  a  reef  near 
Naloa,  to  which  the  natives  tama  ;  and  one  near  Tho- 
kova,  Na  Fiti  Levu,  named  Lovekaveka,  is  regarded 
as  the  abode  of  a  goddess,  for  whom  food  is  provided. 
This,  as  seen  in  the  engraving,  is  like  a  round  black 
milestone,  slightly  inclined,  and  having  a  liku  (girdle) 
tied  round  the  middle.     The  shrine  of  0  Rewau  is  a 
large  stone,  which,  like  the  one  near  Nalon,  hates  mos- 
quitoes, and  keeps  them  from  collecting  near  where  he 
rules  ;  he  has  also  two  large  stones  for  his  wives,  one 
of  whom  came  from  Yandua,   and   the  other  from 
Yasawa.      Although   no   one   pretends  to  know  the 
origin  of  Ndengei,  it  is  said  that  his  mother,  in  the 
form  of  two  great  stone?,  lies  at  the  bottom  of  a  moat. 

>  CaiUi^,  Tol.  L  p.  25.  *  DieflfonbAch's    New    Zealand, 

•  nnice*s  Travela,  yol.  tI.  p.  343.  vol.  i.  p.  347. 

•  Ilawkesworth's   Voyages,  vol.  *  WillianiH'  Fiji  and  the  F1jian8, 
n.  p.  338.  Tol.  i.  p.  220. 


302  mOUONEBIA. 

t  Stoccs  are  also  used  to  denote  the  locality  of  some 
'  other  gods,  and  the  occasional  resting-places  of  others. 
■  On  the  southern  beaches  of  Vanua  Levu  a  large  stone 
'  is  seen  which  has  fallen  upon  a  smaller  one.  These, 
'  it  is  said,  represent  the  gods  of  two  towns  on  that  coast 
'  fighting,  and  their  quarrel  has  for  years  been  adopted 
'  bv  those  towns.'     On  one  of  these  sacred  stones  in  the 


sACRun  STOHEB.    (FeeJM  Islnndi.) 

eame  neighbourhood  are  circular  marks,  closely  resem- 
bling those  on  some  of  our  European  menhirs,  &c. 

In  Micronepia,  in  the  groups  of  Apamama  and 
Tarawa,  '  Tabueriki  is  worshipped  under  the  fotm  of  a 
'  flat  coral  stone,  of  irregular  8hai>e,  about  three  feet 
'  long  by  eighteen  inches  wide,  set  up  on  one  end  in  die 
'  open  air.' '     The  Tanuese  also  venerate  stones,  and 

'  Iiftlc'8  rthn.  of  thy  V,S.  Kx.  Eip.,  p.  97. 


AMERICA.  803 

the  principal  deity  of  Tokalau  was  supposed  to  be  em- 
bodied in  a  stone,  which  is  carefully  wrapped  up  in  fine 
mats.^  The  Sumatrans  also,  as  already  mentioned  {antky 
p.  283),  had  sacred  stones. 

Prescott  *  says,  that  a  Dacotah  Indian  *  will  pick  up 
^  a  round  stone,  of  any  kind,  and  paint  it,  and  go  a  few 
'  rods  from  his  lodge,  and  clear  away  the  grass,  say 
'  from  one  to  two  feet  in  diameter,  and  there  place  his 

*  stone,  or  god,  as  he  would  term  it,  and  make  an 
^  offering  of  some  tobacco  and  some  feathers,  and  pray 

*  to  the  stone  to  deliver  him  from  some  danger  that  he 

*  has  probably  dreamed  of^  or  from  imagination/ 

The  Monitarris  also  before  any  great  undertaking 
were  in  the  halnt  of  making  offerings  to  a  sacred  stone 
named  Mih  Choppenish.'  In  Florida  a  mountain  called 
Olaimi  was  worshipped,  and  among  the  Natchez  of 
Louisiana  a  conical  stone.^ 

In  South  America  the  Peruvians  kept  ^stones  in 
'  their  houses,  treating  them  as  gods,  and  sacrificing 
^  human  flesh  and  blood  to  them.'  ^ 

Fire-worship  is  so  widely  distributed  as  to  be  almost 
universal.  Since  the  introduction  of  lucifer  matches  we 
can  hardly  appreciate  the  difficulty  which  a  savage  has 
in  obtaining  a  light,  especially  in  damp  weather.  It  is 
said,  however,  that  some  Australian  tribes  did  not  know 
how  to  do  so,  and  that  others,  if  their  fire  went  out, 
would  go  many  miles  to  borrow  a  spark  from  another 
tribe,  rather  than  attempt  to  produce  a  new  one  for 

*  Tunei^s    NiDeteen    Years    in  '  Klemm,  Culturgeschichte,  rol. 
VcHynmuL,  pp.  88,  627.                          ii.  p.  178. 

*  Schoolcraft's    Indian     Tribes,  *  Lafitau,  toI.  i.  p.  140. 

ToL  ii.  p.  229.    Lafitau,  vol.  ii.  p.  ^  Garcilasso  de  La  Vega,  toI.  ii. 

881.  p.  138.    See  also  vol.  i.  p.  47. 


804  FIRE'WOBSHIP. 

themselves.  Hence  in  several  very  widely  separated 
parts  of  the  world  we  find  it  has  been  customary  to  tell 
off  one  or  more  persons,  whose  sole  duty  it  should 
be  to  keep  up  a  continual  fii-e.  Hence,  no  doubt,  the 
origin  of  the  Vestal  Virgins ;  and  hence  also  the  idea  of 
the  sacredness  of  fire  would  naturally  arise. 

Accoixling  to  Lafitau,^  M.  Huet,  in  a  work  which  1 
have  not  been  able  to  see,  ^  fidt  une  longue  Enumeration 
des  peuples  qui  entretenoient  ce  feu  sacrE,  et  il  cite 
partout  ses  autorit&,  de  sorte  qu*il  paroit  qn'il  n'y 
avoit  point  de  partie  du  monde  cannu,  oil  ce  culte  ne 
fftt  universellement  r^pandu.  Dans  I'Asie,  outre  les 
Juifs  et  les  Chald^ns  dont  nous  venons  de  parler, 
outre  les  peuples  de  Phrygie,  de  Lycie,  et  de  TAsie- 
Mineure,  il  Etoit  encore  chez  les  Perses,  les  Medes,  les 
Scythes,  les  Sarmates,  chez  toutes  les  nations  du  Ponte 
et  de  la  Cappadoce,  chez  toutes  celles  des  Indes,  oil 
Ton  se  faisoit  un  devoir  de  se  jeter  dans  les  flammes, 
et  de  s'y  consumer  en  holocauste,  et  chez  toutes  celles 
des  deux  Arabics,  oil  chaque  jour  h  certaines  heures 
on  faisoit  un  sacrifice  au  feu,  dans  lequel  plusieurs 
personnes  se  d6vouoient.  Dans  TAfrique  il  <5toit  non- 
seulement  chez  les  figyptiens,  qui  entretenoient  ce  feu 
immortel  dans  chaque  temple,  ainsi  que  Tassure 
Porphyre,  mais  encore  dans  Tfithiopie,  dans  la  Lybie, 
dans  le  temple  de  Jupiter  Animon,  et  chez  les  Atlan- 
tiques,  ou  Hiarbas,  roy  des  Garamantes  et  des  Getules, 
avoit  dress6  cent  autels,  et  consacr(5  autant  de  feux, 
que  Virgile  appelle  des  feux  vigilans  et  les  gardes 
eternelles  des  dieux.     Dans  TEurope  le  culte  de  Vesta 

i  GarciUsso  de  la  Vega,  p.  1*53. 


FIRE.WOnSiriP,    ASIA.  305 

'  6toit  si  bien  ^tabli,  que,  sans  parler  de  Rome  et  de 

*  ritalie,  il  n'y  avoit  point  de  ville  de  la  Grece  qui  n'eut 

*  un  temple,  un  prytan^e,  et  un  feu  ^ternel,  ainsi  que  le 

*  rcmarque  Casaubon  dans  ses  "  Notes  sur  Athende." 

*  Les  temples  c^l^bres  d'Hercule  dans  les  Espagnes  et 
^  dans  les  Gaules,  celui  de  Yulcain  au  Mont  Ethna,  de 

*  V^nus  Erycine,  avoient  tous  leurs  pyr6tlies  ou  feux 

*  sacr^.     On  pent  citer  de  semblables  t^moignages  des 

*  nations   les  plus  reculees   dans  le  nord,  qui  ^toient 

*  toutes  originaires  des  Scythes  et  des  Sarmates.     Enfin 

*  M.  Huet  pnStend  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  encore  long-temps  que 

*  08  culte  a  6t6  aboli  dans  THybernie  et  dans  la  Moscovie, 

*  qu'il  est  encore  aujourd'hui,  non-seulement  chez   les 

*  Gaures,  mais  encore  chez  les  Tartares,  les  Chinois,  et 

*  dans  FAmerique   chez    les  Mexiquains.     11  pouvoit 

*  encore  en  ajouter  d'autres.' 

Among  the  ancient  Prussians  a  perpetual  fire  was 
kept  up  in  honour  of  the  god  Potrimix)s,  and  if  it 
was  allowed  to  go  out,  the  priest  in  charge  was  burnt  to 
death.^ 

The  Ainos  of  Yesso  '  have  many  gods ;  but  Jire,  not 

*  the  sun,  the  moon,  or  the  stars,  is  the  principal  one,  and 

*  they  are  accustomed  to  pray  to  it,  in  general  terms,  for 

*  all  they  may  need.'  ^     *  Many  Tunguz,  Mongol,  and 

*  Turk  tribes,'  says  Tylor,  *  sacrifice  to  fire,  and  some 

*  clans  will  not  eat  meat  without  first  throwing  a  morsel 

*  upon  the  hearth.'  * 

The  Natchez  and  Cherokces  *  had  a  temple  in  Avhich 

»  Voipt,  Oeach.   PreuMonfl,  vol.  '  Tylor  8  rrimitivc  Culture,  vol, 

i.  p.  682.    Bchwenk,   Die  MythoL  ii.  p.  204. 
der  Hlawen,  p.  d^.  *  Prichard's  Nat.  Ilittt.  of  Man, 

•  Bukmore,  Trann.   Ethn.  Soc.,  1 855,  vol.  ii.  p.  630. 
▼ol.  TM.  p.  20. 


306  AMEBIOA.    AFBIOA. 

they  kept  up  a  perpetoal  fire,^     The  Ojibwas '  mam- 
tained  ^  a  continual  fire  as  a  symbol  of  their  nationality. 

*  They  maintained  also  a  civil  polity,  which,  however, 
^  was  much  mixed  up  with  their  religious  and  medicinal 
'  beliefs/    In  Mexico  'also  we  find  the  same  idea  of 
sacred  fire.     Colonel  McLeod  has  seen  the  sacred  fire 
still  kept  burning  in  some  of  the   valleys   of  South 
Mexico.'    At   the  great  festival   of  Xiuhmolpia,  the 
priests  and  people  went  in  procession  to  the  mountain 
of  Huixachtecatl ;  then   an   unfortunate   victim  was 
stretched  on  the  ^  stone  of  sacrifice/  and  killed  by  a 
priest  with  a  knife  of  obsidian;  the  dish  made  use  c^to 
kindle  the  new  fire  was  then  placed  on  the  wound,  and 
fire  was  obtamed  by  friction.* 

In  Peru  *  ^  the  sacred  flame  was  entrusted  to  the  care 

*  of  the  Virgins  of  the  Sun ;  and  i^  by  any  neglect,  it  was 

*  suffered  to  go  out  in  the  course  of  the  year,  the  event 
^  was  regarded  as  a  calamity  that  boded  some  strange 

*  disaster  to  the  monarchy.* 

Fire  is  also  regarded  as  sacred  in  Congo,  and  in 
Dahome  Zo  is  the  fire  fetich.  A  pot  is  placed  in  a 
room  and  sacrifice  is  offered  to  it,  that  fire  may  *  live  * 
there.^ 

No  one  can  wonder  that  the  worship  of  sun,  moon, 
and  stars  is  very  widely  distributed.  It  can,  however, 
scarcely  be  regarded  as  of  a  higher  character  than  the 

»  Lafitau,  voL  i.  p.  167.  don,  1824,  vol.  i.  pp.  225,  382.    See 

'  Warren  in  Schoolcraft^s  Indian  also  Lafitau,  vol.  i.  p.  170.      Qaitt* 

Tribes,  vol.  ii.   p.   188.     See  also  lasdo  de  la  Vega,  vol.  ii.  p.  162. 
Whipple's  Report  on  Indian  Tribee,  ^  Preacott,  toL  i.  p.  09.  Wuttke, 

p.  36.  Oes,  der  Menacb.,  toL  i.  p.  276. 

»  Jour.  Ethn.  Soc,  1800,  p.  225.  «  Burton's    Dahome,   vol.  il  p. 

See  also  p.  246.  148. 

^  Humboldt's  Reeearchee,  Lion- 


SUN  AND  MOON   WORSHIP.  307 

preceding  forms  of  Totemisin;  it  is  unknown  in  Aus- 
tralia, and  almost  so  in  Polynesia. 

In  hot  countries  the  sun  is  generally  regarded  as  an 
evil,  and  in  cold  as  a  beneficent,  being.  It  was  the 
chief  object  of  religious  worship  among  the  Natchez,^ 
and  was  also  worshipped  by  the  Navajos,  and  other 
allied  tribes  in  North  America.^  Among  the  Comanches 
of  Texas  '  the  sun,  moon,  and  earth  are  the  principal 

*  objects  of  worship/  ®  Lafitau  observes  that  the  Ame- 
rican Redskins  did  not  worship  the  stars  and  planets, 
but  only  the  sun.*  In  North- West  America,  however, 
the  Ahts  worship  both  the  sun  and  moon,  but  especially 
the  latter.  They  regard  the  sun  as  feminine  and  the 
moon  as  masculine,  being,  moreover,  the  husband  of  the 
Bun.*  The  Eaniagmioutes  consider  them  to  be  brother 
and  sister/  It  has  been  said  that  the  Esquimaux  of 
Greenland  used  to  worship  the  sun.  This,  however, 
seems  more  than  doubtful,  and  Crantz  ^  expressly  denies 
the  statement. 

The  Peruvians  worshipped  the  sun,  making  to  it 
offerings  of  drink  in  a  vessel  of  gold,  and  declaring  '  that 

*  what  appeared  to  be  gone  had  been  drunk  by  the  sun, 

*  and  they  said  truly,  for  the  sun's  heat  had  evaporated 

*  the  liquor.'  *  We  are  told,  however,  that  the  Yuea 
Huayna  Capac  questioned  this,  asking  if  it  was  likely 

'  RobertaoD*8  America,  bk.  iv.  ^  Sproat's  Scenes  and  Stadies  of 

p.  12e.  Savage  Life,  p.  200. 

*  Whipple's  Report    on  Indian  *  Pinarf,   ISevue   d'Anthropolo- 
Tribea,  p.  ^.     Lafitau,  toI.  ii.  p.  gie,  1873,  p.  078. 

180.  Tertre'a  Iliatory  of  the  Caribby  ^  Loc.  cit,  vol  i.  p.  190.    See 

lalanda,  p.  230.  Graah*8  Voyage  to    Greenland,  p. 

'  Neighborwy    in     Schoolcrart*8  124. 
Indian  Tribes,  vol.  ii.  p.  127.  •  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  vol.  ii. 

*  Loc.  ciL,  vol.  i.  p.  140.  pp.  00, 131.,  vol.  L  p.  271. 

X  2 


308  AMERICA.    DWIA. 

that  the  sun,  if  a  god,  would  go  over  the  same  course 
day  after  day.  *If  he  were  supreme  Lord  he  would 
^  occasionally  go  aside  from  his  course,  or  rest  for  his 

*  pleasure,  even  though  he  might  have  no  necessity  what- 

*  ever  for  doing  so/  ^  The  moon  was  held  to  be  the  sister 
and  wife  of  the  sun.  Garcilasso  states  that  she  had  no 
separate  temple,  and  that  no  sacrifices  were  offered  to 
her.2  They  also  worshipped  several  of  the  stars,  which 
they  regarded  as  attendants  on  the  moon.* 

In  Brazil  the  Coroados  worship  the  sun  and  moon, 
the  moon  being  the  more  powerful.*  The  Abipones* 
thought  that  they  were  descended  from  the  Pleiades; 
and  *'  as  that  constellation  disappears  at  certain  periods 
^  from  the  sky  of  South  America,  upon  such  occasions 

*  they  suppose  that  their  grandfiither  is  sick,  and  are 
'  under  a  yearly  apprehension  that  he  is  going  to  die; 
'  but  as  soon  as  those  seven  stars  are  again  visible  in 
'  the  month  of  May,  they  welcome  their  grandfather,  as 
'  if  returned  and  restored  from  sickness,  with  joyful 

*  shouts,  and  the  festive  sound  of  pipes  and  trumpets, 
'  congratulating  him  on  the  recovery  of  his  health.' 

In  Central  India  sun-worship  prevails  among  manj 
of  the  Hill  tribes.     '  The.  worship  of  the  sun  as  the 

*  Supreme  Deity  is  the  foundation  of  the  religion  of  the 
'  Hos  and  Oraons  as  well  as  of  the  Moondahs.  By  the 
'  former  he  is  invoked  as  Dhurmi,  the  Holy  One.  He 
'  is  the  Creator  and  the  Preserver;  and,  with  reference 

*  to  his  purity,  white  animals  are  offered  to  him  by  his 


>  Ijoc.  ciV.,  p.  446.     Molina,  Fa-  *  Spix  and  Marti ub,  voL  iL  p. 

bles  and  Kites  of  the  Incas,  p.  11.  243. 

*  Ia)c.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  103,  275.  *  Dobrltzhoffer,  ioc.  cit^  voL  iL 

5  Lvc,  cit.y  pp.  276,  18iJ,  170.  p.  65. 


ASIA.    AFBIOA. 


309 


*  votaries. '  ^  The  sun  and  moon  are  both  regarded  as 
deities  by  the  Korkus,^  Khonds,®  Tunguses,*  and 
Buraets.'  In  Northern  Asia  the  Samoyedes  are  said  to 
have  worshipped  the  sun. 

In  Western  Africa  moon-worship  is  very  prevalent. 

*  At  the  appearance  of  every  new  moon/  says  Merolia/ 

*  these  people  fall  on  their  knees,  or  else  cry  out,  stand- 

*  ing  and  clapping  their  hands,  ^'  So  may  I  renew  my 

*  "  life  as  thou  art  renewed."  '  They  do  not,  however, 
appear  to  venerate  either  the  sun  or  the  stars.  Bruce 
also  mentions  moon-worship  as  occurring  among  the 
Shangallas.^ 

Further  South  the  Bechuanas  '  watch  most  eagerly 
.  for  the  first  gUmp«  of  the  new  moon,  a-d  when  they 
'  perceive  the  faint  outline  after  the  sun  has  set  deep 

*  in  the  west,  they  utter  a  loud  shout  of ''  Kua !  "  and 

*  vociferate  prayers  to  it."  *  Herodotus  *  mentions  that 
the  Atarantes  used  to  curse  the  sun  as  he  passed  over 
their  heads. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  heavenly  bodies  do  not 
appear  to  be  worshipped  by  the  Polynesians. 

The  natives  of  Erromango,  according  to  Mr.  Brench- 
Icy,  worship  the  moon,  having  stone  images  of  the  form 
of  new  and  full  moons.^^    According  to  Lord  Eames, 


>  Colonel  DaltoD,  TraoB.  Ethn. 
80c:,  ToL  vi.  p.  83. 

*  Fonjth's  Highlands  of  Central 
India,  p.  14a 

'  Forbes  Leslie's  Ear! j  Races  of 
Scotland,  toI.  ii.  p.  406.  CampbeU, 
Wild  Tribes  of  Khondistan,  p.  120. 

«  Bell's  Travels  from  St  Peters- 
borgf  ToL  i.  p.  274. 

*  Klemm,  Cult.  d.  Mensch.,  t.  iii. 
pp.  101, 100.  Miiller,  Des.  de  toutes 


les  Nat  de  TEmpire  Russe,  Ft  III. 
p.  25. 

•  Voyage  to  Congo,  Pinkertoni 
ToL  XV.  p.  273. 

'  Travels,  vol.  iv.  p.  35,  voL  vL 
p.  344. 

^  Livingstone's  Journeys  in  South 
Africa,  p.  235. 

•  Herodotus,  iv.  184. 

><>  Cruise  ofthe'Cura^oa,' p.  820. 


310  SUNDBY  WORSHIPS. 

*  the  inhabitants  of  Celebes  formerly  acknowledged  no 

*  gods  but  the  sun  and  moon.'  ^  The  people  of  Borneo 
are  said  to  have  done  the  same. 

The  worship  of  ancestors  is  a  natural  development 
of  the  dread  of  ghosts,  and  is  another  widely  distributed 
form  of  religious  belief;  which,  however,  I  shall  not 
enter  into  here,  as  it  may  be  more  conveniently  con- 
sidered when  we  come  to  deal  with  Idolatry. 

These  are  the  principal  deities  of  man  in  this  stagB 
of  his  religious  development.  They  are,  however,  as 
already  mentioned,  by  no  means  the  only  ones. 

The  heavens  and  earth,  thunder,  lightning,  and 
winds  were  regarded  as  deities  in  various  parts  of  the 
world.  The  Scythians  worshipped  an  iron  scimetar  as  a 
symbol  of  the  war-god  ;  *  to  this  scimetar  they  bring 

*  yearly  sacrifices  of  cattle  and  horses ;  and  to  these 
'  scimetars  they  offer  more  sacrifices  than  to  the  rest  of 

*  their  gods.'  ^  In  the  Sagas  many  of  the  swords  have 
special  names,  and  are  treated  with  the  greatest  respect. 
Similarly  the  Feejeeans   regarded  ^certain  clubs  with 

*  superstitious  respect ; ' '  and  the  negroes  of  Ira  wo,  a 
town  in  Western  Yoruba,  worshipped  an  iron  bar  with 
very  expensive  ceremonies.*  The  New  Zealanders, 
some  of  the  Melanesians,  and  the  Dahomans  worshipped 
the  rainbow.' 

When  Mr.  Williams  was  murdered  at  Dillon  s  Bay, 
a  piece  of  red  sealing-wax   which   they  found  in  his 

'  Ili&tory  of  Man,  vol.  iv.  p.  252.  *  Burton's  Abbeokuta,  vol.  L  p. 

2  Iler.,  iv.  02.    See  also  Klemni,       102. 

^Vorkzeuge  und  Waffen,  p.  22»').  *  Burton's  Mission   to  DahoiDe, 

3  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  vol.  i.  p.      vol.  ii.  p.  148.     Trans.   Ethn.  Soc 
210.  1670,  p.  3(57. 


8UNDBT  WORSHIPS,  311 

pocket  *  was  supposed  by  the  natives  to  be  some  port- 

*  able  god,  and  was  carefiilly  buried.'  ^ 

In  Central  India,  as  mentioned  in  p.  277,  a  great 
variety  of  inanimate  objects  are  treated  as  deities.  The 
Todas  are  said  to  worship  a  buffalo-bell.^  The  Kotas 
worship  two  silver  plates,  which  they  regard  as  husband 
and  wife ;  *  they  have  no  other  deity.'  ®  The  Kurumbas 
worship  stones,  trees,  and  anthills.^  The  Toreas, 
another  Neilgherry  Hill  tribe  worship  especially  a 
^gold  nose-ring,  which  probably  once  belonged  to  one 

*  of  their  women.'  •  According  to  Nonnius,  the  sacred 
lyre  sang  the  victory  of  Jupiter  over  the  Titans,  with- 
out being  touched.*  Many  other  inanimate  objects 
bave  also  been  worshipped.  De  Brosses  even  men- 
tionB  an  instance  of  a  king  of  hearts  being  made  into  a 
deity/ 

According  to  some  of  the  earlier  travellers  in 
America,  even  the  rattle  was  regarded  as  a  deity.® 

Thus,  then,  I  have  attempted  to  show  that  animals 
and  plants,  water,  mountains  and  stones,  fire  and  the 
heavenly  bodies,  are,  or  have  been,  all  very  extensively 
and  often  simultaneously  worshipped,  so  that  they  do 
not  form  the  basis  of  a  natural  classification  of  religions. 

>  Taraer^s   Nineteen   Yean   in     278. 
Poljueoa,  p.  487.  *  The  Tribes  of  the  Neilgherries, 

*  The  Tribes  of  the  Neilghenies,     p.  67. 

p.  15.  •  Lafitau,  toL  i.  p.  205. 

»  Ibid.,  p.  114.  »  Loc,  cU.,  p.  52. 

*  Trans.  Elhn.  Soc,  vol  vii.  p.  *  JM.,p.211. 


312  UELiaiON. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

RELIGION  (concluded). 

HAVING  thus  given  my  reasons  for  regarding  as 
unsatisfactory  the  classifications  of  religions  which 
have  been  adopted  hitherto,  I  will  now  endeavour  to 
trace  up  the  gradual  evolution  of  religious  beliefs,  begin- 
ning A\dth  the  Australians,  who  possess  merely  certain 
vague  ideas  as  to  the  existence  of  evil  spirits,  and  a 
general  dread  of  witchcraft.  This  belief  cannot  be  said 
to  influence  them  by  day,  but  it  renders  them  very 
unwilling  to  quit  the  camp-fire  by  night,  or  to  sleep 
near  a  grave.  They  have  no  idea  of  creation,  nor  do 
they  use  prayers ;  they  have  no  religious  forms,  cere- 
monies, or  worship.  They  do  not  believe  in  the 
existence  of  a  Deity,  ^  nor  is  morality  in  any  way  con- 
nected with  their  religion,  if  such  it  can  be  called.  The 
words  '  good '  or  '  bad  '  had  reference  to  taste  or  bodily 
comfort,  and  did  not  convey  any  idea  of  right  or  wrong.* 
Another  curious  notion  of  the  Australians  is,  that  white 
men  are  blacks,  who  have  risen  from  the  dead.  This 
notion  was  found  among  the  natives  north  of  Sydney 
as  early  as  1795,  and  can  scarcely,  therefore,  be  of  mis- 
sionary orgin.^     It  occurs  also  among  the  negroes  of 

*  Keportof  the  Committee  of  the  Australia,  vol.  ii.  pp.  354,  365,  350. 
Legislative  Council  on  Aborigines,  *  Collins' English  Colony  in  N.S. 
Victoria,  1800,  pp.  9,  69,  77.  Wales,  p.  303. 

*  Eyre's  Discoveries  in  Central 


BELIGIONS   OF  AUSTBALLiNS.  313 

Guinea  and  elsewhere.^  The  ideas  of  the  Australians 
on  this  point,  however,  seem  to  have  been  very  various 
and  confused.  They  had  certainly  no  general  and  de- 
finite view  on  the  subject. 

As  regards  the  North  Australians  we  have  trust- 
worthy accounts  given  by  a  Scotchwoman,  Mrs.  Thom* 
son,  who  was  wrecked  on  the  Eastern  Prince  of  Wales 
Island.  Her  husband  and  the  rest  of  the  crew  were 
drowned,  but  she  was  saved  by  the  natives,  and  lived 
with  them  nearly  five  years,  until   the   visit  of  the 

*  Rattlesnake/  when  she  escaped  with  some  difficulty. 
On  the  whole  she  was  kindly  treated  by  the  men, 
though  the  women  were  long  jealous  of  her,  and  be- 
haved towards  her  with  much  cruelty.  These  people 
had  no  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being.^  They  did  not 
believe  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  held  that 
they  are  *  after  death  changed  into  white  people  or 

*  Europeans,  and  as  such  pass  the  second  and  final  period 

*  of  their  existence ;  nor  is  it  any  part  of  their  creed  that 

*  future  rewards  and  punishments  are  awarded." 

Mrs.  Thomson  was  supposed  to  be  the  ghost  of  Giom, 
a  daughter  of  a  man  named  Piaquai,  and  when  she  was 
teased  by  children,  the  men  would  often  tell  them  to 
leave  her  alone,  saying,  *  Poor  thing !  she  is  nothing — 

*  only  a  ghost.'  This,  however,  did  not  prevent  a  man 
named  Boroto  making  her  his  wife,  which  shows  how 
little  is  actually  implied  in  the  statement  that  Australians 
believe  in  spirits.  They  really  do  no  more  than  believe 
in  the  existence  of  men  somewhat  different  from,  and  a 

>  Smith*8  Guinea,  p.  215.    Bos-  '  Macg^Ilivra^r's  Voyage  of  the 

nan,  Pinkerton'a  Voyages,  to),  xti.      *  liattlesnake/  vol.  ii.  p.  20. 
p.  401.  •  Loc.  cU,,  p.  20. 


3C*  TUIAHS.    CALIFORNIANB. 

ln:Ltf   njjc^    jcverTol  than   tfaemselTes.      The    South 

A:5?cri^^.irijw  ss^  oesmhed  by  Stephens,  had  no  religions 

.:^S!^*:>:c5esw  cr  worship ;   no  idea  of  a  Supreme 

iz;r.  ^gt:  &  v&TTse  dread  of  evil  spirits.^ 

Tb(  Veoiihs  oi  Ceykxt,  aooording  to  Davy,  believe 

^  -fxEl  r€£i:;ssw  bat "  have  no  idea  of  a  supreme  and  bene- 

*  rciECL^  Goi.  cr  of  a  state  of  future  existence,  (ht  of  a 

*  sysccc*  €C  ir^iruds  and  punishments  ;   and,  in  conse- 

*  '^Tae£>re.  they  are  of  opinion  that  it   signifies  little 

*  vieiier  tiaev  do  gwd  or  eviL*  * 

Tbe  Ind&uLs  of  California  have  been  well  described 
by  F;iuber  Barren,  a  Jesuit  missionary,  who  lived 
amccg  them  no  ks&  than  seventeen  years.'  As  to 
gov^eruxirnt  or  religion,  he  says,^  ^  neither  the  one  nor 
"  the  ocher  existed  among  them.  They  had  no  magis- 
"  trar^s^  no  police*  and  no  laws ;  idols,  temples,  religious 

*  worship*  or  ceiemonies  were  unknown  to  them,  and 

*  triry  neither  believed  in  the  true  and  only  God  not 

*  adorv^l  fiklse  deities.     They  were  all  equals,  and  every- 

*  one  did  as  he  pleased,  without  asking  his  neighbour  or 

*  caring  for  his  opinic4i,  and  thus  all  vices  and  misdeeds 

*  remained  unpunished,  excepting  such  cases  in  which 

*  the  offended  individual  or  his  relations  took  the  law 

*  into  their  own  hands  and  revenged  themselves  on  the 

*  guilty  party.     The  different  tribes  represented  by  no 

*  means  communities  of  rational  beings,  who  submit  to 

*  laws  and  regulations  and  olny  their  superiors,  but 
'  resembled  far  more  herds  of  wild  swine,  which  run 


>  ^^tepbcn8'  South  Australia,  p.  Ilalb,  Califomie.  1773.     Translated 

78.  in  Smithsk-tnion  Reporte,  1803-^. 

»  DaryV  Ceylon,  p.  US.  *  ^Smithsonian  KeporU,  1861,  p. 

*  Nacbricbten    tou    der    Amer.  300. 


RELIGIOUS  IDEAS   OF  THE   CALIFOBNIANS.     315 

*  about  according  to  their  own  liking,  being  together 

*  to-day  and  scattered  to-morrow,  till  they  meet  again 
'  by  accident  at  some  future  time. 

*  In  one  word,  the  Califomians  lived,  salva  veniGj  as 
'  though  they  had  been  freethinkers  and  materialists. 

*  I  made  diligent  inquiries  among  those  with  whom 

*  I  lived,  to  ascertain  whether  they  had  any  conception 

*  of  God,  a  future  life,  and  their  own  souls,  but  I  never 

*  could  discover  the  slightest  trace  of  such  a  knowledge. 

*  Their  language  has  no  words  for  **  God  "  and  •*  soul," 

*  for  which  reason  the  missionaries  were  compelled  to 
'  use  in  their  sermons  and  religious  instructions  the 

*  Spanish  words  Dies  and  alma.     It  could  hardly  be 

*  otherwise  with  people  who  thought  of  nothing  but 

*  eating  and  merry-making,   and  never   reflected   on 

*  serious  matters,  but  dismissed  everything  that  lay  be- 

*  yond  the  narrow  compass  of  their  conceptions  with  the 

*  phrase  aipek^riri,  which  means,  "Who  knows  that?" 

*  I  often  asked  them  whether  they  had  never  put  to 

*  themselves  the  question  who  might  be  the  Creator 

*  and  Preserver  of  the  sun,  moon,   stars,  and  other 

*  objects  of  nature,  but  was  always  sent  home  with  a 

*  vara,  which  means  "  no  "  in  their  language.'  They 
had,  however,  certain  sorcerers,  whom  they  believed 
to  possess  power  over  diseases,  to  bring  small-pox, 
famine,  &c.,  and  of  whom,  therefore,  they  were  in 
much  fear. 

Mr.  Gibbs,  speaking  of  the  Indians  living  in  the 
valleys  drained  by  the  Sacramento  and  the  San  Joaquin, 
says :  *  One  of  this  tribe,  who  had  been  for  three  or  four 

*  years  among  the  whites,  and  accompanied  the  expcdi- 

*  tion,  on  being  questioned  as  to  his  own  belief  in  a 


316  BACHAPINS.    KAFFIB8. 

*  Deity,  acknowledged  his  entire  ignorance  on  the  sub- 

*  ject.     As  regarded  a  future  state  of  any  kind,  be  was 

*  equally  uninformed  and  indifferent;   in  fact,  did  not 

*  believe  in  any  for  himself.      As  a  reason  why  his 

*  people  did  not  go  to  another  country  after  death, 

*  while  the  whites  might,  he  assigned  that  the  Indians 

*  burned  their  dead,  and  he  supposed  there  was  an  end 
'  of  them.'  ^ 

The  religion  of  the  Bachapins,  a  Kaffir  tribe,  has 
been  described  by  Burchell.  They  had  no  outward 
worship,  nor,  so  far  as  he  could  learn,  any  private 
devotion  ;  indeed,  they  had  no  belief  in  a  beneficent 
Deity,  though  they  feared  an  evil  being  called  *  Mu- 

*  leemo,'  or  *  Murimo.'  They  had  no  idea  of  creation. 
Even  when  Burchell  suggested  it  to  them,  they  did  not 
attribute  it  to  Muleemo,  but  *  asserted  that  everything 

*  made  itself,  and  that  trees  and  herbage  grew  by  their 

*  own  will.'  *  They  believed  in  sorcery,  and  in  the 
efficacy  of  amulets. 

Dr.  Vanderkemp,  the  first  missionary  to  the  Kaffirs, 
'  never  could  perceive  that  they  had  any  religion,  or  any 

*  idea  of  the  existence  of  God.'  Mr.  Moffat  also,  who 
lived  in  South  Africa  as  a  missionary  for  many  years, 
says  that  they  were  utterly  destitute  of  theological 
ideas ;  and  Dr.  Gardner,  in  his  *  Faiths  of  the  World,' 
concludes  as  follows : '  *  From  all  that  can  be  ascertained 
^  on  the  religion  of  the  Kaffirs,  it  seems  that  those  of 
'  them  who  are  still  in  their  heathen  state  have  no  idea, 
'(1)  of  a  Supreme  Intelligent  Ruler  of  the  universe; 

*  (2)  of  a  Sabbath  ;  (3)  of  a  day  of  judgment ;    (4)  of 

»  Schcx>lcraa8lndiHuTribo<»,  vol  ''  Travils,  \o1.  ii.  p.  550. 

iii.  p.  1<^7.  s  Zoc.  riV.,  p.  200. 


KAFFIRS. 


317 


'the  guilt  and  pollution  of  sin;  (5)  of  a  Saviour  to 

*  deliver  them  from  the  wrath  to  come.' 

The  Rev.  Canon  Callaway  has  recently  published  a 
very  interesting  memoir  on  '  The  Religious  System  of 
'  the  Amazulu/  who  are  somewhat  more  advanced  in 
their  religious  conceptions.   The  first  portion  is  entitled 

*  Unkulunkulu,  or  the  Tradition  of  Creation.'  It  does 
not,  however,  appear  that  Unkulunkulu  is  regarded  as 
a  Creator,  or  even  as  a  deity  at  all.  It  is  simply  the 
first  man,  the  Zulu  Adam.  Some  complication  arises 
from  the  fact  that  not  only  the  ancestor  of  all  mankind, 
but  also  the  first  of  each  tribe,  is  called  Unkulunkulu, 
80  that  there  are  many  Onkulunkulu,  or  Unkulunkulus. 
None  of  them,  however,  have  any  of  the  characters  of 
Deity ;  no  prayers  or  sacrifices  are  ofiered  to  them ;  ^ 
indeed,  they  no  longer  exist,  having  been  long  dead.* 
Unkulunkulu  was  in  no  sense  a  Creator,®  nor,  indeed,  is 
any  special  power  attributed  to  him.*  He,  i.e.  man, 
arose  from  *Umklangla,'  that  is  'a  bed  of  reeds,'  but 
how  he  did  so  no  one  knew.^  Mr.  Callaway  agrees 
with  Casalis,  that  *  it  never  entered  the  heads  of  the 

*  Zulus  that  the  earth  and  sky  might  be  the  work  of  an 

*  invisible  being.'  ^  One  native  thought  the  white  men 
made  the  world.^  They  had,  indeed,  no  idea  of  or 
name  for  God.®  When  Mofiiit  endeavoured  to  explain 
to  a  chief  about  God  he  exclaimed,  *  Would  that  I  could 

*  catch  it !  I  would  transfix  it  with  my  spear ; '  yet  this 
was  a  man  *  whose  judgment  on  other  subjects  would 

*  command  attention.' • 


»  Loc.  cit.,  pp.  9,  25,  34,  75. 
"  Xoc.cf^.,  pp.  16,  S;3,  02. 
»  Loc.  cii,,  p.  187. 
^  Loc.  cH.y  p.  48. 
*  Loc.  cit.f  pp.  0,  40. 


•  Loc,  cit,  pp.  64,  108. 
'  Loc,  cit.,  p.  65. 

•  lAfC.  cU.,  pp.  107, 113, 130. 

•  lioccil.f  p.  HI. 


n^  KAFFIRS. 

Yec  they  are  not  witboat  a  belief  in  invisible  bemgs. 
Tbis  is  tbonded  partly  on  tbe  sbadow,  but  principally 
on  the  dream.  They  regard  tbe  sbadow  as  in  some  way 
the  spirit  which  accompanies  tbe  body  (remindmg  as  of 
the  similar  idea  among  tbe  Greeks),  and  they  have  a 
corioos  notion  that  a  dead  body  casts  no  shadow.^ 

Still  more  important  has  been  the  influence  of 
dreams.  When  a  dead  &ther  or  brother  appears  to  a 
man  in  bis  sleep  be  does  not  doubt  tbe  reality  of  the 
occurrence,  and  hence  concludes  that  their  spirits  still 
live.  As,  however,  they  rarely  dream  about  their 
grand&thers,  they  suppose  them  to  be  dead.^ 

Diseases  are  regarded  as  being  often  caused  by  the 
spirits  of  discontented  relatives. 

In  Samoa  it  was  supposed  that  the  spirits  of  the 
departed  ^  had  power  to  return  and  cause  disease  and 
^  death  in  other  members  of  the  fiEunily.  Hence,  all  were 
'  anxious  as  a  person  drew  near  the  close  of  life  to  part 
*  on  good  terms  with  him,  feeling  assured  that,  if  he 
'  died  with  angry  feelings  towards  any  one,  he  would 
'  certainly  return,  and  bring  some  calamity  upon  that 
'  very  person  or  some  one  closely  allied  to  him.'  ^ 

In  other  respects  these  spirits  are  not  regarded  as 
possessing  any  special  powers  ;  though  prayed  to,  it  is 
not  in  such  a  manner  as  to  indicate  a  belief  that  they 
have  any  supernatural  influence,  and  they  are  clearly 
not  regarded  as  immortal.  In  some  cases  dei)arted  spirits 
are  regarded  as  reappearing  in  the  form  of  snakes,* 
which  may  be  known  from  ordinary  snakes  by  certain 

*  Loc.  cit.f  p.  91.  Polvncsin,  p.  2'iO. 

'  Loc.  cit.f  p.  15.  *  Ltc.  cU.,  p.  8. 

•  Turner's    Nineteen    Yeaw    in 


FETIGUISM.  319 

signs/  such  as  their  frequenting  huts,  not  eating  mice, 
and  showing  no  fear  of  man.  Sometimes  a  snake  is 
recognised  as  the  representative  of  a  given  man  by  some 
peculiar  mark  or  scar,  the  absence  of  an  eye,  or  some 
other  similar  point  of  resemblance. 

In  such  cases  sacrifices  are  sometimes  offered  to  the 
snake,  and,  when  a  bullock  is  killed,  part  is  put  away  for 
the  use  of  the  dead,  or  Amatongo,  who  are  specially 
invited  to  the  feast,  whose  assistance  is  requested, 
and  wrath  deprecated.  Yet  this  can  hardly  be  called 
*  ancestor- worship.'  The  dead  have,  it  is  true,  the 
advantage  of  invisibility,  but  they  are  not  regarded 
as  omnipresent,  omnipotent,  or  immortal.  There  are 
even  means  by  which  troublesome  spirits  may  be  de- 
stroyed or  ^  laid.'  ^  In  such  cases  as  these,  then,  we  see 
religion  in  a  very  low  phase ;  that  in  which  it  consists 
merely  of  belief  in  the  existence  of  evil  beings,  less 
material  than  we  are,  but  mortal  like  ourselves,  and  if 
more  powerful  than  man  in  some  respects,  even  less  so 
in  others. 


FBTICniSM. 

In  the  Fetichism  of  the  negro,  Religion,  if  it  can  be 
so  called,  is  systematised,  and  greatly  raised  in  import- 
ance. Nevertheless  from  another  point  of  view  Fetich- 
ism may  almost  be  regarded  as  an  anti-reUgion.  It 
has  hitherto  been  defined  as  the  worship  of  material 
substances.  This  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  its  true 
characteristic.  Fetichism  is  not  truly  a  form  of  *  wor- 
*  ship '  at  all.     For  the  negro  believes  that  by  means 

»  Loe.  eU^  pp.  198, 109.  •  Loc.  cU.,  p.  100. 


:z  liff  ftoiri  hz  riz.  :::er:e  i=?i  <»nTTol  his  deitv.   In  fact, 
F  "tridViL^^iL  if  zi-fiTr  -^ir-iLrrif:.     We  have  already  seen 
::7Ti^.  -.  tST    zhLZ  ^ A  y^."fATi<.  ill  orer  the  world  think 
'jmr  if  iifj  raz.  iccii-  ;&  pfcrt  of  an  enemy  the  possession 
:z  ir  zr^^^  "^y^n  4  rcTer  over  him.      Even  a  bit  of  his 
ijnfizi:!  ^^  ajLSTTrr  -ir  pcrpose.  or,  if  this  cannot  he 
z^:  c  ir  ^e^nLS  zc  Tb=f:i  iiAmral  that  an  injury  even  to  his 
i-uiapt  ir:tL.*i  -i^znz  itjc  oerginal.     lliat  is  to  say,  a  man 
w^*:  ^:az.  i«*^?cr:y  cr  ^omxre  the  image  thus  inflicts  jwin 
•:c  rbf  :r^"';il.  in»i  "rrii*.  being  magical,  is  independent 
ct  tze  p.inrr  rt  :bi«  original ■     Even  in  Europe,  and  in 
trie  ■elev^i'ri  c^ntrcrr.  stxae  unfortunate  Jews  were  ac- 
cTi^*i»i  cc  Livbiz  mnrdcned  a  certain  Bishop  Eberhard 
in  :rii^  w^iv.     Thev  niadie  a  wax  image  of  him,  had  it 
birrl:k:\L  and  tiien  '^cmr  it*  and  so  the  bishop  died. 

Li:ri  Kam-fs  sav$  that  at  the  time  of  Catherine  de 
Mr^^iioLs  '  iz  was  ct?inmon  to  tak^  the  resemblance  of 

•  tn^jmie?  in  wax.  in  order  to  torment  them  by  roasting 

•  rhf  r.r'-ir>e  a:  a  s!  •'^  tre,  and  pricking  it  with  needles/* 

I:.  Iiiiii,  scys  Dubois^*  'a  quantity  of  mud  is 
n.ou'Ird  ii:to  smiU  ligure?*  on  the  breasts  of  which 
th'cry  ^Titc  the  name  of  the  persons  whom  they  mean 

to  annoy They  pierce  the  images  with 

:homs,  or  murihite  them,  so  as  to  communicate  a  cor- 
rv:s[x>LLdini:  injur}-  to  the  person  represented.' 

Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  Fetichism  is  an  extension 
of  this  l>elief.  The  no^ro  supix>ses  that  the  jH^ssessiun 
of  a  fotieli  rejresenting  a  spirit  makes  that  spirit  iiis 
servant.  We  know  that  the  neirroes  beat  their  fetich 
if  their   prayers  are  imanswered,  and  I  believe  tliey 

*  L'trJ  K:ini»-s*  IIi.-«t.irv  i»f  Man.  %ol.  iv.  p.  lN»!. 
'  Z'x\  cif.,  p.  .'i47. 


NSOBOSS.  821 

seriously  think  they  thus  inflict  suffering  on  the  actual 

Deity.     Thus  the  fetich  cannot  fairly  be  called  an  idol. 

The  same  image  or  object  may  indeed  be  a  fetich  to  one 

man  and  an  idol  to  another ;  yet  the  two  are  essentially 

di£ferent  in  their  nature.     An  idol  is,  indeed,  an  object 

of  worship,  while,  on  the  contrary,  a  fetich  is  intended 

to  bring  the  Deity  within  the  control  of  man — an  attempt 

which  is  less  absurd  than  it  at  first  sight  appears,  when 

considered  in  connection  with  their  low  religious  ideas. 

If^  then,  witchcraft  be  not  confused  with  religion,  as 

I  think  it  ought  not  to  be,  Fetichism  can  hardly  be 

called  a  religion ;  to  the  true  spirit  of  which  it  is  indeed 

entirely  opposed. 

Anything  will  do  for  a  fetich ;  it  need  not  represent 
the  human  figure,  though  it  may  do  bo.  Even  an  ear 
of  maize  will  answer  the  purpose.  If,  said  an  intelligent 
n^ro  to  Bosman,^  any  of  us  is  ^  resolved  to  undertake 
anything  of  importance,  we  first  of  all  search  out  a  god 
to  prosper  our  designed  undertaking;  and,  going  out 
of  doors  with  this  design,  take  the  first  creature  that 
presents  itself  to  our  eyes,  whether  dog,  cat,  or  the 
most  contemptible  animal  in  the  world,  for  our  god; 
or,  perhaps,  instead  of  that,  any  inanimate  object  that 
falls  in  our  way,  whether  a  stone,  or  piece  of  wood,  or 
anything  else  of  the  same  nature.  This  new-chosen 
god  is  immediately  presented  with  an  offering,  which 
is  accompanied  with  a  solemn  vow,  that  if  he  pleaseth 
to  prosper  our  undertakings,  for  the  future  we  will 
always  worship  and  esteem  him  as  a  god.  If  our  de- 
sign prove  successful,  we  have  discovered  a  new  and 

^  Bo«iiun*8  Guinea,  IHokertoii*8     Loycr  (1701),  ^Vstle/d  Collection, 
Vojages,  Tol  xtL  p.  403.    See  alao     vol  IL  p.  440. 

Y 


322  FETIGHI8M  IN  OTHER  BACE8. 

*  assisting  god,  which   is   daily  presented  with  fresh  ' 

*  offerings  ;  but  if  the  contrary  happen,  the  new  god  is 

*  rejected  as  a  useless  tx)ol,  and  consequently  returns  to 
'  his  primitive  estate.     We  make  and  break  our  gods 

*  daily,  and  consequently  are  the  masters  and  inventors 

*  of  what  we  sacrifice  to.' 

The  term  Fetichism  is  generally  connected  with  the 
negro  race,  but  a  corresponding  state  of  mind  exists  in 
many  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  fact,  it  may  almost 
be  said  to  be  universal,  since  it  is  nothing  more  nor  le« 
than  witchcraft ;  and  in  the  most  advanced  countries- 
even  in  our  own — the  belief  in  witchcraft  has  scarcely 
been  entirely  eradicated. 

The  Badagas  (Hindostan),  according  to  Metz,  are 
still  in  a  *  condition  little  above  Fetichism.  Anything 
'  with  them  may  become  an  object  of  adoration,  if  the 
'  head  man  or  the  village  priest  should  take  a  fancy  to 
'  deify  it.  As  a  necessary  consequence,  however,  of  this 
'  state  of  things,  no  real  respect  is  entertained  towards 
'  their  deities,  and  it  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  to  hear 
'  the  people  call  them  liars,  and  use  opprobrious  epithets 

*  respecting  them.'  -  Again,  speaking  of  the  Chota  Nag- 
pore  tribes  of  Central  India,  Colonek  Dalton  observes 
that  certain  '  peculiarities  in  the  paganism  of  the  Oraon, 

*  and  only  practised  by  Moondahs  who  lived  in  the  harac 
'  village  with  them,  appear  to  me  to  savour  thoroughly 
'  of  Fetichism.'  *^ 

In  Jeypore  ^  the  body  of  a  small  musk-rat  is  re- 
garded as  a  powerful  talisman.     '  The  Ixxly   of   this 

*  Tlio  Tribcfi  of  llic  Neilgherriep,      p.  -i^. 
p.  00.  =»  Shoilt,  Trails.,  Etbn.  5<oc.,  voL 

'^  Trans.  Eihn.  Soc.,  N.S.,  vol.  vi.      vi.  p.  278. 


DWIA.     NORTH  AMEBIOA.  823 

^  animal,  dried,  is  euclos^  in  a  case  of  brass,  silver, 

*  or  gold,  according  to  the  means  of  the  individual,  and 

*  is  slmig  around  the  neck,  or  tied  to  the  arm,  to  render 
'  the  individual  proof  against  all  evil,  not  excepting 
^  Bword  and  other  cuts,  musket-shot,  &c.' 

The  Abors  of  Bengal  worship  trees,  and  if.  mis- 
fortunes occur,  *  they  retaliate  on  the  spirits  by  cutting 

*  down  trees.'  ^ 

In  all  these  cases  the  tribes  seem  to  me  to  be 
naturally  in  the  state  of  Fetichism,  disguised,  however, 
and  modified  by  fragments  of  the  higher  Hindoo  reli- 
gions, which  they  have  adopted  without  understanding. 

Though  the  Redskins  of  North  America  have  reached 
a  higher  state  of  religious  development,  they  still  retain 
fetiches  in  the  form  of  *  medicine-bags.'  '  Every  Indian,* 
says  Catlin,^  ^in  his  primitive  state,  carries  his  medicine- 

*  bag  in  some  form  or  other,'  and  to  it  he  looks  for  pro- 
tection  and  safety.  The  nature  of  the  medicine-bag  is 
thus  determined : — ^At  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age 
the  boy  wanders  away  alone  upon  the  prairie,  where  he 
remains  two,  three,  four,  or  even  five  days,  lying  on  the 
ground  musing  and  fiisting.  He  remains  awake  as  long 
as  he  can,  but  when  he  sleeps  the  first  animal  of  which 
he  dreams  becomes  his  ^  medicine.'  As  soon  as  possible 
he  shoots  an  animal  of  the  species  in  question,  and 
makes  a  medicine-bag  of  the  skin.  To  this  he  looks  for 
protection,  to  this  he  sacrifices;  unUke  the  fickle  negro, 
however,  the  Redskin  never  changes  his  fetich.  To 
him  it  becomes  an  emblem  of  success,  like  the  shield  of 

1  DaltoD,  Dee.  EUul  of  Bengal,  p.  26. 
'  American  Indiana,  vol.  i.  p.  36. 

T  2 


2M  CEIKA. 

wt  GpKk.  or  the  more  modem  sword,  and  to  lose  it  is 


Tb^  C*xambun  Tndims  have  small  figures  in  the 
A  q^iaimped.  binL  or  fish.  These,  though  called 
ail:i:^«  £!«  rcber  leddies*  because,  as  all  disease  is  attri- 
brrai  «c  mfm  when  any  one  is  ill  they  are  beaten  to- 
rf^i^er.  jQi  ^  first  which  loses  a  tooth  or  claw  is  su})- 

Li  CSira.-  also,  the  lower  people.  "  if,  after  long 
'  TcajE^  to  tber  images,  they  do  not  obtain  what  they 

•  5sr«^  *s  n  often  happens,  they  turn  them  off  as  im- 

•  recall  ii'^is :  odier^  ose  them  in  a  most  reproachful 
rr^r^.  kfiding  them  with  hard  names,  and  sometimes 

^  How  now,  dog  of  a  spirit ! "  say  they 
t:  'ibfjn:  •'Wr  gire  you  a  lodging  in  a  magnificent 
•  r«!ctrir.  ^e  giM  yon  handsomely,  feed  you  well  and 
~  :iff  r  rDLtcse  ro  you :  yet,  after  all  this  care,  you  arc 
-  >:  •j.r.jTtLTcr-I  is  to  reftise  us  what  we  ask  of  voii.'' 
:t-:r:  .:t«:c  :J::y  ii^  liis  image  with  conls,  pluck  him 
i'.'^Tu  ini  ni::!^  him  along  the  streets,  through  all  the 
n"^i  i.~c  vV-ui^ills.  to  punish  him  for  the  exi>ense  of 
T^irfMr^:  'ir'::::!-  ;bey  have  thrown  away  uix>u  him.    If 
::;  tI*:--  r.>:Jkn:ii!>:  ::  happens  that  they  obtain  their  re- 
:'>.<^:.  :i-r..  w;:h  a  grva:  dt-al  of  ceremony,  they  wa>h 
«krn"  him  back«  and  place  him  in  his  niclio 
htrt  :hcv  fall  down  to  him.  and  make  ex- 

*  :u<<>  :>r  wha:  :hev  have  done.     *•  In  a  truth,"  sav 

*  rl.-.y.  *•  trt  wtrv  a  little-  too  ha<ty.  as  well  as  you  were 

*  •'  >vi:>:'.vhi:  ivx^  lonir  in  vour  srant,     Whv  should  vou 

•  *  Vr::.c  :his  Iv-iiiii^  on  voursoif  ?     But  what  is  done 

•  A<Ir*T*5  CoIIecdoD  of  Votju^w,  toL  ir.  p.  21>. 


*■  -"f  *  -" 


SISEBIA.    AFBIOA.  325 

*  "  cannot  be  now  undone ;  let  us  not  therefore  think  of 
'  ^*  it  any  more.  If  you  will  forget  what  is  past,  we  will 
'  '^  gild  you  over  again/*  ' 

Pallas,  speaking  of  the  Ostiaks,  states  that,  *  Malgr6 

*  la  v^n^ration  et  le  respect  qu'ils  ont  pour  leurs  idoles, 

*  malheur  a  elles  lorsqu'il  arrive  un  malheur  a  TOstiak, 

*  et  que  Tidole  n'y  reraddie  pas.     II  la  jette  alors  par 

*  terre,  la  frappe,  la  maltraite,  et  la  brise  en  morceaux. 

*  Cette  correction  arrive  fr^quemment.     Cette  colore  est 

*  commune  k  tons  les  peuples  idol&tres  de  la  Sib^rie.'  ^ 
Miiller  also  ^  makes  very  similar  statements.  Dr.  Ger* 
land,  in  the  continuation  of  Waitz'  Anthropologic, 
mentions  several  cases  of  Fetichism  in  Polynesia.^ 

In  Madas^ascar  a  small  basket  was  in  every  house 
to»g  ngatot  the  northern  roof-post,  and  in  it  wa. 
placed  the  fetich,  which  was  sometimes  a  stone,  some* 
times  a  leaf,  a  flower,  or  a  piece  of  wood.     This  'is  the 

*  household  "  sampy,"  or  charm,  which  is  trusted  in  and 

*  prayed  to  as  a  protection  from  evil.'  ^ 

In  Whydah  (Western  Africa),  and  I  believe  gene- 
rally the  negroes  will  not  eat  the  animal  or  plant  which 
they  have  chosen  for  their  fetich.^  In  Issini,  on  the 
contrary,  *  eating  the  fetich'  is  a  solemn  ceremony 
on  taking  an  oath,  or  as  a  token  of  friendship.^ 

Fetichism,  strictly  speaking,  has  no  temples,  idols, 
priests,  sacrifices,  or  prayer.  It  involves  no  belief  in 
creation  or  in  a  future  life,  and  a  fortiori  none  in  a  state 
of  rewards  and  punishments.     It  is  entirely  indepen- 

»  PalW  Voyages,  vol.  ir.  p.  70.  People,  p.  204. 
»  Des.   de    toutea    les   Nat   de  *  Phillip-,  1008.     Astley,  vol.  ii. 

I'Emp.  Rnase,  Pt.  IIL  p.  151.  p.  411. 

»  Loc.  at.,  vol.  vL,  pp.  822,  341.  •  Loyer,  1701,  /oc.  ct^.,  p.  486. 

^  Sibiee's    Madagascar   and  its 


326  TOTEMISM. 

dent  of  morality.  In  most,  however,  of  the  powerful 
negro  monarchies,  religion  has  made  some  progress  in 
organisation;  but  though  we  find  both  sacred  buildings 
and  priests,  the  religion  itself  shows  little,  if  any,  intel- 
lectual improvement. 


TOTBMISM. 

The  next  stage  in  religious  progress  is  that  which 
may  be  called  Totemism.    The  savage  does  not  abandon 
his  belief  in  Fetichism,  from  which,  indeed,  no  race  of 
men  has  yet  entirely  freed  itself ;  but  he  superinduces 
on  it  a  belief  in  beings  of  a  higher  and  less  material 
nature.     In  this  stage  everything  may.  be  worshipped 
— ^trees,  stones,  rivers,  mountains,  the  heavenly  bodies, 
and  animals ;  but  the  higher  deities  are  no  longer  re- 
garded as  liable  to  be  controlled  by  witchcraft.     Still 
they  are  not  regarded  as  Creators ;  they  do  not  reward 
virtue,  or  punish  vice.     The  spirits  of  the  departed  have 
before  them  a  weary  and  dangerous  journey,  and  many 
perish   by   the   way;   heaven,   however,    seems   to  be 
merely  a  distiint  part  of  the  earth. 

Even  the  deities  still  inhabit  this  earth;  they  are 
part  of  nature,  not  sapernktural ;  in  feet,  we  may  say 
that  in  Fetichism  the  deities  are  non-human,  in  Tote- 
mism superhuman,  but  do  not  become*  supernatural 
until  a  still  further  stage  of  mental  development. 

Again,  Totemism  is  a  deification  of  classes;  the 
fetich  is  an  individual.  The  negro  who  luis,  let  us  sav, 
an  ear  of  maize  as  a  fetich,  values  that  imrticular  ear, 
more  or  less  us  the  case  may  be,  but  has  no  fcelin<r  for 
maize  as  a  species.     On  the  contrary,  the  Kedskin  who 


TOTEMISM.  327 

regards  the  bear,  or  the  wolf,  as  his  totem,  feels  that 
he  is  in  intimate,  tliough  mysterious,  association  with 
the  whole  species. 

The  name  *  Totemism  '  is  of  North  American  origin, 
and  is  primarily  used  to  denote  the  form  of  religion 
widely  prevalent  among  the  Redskins  of  that  continent, 
but  similar  religious  views  are  held  in  various  other 
parts  of  the  world. 

In  order  to  realise  clearly  the  essential  character- 
istics of  the  religions  of  different  races,  we  must  bear  in 
mind  that  at  the  stage  at  which  we  have  now  arrived  in 
the  course  of  our  enquiry,  the  modifications  of  which  a 
religion  is  susceptible  may  be  divided  into  two  classes, 
▼iz.,  developmental  and  adaptational,  or  adaptive.  I 
use  the  term  *  developmental '  to  signify  those  changes 
which  arise  from  the  intellectual  progress  of  the  race. 
Thus  a  more  elevated  idea  of  the  Deity  is  a  develop- 
mental change.  On  the  other  hand,  a  Northern  people 
is  apt  to  look  on  the  sun  as  a  beneficent  deity,  while  to 
a  tropical  race  it  would  suggest  drought  and  destruc- 
tion. Again,  hunters  tend  to  worship  the  moon,  agri- 
culturists the  sun.  These  I  call  adaptational  modifica- 
tions. They  are  changes  produced,  not  by  difference  of 
race  or  of  civilisation,  but  by  physical  causes. 

In  some  cases  the  character  of  the  language  has  pro- 
bably exercised  much  influence  over  that  of  religion. 
No  one,  for  instance,  can  fail  to  be  struck  by  the  differ- 
ences existing  between  the  Aryan  and  Semitic  religions. 
All  Aryan  races  have  a  complicated  mythology,  which 
is  not  the  case  with  the  Semitic  races.  Moreover,  the 
character  of  the  gods  is  quite  different.  The  latter  have 
El,   Strong:;  Bel  or  Baal,  Lord;  Adonis,    Lord;    Shet, 


328  DEVELOPMENTAL  AND 

Master;  Moloch,  King;  Ram  and  Rimmon,  the  Exalted; 
and  other  shnilar  names  for  their  deities.  The  Aryans, 
on  the  contrary,  Zeus,  the  sky;  Phcebus  Apollo,  the 
sun;  Neptune,  the  sea;  Mars,  war;  Venus,  beauty,  &c. 
Max  Miiller  ^  has  very  ingeniously  endeavoured  to  ex- 
plain this  difference  by  the  different  character  of  the 
language  in  these  two  races. 

As  a  general  rule  nations  in  whose  languages  the 
division  of  the  nouns  into  classes  has  no  reference  to  the 
distinctions  of  sex,  possess  no  mytholog}* ;  and  though 
there  are  some  apparent  exceptions,  it  is  probable,  as 
Dr.  Bleek  has  suggested,^  that  in  such  cases  the  '  hn- 
^  guages,  if  not  at  the  present  day  sex-denoting,  may 
^  formerly  have  been  so,'  and  that  thus  the  presence  ci 
inherited  mythological  ideas  in  a  nation  may  give  evi- 
dence of  a  former  state  of  its  language,  a  state  of  which 
all  other  e\idence  may  have  now  disappeared. 

A^in,  in  Semitic  words  the  root  remains  alwavs 
distinct  and  unmistakable.  In  Ar}'an,  on  the  contrary, 
it  soon  becomes  altered  and  disguised.  Hence  Semitic 
dictionaries  are  mostly  arranged  according  to  the  roots, 
a  method  which  in  Aryan  languages  would  be  most 
inconvenient,  the  root  being  often  obscure,  and  in  many 
oases  doubtful.  Now,  take  such  an  expression  as  '  the 
*  sky  thunders.'  In  any  Semitic  tongue  the  word  'sky* 
would  remain  unaltered,  and  so  clear  in  its  meaning, 
that  it  would  with  difficulty  come  to  be  thought  of  as 
a  pn>i>er  name.  But  among  the  Aryans  the  case  was 
different,  and  we  find  in  the  earlier  Vedic  |X)etry  that 

*  S?o  Mull^r  9  Chip*  fn>ni  a  Ger-      and    Australian    Mjthologr,  Cape 
man  Worktop,  vol  L  p.  **)03w  Monthly  Magazine,  Februarj  187^ 

*  Chi  Kec^^^mblanct'e  in  Biwhoun 


ADAPTATIONAL  MODIFICATION.  329 

the  names  of  the  Greek  gods  stand  as  mere  words  de- 
noting natural  objects.  Thus  the  Sanskrit  Dyaus,  the 
Bky,  became  the  Greek  Zeus,  and  when  the  Greek  said 
Zevs  fipopTqi  his  idea  was  not  *  the  sky  thunders/  but 
^Zeus  thunders/  When  the  gods  were  thus  once 
created,  the  m3rthology  follows  as  a  matter  of  course. 
Some  of  the  statements  may  be  obscure,  but  when  we 
are  told  that  Hupnos,  the  god  of  sleep,  was  the  father 
of  Morpheus,  the  god  of  dreams  ;  or  that  Venus,  married 
to  Vulcan,  lost  her  heart  to  Mars,  and  that  the  intrigue 
was  made  known  to  Vulcan  by  Apollo,  the  sun,  we  can 
dearly  see  how  such  myths  might  have  arisen. 

The  attitude  of  the  ancients  towards  them  is  very 
interesting.  Homer  and  Hesiod  relate  them,  apparently 
without  suspicion,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  the  un- 
educated public  received  them  without  a  doubt.  So- 
crates, however,  explains  the  story  that  Boreas  carried 
off  Oreithyia  from  the  Ilissos,  to  mean  that  Oreithyia 
was  blown  off  the  rocks  by  the  north  wind.  Ovid  also 
says  that  under  the  name  of  Vesta,  mere  fire  is  to  be 
imderstood.  We  can  hardly  doubt  that  many  others 
also  must  have  clearly  perceived  the  origin  of  at  any 
rate  a  portion  of  these  myths,  but  they  were  probably 
restrained  from  expressing  their  opinion  by  the  dread 
of  incurring  the  odium  of  heterodoxy. 

One  great  charm  of  this  explanation  is  that  we  thus 
remove  some  of  the  revolting  features  of  ancient  myths. 
Thus,  as  the  sun  destroys  the  darkness  from  which  it 
springs,  and  at  evening  disappears  in  the  twilight,  so 
CEdipus  was  fabled  to  have  killed  his  father,  and  then 
married  his  mother.  In  this  way  the  whole  of  that  ter- 
rible story  may  be  explained  as  arising,  not  from  the 


I^>  MYTHS. 

depnTiiy  of  the  human  heart,  but  from  a  mistaken  ap- 
;^5c&nan  €4*  the  statement  that  the  sun  destroys  the 
darkscssw  and  ultimatelT  marries,  as  it  were,  the  twilight 
srv-tn  which  it  sprang. 

But  ahboQgfa  poetiT  may  thus  throw  much  light  on 
tie  offigin  of  the  myths  which  formed  the  religion  of 
iire<Or  azjd  Rome,  it  cannot  explain  the  origin  or  clui- 
racier  of  religion  among  the  lower  savages,  because  a 
dyrbolocy  suoh  as  that  of  Greece  and  Kom6  can  only 
am^  amorg^t  a  people  which  have  already  made  con- 
sS.feab!e  prvign?ss.  True,  myths  do  not  occur  among 
thv  !owe<t  raL>?s.  Even  in  Madagascar,  according  to  a 
gvxxl  authority,'  •  there  is  nothing  corresponding  to  a 

*  nivthok>ir\\  or  anv  fables  of  gods  or  goddesses,  amon<;^ 

*  tht!  Ma!a^?asy/  Tempting,  therefore,  as  it  may  be  to 
s^^^  lu  the  natun^  of  language  and  the  use  of  poetical 
exprvs«?ioas  an  explanation  of  the  religious  systems  of 
the  lower  races,  and  fiillv  admittinir  the  influence  which 
t::-v>v  oiiiiscs  b^vo  exercised,  we  must  l(X)k  deeper  for 
:he  orici:*  of  rvliciou,  and  can  W  satisfied  only  bv  an 
exphr^rion  which  is  applicable  to  the  lowest  races  pos- 
scssiuiT  :u'*y  rvltpous  opinions.  I  n  the  preceding  chapters 
I  have  arrempterl  to  do  this,  and  to  show  how  certain 
phe::o!uoiui,  as  for  instance  sleep  and  dreams,  pain, 
^.l:>v;i2^\  :\:id  death,  have  naturally  croate<l  in  the  sav:ijre 
mini  :;  Ivlicf  in  the  oxi:>tonceof  nn<torious  ainl  invisihlo 
bcinjjs. 


SHAMANISM.  331 


SHAMANISM. 

As  Totemism  overlies  Fetichism,  so  does  Shamanism 
overlie  Totemism.  The  word  is  derived  from  the  name 
used  in  Siberia,  where  the  *  Shamans '  work  themselves 
up  into  a  fury,  supposing  or  pretending  that  in  this  con- 
dition they  are  inspired  by  the  Spirit  in  whose  name 
they  speak,  and  through  whose  inspiration  they  are 
enabled  to  answer  questions  and  to  foretell  the  future. 
In  the  phases  of  religion  hitherto  considered  the  deities 
(if  indeed  they  deserve  the  name),  are  regarded  as 
visible  to  all,  and  present  amongst  us.  Shamanism  is  a 
considerable  advance,  inasmuch  as  it  presents  us  with  a 
higher  conception  of  religion.  Although  the  name  is 
Siberian,  the  phase  of  thought  is  widely  distributed,  and 
seems  to  be  a  necessary  stage  in  the  progress  of  religious 
development.  Those  who  are  disposed  to  adopt  the 
view  advocated  in  this  work  will  not  be  surprised  to 
find  that  '  Shamanism '  is  no  definite  system  of  theology. 
Wrangel,  however,  regarding  Shamanism  as  a  religion 
in  the  ordinary  sense,  was  atonished  at  this.  '  It  is  re- 
^  markable,'  he  says,  ^  that  Shamanism  has  no  dogmas 

*  of  any  kind ;  it  is  not  a  system  taught  or  handed  down 

*  from  one  to  another ;  though  it  is  so  widely  spread,  it 

*  seems  to  originate  with  each  individual  separately,  as 

*  the  fruit  of  a  highly  excited  imagination,  acted  upon 

*  by  external  impressions,  which  closely  resemble  each 

*  other,  throughout  the  deserts  of  Northern  Siberia.'  ^ 

It  is  far  from  easy  in  practice  always  to  distmguish 
Shamanism   from    Totemism   on    the    om    hand,   and 

'  Siberia  and  Polar  Sea,  p.  123. 


3a2  8IBEEIA.    THE  ESQUIMAUX. 

Idolatry  on  the  other.  The  main  difference  lies  in  the 
conception  of  the  Deity.  In  Totemism  the  deities  in- 
habit  our  earth ;  in  Shamanism  they  live  generally  in  a 
world  of  their  own,  and  trouble  themselves  little  about 
what  is  passing  here.  The  Shaman,  however,  is  occa- 
sionally honoured  by  the  presence  of  Deity,  or  is 
allowed  to  visit  the  heavenly  regions. 

Among  the  Esquimaux  the  '  Angekok '  answers 
precisely  to  the  Shaman.  Graah  thus  describes  a  scene 
in  Greenland.  The  angekok  came  in  the  evening,  and 
^  the  lamps '  being  extinguished,  and  skins  hung  before 

*  the  windows  (for  such  arts,  for  evident  reasons,  are 
^  best  practised  in  the  dark),  took  his  station  on  the 
'  floor,  dose  by  a  well-dried  seal-skin  there  suspended, 

*  and  commenced  rattling  it,  beating  the  tambourine  and 
^  singing,  in  which  last  he  was  seconded  by  all  present. 

*  From  time  to  time  his  chant  was  interrupted  by  a  cry 

*  of  •*  Goie,  Goie,  Goie,  Goie,  Goie,  Goie !  "  the  meaning 

*  of  which  I  did  not  comprehend,  coming  first  from  one 

*  comer  of  the  hut,  and  then  from  the  other.     Presently 

*  all  was  quiet,  nothing  being  heard  but  the  angekok 
'  puffing  and  blowing  as  if  struggling  with  something 

*  superior  to  him  in  strength,  and  then  again  a  sound 

*  resembling  somewhat  that   of  castanets,  whereupon 

*  commenced  once  more  the  same  song  as  before,  and 
'  the  same  ctv  of  "  Goie,  Goie,  Goie ! "     In  this  way  a 

*  whole  hour  elapsed  before  the  wizard  could  make  the 

*  tornpik,  or  spirit,  obey  his  summons.     Come  he  did, 
'  however,  at  last,  and  his  approach  was  announced  by 

*  a  stnuijn^  rushin«r  sound,  verv  like  the  sound  of  a  larjre 

-  Onuih «  Vova^  to  Greenland,  p.  12;^     cSee  also  Kgedea  Greenland, 
}\  Inw"^.  and  Lron  s  Journ.,  p.  350. 


PACIFIC  ISLANDS.  333 

*  bird  flying  beneath  the  roof.     The  angekok,  still  chant- 

*  ing,  now  proposed  his  questions,  which  were  replied 

*  to  in  a  voice  quite  strange  to  my  ears,  but  which 

*  seemed  to  me  to  proceed  from  the  entrance  passage, 

*  near  which  the  angekok  had  taken  his  station.' 

The  account  given  by  Cranz  agrees  with  the  above 

in  all  essential  particulars.^ 

Williams  ^  gives  the  following  very  similar  account 

of  a  scene  in  Feejee: — *  Unbroken  silence  follows;  the 
priest  becomes  absorbed  in  thought,  and  all  eyes  watch 
him  with  unblinking  steadiness.  In  a  few  minutes  he 
trembles;  slight  distortions  are  seen  in  his  face,  and 
twitching  movements  in  his  limbs.  These  increase  to 
a  violent  muscular  action,  which  spreads  until  the 
whole  frame  is  strongly  convulsed,  and  the  man  shivers 
VLB  with  a  strong  ague  fit.  In  some  instances  this  is 
accompanied  with  murmurs  and  sobs,  the  veins  are 
greatly  enlarged,  and  the  circulation  of  the  blood 
quickened.  The  priest  is  now  possessed  by  his  god, 
and  all  his  words  and  actions  are  considered  as  no 
longer  his  own,  but  those  of  the  deity  who  has  entered 
mto  hun.  Shrill  cries  of  "  Koi  au,  Koi  au !  "  "  It  is  I, 
"  It  is  I !  "  fill  the  air,  and  the  god  is  supposed  thus 
to  notify  his  approach.  While  giving  the  answer  the 
priest's  eyes  stand  out  and  roll  as  in  a  frenzy;  his 
voice  is  unnatural,  his  face  pale,  his  lips  livid,  his 
breathing  depressed,  and  his  entire  appearance  like  that 
of  a  furious  madman;  the  sweat  runs  from  every  pore, 
and  tears  start  from  his  strained  eyes;  after  which  the 
symptoms  gradually  disappear.    The  priest  looks  round 

>  History  of  Greenland,  toL  L  p.  *  Fiji  and  the  Fijiaw,  toL  L  p. 

210.  224. 


aS4  AFRICA.    INDIA. 


j> 


*  with  a  vacant  stare,  and,  as  the  god  says,  '^  I  depart. 
^  annoonces  his  actual  departure  by  violently  flinging 
*•  himsdf  down  on  the  mat,  or  by  suddenly  striking  the 
^  ground  with  his  club.  The  convulsive  movements  do 
'  not  entirely  disappear  for  some,  time.'  The  proceBs 
described  by  Dobritzhoflfer^  as  occurring  among  the 
AlMpones  is  also  somewhat  similar. 

Among  ihe  negroes  of  W.  Africa,  Brue^  mentions  a 

*  prophet '  who  pretended  *  to  be  inspired  by  the  Deity 
^  in  snch  a  manner  as  to  know  the  most  hidden  secrets; 

*  and  go  invisible  wherever  he  pleased,  as  well  as  to 
'  make  his  voice  be  heard  at  the  greatest  distance.  His 
'  disdples  and  accomplices  attested  the  truth  of  what  he 

*  said  by  a  thousand  fabulous  relations ;   so  that  the 

*  common  people,  always  credulous  and  fond  of  novelty, 

*  readily  gave  in  to  the  cheat/  Burton  mentions  the 
same  thing  in  Dahome.' 

Colcmel  Dalton  states  that  '  the  paganism  of  the 

*  Ho  and  Moondah   in   all  essential  features  is  Sha- 

*  manisric/ 

Amcmg  the  Karens,^  the  '  wee/  or  prophet,  '  works 

*  himself  into  the  state  in  which  he  can  see  departed 

*  spirits,  visit  their  distant  home,  and  even  recall  them 

*  to  the  body,  thus  raising  the  dead;  these  wees  are 

*  nervous    excitable  men,  such  as  would  become  me- 

*  diums,  and  in  ^ving  oracles  tliey  go  into  actual  con* 
'  Avulsions.' 


^  HistoTT  of  the  AbipoDOs,  roL  158. 

ii.  ^  ra.      '  *  Trans.  EthiL  Soo.,  1868,  p.  35. 

*  AstleT'a  Collection  of  Vova^s,  •  Tylor'a  Primitive  Culture,  foL 
ToL  ii.  |v  Sa  il  p.  120. 

*  Mission  to  Dahome,  toL  ii  p. 


WOLATBY.  335 


IDOLATRY. 

The  worship  of  Idols  characterises  a  somewhat 
higher  stage  of  human  development.  We  find  no  traces 
of  it  among  the  lowest  races  of  men ;  and  Lafitau  ^  says 
truly,  *  On  pent  dire  en  g^n^ral  que  le  grand  nombre 

*  des  peuples  sauvages  n'a  point  d'idoles.'  The  error  of 
regarding  Idolatry  as  the  general  religion  of  low  races 
has  no  doubt  mainly  arisen  from  confusing  the  Idol  and 
the  Fetich.  Fetichism,  however,  is  an  attack  on  the 
Deity,  Idolatry  is  an  act  of  submission  to  him ;  rude,  no 
doubt,  but  yet  humble.  Hence,  Fetichism  and  Idolatry 
are  not  only  different,  but  opposite,  so  that  the  one 
could  not  be  developed  directly  out  of  the  other.  We 
must  therefore  expect  to  find  between  them,  as  indeed 
we  do,  a  stage  of  religion  without  either  the  one  or  the 
other. 

Captain  Lyon  states  that  the  Esquimaux  have  no 
idols.*  '  Neither  among  the  Esquimaux  nor  the  Tinne,' 
says  Richardson,  *did  I  observe  any  image  or  visible 

*  object  of  worship.'  ^ 

Carver  states  that  the  Canadian  Indians  had  no 
idols ;  *  and  this  seems  to  have  been  true  of  the  North 
American  Indians  generally.  Lafitau  mentions  as  an 
exception  the  existence  of  an  idol  named  Oki  in  Vir- 
ginia.^ 

In  Eastern  Africa  Burton  states  that  he  knows  *  but 

*  one  people,  the  Wanyika,  who  have  certain  statuettes 

>  Mosan  des  Saayages  Am^ri*  '  Boat  Journey,  toL  iL  p.  44. 

caina,  toL  i.  p.  161.  *  Travela,  p.  887. 

•  Journal,  p.  372.  •  Vol.  i.  p.  168. 


336  ABSENCE  OF  IDOLATRY 

'  called  Eosukas.'  Prichard,  however,  quotes  a  commu- 
nication from  Dr.  Kraff,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  *  the 

*  Wanika  are  pagans,  though  they  have  no  images.'  ^ 
Neither  the  KaflSirs  nor  the  Bechuanas  have  idols.* 

Nor  do  the  West  African  negroes  worship  idols.*  It 
is  true  that  some  writers  mention  idols,  but  the  context 
almost  always  shows  that  fetiches  are  really  meant.  In 
the  kingdom  of  Whydah  '  Agoye '  was  represented 
under  the  form  of  a  deformed  black  man,  from  whose 
head  proceed  lizards  and  snakes,^  offering  a  striking 
similarity  to  some  of  the  Indian  idols.  This,  is  how- 
ever, an  exceptional  case.  Battel  only  mentions  par- 
ticularly two  idols  ;  ^  and  Bosman  ^  expressly  says  that 

*  on  the  Gold  Coast  the  natives  are  not  in  the  least 
'  acquainted    with   image- worship ; '    adding,    *  but  at 

*  Ardra  there  are  thousands  of  idols,'  i.e.  fetiches.  At 
Loango  there  was  a  small  black  image  named  Chikokke. 
which  was  placed  in  a  little  house  close  to  the  port.' 
These,  however,  were  merely  fetiches  in  human  form. 
For  instance,  we  are  told  by  the  same  author  that  in 
Kakongo,  the  kingdom  which  lies  to  the  south  of  Loango, 
the  natives  during  the  plague  '  burnt  their  idols,  saying, 

*  "  7/*  they  will  not  help  us  in  such  a  misfortune  as  this^ 
'  ^'^  when  can  we  expect  they  should?^^^^  Thus,  appa- 
rently doubting  not  so  much  their  power  as  their  will. 
Again,  in  Congo  the  so-called  idols  are  placed  in  fields 

*  Prichard's  Nat  lEst  of  Mau,  *  Astley's  Collection  of  Voragvi^ 

vol.  ii.  p.  398.  pp.  20,  <>0. 

'  Livingstone's  Trayela  in  South  *  Adventures  of  A.  Battel.    Pin- 
Africa,  p.  158.     Maclean's  Comp.  of  kerton,  vol.  xvi.  p.  331. 
Kaffir  Laws  and  Customs,  p.  78.  *  Bosnian's  Guinea.      I^nkertoo, 

'  Astlej's  Collection  of  Vojages,  loc,  cif.y  p.  403. 
vol.   ii.  p.  240,  for  FuU,   and   for  '  Astley,  ioc.  citj  p.  210. 

Guinea,  as  far  as  Ardrab,  p.  000.  "  /6m/.,  p.  217. 


AMONG  SAVAGES.  337 

to  protect  the  growing  crops.^  This  is  clearly  the  func- 
tion of  a  fetich,  not  of  a  true  idol. 

In  Madagascar,  though  of  late  years  certain  idols 
were  treated  with  great  respect,  yet  there  seems  reason 
to  suppose  that  this  '  idolatrous  system  is  of  compara- 

*  tively  modern  date.'  *  The  Australians  and  Tas- 
manians  had  no  idols. 

Idolatry,  says  Williams,  of  the  Feejeean,  *  he  seems 

*  never  to  have  known ;  for  he  makes  no  attempt  to 
^fashion  material  representations  of  his  gods.'®  As 
r^ards  the  New  Zealanders,  Yate  *  says,  that  *  though 

*  remarkably  superstitious,  they  have  no  gods  that  they 

*  worship ;  nor  have  they  anything  to  represent  a  being 

*  which  they  call  God.'  Dieffenbach  also  observes  that 
in  New  Zealand  *  there  is  no  worship  of  idols,  or  of 
^  bodily  representations  of  the  Atoua.'  ^ 

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Tongans,  while,  on  the 
other  band,  the  reverse  seems  to  have  been  the  case 
with  the  Society  Islanders.  The  Tannese  had  no  idols,^ 
and  according  to  Hale  this  is  true  with  the  Micronesians 
generally.^ 

Speaking  of  the  Singfe  Dyaks,®  Sir  James  Brooke 
says,  *  Religion  they  have   none ;    and  although   they 

*  know  the  name  for  a  god '  ( which  is  probably  taken 
from  the  Hindoos),  '  they  have  no  priests  nor  idols,  say 

*  no  prayers,  oflfer  no  oflferings.'   He  subsequently  modi- 

*  ABtley,  loc,  cU.^  vol  ill  p.  229.  ^  Loc,  cit,  p.  141. 

LiTiogBtone,     Expedition    to     the  *  Loc,  cU.,  voL  iL  p.  118. 

p.  523.  *  Turner,    Nineteen     Years    in 


*  Sibree,    MadagMCAr    and    its  Polynesia,  p.  88. 
People,  p.  396.  ^  Ethno.  of  the  United  SUtea 

*  Fiji  and  the  Fijiana,  vol.  L  p.  Exp.  Exp.,  pp.  77,  84. 

216.    Seeman'a  Mission  to  Viti,  p.  *  Keppel*a  Expedition  to  Borneo, 

t/u  vol.  i.  D.  231. 


838  OBIOm  OF  mOLATET. 

fied  this  opinion  on  some  points,  but  as  regards  the 
absence  of  idols  it  seems  to  be  correct. 

In  India  the  Ehasias  have  no  temples  or  idols.^ 
The  Kols  of  Central  India  worship  the  sun  ;  '  material 
'  idol  worship  they  have  none.'  ^  Originally,  says 
Dubois,  the  Hindoos  did  not  resort  ^  to  images  of  stone 

*  or  other  materials  ....  but  when  the  people  of 
^  India  had  deified  their  heroes  or  other  mortals,  they 
^  began  then,  and  not  before,  to  have  recourse  to  statnefl 

*  and  images.'  ^  In  China  '  it  is  observable*  that  there 
^  is  not  to  be  found,  in  the  canonical  books,  the  least 

*  footstep  of  idolatrous  worship  till  the  image  of  Fo  was 
'  brought  into  China,  several  ages  after  Confucius.' 

The  Ostyaks  never  made  an  image  of  their  god 
'  Torium,' «  and  some  other  Siberian  tribes  were  without 
idols.*  In  fact,  idols  do  not  occur  until  we  arrive  at 
the  stage  of  the  highest  Polynesian  Islanders.  £v^ 
then  they  are  often,  as  Ellis  expressly  tells  us,^  mere 
shapeless  pieces  of  wood;  thus  leaving  much  to  the 
imagination.  It  may,  I  think,  be  laid  down  almost  as  a 
constant  rule,  that  mankind  arrives  at  the  stage  of 
monarchy  in  government  before  he  reaches  idolatry 
in  religion. 

The  idol  usually  assumes  the  human  form,  and 
idolatry  is  closely  connected  with  that  form  of  religion 
which  consists  in  the  worship  of  ancestors.  We  have 
already  seen  how  imperfectly  uncivilised   man  realises 

^  Dalton,  Dea.  Ethn.  of  Bengal,  *  Astley,  vol.  iv.  p.  20:1. 

p.  67.  Jour.  Anthr.  Ins.  1871,  p.  130.  ^  Ennan,  ioc.  cit^  toI.  iL  p.  60. 

*  Dalton,  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc,  N.S.,  *  Miiller,  IVs.  de  touted  let  Nat. 

vol.  vi.  p.  32.  de  TEmpire  Kus^e,  pt.  i.  pp.  54, 63. 

'  Dubois,  The  People  of  India,  p.  '  Polynesian  Ke^arche«,  voL  ii. 

870  p.  220. 


CONNECTION  WITH  THE  WORSHIP  OF  AN0E8T0B8.    389- 

the  conception  of  death ;  and  we  cannot  wonder  that 
death  and  sleep  should  long  have  been  intimately  con- 
nected together  in  the  human  mind.  The  savage,  how- 
ever, knows  well  that  in  sleep  the  spirit  lives,  even 
though  the  body  appears  to  be  dead.  Morning  after 
morning  he  wakes  himself,  and  sees  others  rise,  from 
sleep.  Naturally,  therefore,  he  endeavours  to  rouse  the 
dead.  Nor  can  we  wonder  at  the  very  general  custom 
of  providing  food  and  other  necessaries  for  the  use  of 
the  dead.  Among  races  leading  a  settled  and  quiet  life 
this  habit  would  tend  to  continue  longer  and  longer. 
Prayers  to  the  dead  would  reasonably  follow  from  such 
customs,  for  even  without  attributing  a  greater  power 
to  the  dead  than  to  the  living,  they  might  yet,  from 
their  different  sphere  land  nature,  exercise  a  con- 
siderable power,  whether  for  good  or  evil.  But  it 
18  impossible  to  distinguish  a  request  to  an  invisible 
being  from  prayer ;  or  a  powerful  spirit  from  a  demi- 
god. 

The  Kaffirs  also  sacrifice  and  pray  to  their  deceased 
relatives,  although  *  it  would  perhaps  be  asserting  too 

*  much  to  say  absolutely  that  they  believe  in  the  exist- 

*  ence  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.'  ^  In  fact,  their 
belief  seems  to  go  no  further  than  this,  that  the  ghosts 
of  the  dead  haunt  for  a  certain  time  their  previous 
dwelling-places,  and  either  assist  or  plague  the  living. 
No  special  powers  are  attributed  to  them,  and  it  would 
be  a  misnomer  to  caU  them  *  Deities.' 

In  uncivilised  societies,  when  there  were  no  great 
differences  of    rank,   deceased   spirits  would,   indeed, 

1  The  BmuUm  ;  Cawdin,  p.  243.      of  the  Amazolu.  Livingstone,  Zam« 
See  also  Callaway's  Religious  System      besi,  p.  40. 

X  2 


340  INDIA.    AFRICA.    FOLTNSBU. 

scarcely  rise  beyond  the  dignity  of  ghosts ;  but  under  a 
more  settled  government,  the  ghosts  of  the  great  would 
tend  to  become  gods.  Thus  it  appears  that  in  Poly- 
nesia,^ the  worship  of  ancestors  has  tended  to  replace 
that  of  the  earlier  deities. 

The  nations  of  Mysore  at  the  new  moon  '  observe  a 

*  feast  in  honour  of  deceased  parents.'  ^  The  Kurum- 
bars  of  the  Deccan  also  *  sacrifice  to  the  spirits  of  an- 
cestors/ and  the  same  is  the  case  with  the  Santals.' 
Indeed  the  worship  of  ancestors  appears  to  be  more  or 
less  prevalent  among  all  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  Central 
India. 

Burton  *  considers  that  some  of  the  Egba  deities  arc 

*  palpably  men  and  women  of  note  in  their  day. ' 

*  The  gods  whom  the  New  Zealanders  fear/  says 
Shortland, '  are  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  who  are  beUeved 

*  to  be  constantly  watching  over  the  living  with  jealous 
'  eyes.'^  I  have  already  indeed  mentioned  that  through- 
out Polynesia  the  worship  of  ancestors  seems  to  have 
been  gaining  ground  over  the  older  forms  of  religion; 
and  Hale  says  broadly  ^  that  the  religion  of  the  Micro- 
nesians  *  is  the  worship  of  the  spirits  of  their  ancestors.* 
In  Peru,  the  deceased  Yncas  were  worshipped  as  gods,^ 
and  in  Mexico  Quetzalcoatl  was  doubtless,  says  Pres- 
cott,  '  one  of  those  benefactors  of  their  species,  who  have 

*  been  deified  by  the  gratitude  of  posterity.'  ®    In  Tanni 

*  Gerland's    Cont     of    Waitz's      landers,  p.  81. 
Antbropologie,  vol.  vi.  p.  330.  •  U.S.  Expl.  Expedition,  p.  77. 

'  Buchanan,    quoted    in    TranB.  '  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  voL  L  p. 

Etlin.  See.,  N.S.,  vol.  viii.  p.  96.  03.     Markham,  Rites  and  Laws  of 

^  Elliott,  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc,.N.S.,  the  Yncas,  p.  12. 
vol.  viii.  pp.  104, 106.  •  Hist  of  Mexico,   vol.  i,  p.  -Id. 

*  Abeokuta,  vol.  i.  p.  101.  See  also   WUttke,  (les.  der  Mensck 

*  Traditions    of  the  New  Zea-  vol.  i.  p.  262. 


8IBEBIA.  841 

and  other  neighbouring  islands  they  worship  the  spirits 
of  their  ancestors.^  There  can  be  little  doubt,  says 
Hale,^  speaking  of  the  Micronesians,  *that  the  deities 

*  worshipped  in  the  Southern  clusters  were  only  deified 
'  chiefs,  the  memory  of  whose  existence  has  been  lost  in 
'  the  lapse  of  time ; '  in  many  cases,  at  any  rate,  worship 
is  avowedly  paid  to  the  spirits  of  their  ancestors. 

Other  races  endeavour  to  preserve  the  memory  of 
the  dead  by  rude  statues.  Thus,  ancestor  worship  is 
very  prevalent  in  Siberia,  and  Pallas*  mentions  that 
the  Ostyaks  of  Siberia  '  rendent  aussi  un  culte  k  leurs 

*  morts.     lis  sculptent  des  figures  de  bois  pour  repr^- 

*  senter  les  Ostiaks  c^l^bres.     Dans  les  repas  de  comm^- 

*  moration  on  place  devant  ces  figures  une  partie  des 
^  mets.     Les  femmes  qui  ont  ch^ri  leurs  maris  ont  de 

*  pareilles  figures,  les  couchent  avec  elles,  les  parent,  et 

*  ne  mangent  point  sans  leur  presenter  une  partie  de 

*  leur  portion.'  Firman*  also  mentions  that  when  a 
man  dies  ^the   relatives   form  a  rude  wooden  image 

*  representing,  and  in  honour  of,  the  deceased,  which  is 

*  set  up  in  their  yurt,  and  receives  divine  honours '  for 
a  certain  time.     '  At  every  meal  they  set  an  oflfering  of 

*  food  before  the  image ;  and  should  this  represent  a 

*  deceased  husband,  the  widow  embraces  it  from  time 

*  to  time,  and  lavishes  on  it  every  sign  of  attachment.' 
In  ordinary  cases  this  semi-worship  only  lasts  a  few 
years,  after  which  the  image  is  buried.     *  But  when  a 

*  Shaman  dies,  this  custom  changes,  in  his  favour,  into  a 

*  complete   and  decided    canonisation  ;    for  it  is  not 

*  thought  enough  that,  in  this  case,  the  dressed  block  of 

»  Turner,    Nineteen    Years    in      p.  07. 
Polyneftiii,  pp.  88,  8M,  411.  *  Pallaa'  Voyages,  vol.  iv.  p.  79. 

«  Ethn.  of  the  U.S.  Expl.  Exp.  *  Erman,  loc.  cd.,  vol.  ii.  p.  61. 


342  EXPLANATION  QWBN  IN 

wood  which  represents  the  deceased  should  receive 
homage  for  a  limited  period,  but  the  priest's  descend- 
ants do  their  best  to  keep  him  in  vogue  fi*om  genera- 
tion to  generation ;  and  by  well-contrived  oracles  and 
other  arts  they  manage  to  procure  offerings  for  these 
their  families'  penates,  as  abundant  as  those  laid  on 
the  altars  of  the  universally  acknowledged  gods,  fiat 
that  these  latter  also  have  an  historical  origin,  that 
they  were  originally  monuments  of  distinguished  men, 
to  which  prescription  and  the  interest  of  the  Shamans 
gave  by  degrees  an  arbitrary  meaning  and  importance, 
seems  to  me  not  liable  to  doubt ;  and  this  is,  further- 
more, corroborated  by  the  circumstance  that  of  all  the 
sacred  yurts  dedicat;ed  to  these  saints,  which  have  been 
numerous  from  the  earliest  times  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
river,  only  one  has  been  seen  (near  Samarovo)  am- 
taining  the  image  of  a  woman.' 

It  seems  to  me  that  in  other  countries  also,  statues 
have  in  this  manner  come  to  be  worshipped  as  deities. 

The  writer  of  the  '  Wisdom  of  Solomon,'  ^  long  ago, 
observed  truly  of  idols  that 

'13.  Neither  were  they  from  the  beginning,  neither 

*  shall  they  be  for  ever. 

'  14.  For  by  the  vain  glory  of  men  they  entered 

*  into  the  world,  and  therefore  shall  they  come  shortly 

*  to  an  end. 

*  15.  For  a  father  afflicted  with  untimely  mourning, 

*  when  he  hath  made  an  image  of  his  child  soon  taken 

*  away,  now  honoured  him  as  a  god,  which  was   then 

*  a  dead  man,  and  delivered  to  thone  that  were  under 

*  him  ceremonies  and  sacrifices. 

*  Wisdom,  rh.  xiv.  p.  12. 


THE  *  WISDOM  OF  SOLOMON.*  343 

'16.  Thus,  in  process  of  time,  an  ungodly  custom 

*  grown  strong  was  kept  as  a  law,  and  graven  images 

*  were  worshipped  by  the  commandments  of  kings : 

'  17.  Whom  men  could  not  honour  in  presence,  be- 
'  cause  they  dwelt  fitr  off,  they  took  the  counterfeit  of 
'  the  visage  from  far,  and  make  an  express  image  of  a 

*  king  whom  they  honoured,  to  the  end  that  by  this  their 

*  forwardness,  they  might  flatter  him  that  was  absent  as 
'  if  he  were  present. 

*  18.  Also  the  singular  diligence  of  the  artificer  did 

*  help  to  set  forward  the  ignorant  to  more  superstition. 

*  19.  For  he,  peradventure  willing  to  please  one  in 
'  authority,  forced  all  his  skill  to  make  the  resemblance 

*  of  the  best  &shion. 

*  20.  And  so  the  multitude,  allured  by  the  grace  of 

*  the  work,  took  him  now  for  a  god,  which  a  little  before 
^  was  but  honoured  as  a  man.' 

The  idol  is  by  no  means  regarded  as  a  mere  emblem. 
In  India,*  when  the  offerings  of  the  people  have  been 
less  profuse  than  usual,  the  Brahmans  sometimes  ^  put 
^  the   idols   in   irons,    chaining   their   hands   and  feet. 

*  They  exhibit  them  to  the  people  in  this  humiliating 

*  state,   into   which   they   tell    them   they   have   been 

*  brought  by  rigorous  creditors,  from  whom  their  gods 

*  had  been  obliged,  in  times  of  trouble,  to  borrow  money 

*  to  supply  their  wants.      They  declare  that  the  in- 
'  exorable  creditors  refuse  to  set  the  god  at  liberty, 

*  until  the  whole  sum,  with  interest,  shall  have  been 

*  paid.     The  people  come  forward,  alarmed  at  the  sight 

*  of  their  divinity  in  irons  ;   and  thinking  it  the  most 
'  meritorious  of  all  good  works  to   contribute  to  his 

*  Dubou,  The  People  of  India,  p.  407. 


844  THE  IDOL  NOT  EEGAEDED 

*  deliverance,  they    raise    the    sum   required   by  the 

*  Brahmans  for  that  purpose.' 

'  A  statue  of  Hercules  ^  was  worshipped  at  Tyre,  not 

*  as  a  representative  of  the  Deity  but  as  the  Deity  him- 
'  self ;  and  accordingly  when  Tyre  was  besieged  by 
'  Alexander,  the  Deity  was  fast  bound  in  chains,  to 
'  prevent  him  from  deserting  to  the  enemy/ 

It  is  hard  for  us  to  appreciate  the  difficulty  which  an 
undeveloped  mind  finds  in  raising  itself  to  any  elevated 
conception.  Thus  Campbell  mentions  that  a  High- 
lander, wishing  to  describe  a  castle  of  the  utmost  pos- 
sible magnificence,  ended  with  this  climax :  '  That  w«a 
'  the  beautiful  castle  !  There  was  not  a  shadow  of  t 
*'  thing  that  was  for  the  use  of  a  castle  that  was  not 
'  in  it,  even  to  a  herd  for  the  geese.'  As,  however, 
civilisation  progresses,  and  the  chiefs,  becoming  more 
despotic,  exact  more  and  more  respect,  the  people  are 
introduced  to  conceptions  of  power  and  magnifioence 
higher  than  any  which  they  had  previously  entertiuned* 

Hence,  though  the  worship  of  ancestors  occurs 
among  races  in  the  stage  of  Totemism,  it  long  survives, 
and  may  be  regarded  as  characterising  Idolatry  ;  whidi 
is  really  a  higher  religion,  and  generally  indicates  a 
more  advanced  mental  condition  than  the  worship  of 
animals  or  of  tlie  heavenly  bodies.  At  first  sight  the 
reverse  would  appear  to  be  the  case:  most  would  re 
gard  the  sun  as  a  far  grander  deity  than  any  in  hum^n 
form.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  this  is  not  so,  and 
worship  is  generally,  though  not  invariably,  associated 
with  a  lower  idea  of  the  Deity  than  is  the  case  with 
Idolatry. 

^  Ilifltorjr  of  Miin.  ^ol.  ir.  p.  31<i. 


AS  A  MERE  EMBLEM.  345 

Indeed,  the  very  circumstances  which  to  our  minds 
ahnost  render  the  sun  worthy  of  deification  are  pre- 
cisely those  which  made  sun-worship  comparatively  a 
rare  form  of  religion  amongst  the  lower  races  of  savages. 

Again,  in  the  lowest  religions,  man  does  not  form  to 
himself  any  definite  conception  of  Deity.  If  we  enquire 
in  what  sense  a  savage  regards  a  tree  or  a  serpent  as  a 
deity,  we  are  putting  to  ourselves  a  question  which  the 
savage  does  not  think  of  asking.  But  when  religion 
acquired  a  more  intellectual  character — when  it  in- 
cluded faith  as  well  as  feeling,  belief  as  well  as  mystery 
— ^man  first  conceived  the  Deity  as  a  being  like  himself 
in  form,  character,  and  attributes,  only  wiser  and  more 
powerful.  This  is  one  reason  why  the  deities  in  this 
stage  are  anthropomorphous. 

Another  is  the  ^t  that  the  gradually  increasing 
power  of  chiefs  and  kings  has  familiarised  the  mind 
with  the  existence  of  a  power  greater  than  any  which 
had  been  previously  conceived.  Thus,  in  Western  Africa, 
the  slave  trade  having  added  considerably  to  the  wealth 
and  consequently  to  the  power  of  the  chiefs  or  kings, 
they  maintained  much  state,  and  insisted  upon  being 
treated  with  servile  homage.  No  man  was  allowed  to 
eat  with  them,  or  to  approach  them  excepting  on  his 
knees  with  an  appearance  of  fear,  which  no  doubt  was 
in  many  cases  sutiSciently  well-founded. 

These  marks  of  respect  so  much  resembled  adora- 
tion, that   ^  the  individuals  ^  of  the  lower  classes  are 

*  persuaded  that  his  (the  king's)  power  is  not  confined 

*  to  the  earth.' 

*  l*royart's  Iliitorj  of  Ix)aDgo,      ley's  Collection  of  Voyages,  vol,  iiL 
mnkorlon,  vol.  x\\.  p.  577.    See  also      pp.  70,  223,  220. 
Btjemai),  loc,  cit.^  pp.  488, 401.    Ast- 


346  WORSHIP  OF  MEN. 

Battel  mentions  that  the  king  of  Loango  *  is  honoured 

*  among  them  as  though  he  were  a  god.*  ^  He  is  so  holy 
that  no  one  is  allowed  to  see  him  eat  or  drink.  The 
tyrants  of  Natal,  says  Casalis,  *  exacted  almost  divine 

*  homage.'  * 

In  Peru  the  Ynca  Uiraccocha  was  adored  as  a  god 
even  during  his  life,  *  though  he  wished  to  teach  the 
'  Indians  not  to  worship  him.'  • 

In  Madagascar,  also,  the  reigning  sovereign  was  re- 
garded almost  as  a  god.^ 

In  New  Zealand,  says   Hale,^  *  the  great   warrior 

*  chief,  Hongi,  claimed  for  himself  the  title  of  a  god, 
'and  was  so  called  by  his  followers.  At  the  Society 
'  Islands,  Tamatoa,  the  last  heathen  king  of  Raitea,  was 

*  worshipped  as  a  divinity.  At  the  Marquesas  there  are, 
*'  on  every  island,  several  men  who  are  termed  atua,  or 

*  gods,  who  receive  the  same  adoration,  and  are  believed 

*  to  possess  the  same  powers,  as  other  deities. 

'  At  Depeyster*s  group,  the  westernmost  cluster  of 
'  Polynesia,  we  were  visited  by  a  chief,  who  announced 
'  himself  as  the  atua  or  god  of  the  islands,  and  was  ac- 
'  knowledged  as  such  by  the  other  natives.' 

The  king  and  queen  of  Tahiti  were  regarded  as  so 
sacred  that  nothing  once  used  by  them,  not  even  the 
sounds  forming  their  names,  could  be  used  for  any 
ordinary  purpose.^  The  language  of  the  court  was 
characterised  by  the  most  ridiculous  adulation.     The 

*  Pinkerton's  Travels,  vol.  xvi.  p.  *  Sibrt»e»     Madagascar    and     iu 

300.  People,  p.  :\\rK 

»  The  nasutos,  p.  211).  *  T.S.  Kxpl.  I-Ixped.  p.  21. 

■»  Oarcilasso  de  la  Vega,  vol.  ii.  «  Klli/    P.^Iynesian    Ke««earche«s 

P-  tJ7.  vol.  ii.  pp.  348,  ii<H). 


WORSHIP  OF  CHIEFS.  347 

king's  *  houses   were  called   the  aarai,   the  clouds  of 

*  heaven  ;   anuanua,  the  rainbow,  was  the  name  of  the 

*  canoe  in  which  he   voyaged ;   his   voice  was   called 

*  thunder  ;  the  glare  of  the  torches  in  his  dwelling  was 
^  denominated   lightning ;  and   when   the   people   saw 

*  them  in  the  evening,  as  they  passed  near  his  abode, 
'  instead  of  saying  the  torches  were  burning  in  the 
'  palace,  they  would  observe  that  the  lightning  was 
'  flashing  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.' 

Man- worship  would  not,  indeed,  be  long  confined  to 
the  dead.  In  many  cases  it  extends  to  the  living  also. 
Indeed,  the  savage  who  worships  an  animal  or  a  tree, 
would  see  no  absurdity  in  worshipping  a  man.  His 
chief  is,  in  his  eyes,  almost  as  powerful,  if  not  more  so, 
than  his  deity.  Yet  man-worship  does  not  prevail  in 
altogether  uncivilised  communities,  because  the  chiefs, 
associating  constantly  with  their  followers,  lack  that 
mystery  which  religion  requires,  and  which  nocturnal 
animals  so  eminently  possess.  As,  however,  civilisation 
progresses,  and  the  chiefs  separate  themselves  more  and 
more  from  their  subjects,  this  ceases  to  be  the  case,  and 
man- worship  becomes  an  important  element  of  religion. 

The  worship  of  a  great  chief  seems  quite  as  natural 
to  man  as  that  of  an  idol.  '  Why,'  said  a  Mongol  ^  to 
Friar  Ascelin,  *  since  you  Christians  make  no  scruple  to 

*  adore  sticks  and  stones,  why  do  you  refuse  to  do.  the 

*  same  honour  to  Bayoth  Noy,  whom  the  Khan  hath 
^  ordered  to  be  adored  in  the  same  manner  as  he  is 

*  himself?' 

*  Tuikilakila,^  the  chief  of  Somosomo,  offered  Mr. 

'  AsUey,  vol.  iv.  p.  651.  «  Ewkine's  Weetern  Pacific,  p.  240. 


348  WORSHIP  OF  TBAVELLBBS. 

'  Hunt  a  preferment  of  the  same  sort.     "  If  you  die 

*  "  first,"  said  he,  "  I  shall  make  you  my  god."    In  fact 
^  there  appears  to  be  no  certain  line  of  demarcation 

*  between  departed  spirits  and  gods,  nor  between  gods 

*  and  living  men,  for  many  of  the  priests  and  old  chiefs 
^  are  considered  as  sacred  persons,  and  not  a  few  of 

*  them  will  also  claim  to  themselves  the  right  of  divinity. 

*  "  I  am  a  god,"  Tuikilakila  would  sometimes  say ;  and 

*  he  believed  it  too.  They  were  not  merely  the  words  of 
^  his  lips ;  he  believed  he  was  something  above  a  noere 
'  man.' 

This  worship  is,  however,  almost  always  accom- 
panied by  a  belief  in  higher  beings.  We  have  already 
seen  that  the  New  Zealanders  and  some  other  nations 
have  almost  entirely  abandoned  the  worship  of  animak, 
&c.,  without  as  yet  realising  the  higher  stage  of  Idolatry, 
owing  probably  in  great  measure  to  their  political  con- 
dition. In  other  cases  where  Shamanism  has  not  so 
effectually  replaced  Totemism,  the  establishment  of 
monarchical  government  with  its  usual  pomp  and  cere- 
monial, led  to  a  much  more  organised  worship  of  the  old 
gods.  Of  this  the  serpent- worship  in  Western  Africa 
and  the  sun-worship  in  Peru,  are  striking  examples. 

I  do  not  therefore  wonder  that  white  men  should 
have  been  so  often  taken  for  deities.  This  was  the  case 
with  Captain  Cook  in  the  Pacific,  with  Lander  in 
Western  Africa,^  and,  as  already  mentioned,  Mrs.  Thom- 
son was  regarded  by  the  North  Australians  as  a  spirit, 
though  she  lived  with  them  for  some  years.  In  the 
Voyage  of  Sir  Fnincis  Drake ^  it  is  mentioned  that  some 

*  See  fln/^,  p.  251.  Southern  Indian?,  p.  .31H}.     Steveitf. 

«  Jones,       Antiquities     of     the      Flint  Chips,  pp.  818,  aiO. 


WORSHIP  OF  TBAVELLEB8.  84,9 

of  the  North  American  Indians  brought  *  feathers  and 

*  bags  of  Tobah  for  presents,  or  rather  indeed  for  sacri- 

*  fices,  upon  this  persuasion  that  we  were  gods.' 

Mr.  Hale  tells  us  that  the  natives  of  Oatufu  and 
other  islands  thought  that  these  ^  came  from  above,  in 

*  the  sky,  and  were  divinities.'  * 

It  seems  at  first  sight  hard  to  understand  how  men 
can  be  regarded  as  immortal.  Yet  even  this  belief  has 
been  entertained  in  various  countries. 

Merolla  tells  us^  that  in  his  time  the  wizards  of 
Congo  were  called  Scinghili,  that  is  to  say  Gods  of  the 
Elarth.     The  head  of  them  is  styled  *  Ganga  Chitorne, 

*  being  reputed  Gxxi  of  all  the  Earth.'     *  He  further 

*  asserts  that  his  body  is  not  capable  of  suffering  a 
^  natural  death;  and,  therefore,  to  confirm  his  adorers  in 

*  that  opinion,  whenever  he  finds  his  end  approaching, 
^  dther  through  age  or  disease,  he  calls  for  such  a  one  of 
^  his  disciples  as  he  designs  to  succeed  him,  and  pre- 
'  tends  to  communicate  to  him  his  great  powers :  and 

*  afterwards  in  public    (where  this  tragedy  is  always 

*  acted)  he  commands  him  to  tie  a  halter  about  his  neck 

*  and  to  strangle  himself  therewith,  or  else  to  take  a 

*  club  and  knock  him  down  dead.    This  command  being 

*  once  pronounced,  is   soon  executed,  and  the  wizard 

*  thereby  sent  a  martyr  to  the  devil.     The  reason  that 

*  this  is  done  in  public,  is  to  make  known  the  successor 

*  ordained  by  the  last  breath  of  the  predecessor,  and  to 

*  show  that  it  has  the  same  power  of  producing  rain, 
'  and  the  like.     If  this  office  were  not  thus  continually 

'  U.8.  Expl.  Exp.,  pp.  153,  166.  «  Pinkertpn;  toL  xn.  p.  220,  d 

See  al«o  Oerland,  Anthr.  de  Natur-      sfg. 
Tolker,  ToL  n.  p.  607. 


B50  THE  WORSHIP  OF  PRINCIPLES. 

*  filled,  the  inhabitants  say  that  the  earth  would  sc^^^ 
'  become  barren,  and  mankind  consequently  perish.       /^ 
'  my  time,  one  of  these  magicians  was  cast  into  the  %ei 
'  another  into  a  river,  a  mother  and  her  son  put  to 
'  death,  and  many  others  banished  by  our  order,  as  baa 
'  been  said.' 

So  also  the  Great  Lama  of  Thibet  is  regarded  as  im- 
mortal ;  though  his  spirit  occasionally  passes  fi*om  one 
earthly  tenement  to  another. 

These,   then,    are   the    lowest    intellectual    stages 
through  which  religion  has  passed.     It  is  no  part  of  my 
plan  to   describe   the  various  religious  beliefs  of  the 
higher  races.     I  have,  however,  stopped  short  sooner 
perhaps  than  I  should  otherwise  have  done,  because  the 
worship  of  personified  principles,  such  as  Fear,  Love, 
Hope,  &c.,  could  not  have  been  treated  apart  from  that 
of  the  Phallus  or  Lingam  with  which  it  was  so  inti- 
mately associated  in  Greece,  India,  Mexico,  and  else- 
where ;  and  which,  though  at  first  modest  and  pure,  as 
all  religions  are  in  their  origin,  led  to  such  abominable 
practices,  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  painful  chapters  in 
human  history. 

I  will  now,  therefore,  pass  on  to  some  points  inti- 
mately connected  with  religion,  but  which  could  not  be 
conveniently  treated  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  work. 

Tliere  is  no  difficulty  in  understanding  that  when 
once  the  idea  of  Spiritual  Beings  had  become  habitual 
— when  once  man  had  come  to  regard  them  as  exer- 
cising an  important  influence,  whether  for  good  or  evil 
— he  would  endeavour  to  secure  their  assistance  and 
support.  Before  a  war  he  would  try  to  propitiate  them 
by  promising  a  share  of  the  spoil  after  victory ;  and  fear, 


8AGBIFIGE8.  351 

even  if  no  higher  motive,  would  ensure  the  performance 
of  his  promise. 

We,  no  doubt,  regard,  and  justly  regard,  sacrifices 
as  unnecessary.  *  I  will  take  no  bullock,'  says  David,^ 
'  out  of  thine  house,  nor  he-goat  out  of  thy  folds.'  This 
sentiment,  however,  was  far  in  advance  of  its  time,  and 
even  Solomon  felt  that  sacrifices,  in  the  then  condition 
of  the  Jews,  were  necessary.  They  form,  indeed,  a  stage 
through  which,  in  any  natural  process  of  development, 
religion  must  pass.  At  first  it  is  supposed  that  the 
Spirits  actually  eat  the  food  oflered  to  them.  Soon, 
however,  it  would  be  observed  that  animals  sacrificed 
did  not  disappear;  and  the  natural  explanation  would 
be  that  the  Spirit  ate  the  spiritual  part  of  the  victim, 
leaving  the  grosser  portion  to  his  devout  worshipper. 
Thus  the  Limboos,  near  Darjeeling,  eat  their  sacrifices, 
dedicating,  as  they  forcibly  express  it,  '  the  life-breath 

*  to  the  gods,  the  flesh  to  ourselves.'  ^ 

So  also,  as  Sir  G.  Grey  tells  us,  the  New  Zealand 
fiEiiries,  when  Te  Kanawa  gave  them  his  jewels,  carried 
oflF  the  shadows  only,  not  caring  for  the  earthly  sub- 
stance.'    In   Guinea,   according  to  Bosman,  *the  idol 

*  hath  only  the  blood,  because  they  like  the  flesh  very 

*  well  themselves.'  *  In  other  cases  the  idols  were 
smeared  with  the  blood,  while  the  devotees  feasted  on 
the  flesh.  The  Ostyaks,  when  they  kill  an  animal,  rub 
some  of  the  blood  on  the  mouths  of  their  idols.  Even 
this  seems  at  length  to  be  replaced  in  some  cases,  as  Mr. 


^  pMlm  L  *  Bosman.    Pinkerton's  Vo}  agrs, 

*  Campbell,  in  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.,  vol.  zvi.  p.  531.    Astley's  Collection 
^.S.,  ToL  vii.  p.  153.  of  Voyages,  vol.  ii.  p.  97. 

•  Polynesian  Mythology,  p.  294. 


Sa  SAOUFICES  EATEN. 

Tjlor  kss  si^gested,  by  red  {Munt.  Thus,  the  sacred 
5<oDe^  in  Locli^  ms  ColoDel  F(H*be8  Leslie  has  shown,  are 
frajoe^iiy  cnttmoited  with  red.'     So  also  m  GoDgo  it 

rr  u>  danb  the  fetiches  with  red  eyeiy  new 


Of  t2»e  groit  otfcrings  of  food  among  the  Feejeeans, 
UilfiuBs^^  'natiTe  bdief  i^portions  merely  the 
Ukereof  to  the  gods,  who  are  described  as  being 
earns:  the  substance  is  consumed  by  the 


la  Madigascar  *  in  alinoat  all  cases  the  worshippers 
"^  »i«i  i«>  haTi^  feasted  on  the  flesh.'  ^ 

GrftdhsiDT.  indeed*  it  otxnes  to  be  a  necessary  por- 
t»n  <€  the  cer«Dony  that  the  victim  shoold  be  eaten 
bj  dioise  present.  Thus,  in  India,^  when  the  sacrifice 
"  b  oiner«  the  priest  comes  out,  and  distributes  part  of 
"  die  arifezies  which  have  been  offSsred  to  the  idols. 
"  llLk  is  nev-eiTed  as  holy,  and  is  eaten  immediately.' 

Ellii  ^  sieniioos  an  indication  of  this  in  Tahiti,  when 
husian  ^dkrridces  prevailed*  but  cannibalism  was  aban- 
dooevl.  The  priest  handed  a  portion  of  the  victim  to 
ihje  kin^*  *  who  raised  it  to  his  mouth  as  if  desirous  to 
*  e;jit  it/  but  th^i  handed  it  to  an  attendant.  Am<Mig 
the  Redskins.*  at  the  feast  held  when  the  hunting 
s^^tison  Wotxs^  the  victim  *  must  be  all  eaten  and  nothing 
'  Ie:\/      It  is  remarkable  that   among  the   Algonkins 


-  S<^  &Y  ivtuK^  E*riT  Rae«M  of  *  DuboLs  The  People  of  India,  p. 

S.v5iAai,  Tv>L  iL  p.  4^     '  401. 

'  Sn«  «»^«  (w  *  Polrneeuan  ReeeaicheA,  voL  iu 

*  K:;i  Asd  tW  FijUzidk  toL  L  p.  p^  1?14. 

:W;l.     $^  Also  p.  ±J3L  '  Scho^acmft  5  Indiim  Tribe^  vol 

*  SibiDNw    Madagwcar   uid    its  iii.  p.  61.      Tanners  Namdie,  p. 
IV>p)«,  p,  *!a  287. 


0NFU8I0N  OF  THE  8AGBIFIGE  AND  THE  DEITY.     363 

nothcr  rule  at  the  same  feast  is  that  not  a  bone  of  the 
ictim  must  be  broken.^ 

In  many  cases  a  curious  confusion  arises  between 
le  victim  and  the  deity,  and  the  former  is  worshipped 
efore  it  is  sacrificed  and  eaten.  Thus  in  ancient 
Igypt,  Apis,  the  victim,  was  also  regarded  as  the  God,^* 
ad  Iphigenia  was  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  same  as 
Lrtemis.^ 

In  Mexico*  at  a  certain  period  of  the  year  the  priest 
f  Quetzalcoatl  made  an  image  of  the  Deity,  of  meal 
dxed  with  infants'  blood,  and  then,  after  many  im- 
ressive  ceremonies,  killed  the  image  by  shooting  it  with 
1  arrow,  and  tore  out  the  heart,  which  was  eaten  by 
16  king,  while  the  rest  of  the  body  was  distributed 
nong  the  people,  every  one  of  whom  was  most  anxious 
>  procure  a  piece  to  eat,  however  small. 

The  great  yearly  sacrifice  in  honour  of  Tezcatlipoca 
HB  also  very  remarkable.  Some  beautiful  youth, 
loally  a  war  captive,  was  chosen  as  the  victim.  For 
whole  year  he  was  treated  and  worshipped  as  a  god. 
Then  he  went  out  he  was  attended  by  a  numerous 
ain  of  pages,  and  the  crowd  as  he  passed  prostrated 
lemselves  before  him,  and  did  him  homage  as  the  im- 
^nsonation  of  the  good  Deity,  Everything  he  could 
iah  was  provided  for  him,  and  at  the  commencement 
*  the  last  month  four  beautiful  girls  were  allotted  to 
m  as  wives.  Finally,  when  the  fatal  day  arrived,  he 
B0  placed  at  the  head  of  a  solemn  procession,  taken  to 
le  temple,  and  after  being  sacrificed  with  much  cere- 

1  Tanner's  Narrative,  p.  105.  158. 

•  Cox'e  Manual  of  Mytholojry,  p.  *  See  Muller,  Ge«.  d.  Amer.  Urr. 

S.  p.  005.    Wuttke,  Qes.  der  Menscb, 

»  Cox'i  Manual  of  MyUiology,  p.  vol.  i.  p.  314. 

A  A 


354  WORSHIP  OF  THE  8ACBIFI0E. 

mony  and  every  token  of  respect,  he  was  eaten  by  tie 

priests  and  chiefs.^ 

Again,  among  the  Khonds^  of  Central  India  human 

sacrifices  prevailed  until  quite  lately.  *  A  stout  stake 
is  driven  into  the  soil,  and  to  it  the  victim  is  fastened, 
seated,  and  anointed  with  ghee,  oil,  and  turmeric, 
decorated  with  flowers,  and  worshipped  during  the  day 
by  the  assembly.  At  nightfall  the  licentious  revelry 
is  resumed,  and  on  the  third  morning  the  victim  gets 
some  milk  to  drink,  when  the  presiding  priest  implores 
the  goddess  to  shower  her  blessings  on  the  people, 
that  they  may  increase  and  multiply,  prosperity  attend 
their  cattle  and  poultry,  fertility  their  fields,  and  hap- 
piness to  the  people  generally.  The  priest  recounts 
the  origin  and  advantage  of  the  rite,  as  previously 
detailed,  and  concludes  by  stating  that  the  goddess 
has  been  obeyed  and  the  people  assembled. 

'  Other  softening  expressions  are  recited  to  excite 
the  compassion  of  the  multitude.  After  the  mock 
ceremony,  nevertheless,  the  victim  is  taken  to  the 
grove  where  the  sacrifice  is  to  be  carried  out;  and, 
to  prevent  resistance,  the  bones  of  the  arms  and  legs 
are  broken,  or  the  victim  drugged  with  opium  or 
datura,  when  the  janni  wounds  his  victim  -with  his 
axe.  This  act  is  followed  up  by  the  crowd;  a  number 
now  press  forward  to  obtain  a  piece  of  his  flesh,  and 
in  a  moment  he  is  stripped  to  the  bones.' 

An    almost   identical   custom  prevails   among  the 

*  MuUer,/oc.  ciV.,  p.  017.  Prescott,  '  Dr.  Shortt,  Trans.  Ethn.  Sot, 

loo,  cit.f  vol.  i.  p.  5.     Rites  and  Laws      N.S  ,   vol.   vi.  p.  273.     ^Campbell, 
of  tho  Incas,  p.  28.  Wild  Tribes  of  Khondiston,  p.  IIS. 


EATING  THE  8A0BIFIGE.  S&B 

Marimos,  a  tribe  of  South  Africa  much  resembling  the 
Bechuanas.     We  find  amongst  them,  says  Arbousset, 

*  the  practice  of  human  sacrifices  on  the  occasion  of  a 

*  ceremony  which  they  call  meseletso  oa  mabele,  or  the 

*  boiling  of  the  com.     They  generally   select   for  this 

*  sacrifice  a  young  man,  stout,  but  of  smaU  stature. 

*  They  secure  him,  it  may  be  by  violence,  or  it  may  be 

*  by  intoxicating  him  with  yoala.     They  then  lead  him 
^  into  the  fields,  and  sacrifice  him  in  the  midst  of  the 

*  fields,  according  to   their  own  expression,  for  seed. 

*  His  blood,  after  having  been  coagulated  by  the  rays 

*  of  the  sun,  is  burned  along  with  the  frontal  bone,  the 
^  flesh  attached  to  it,  and  the  brain.     The  ashes  are 

*  then  scattered  over  the  lands  to  fertilise  them,  and  the 

*  remainder  of  the  body  is  eaten.'  ^  ' 

In  some  parts  of  Africa  *  eating  the  fetish'  is  a 
solemn  ceremony,  by  which  women  swear  fidelity  to 
their  husbands,  men  to  their  friends.  On  a  marriage  in 
Issini,  the  parties  *  eat  the  fetish  together,  in  token  of 

*  friendship,  and  as  an  assurance  of  the  woman's  fidelity 

*  to  her  husband.'^    In  taking  an  oath  also,  the  same 
ceremony  is  observed.     To  know,  says   Loyer,  *the 

*  truth  from  any  negro,  you  need  only  mix  something 

*  in  a  little  water,  and,  steeping  a  bit  of  bread,  bid  him 

*  eat  or  drink  that  fetish  as  a  sign  of  the  truth.     If  the 

*  thing  be  so,  he  will  do  it  freely;  but  if  otherwise,  he 

*  will  not  touch  it,  believing  he  should  die  on  the  spot 

*  if  he  swore  falsely.     Their  way  is  to  rasp  or  grate  a 

*  little  of  their  fetish  in  water,  or  on  any  edible,  and  so 

*  put  it  in  their  mouth  without  swallowing  it.' 

»  Tour  to  the  N.E.  of  the  Cape  •  Loyer,  in  Aatley'a  Collection 

of  Good  Hope,  p.  68.  of  Voyages,  vol.  ii.  pp.  456,  441. 

A  42 


356  EATING  THE  SACRIFICE. 

The  sacrifices  were,  as  a  general  rule,  not  eaten  by 
all  indiscriminately.  In  Feejee  they  were  confined  to 
the  old  men  and  priests;  women  and  young  men  being 
excluded  from  any  share. 

In  many  cases,  the  priests  gradually  established  a 
claim  to  the  whole ;  a  result  which  could  not  fail  to  act 
as  a  considerable  stimulus  to  the  practice  of  sacrifice. 
It  also  affected  the  character  of  the  worship.  Thus,  as 
Bosman  tells  us,  the  priests  encouraged  offerings  to  the 
Serpent  rather  than  to  the  Sea,  because,  in  the  latter 
case,  as  he  expresses  it,  *  there  happens  no  remainder  to 

*  be  left  for  them/ 

As  already  mentioned,  the  feeling  which  has  led  to 
the  sacrifice  of  animals  would  naturally  culminate  in 
that  of  men  So  ^natural,  indeed,  does  the  idea  of 
human  sacrifice  appear  to  the  human  mind  in  this  stage, 
that  we  meet  with  it  in  various  nations  all  over  the 
world :  and  it  is  unjust  to  regard  it,  with  Prescott,'  as 
evidence  of  fioiulish  passions:  on  the  contrary,  it  indi- 
cates deep  and  earnest  religious  feeling,  perverted  by  an 
em>noous  conception  of  the  Divine  character. 

Human  sacrifices  occurred  in  Guinea,-  and  Burton* 
55!iw  *  at  IxMiin  citv  a  voun<r  woman  lashed  to  a  scaffold- 

*  ing  ujv^n  the  summit  of  a  tall  blasteil  tree,  and  being 

*  devoured!  by  the  turkey-buzzards.     The    people   de- 

*  olarcvl  it  to  Iv  a  *•  fetish  '*  or  charm  for  bringing  rain.' 
I  haw  alreadv  mentioned  the  existence  of  human 
sjiorifioe  amonir  the  Marimos  of  South  Africa. 

OAptain  Cook  describes  human  sacrifices  as  prevalent 


•  Ui»t«.>orT  of  Mtxicv\  r.^.  L  p.      vol.  iii.  p.  11.*^ 

<^  '  .Ybe«)l{utii,  vol.  i.  p.  10. 

*  A5t]«T**  CiUWcuco  of  VoTag«i«y 


li:- 


M... 


■i  •  ■ 


■■    ■.'•-. 


i,'»^.i    .  l.^:'  ■■', 


r 


I    t  ' 


',* 


I 


r  I 


I  I  ' 


I 


HUMAN  SACRIFICE.  357 

among  the  islanders  of  the  Pacific/  and  especially  in 
the  Sandwich  group.^  He  particularly  describes  ^  the 
case  of  a  sacrifice  offered  by  Towha,  cliief  of  the  district 
of  Tettaha,  in  Tahiti,  to  propitiate  the  Deity  on  the 
occasion  of  an  expedition  against  Eimeo  (PL  IV.) ;  and 
mentions  that,  during  the    ceremony,   *a  kingfisher, 

*  making  a  noise  m  the  trees,  Otoo  (the  king)  turned 

*  to  me,  saying,  "  That  is  the  Eatood,"  i.e.  Deity.'  War 
captives  were  firequently  sacrificed  in  Brazil. 

In  Madagascar  himian  sacrifices  seem  to  have  pre- 
vailed in  the  province  of  Vangaidrano,  but  not  elsewhere/ 

Various  nations  in  India,  besides  the  Khonds,  who 
have  been  already  mentioned,  used  to  offer  up  human 
sacrifices  on  extraordinary  occasions;  but  so  recently 
as  1865-66  such  sacrifices  were  resorted  to  in  hopes  of 
averting  the  famine;^  and  even  now  in  some  places, 
though  the  actual  sacrifice  is  no  longer  permitted,  they 
make  human  figures  of  flour,  paste,  or  clay,  and  then 
cut  off^  the  heads  in  honour  of  their  gods;  *  just  as  the 
Romans  used  to  throw  dolls  into  the  Tiber  as  a  substi* 
tute  for  human  sacrifices. 

Many  cases  of  human  sacrifice  are  mentioned  in 
ancient  history.  The  Carthaginians,  after  their  defeat 
of  Agathocles,  burnt  some  of  their  captives  as  a  sacrifice ; 
the  Assyrians  offered  human  sacrifices  to  the  god  Nergal. 

Although  resorted  to  on  various  critical  occasions 
by  the  Greeks,  human  sacrifice  apjiears  to  have  been 
foreign  to  the  mythology,  and  opposed  to  the  spirit  of 

»  Cook,  Voyage  to  the  Pacific,  People,  p.  300. 
▼oL  iL  p.  41.  ^  IIuDter,  Annala  of  Hural  Ben- 

»  Loc.  ciL,  voL  iil  p.  101.  gal,  18U8,  p.  128. 
•  Loc.  cit,f  vol.  ii.  p.  30.  ^  Dubois,  ioc,  ciL,  p.  490. 

^  Sibree,    Madagaacar   and    ita 


358  EUBOPE. 

that  people.  Human  sacrifices  are  connected  with  a 
more  earnest  and  melancholy  theology.  In  Roman 
history  they  occur  far  more  frequently,  and  even  down 
to  a  late  date.  In  the  year  46  B.C.,  Caesar  sacrificed  two 
soldiers  on  the  altar  in  the  Campus  Martius.^  Augustas 
is  said  to  have  sacrificed  a  maiden  named  Gregoria.* 
Even  Trajan,  when  Antioch  was  rebuilt,  sacrificed 
Calliope,  and  placed  her  statue  iii  the  theatre.*  Under 
Commodus,  and  later  emperors,  human  sacrifices  ap- 
pear to  have  been  more  common  ;  and  a  gladiator 
appears  to  have  been  sacrificed  to  Jupiter  Latialis  even 
in  the  time  of  Constantine.*  Yet  these  awful  rites  had 
been  expressly  forbidden  B.C.  95 ;  and  Pliny  asserts 
that  in  his  time  they  were  never  openly  solemnised.^ 

In  Northern  Europe  human  sacrifices  were  not  un- 
common. The  Yarl  of  the  Orkneys  is  recorded  to  have 
sacrificed  the  son  of  the  King  of  N,orway  to  Odin  in  the 
year  893.^  In  993,  Hakon  Yarl  sacrificed  his  own  son 
to  the  gods.  Domald,  King  of  Sweden,  was  burnt  by 
his  people  as  a  sacrifice  to  Odin,  in  consequence  of  a 
severe  famine.^  At  Upsala  was  a  celebrated  temple, 
round  which  an  eye-witness  assured  Adam  of  Bremen 
that  he  had  seen  the  corpses  of  seventy-two  victims 
hanging  up  at  one  time.® 

In  Russia,  as  in  Scandinavia,  human  sacrifices  con- 
tinued down  to  the  introduction  of  Christianity.  In 
Mexico  and  Peru  they  seem  to  have  been  peculiarly 
numerous.    Miiller^has  suggested  that  this  may  have 

'  Dio,  II.  II ,  xliii.  24.  p.  81.     T<>rf:vus,  Hi.'*.  Ror.  Norvegi- 

'  Malnlas^  Chron.,  p.  221.  carum,  vol.  ii.  p.  52. 

'  /6k/.,  p.  275.  "  Snom',  vol.  i.  p.  T)!?. 

*  Porphyry,  De  Abstin.,  ii.  5(5.  "  Adam  of  Bremen,  vol.  iv.  p.  27. 

*  Nat  His.,  XXX.  1, 12.  »  Geschichte  der  Americaniichen 

*  Snorre,   Ileimskringla,  vol.  ii.  Urreligionen,  p.  23. 


AMEBIOA.    THE  JEWS,  359 

partly  arisen  from  the  fact  that  these  nations  were  not 
softened  by  the  possession  of  domestic  animals.  Various 
estimates  have  been  made  of  the  nmnber  of  human  vic- 
tims annually  sacrificed  in  the  Mexican  temples. 
Miiller  thinks  2,500  is  a  moderate  estimate;  and  in 
one  year  it  appears  to  have  exceeded  100,000. 

Among  the  Jews  we  find  a  system  of  animal  sacri- 
fices on  a  great  scale,  and  symbols  of  human  sacrifices, 
which  can,  I  think,  only  be  understood  on  the  hypo- 
thesis that  the  latter  were  once  usual.  The  case  of 
Jephtha's  daughter  is  generally  looked  upon  as  quite 
exceptional,*  but  the  twenty-eighth  and  twenty-ninth 
verses  of  the  twenty-seventh  chapter  of  Leviticus  ap- 
pear to  indicate  that  human  sacrifices  were  at  one  time 
habitual  among  the  Jews. 

I  do  not  here  refer  to  the  human  sacrifices  at  burials, 
because  these  are  not,  strictly  speaking,  of  a  religious 
character,  but  intended  to  supply  the  deceased  with 
wives  or  slaves  in  the  land  of  spirits. 

The  lower  savages  have  no  Temples  or  sacred  build- 
ings. Throughout  the  New  World  there  was  no  such 
thing  as  a  temple,  excepting  among  the  semi -civilised 
races  of  Central  America  and  Peru. 

The  Stiens  of  Cambodia  '  have  neither  priest  nor 

*  temples."     We  should   seek   in   vain,  says   Casalis,^ 

*  from  the  extremity  of  the  southern  promontory  of 
^  Africa  to  the  country  far  beyond  the  banks  of  the 

*  Zambesi,  for  anything  like  the  pagodas  of  India,  the 

*  maraes  of  Polynesia,  or  the  fetish  huts  of  Nigritia.' 

1    See  Kalbcli,  CommeDtary  on  '  Mouhot's  Travelfl  in  the  Central 

the  Old  Testament,  Lev.,  pt  i.  p.      Parts  of  Indo-China,  voL  i.  p.  250. 
400.  '  The  Basutos,  p.  237. 


S60  TEMPLES. 

The  people  of  Madagascar,  as  we  are  informed  by 
Drury,^  who  resided  fifteen  years  among  them,  although 
they  have  settled  abodes,  keep  large  herds  of  cattle,  and 
are  diligent  agriculturists,  '  have  no  temples,  no  taber- 

*  nacles,  or  groves  for  the  public  performance  of  their 

*  divine  worship;    neither  have  they  solemn  fasts,  or 

*  festivals,  or  set  days  or  times;  nor  priests  to  do  it  for 

*  them.' 

The    Toorkmans,     says     Burnes,^     *  are     without 

*  mosques/      The    Micronesians,   according    to   Hale,' 

*  have  neither  temples,  images,  nor  sacrifices/  The 
Khasias*  '  have  no  temples.'  The  same  is  the  case 
with  the  Ostyaks  and  other  savage  races  of  Siberia.* 

Professor  Nilsson  was,  I  believe,  the  first  to  point 
out  that  certain  races  buried  the  dead  in  their  houses, 
and  that  the  chambered  tumuli  of  Northern  Europe  are 
probably  copies  of  the  dwellings  then  used ;  sometimes 
perhaps  the  actual  dwellings  themselves.  We  know 
that  as  the  power  of  chiefs  increased,  their  tombs  became 
larger  and  more  magnificent;  and  Mr.  Fergusson  has 
well  shown  how,  in  India,  the  tumulus  has  developed 
into  the  temple. 

In  some  cases,  as,  for  instance,  in  India,  it  is  far 
from  easy  to  distinguish  between  a  group  of  stone  goiis 
and  a  sacred  fane.  In  fact,  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
very  same  stones  are  by  some  supposed  to  be  actual 
deities,  while  others  more  advanced  regard  them  as 
sacred  only  because  devoted  to  religious  purposes.  Some 

*  Adventurus  of   Robert  Drury,  *  Godwin-AusU'ii,   Jour,   of  the 

p.  10.  Anthr.  Inst.,  1871,  p.  1:K). 

'  Travels  into  IJokhora,  vol.  ii.  p.  ^  Miiller,  De«.  de  toutes  les  NnL 

iW).  de  lEmp.   Kusse,    Pt.   II.    p.    10.5, 

'  U.S.  Explor.  Expod.  pp.  77, 84.  Pt  III.  p.  141. 


Si      Br  i  1 


w 


^ 


1  I 


•      ll 


.  ,.    ■  . 


i     •     I 


:  ::  :t^ 


•      I 


1) 


»     ■ 


,        •'  .     ' 


I 


I 
I  I 


■    \'t 


,      /      ■...,,'...       ;    i  ':•       .••.•  'i 


•  1     \y\''      f  '\.  .  .  -I    '    '  ! 

■.     r    I"'  .  ■   ■;       "Jr.'':      **   :  *  • 


.  • » 


I  > 


".        »  .l>    .     •    *■.    *»''      .    . 


»•"■    I  ■  1  -iN         'hi.' 

■■■■'■■  !■•       •      * 

*•     If 

:r.  =     I-  < 


'  r   ■  •>  ,<     1 


•    "I     ^    i''    i  *    '. 


•      r  .  •!  -I 


..» 


* 


."."    "    t* 


?'i    .. 


•      •  •      I 


•  • 


•S      /.' 


Jl'Il' 


M..  1..  •. 


PBIE8T8,  861 

of  the  ruder  Hindostan  tribes  actually  worship  upright 
stones;  but  Colonel  Forbes  Leslie  regards  the  sacred 
stones  represented  in  PL  III.  as  a  place  of  worship, 
rather  than  as  actual  deities;  and  this  is  at  any  rate 
the  case  with  another  group  similarly  painted,  which 
he  observed  near  Andlee,  also  in  the  Dekhan,  and 
which  is  peculiarly  interesting  from  its  resemblance  to 
those  stone  circles  of  our  own  country ;  of  which  Stone- 
henge  is  (see  Frontispiece)  the  grandest  representative. 
Fig.  18,  p.  248,  represents^  a  religious  dance  as  prac- 
tised by  the  Redskins  of  Virginia.  Here,  also,  as  already 
mentioned,  we  see  a  sacred  circle  of  stones,  differing 
from  those  of  our  own  country,  and  of  India,  only  in 
having  a  human  head  rudely  carved  on  each  stone. 

The  lower  races  of  men  have  no  Priests,  properly  so 
called.  Many  passages,  indeed,  may  be  quoted  which, 
at  first  sight,  appear  to  negative  this  assertion.  If, 
however,  we  examine  more  closely  the  true  functions 
of  these  so-called  '  priests,'  we  shall  easily  satisfy  our- 
selves that  the  term  is  a  misnomer,  and  that  wizards 
only  are  intended.  Without  temples  and  sacrifices 
there  cannot  be  priests. 

According  to  Drury,  there  were  no  priests  in  Mada- 
gascar; more  recently,  however,  the  guardians  of  the 
idols  had  usurped  priestly  functions,  and  even  claimed 
for  themselves  immunities  from  legal  consequences, 
akin  to  the  custom  of  privilege  of  clergy,  which  sur- 
vived until  so  recently  among  ourselves.^ 

Even  the  New  Zealanders'  had  '  no  regular  pries t- 

»  MoBUw  dee  Sauv.  Am4it.,  voL      People,  p.  400, 
iL  p.  136.  •  Yate,  p.  146. 

*  Sibrec,    Madagascar    and    its 


3G2  MYSTERY  MEN. 

*hood/  Mr,  Gladstone^  observes  that  the  priest  was 
not,  *  as  such,  a  significant  personage  in  Greece  at  any 

*  period,  nor  had  the  priest  of  any  one  place  or  deity,  so 
'  far  as  we  know,  any  organic  connection  with  the  priest 
'  of  any  other ;  so  that  if  there  were  priests,  yet  there 
'  was  not  a  priesthood.' 

Miiller  again  expresses  himself  in  very  similar 
language.  *  That  there  ever  was  in  Greece,'  he  says, 
'  a  priesthood,  strictly  speaking,  in  contradistinction  to 
'  a  laity,  is  a  point  which,  m  my  opinion,  cannot  at  all 

*  be  established/  '^ 

The  progress  seems  to  be  that  at  first  all  men  were, 
in  this  respect  at  least,  alike.  After  a  while  some 
became  more  celebrated  than  others  as  sorcerers  and 
diviners.  These  persons  gradually  associated  them- 
selves into  a  special  class  or  caste,  and  assumed  also 
the  functions  of  doctors  and  priests.  These  qualities 
by  degrees  assumed  more  and  more  importance.  It  is, 
therefore,  in  some  cases,  diificult  to  say  whether  the 

*  medicine  men,'  or  '  mystery  men,'  are  doctors  or 
priests.  For  instance,  among  the  Kaffirs  there  are 
certain  persons  known  as  '  Isanusi,'  *  Intonga,'  or, 
'  Igqira,'  which  terms,   says  Mr.  Warner,^  *  I  choose 

*  to  translate  by  the  word  ''  priest,"  in  preference  to 
'  that  of  "  doctor,"   the   term  generally  employed  by 

*  Europeans  to  designate  this  class  of  persons/ 

An  important  part  of  their  duty  consists  in  regulat- 
ing the  weather.  '  This,'  says  Mr.  Warner,*  '  is  another 
'  of  the   heathenish   vanities  in  which  the   benighted 

^  Juventus  Mundi,  p.  181.  ^  Kaffir  Laws  and  CuAtoma,  p.  SO. 

'  Scientific  System  of  Mythology,  *  J^m?.,  p.  104. 

p.  188. 


THE  CONDITION  OF  THE  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.     363 

*  Kaffirs  put  their  trust.   They  firmly  believe  that  some 

*  of  their  priests  have  the  power  to  cause  it  to  rain/ 

I  have  already  pointed  out  (ante^  p.  226)  the  great 
difference  between  the  belief  in  ghosts  and  in  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul.  Some  races  entirely  disbelieve 
in  the  survival  of  the  soul  after  the  death  of  the  body, 
and  even  those  which  are  more  advanced,  often  differ 
from  us  very  much  in  their  views ;  in  fact  the  belief  in 
a  universal,  independent,  and  endless  existence  is  con- 
fined to  the  very  highest  races  of  men.  The  New 
Zealanders  believe  that  a  man  who  is  eaten  as  well  as 
killed,  is  thus  destroyed  both  soul  and  body.^  Even, 
however,  those  who  have  proper  mterment  are  far  from 
secure  of  reaching  the  happy  regions  in  the  land  of 
spirits.  The  road  to  these  is  long  and  dangerous,  and 
many  a  soul  perishes  by  the  way. 

In  the  Tonga  Islands  the  chiefs  are  regarded  as  im- 
mortal, the  Tooas  or  common  people  as  mortal;  with 
reference  to  the  intermediate  class,  or  Mooas,  there  is  a 
difference  of  opinion. 

A  friend  of  Mr.  Lang's  ^  '  tried  long  and  patiently  to 

*  make  a  very  intelligent  docile  Australian  black  under- 
'  stand  his  existence  without  a  body,  but  the   black 

*  never  could  keep  his  countenance,  and  generally  made 

*  an  excuse  to  get  away.     One  day  the  teacher  watched 
'  and   found   that   he   went   to  have   a  hearty  fit  of 

*  laughter  at  the  absurdity  of  the  idea  of  a  man  living 
'  and  going  about  without  arms,  legs,  or  mouth  to  eat ; 

*  for  a  long  time  he  could  not  believe  that  the  gentle- 
^  man  was  serious,  and  when  he  did  realise  it,  the  more 

*  Taylor,  New  Zealand  and  its  '  The  Aborigines  of  Australia,  p. 

p.  101.  31. 


364  SURVIVAL  OF  THE  SOUL 

*  serious  the  teacher  was  the  more  ludicrous  the  whole 
'  affair  appeared  to  the  black.' 

The  resurrection  of  the  body,  as  preached  by  the 
missionaries,^  appeared  to  the  Tahitians  *  astounding ' 
and  '  incredible ; '  and  *  as  the  subject  was   more  fre- 

*  quently  brought  under  their  notice  in  public  discourse, 

*  or  in  reading  the  Scriptures,  and  their  minds  were 

*  more  attentively  exercised  upon  it  in  connection  with 
'  their  ancestry,  themselves,  and  their  descendants,  it 

*  appeared  invested  with  more  than  ordinary  difficulty, 
'  bordering,  to  then*  apprehension,  on  impossibility.' 

Although  the  Feejeeans  believe  that  almost  every- 
thing has  a  spirit,  few  spirits  are  immortal :  the  road  to 
Mbulu  is  long,  and  beset  with  so  many  difficulties,  that 
after  all '  few  attain  to  inunortality.'  ^ 

We  find  a  very  similar  belief  also  among  the  Es- 
quimaux '  and  the  Kaffirs.* 

As  regards  Central  India,  Colonel  Daltoii  says,*  '  I 
'  do  not  think  that  the  present  generation  of  Kols  have 
'  any  notion  of  a  heaven  or  hell  that  may  not   be  traced 

*  to  Brahminical  or  Christian  teaching.     The  old  idea 

*  is  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  become  *'  bhoots/'  spirits, 
'  but  no  thought  of  reward  or  punishment  is  connected 
'  with  the  change.      When  a  Ho  swears,  the  oath  has 

*  no  reference  whatever  to  a  future  state.      He  pravs 

*  that  if  he  speak  not  the  truth  he  may  be  afflicted  in 

*  this  world   with  the  loss  of  all — health,  wealth,  wife, 

*  Ellis*   Polynesian    Researches,  quoted  in  Tylor's  Primitive  Cultuiv, 

vol.  ii.  p.  106.  vol.  ii.  p.  20. 

"  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  vol.  i.  p.  *  Callaway,  Amazulu   ReligioD. 

247.     Seemann,  Mission  to  Viti,  p.  p.  G5^. 
400.  »  Traiw.  Ethn.  Soc.,  1807,  p.  38. 

'  Crantz's    Greenland,    p.    250, 


WITHOUT  DOIOETALITY.  365 

*  children ;    that  he   may   sow  without   reaping,    and 

*  finally  may  be  devoured  by  a  tiger ;  but  he  swears 
'  not  by  any  happiness  beyond  the  grave.     He  has  in 

*  his  primitive  state  no  such  hope ;   and  I  believe  that 

*  most  Indian  aborigines,  though  they  may  have  some 

*  vague  ideas  of  continuous  existence,  will  be  found 
'  equally  devoid  of  original  notions  in  regard  to  the 

*  judgment  to  come.'  'j 

In  his  *  Descriptive  Ethnology  of  Bengal '  he  makes 
a  similar  statement  with  reference  to  the  Chalikatas, 
another  of  the  hill  tribes,  declaring  that  they  '  utterly 

*  rejected  all  notions  of  a  fiiture  state.     The  spirits  they 

*  propitiated   were,   they  declared,  mortal   like   them- 

*  selves.'  ^  The  Buihers,^  Oraons,^  and  Juangs  *  also 
held  very  similar  views.     Again,  *  all  enquirers  on  the 

*  subject  appear  to  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that 

*  the  Santals  have  no  belief  in  a  future  state.'  ^ 

Among  the  Micronesians,  according  to  Hale,^  the 
souls  of  those,   *only  those,  who  are  tattooed  (being 

*  chiefly  persons  of  free  birth)  can  expect  to  reach  the 

*  Kainakaki.     All  others  are  intercepted  on  their  way, 

*  and  devoured  by  a  monstrous  giantess,  called  Baine.^ 
Some  of  the  Guinea  negroes  considered  that  the  soul  of 
the  departed  was  subjected  to  an  examination  as  to 
their  conduct  during  life,  and  if  found  wanting  *  his 
'  god  plunges  him  into  the  river,  where  he  is  drowned, 

*  and  buried  in  eternal  oblivion.'  ^ 

Even  when  the  spirit  is  supposed  to  survive  the 


»  Tnmt.  EthD.  Soc.,  1867,  p.  21.  *  Loc,  cit,,  p.  218. 

•  D«.  Ethn  of  Bengal,  p.  ia3.  •  U.S.  Expl.  Exped.,  p.  99. 
*'Loc.  cU,f  p.  257.  '  Bosman.    Pinkerton's  Vojagea, 

*  Loe.  ciLf  p.  157.  vol.  xvL  p.  401. 


366  HEAVEN  UPON  EARTH. 

body,  the  condition  of  souls  after  death  is  not  at  first 
considered  to  differ  materially  fi*om  that  during  life. 
Heaven  is  merely  a  distant  part  of  earth.     Thus  the 

*  seats   of  happiness  are  represented  by  some   Hindu 

*  writers  to  be  vast  mountains  on  the  north  of 
'  India/  1 

The  Haitians  considered  that  the  paradise  of  the 
dead  was  situated  in  the  lovely  western  valleys  of  their 
island/^ 

Again,  in  Tonga  the  souls  are  supposed  to  go  to 
Bolotoo,  a  large  island  to  the  north-west,  well  stocked' 
with  all  kinds  of  useful  and  ornamental  plants,  '  always 
bearing  the  richest  fruits  and  the  most  beautiful 
flowers,  according  to  their  respective  natures  ;  that 
when  these  fruits  or  flowers  are  plucked,  others  im- 
mediately occupy  their  place  .  .  .  The  island  of  Bolo- 
too is  supposed  to  be  so  far  off  as  to  render  it  danger- 
ous for  their  canoes  to  attempt  going  there ;  and  it 
is  supposed,  moreover,  that  even  if  they  were  to  suc- 
ceed in  reachmg  so  far,  unless  it  happened  to  be  the 
particular  will  of  the  gods,  they  would  be  sure  to 
miss  it/ 

They  believe,  however,  that  on  one  occasion  a  canoe 
actually  reached  Bolotoo.  The  crew  landed,  but  when 
they  attempted  to  touch  anything,  *  they  could  no  more 
'  lay  hold  of  it  than  if  it  had  been  a  shadow.*  Conse- 
quently hunger  soon  overtook  them,  and  forced  them 
to  return,  which  they  fortunately  succeeded  in  doing, 

A  curious  notion,  already  referred  to,  is  the  belief 
that   each  man  has   several  souls.     It  is   common  to 

*  Dubois,  he.  cit.j  p.  485.  ii.  p.  56. 

^  Tylor'a  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  '  Mariner,  loc,  ciLj  voL  iL  p.  108. 


BELIEF  IN  A  FUTUBE  LIFE.  367 

various  parts  of  America,^  and  exists  in  Madagascar  as 
well  as  among  the  Khonds  of  Hindostan.  It  apparently 
arises  from  the  idea  that  each  pulse  is  the  seat  of  a 
different  life.  It  also  derives  an  appearance  of  proba- 
bility from  the  inconsistencies  of  behaviour  to  which 
savages  are  so  prone,  The  Feejeeans  also  believed  that 
each  man  has  two  spirits.^  Among  the  ancient  Greeks 
and  Romans  there  are  some  indications  of  the  existence 
of  a  similar  belief.^ 

The  belief  in  a  future  state,  if  less  elevated  than  our 
own,  is  singularly  vivid  among  some  barbarous  races. 
Thus  we  are  told  that  among  the  Ancient  Britons 
money  was  habitually  lent  on  what  may  strictly  be 
termed  '  postobits' — promises  to  pay  in  another  world, 
and  it  is  said  that  the  same  thing  occurs  even  now  in 
Japan. 

A  striking  mstance  of  undoubting  faith  is  mentioned 
by  Mr.  Tylor.  A  Hindoo  thought  he  had  been  imfairly 
deprived  of  forty  rupees,  whereupon  he  cut  off  his  own 
mother's  head,  with  her  full  consent,  in  order  that  her 
spirit  might  haunt  and  harass  the  man  who  had  taken 
the  money  and  those  concerned  with  him.  * 

The  Feejeeans  believe  that  *  as  they  die,  such  will  be 
*  their  condition  in  another  world ;  hence  their  desire  to 
'  escape  extrepie  infirmity.'  ^  The  way  to  Mbulu,  as 
already  mentioned,  is  long  and  difficult ;  many  always 
perish,  and  no  diseased  or  infirm  person  could  possibly 
succeed  in  surmounting  all  the  dangers  of  the  road. 

1  Tertre's  History  of  the  Caribby  '  Lafitau,  voL  iL  p.  424. 

Islanda,  p.  288.    It  preTaila  also  in  *  Primitive  Culture,  voL  ii.  p. 

Greenland     Miiller,  Qee.  der  Am.  103. 

UxraHgioneo,  p.  66.  ^  F^ji  and  the  Fijians^  toL  i.  p. 

*  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  yol.  i.  p.  183. 
841. 


THE  FUTURE  STATE.  369 

*  and  they  ought  to  put  her  to  death.     On  reaching  the 

*  grave,  the  mother  sat  down,  when  they  all,  including 

*  children,  grandchildren,  relations,  and  friends,  took  an 
'  affectionate  leave  of  her ;   a  rope,   made   of  twisted 

*  tapa,  was  then  passed  twice  around  her  neck  by  her 

*  sons,  who  took  hold  of  it  and  strangled  her;  after 

*  which   she  was  put  in  her  grave,   with  the  usual 

*  ceremonies.'  ^ 

So  general  was  this  custom  that  in  one  town  con- 
taining several  hundred  inhabitants  Captain  Wilkes  did 
not  see  one  man  over  forty  years  of  age,  all  the  old 
people  having  been  buried. 

For  the  same  reason  the  Australians  in  some  cases 
cut  off  the  right  thumb  of  a  dead  foe,  believing  that 
being  thus  *  unable  to  throw  the  spear,  or  to  use  the 

*  dowak  efficiently,  his  spirit  can  do  them  very  little 
'  injur}'.'  *  We  find  also  a  very  similar  belief  among 
some  of  the  negroes.* 

In  Dahome  the  king  sends  constant  messages  to 
hiB  deceased  father,  by  messengers  who  are  killed  for 
the  purpose.*  The  same  firm  belief  which  leads  to  this, 
reconciles  the  messengers  to  their  fate.  They  are  well 
treated  beforehand,  and  their  death,  being  instantaneous, 
is  attended  with  little  pain.  Hence  we  are  assured  that 
they  are  quite  cheerful  and  contented,  and  scarcely 
seem  to  look  on  their  death  as  a  misfortune. 

The  North  American  Indian,  as  Schoolcraft  tells  us, 
has  little  dread  of  death.     '  He  does  not  fear  to  go  to  a 

*  land  which,  all  his  life  long,  he  has  heard  abounds  in 

^  Wilkes'  Exploring  Expedition,  '  Wuttke,    Qes.    der    Mensch. 

eoodensed  edition,  p.  211.  yoL  L  p.  107. 

*  Oldfield,    Traoa.    Etho.    See,  ^  Burton's     Dahome,     toL    IL 

N.a,  Tol.  ilL  p.  287.  p.  25. 

B  B 


OBEATION.  871 

that  Manitu  at  the  beginning  swam  on  the  water,  and 
made  the  earth  out  of  a  grain  of  sand.  He  then  made 
a  man  and  woman  out  of  a  tree.  The  Mingos  and 
Ottawwaws  believe  that  a  rat  brought  up  a  grain  of 
sand  from  the  bottom  of  the  water,  and  thus  produced 
the  land.  The  Crees  ^  had  no  ideas  at  all  as  to  the 
origin  of  the  world. 

Stuhr,  who  was,  as  Miiller  says,  a  good  observer  of 
such  matters,  tells  us  that  the  Siberians  had  no  idea  of 
a  Creator.  When  Burchell  suggested  the  idea  of  crea- 
tion to  the  Bachapin  Kaffirs,  they  *  asserted  that  every- 

*  thing  made  itself,  and  that  trees  and  herbage  grew  by 

*  their  own  will.'  ^  It  also  appears  from  Canon  Calla- 
way's researches  that  the  Zulu  Kaffirs  have  no  notion 
of  creation.  Casalis  makes  the  same  statement:  all 
the   natives,   he   says,    *whom   we  questioned  on  the 

*  subject  have  assured  us  that  it  never  entered  their 

*  heads  that  the  earth  and  sky  might  be  the  work  of  an 

*  Invisible  Being.'  *  The  same  is  also  the  case  with  ihe 
Hottentots. 

The  Australians,  again,  had  no  idea  of  creation. 
According  to  Polynesian  mythology,  heaven  and  earth 
existed  from  the  beginning.*  The  latter,  however,  was 
at  first  covered  by  water,  until  Mawe  drew  up  New 
Zealand  by  means  of  an  enchanted  fish-hook.^  This 
fish-hook  was  made  from  the  jawbone  of  Muri-ranga- 
whenna,  and  is  now  the  cape  forming  the  southern  ex- 
tremity of  Hawkes'  Bay.    The  Tongans  •  and  Samoans  ^ 

*  Franklin's  Journey  to  the  Polar  Shortland,  loc.  cit.,  p.  35. 
Sea,  Tol.  L  p.  143.  •  Ibid.,  p.  45. 

«  Loc.  ciLf  voL  il  p.  550.  •  Mariner,  loc,  at.,  vol.  i.  284. 

»  The  Basutoe,  p.  238.  '  Ilale,  U.S.  Exp.  Exp.  p.  25. 

^  Polynesian    Mythology,  p.  1. 

B  B  2 


PBATEB.  373 

just  ideas  on  the  subject,  probably  derived  from  the 
missionaries. 

The  Kumis  of  Chittagong  believe  that  a  certain 
Deity  made  the  world  and  the  trees  and  the  creeping 
things,  and  lastly  *  he  set  to  work  to  make  one  man  and 
'  one  woman,  forming  their  bodies  of  clay  ;  but  each 
'  night,  on  the  completion  of  his  work,  there  came  a 

*  great  snake,  which,  while  God  was  sleeping,  devoured 
'  the  two  images.'  ^  At  length  the  Deity  created  a  dog, 
which  drove  away  the  snake,  and  thus  the  creation  of 
man  was  accomplished. 

We  cannot  fail  also  to  be  struck  with  the  feet  that 
the  lower  forms  of  religion  are  almost  independent  of 
Prayer.  To  us  prayer  seems  almost  a  necessary  part 
of  religion.  But  it  evidently  involves  a  belief  in  the 
goodness  of  God,  a  truth  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not 
early  recognised. 

Of  the  Hottentots  Kolben  says,  *  It  is  most  certain 

*  they  neither  pray  to  any  one  of  their  deities  nor  utter 

*  a  word  to  any  mortal  concerning  the  condition  of  their 

*  souls  or  a  future  life.'  .  .  .  Even  those  negroes, 
says  Bosman,  Who  have  a  faint  conception  of  a  higher 
Deity,  *  do  not  pray  to  him,  or  offer  any  sacrifices  to 

*  him ;    for  which  they  give  the  following  reasons : — 

*  "  God,"  say  they,  "  is  too  high  exalted  above  us,  and 

*  *'  too  great  to  condescend  so  much  as  to  trouble  him-' 
^  "  self,  or  think  of  mankind."  '  * 

The  Mandingoes,  according  to  Park,  regard  the 
Deity  as  *  so  remote,  and  of  so  exalted  a  nature,  that  it 

*  is  idle  to  imagine  the  feeble  supplications  of  wretched 

>  Lewin'8  Hill  Tncta  of  Chittagong,  p.  90. 
*  BosmaD,  ioc.  cU^  p.  403. 


MORALITY.  375 

chichi,  the  Chief  of  the  Yamacraws  (North  America),  to 
General  Oglethorpe;^  Uhat  the   asking  for  any  par- 

*  ticular  blessing  looked  to  him  like  directing  God ;  and, 

*  if  so,  that  it  must  be  a  very  wicked  thing.     That  for 

*  his  part  he  thought  everything  that  happened  in  the 

*  world  was   as   it    should    be ;    that   God  of  himself 

*  would   do   for   every  one    what  was  consistent  with 

*  the  good  of  the  whole ;  and  that  our  duty  to  him  was 

*  to  be  content  with  whatever  happened  in  general,  and 

*  thankful  for  all  the  good  that  happened  in  particular/ 

The  connection  between  morality  and  religion  will 
be  considered  in  a  later  chapter.  Here,  I  will  only 
observe  that  the  deities  of  the  lower  races,  being  subject 
to  the  same  passions  as  man ;  and  in  many  cases,  indeed, 
themselves  monsters  of  iniquity,  regarded  crime  with 
indifference,  so  long  as  the  religious  ceremonies  and 
sacrifices  in  their  honour  were  not  neglected.  Hence 
it  follows  that  through  all  these  lower  races  there  is  no 
idea  of  any  being  corresponding  to  Satan.  So  far,  in- 
deed, as  their  deities  are  evil  they  may  be  so  called ;  but 
the  essential  character  of  Satan  is  that  of  the  Tempter; 
hence  in  the  order  of  succession  this  idea  cannot  arise 
until  morality  has  become  connected  with  religion. 

Thus,  then,  I  have  endeavoured  to  trace  the  gradual 
development  of  religion  among  the  lower  races  of  man. 

The  lower  savages  regard  their  deities  as  scarcely 
more  powerful  than  themselves;  they  are  evil,  not 
good;  they  are  to  be  propitiated  by  sacrifices,  not  by 
prayer;  they  are  not  creators;  they  are  neither  omni- 
scient nor  all-powerful ;  they  neither  reWard  the  good 
nor  punish  the  evil;  far  fix)m  conferring  immortality 

>  Jones,  AntiqiiitiM  of  the  Southern  Indiana,  p.  421.  J 


376  THE  PROGRESS  OF  RELIGION. 

on  man,  they  are  not  even  in  all  cases  immortal  them- 
selves. 

Where  the  material  elements  of  civilisation  developed 
themselves  without  any  corresponding  increase  of  know- 
ledge, as  for  instance  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  a  more  cor- 
rect idea  of  Divine  power,  without  any  corresponding 
enlightenment  as  to  the  Divine  nature,  led  to  a  religion 
of  terror,  which  finally  became  a  terrible  scourge  of 
humanity. 

Gradually,  however,  an  increased  acquaintance  with 
the  laws  of  nature  enlarged  the  mind  of  man.     He  first 
supposed  that  the  Deity  fashioned  the  earth,  raising  it 
out  of  the  water,  and  preparing  it  as  a  dwelling-place 
for  man ;  and  subsequently  realised  the  idea  that  land 
and  water  were  alike  created  by  Divine  power.     Aft€r 
regarding  spirits  as  altogether  evil,  he  rose  to  a  belief 
in  good  as  well  as  in  evil  deities,  and,  gradually  sub- 
ordinating  the  latter  to  the  former,  worshipped  the 
good  spirits  alone  as  gods,  the  evil  sinking  to  the  level 
of  demons.     From  believmg  only  in  ghosts,   he  came 
gradually  to  the  recognition  of  the   soul:   at  length 
uniting  this  belief  with  that  in  a  beneficent  and  just 
Being,  he   connected  Morality  with  Religion,  a  step, 
the  importance  of  which  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  over- 
estimate. 

Thus  we  see  that  as  men  rise  in  civilisation,  their 
religion  rises  with  them.  The  Australians  dimly 
imagine  a  being,  spiteful,  malevolent,  but  weak,  and 
dangerous  only  m  the  dark.  The  Negro's  deity  is 
more  powerful,  but  not  less  hateful — invisible,  indeed, 
but  subject  to  pain,  mortal  like  himself,  and  liable  to 
be    made    the    slave    of  man   by    enchantment.      The 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION.  377 

deities  of  the  South  Sea  Islanders  are,  some  good,  some 
evil;  but,  on  the  whole,  more  is  to  be  feared  from 
the  latter  than  to  be  hoped  from  the  former.  They 
fashioned  the  land,  but  are  not  truly  creators,  for 
earth  and  water  existed  before  them.  They  do  not 
punish  the  evil,  nor  reward  the  good.  They  watch 
over  the  affairs  of  men;  but  if,  on  the  one  hand,  witch- 
craft has  no  power  over  them,  neither,  on  the  other, 
can  prayer  influence  them — they  require  to  share  the 
crops  or  the  booty  of  their  worshippers. 

It  appears,  then,  that  every  increase  in  science — 
that  is,  in  positive  and  ascertained  knowledge — brings 
with  it  an  elevation  of  religion.  Nor  is  this  progress 
confined  to  the  lower  races.  Even  within  the  last  cen- 
tury, science  has  purified  the  religion  of  Western 
Europe  by  rooting  out  the  dark  belief  in  witchcraft, 
which  led  to  thousands  of  executions,  and  hung  like  a 
black  pall  over  the  Christianity  of  the  middle  ages. 

The  immense  service  which  Science  has  thus  ren- 
dered to  the  cause  of  Religion  and  of  Humanity,  has 
not  hitherto  received  the  recognition  which  it  deserves. 
Science  is  still  regarded  by  many  excellent,  but  narrow- 
minded,  persons  as  hostile  to  religious  truth,  while  in 
fact  she  is  only  opposed  to  religious  error.  No  doubt 
her  influence  has  always  been  exercised  in  opposition 
to  those  who  present  contradictory  assertions  under  the 
excuse  of  mystery,  as  well  as  to  all  but  the  highest  con- 
ceptions of  Divine  power.  The  time,  however,  is  ap- 
proaching when  it  will  be  generally  perceived  that,  so 
far  from  Science  being  opposed  to  Religion,  true  religion 
is,  without  Science,  impossible ;  and  if  we  consider  the 
various  aspects  of  Christianity  as  understood  by  dif- 


879 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


CHARACTER  AND   MORALS. 


rE  accounts  which  we  possess  of  the  character 
of  savage  races  are  conflicting  and  unsatisfac- 
tory. In  some  cases  travellers  have  expressed  strong 
opinions,  for  which  they  had  obviously  no  sufficient 
foundation.  Thus  the  unfortunate  La  Perouse,  who 
spent  only  one  day  on  Easter  Island,  states  his  belief 
that  the  inhabitants  *are  as  corrupt  as  the  circum- 
*  stances  in  which  they  are  placed  will  permit  them  to 
'  be.'  ^  On  the  other  hand,  the  Friendly  Islanders  were 
so  called  by  Captain  Cook  on  account  of  the  apparent 
kindness  and  hospitality  with  which  they  received  him. 
Yet,  as  we  now  know,  this  appearance  of  friendship 
was  entirely  hypocritical.  The  natives  endeavoured  to 
lull  him  into  security,  with  the  intention  of  seizing  his 
ship  ai)d  massacring  the  crew ;  which  design  a  fortunate 
accident  alone  prevented  them  from  carrying  into 
efl^ect;  yet  Captain  Cook  never  had  the  slightest  suspi- 
cion of  their  treachery,  or  of  the  danger  which  he  so 
narrowly  escaped. 

In  some  cases  the  same  writer  gives  accounts  at 
variance  with  one  another.  Thus  Mr.  Ellis,^  the  excel- 
lent missionary  of  the  Pacific,  states  that  the  moral 

*  La  Perouse*8  Voyage,  EDgliah  '  PolyDesian  Reeearchesy  toI.  ii. 

edition,  toL  ii.  p.  827.  p.  25. 


THE  GHABAGTEB  OF  SAVAGE  BAGES.  381 

Mariner  gives  an  excellent  account  of  the  state  of 
manners  among  the  Tongans,  find  one  which  well  illus- 
trates the  diJQBiculty  of  arriving  at  correct  ideas  on  such 
a  subject,  especially  among  a  people  of  a  different  race 
from  ourselves  and  in  a  different  state  of  civilisation. 
He  describes  them  as  loyaP  and  pious,^  obedient  child- 
ren,*  affectionate  parents,^  kind  husbands,^  modest  and 
faithful  wives,^  and  true  friendsJ 

On  the  other  hand,  they  seem  to  have  had  little 
feeling  of  morality.  They  *  had  no  words  for  justice  or 
'  injustice,  for  cruelty  or  humanity.'®    *  Theft,  revenge, 

*  rape,  and  murder  under  many  circumstances  are  not 

*  held  to  be  crimes.'  They  had  no  idea  of  future  rewards 
and  punishments.  They  saw  no  harm  in  seizing  ships 
by  treachery  and  murdering  the  crews.  The  men  were 
cruel,  treacherous,  and  revengeful.  Marriages  were 
terminable  at  the  whim  of  the  husband,^  and,  except- 
ing  in  married  women,  chastity  was  not  regarded  as  a 
virtue,  though  it  was  thought  improper  for  a  woman 
firequently  to  change  her  lover.  Yet  we  are  told  that, 
CD  the  whole,^^  this  system,  although  so  opposed  to  our 
feelings,  had  '  not  the  least  appearance  of  any  bad  effect. 

*  The  women  were  tender,  kind  mothers,  the  children 

*  well  cared  for.'  Both  sexes  appeared  to  be  contented 
and  happy  in  their  relations  to  each  other,  and  '  as  to 

*  domestic  quarrels,  they  were  seldom  known.'  We 
must  not  judge  them  too  hardly  for  their  proposed 
treachery  to  Captain  Cook.     Even  in  Northern  Europe 


'  Loc.  eit.,  voL  ii.  p.  156. 

•  P.  170. 

»  P.  164. 

^  P.  162. 

»  P.  166. 

8  P.  148. 

<  P.  170. 

•  P.  167. 

•  P.  170. 

»«  P.  177. 

AMONO   8AVAQE8.  383 

to  secure  "  the  feather,"  which  is  but  a  record  of  his 
having  murdered  or  participated  in  the  murder  of 
some  human  being — whether  man,  woman,  or  child, 
it  is  immaterial;  and,  after  he  has  secured  his  first 
"  feather,"  appetite  is  whetted  to  increase  the  number 
in  his  cap,  as  an  Indian  brave  is  estimated  by  the 
number  of  his  feathers.' 

In  Tahiti  the  missionaries  considered  that  '  not  less 
than  two-thirds  of  the  children  were  murdered  by  their 
parents.'  ^  Mr.  Ellis  adds,  *  I  do  not  recollect  having 
met  with  a  female  in  the  islands  during  the  whole 
period  of  my  residence  there,  who  had  been  a  mother 
while  idolatry  prevailed,  who  had  not  imbrued  her 
hands  in  the  blood  of  her  offspring.'  Mr.  Nott  also 
makes  the  same  assertion.  Girls  were  more  often  killed 
than  boys,  because  they  were  of  less  use  in  fishing  and 
in  war. 

Mr.  Wallace  maintains  that  savages  act  up  to  their 
simple  moral  code  at  least  as  well  as  we  do  ;  but  if  a 
mans  simple  moral  code  permits  him  to  rob  or  murder; 
that  may  be  some  excuse  for  him,  but  it  is  little  conso- 
lation to  the  sufferer. 

As  a  philosophical  question,  however,  the  relative 
character  of  different  races  is  less  interesting  than  the 
moral  condition  of  the  lower  races  of  mankind  as  a 
whole. 

Mr.  Wallace,  in  the  concluding  chapter  of  his  inter- 
esting work  on  the  Malay  Archipelago,  has  expressed 
the   opinion  that  while   civilised   communities    *  have 

*  progressed  vastly  beyond  the  savage  state  in  intel- 

*  lectual  achievements,  we  have  not  advanced  equally  in 

1  Polyneeian  Renearches,  vol.  i.  pp.  334,  340. 


MOBAL  CONDITION  OF  8AVA0E8.  885 

*  so  great,  he  must  often  be  touched  with  the  images  of 

*  right  and  wrong;  and,  let  his  prejudices  be  ever  so 

*  obstinate,  he  must  observe  that  others  are  susceptible 
'  of  like  impressions.'  ^      Nay,  he  even  maintains  that 

*  those  who  have  denied  the  reality  of  moral  distinc- 

*  tions  may  be  ranked  among  the  disingenuous  dispu- 

*  tants  ;  nor  is  it  conceivable  that  any  human  creature 

*  could  ever  seriously  believe  that  all  characters  and 

*  actions  were  alike  entitled  to  the  affection  and  regard 

*  of  every  one.' 

Locke,  on  the  other  hand,  questions  the  existence 
of  innate  principles,  and  terminates  his  chapter  on  the 
subject  in  the  following  words  :  *  It  is  reasonable/  he 
says,*  *  to  demand  the  marks  and  characters,  whereby 
the  genuine  innate  principles  may  be  distinguished 
from  others ;  that  so,  amidst  the  great  variety  of  pre- 
tenders, I  may  be  kept  from  mistakes  in  so  material 
a  point  as  this.  When  this  is  done,  I  shall  be  ready 
to  embrace  such  welcome  and  useful  propositions ;  and 
till  then  I  may  with  modesty  doubt,  since  I  fear 
universal  consent,  which  is  the  only  one  produced, 
will  scarce  prove  a  sufficient  mark  to  direct  my  choice, 
and  assure  me  of  any  innate  principles.  From  what 
has  been  said,  I  think  it  past  doubt  that  there  are  no 
practical  principles  wherein  all  men  agree;  and  there- 
fore none  innate.' 

Let  us  now  see  what  light  is  thrown  on  this  in- 
teresting question  by  the  study  of  savage  life.  Mr. 
Wallace  draws  a  charming  picture  of  some  small  savage 
communities  which  he  has  visited.     Each  man,  he  says, 

>  Hume*8  EssajSy  toL  ii.  p.  203. 

'  On  the  Human  UndentAnding,  book  i.  ch.  3,  sec.  2. 


WITH  MORAL  FEELINO.  387 

quadrupeds  and  birds,  yet,  perhaps,  among  animals 
there  is  no  stronger  feeling  than  that  of  the  mother  for 
her  offspring.  She  will  submit  to  any  sacrifices  for 
their  welfare,  and  fight  against  almost  any  odds  for 
their  protection.  No  follower  of  Mr.  Darwin  will  be 
surprised  at  this,  because  for  generation  after  generation 
those  mothers  in  whom  this  feeling  was  most  strong 
have  had  the  best  chance  of  rearing  their  young.  It  is 
not,  however,  moral  feeling  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term;  and  she  would,  indeed,  be  a  cold-hearted  mother 
who  cherished  and  protected  her  infant  only  because  it 
was  right  to  do  so. 

Family  affection  and  moral  feeling  have  indeed  been 
very  generally  confused  together  by  travellers,  yet  there 
IB  some  direct  testimony  which  appears  to  show  that  the 
moral  condition  of  savages  is  really  much  lower  than 
has  been  usuaUy  supposed. 

Thus  Mr.  Dove,  speaking  of  the  Tasmanians,  asserts 
that  they  were  entirely  without  any  *  moral  views  and 

*  impressions.' 

Governor  Eyre  says  of  the  Australians  that,  *  having 
^  no  moral  sense  of  what  is  just  and  equitable  in  the 

*  abstract,  their  only  test  of  propriety  must  in  such 

*  cases  be,  whether  they  are   numerically  or   physically 

*  strong  enough  to  brave  the  vengeance  of  those  whom 

*  they  may  have  provoked  or  injured.'* 

Mr.  Ridley  tells  us  '  that  he  had  very  great  difficulty 
in  conveying  to  the  nations  of  Australia  any  idea  of  sin, 
and  eventually  he  could  only  describe  it  by  the  follow- 
ing roundabout  expression :  *  Nyeane  kauungo  warawara 

*  yanani.' 

*  DUcoTeritfs  in  Central  AuBtralia,  toI.  ii.  p.  384. 
'  Qoeenslnndi  p.  442. 

c  0  2 


-FEELINQ  AMONG  SAVAGES.  389 

most  of  the  virtues,  as  well  as  the  vices,  it  would 
appear  from  the  above  passages  that  their  moral  quality 
was  not  clearly  recognised.  It  must  be  confessed, 
however,  that  the  evidence  is  not  very  conclusive,  as 
Mr.  Casalis,  even  in  the  same  chapter,  expresses  an 
opinion  on  the  point  scarcely  consistent  with  that 
quoted  above. 

Similar  accounts  are  given  as  regards  Central  Africa. 
Thus  at  Jenna,^  and  in  the  surrounding  districts,  ^when- 
ever a  town  is  deprived  of  its  chief,  the  inhabitants 
acknowledge  no  law — anarchy,  troubles,  and  confusion 
immediately  prevail,  and  till  a  successor  is  appointed 
all  labour  is  at  an  end.  The  stronger  oppress  the 
weak,  and  consummate  every  species  of  crime,  with- 
out being  amenable  to  any  tribunal  for  their  actions. 
Private  property  is  no  longer  respected  ;  and  thus 
before  a  person  arrives  to  curb  its  licentiousness,  a 
town  is  not  unfrequently  reduced  from  a  flourishing 
state  of  prosperity  and  of  happiness  to  all  the  horrors 
of  desolation.'  Livingstone  mentions^  a  similar  custom 
among  the  Banyai,  a  tribe  living  on  the  river  Zambesi ; 
and  the  same  state  of  things  also  occurred  in  the  Sand- 
wich Islands.' 

The  Tongans,  or  Friendly  Islanders,  had  in  many 
respects  made  great  advances,  yet  Mariner  ^  states  that, 

*  on  a  strict  examination  of  their  language,  we  discover 

*  no  words  essentially  expressive  of  some  of  the  higher 
^  qualities  of  human  merit:  as  virtue,  justice,  humanity; 

*  nor  of  the  contrary,  as  vice,  injustice,  cruelty,  &c.; 

*  R.  and  J.  Lander's  Niger  £x-  '  Gerlaud.  Waitz*8  Antlir.,  vol. 
peditioD,  Tol.  i.  p.  06.                            vi.  p.  203. 

*  TraTels  in  South  Africa,  p.  024.  ^  Tonga  Islands,  ? ol.  ii.  p.  147. 


OONNEOTED  WITH  MORALITY.  391 

races,  has  no  moral  aspect  or  influence.     The  deities 
are  almost  invariably  regarded  as  evil. 

In  Feejee  ^  '  the  names  of  the  gods  indicate  their 

*  characters.      Thus,  as  Williams  tells  us,   Ndauthina 

*  steals  women  of  rank  and  beauty  by  night  or  torch- 
^  light.  Eumbunavanua  is  the  rioter ;  Mbatimona,  the 
*'  brain-eater ;  Ravuravu,  the  murderer ;  Mainatavasara, 
^  fresh  from  the  cutting-up  or  slaughter;  and  a  host  be- 
*'  sides  of  the  same  sort.' 

In  Peru  every  vice  had  its  own  especial  deity.' « 
The  character  of  the  Greek  gods  is  familiar  to  us, 
and  was  anything  but  moral.  Such  beings  would  not 
necessarily  reward  the  good,  or  punish  the  evil.  Hence, 
it  is  not  surprising  that  Socrates  saw  little  connection 
between  ethics  and  religion,  or  that  Aristotle  altogether 
separated  morality  from  theology.  Hence  also  we 
cannot  be  surprised  to  find  that,  even  when  a  belief  in 
a  future  state  has  dawned  on  the  civilised  mind,  it  is 
not  at  first  associated  with  reward  or  punishment. 

The  Australians,  though  they  had  a  vague  belief  in 
ghosts,  and  supposed  that  after  death  they  become 
whitemen ;   that,  as  they  say,  *  Fall  down  blackman, 

*  jump  up  whiteman  ; '  have  no  idea  of  retribution.^ 
The  Guinea  negroes  '  have  no  idea  of  fiiture  rewards  or 
^  punishments,  for  the  good  or  ill  actions  of  their  past 
life.'  *  Other  negro  races,  however,  have  more  ad- 
vanced ideas  on  the  subject. 

^  The  Tahitians  believe  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul, 
^  at  least  its  existence  in  a  separate  state,  and  that  there 

>  Fiji  sod  the  Fijians,  vol.  L  p.  •  Voyage  of  the  *Fly/  toI.  ii.  p. 

218.  22. 

'  OardlMso  de  la  Vega,  toL  i.  ^  Boemaiiy  loc,  cit.  p.  401. 

p.  124. 


302  FUTURE  LIFE  NOT  NJSCES8AEILT 

*  are  two  situations  of  different  degrees  of  happiness^ 
'  somewhat  analogous  to  our  heaven  and  hell :  the  supe- 

*  rior  situation   they  call  "  Tavirna  I'erai,"  the  other 

*  "Tiahoboo  ''     They  do  not,  however,  consider  them 

*  as  places  of  reward  and  punishment,  but  as  receptacles 
'  for  different  classes;  the  first  for  their  chiefs  and 
'  principal  people,  the  other  for  those  of  inferior  rank ; 
^  for  they  do  not  suppose  that  their  actions  here  in 
'  the  least  influence  their  future  state,  or  indeed  that 

*  they  come  under  the  cognisance  of  their  deities  at 
'  all;  ^ 

In  Tonga  and  at  Nukahiva  the  natives  believe  that 
their  chiefs  are  immortal,  but  not  the  common  people.^ 
The  Tonga  people,  says  Mariner,  *  do  not  indeed 
'  believe  in  any  future  state  of  rewards  and  punish- 

*  ments.'  ^ 

Williams*  tells  us  that  '  oflfences,  in  Fijian  estima- 
'  tion,  are  light  or  grave  according  to  the  rank  of  the 
'  offender.     Murder  by  a  chief  is  less  heinous  than  a 

*  petty  larceny  committed  by  a  man  of  low  rank. 
'  Only  a  few  crimes  are  regarded  as  serious;  e.g.,  theft, 
'  adultery,  abduction,  witchcraft,  infringement  of  a 
'  tabu,  disrespect  to  a  chief,  incendiarism,  and  treason;' 
and  he  elsewhere  mentions  that  the  Feejeeans,*  though 
believing  in  a  future  existence,  '  shut  out  from  it  the 
'  idea  of  any  moral  retribution  in  the  shape  either  of 

*  reward  or  punishment.'  In  the  religion  of  the  Fee- 
jceans,  says  Seemann,  '  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any 

*  See  Cook's  Voyage  round  the      18.    Hale,  U.  S.  Exp.  Exp.  p.  38. 
World  in  JIawkesworth's  Vojages,  *  Fiji  and  the  Fijiana,  vol.  L  p. 
vol.  ii.  p.  2.m                                           28. 

'^  Kltuim,  vol.  iv.  p.  351.  *  Ibid.  p.  243. 

*  Tcn^a  Islands*,  vol.  ii.  pp.  147, 


ONE  OF  PUNISHMENT  OB  llEWABD,  393 

separation  between  the  abodes  of  the  good  and  the 
wicked,  nothing  that  corresponds  to  our  heaven  and 
hell.'  ^  The  Sumatrans,  according  to  Marsden,  *  had 
some  idea  of  a  future  life,  but  not  as  a  state  of  retribu- 
tion; conceiving  immortality  to  be  the  lot  of  a  rich 
rather  than  of  a  good  man.  I  recollect  that  an  in- 
habitant of  one  of  the  islands  farther  eastwards  ob- 
served to  me,  with  great  simplicity,  that  only  great 
men  went  to  the  skies;  how  should  poor  men  find 
admittance  there  ?  '  *^ 

In  the  Island  of  Bintang,^  *  the  people,  having  an 
idea  of  predestination,  always  conceived  present  pos- 
session to  constitute  right,  however  that  possession 
might  have  been  acquired ;  but  yet  they  made  no 
scruple  of  deposing  and  murdering  their  sovereigns, 
and  justified  their  acts  by  this  argument:  that  the 
fate  of  concerns  so  imporant  as  the  lives  of  kings  was 
in  the  hands  of  God,  whose  vicegerents  they  were, 
and  that  if  it  was  not  agreeable  to  him,  and  the  conse- 
quence of  his  will,  that  they  should  perish  by  the  dag- 
gers of  their  subjects,  it  could  not  so  happen.  Thus 
it  appears  that  their  religious  ideas  were  just  strong 
enough  to  banish  from  their  minds  every  moral  senti- 
ment.' 

The  Kookies  of  Chittagong  *  have  no  idea  of  hell  or 
heaven,  or  of  any  punishment  for  evil  deeds,  or  rewards 
for   good   actions.'  *     Forsyth   also   makes   a   similar 
statement  as  regards  the  G6nds.*     According  to  Bailey, 

*  Seemann's  MiMion  to  Viti,  p.  ^  Rennel,  quoted  in  I^win*8  Hill 

400.  Tracts  of  Chittagong,  p.  110. 

'  Maraden's  History  of  Sumatra,  *  Highlands  of  Central  India,  p. 

p.  280.  145. 

»  Ibid,  p.  412. 


394  BANK  IN  KEAVBN. 

again,  the  Veddahs  of  Ceylon  *  have  no  idea  of  a  fiiture 

*  state  of  rewards  and  punishments.'  ^ 

The  Hos  in  Central  India  *  believe  that  the  souls 

*  of  the  dead  become  "  bhoots,"  spirits,  but  no  thought 

*  of    reward  or   punishment    is    connected    with    the 

*  change.'  ^^ 

Speaking  of  South  Africa,  Kolben  •  says,  *  that  the 

*  Hottentots  believe  the  immortality  of  the  soul  has 
'  been  shown  in  a  foregoing  chapter.     But  they  have 

*  no  notion,  that  ever  T  could  gather,  of  rewards  and 
'  punishments  after  death.' 

Chief  Commissioner  Warner  remarks  that  the  Kaffirs 
have  not  *  the  slightest  knowledge  of  a  future  state  of 

*  rewards  and  punishments,  arising  out  of  the  moral 
'  quality  of  our  actions  in  this  life.'  * 

In  Daliome,  according  to  Burton,^  the  *  next  world 

*  offers  none  of  those   rewards  and  punishments  by 

*  which,  according  to  the  Semitic  animist^  the  balance 
^  of  good  and  evil  in  this  life  is  to  be  struck.  He  who 
^  escapes  punishment  here,  is  safe  hereafter.' 

Among  the  Mexicans^  and  Peruvians,^  again?  the 
religion  was  entirely  independent  of  moral  considera- 
tions, and  in  some  other  parts  of  America  the  future 
condition  is  supposed  to  depend  not  on  conduct  but 
on  rank.^     In  North  America  *  it  is  rare,'  says  Tanner, 

*  to  observe  among  the  Indians  any  ideas  which  would 

'  Trtuis.  Etbn.  Soc.  N.S.  vol  ii.  *  Mission  to  Dahome,  .vol  IL  p. 

p.  800.  157. 

■  Dalton,  Tmns.  Etbn.  See.  1868,  *  MuUer,  Ges.  der  Amer.  Urre- 

p.  38.  ligion.,  p.  665. 

»  History  of  the  Capo  of  Good  ^  Ilnd,  p.  410.   But  see  Preacott, 

Hope,  vol.  i.  p.  314.  vol.  i.  p.  83. 

^  Maclean's  Compeiid.  of  Kaffir  ^  Ibid,  p.  139.    See  also  pp.  289, 

Laws  and  CwatoniB,  p.  78.  666. 


LAW  AND  BIGHT.  395 

*  lead  to  the  belief  that  they  look  upon  a  future  etate  as 
'  one  of  retribution.'  ^ 

Among  the  Siberian  tribes  the  deities  are  supposed 
to  reward  those  who  conciliate  them  by  worship  and 
offerings,  but  to  morality  they  are  regarded  as  indif- 
ferent.^ 

The  Arabs  and  Afghans  conceive  that  a  broken 
oath  brings  misfortune  on  the  place  where  it  was 
uttered.* 

In  fact,  I  believe  that  the  lower  races  of  men  may 
be  said  to  be  deficient  in  the  idea  of  Right,  though 
quite  familiar  with  that  of  Law.  This  leads  to  the 
curious,  though  not  illogical,  results  mentioned  in  page 
389. 

That  there  should  be  any  races  of  men  so  deficient 
in  moral  feeling,  was  altogether  opposed  to  the  precon- 
ceived ideas  with  which  I  commenced  the  study  of 
savage  life,  and  I  have  arrived  at  the  conviction  by 
slow  degrees,  and  even  with  reluctance.  I  have,  how- 
ever, been  forced  to  this  conclusion,  not  only  by  the 
direct  statements  of  travellers,  but  also  by  the  general 
tenor  of  their  remarks-,  and  especially  by  the  remarkable 
absence  of  repentance  and  remorse  among  the  lower 
races  of  men. 

On  the  whole,  then,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  moral 
feelings  deepen  with  the  gradual  growth  of  a  race. 

External  circumstances,  no  doubt,  exercise  much 
influence  on  character.  We  very  often  see,  however, 
that  the  possession  of  one  virtue  is  counterbalanced  by 

>  Tanner*8  Narrative,  p.  369.  '  Klemm,  Culturgeschichte,  toI. 

'  Mtlller,    Dea.    de    toutea    lea  iv.  p.  100.     Maaeon,  Joumeja  ia 

Nationa  de  1' Empire  de  Rune,  Pt.  Balochiatan,  &c.,  toI.  ii.  p.  268. 
UI.  p.  146. 


ORiaiN  OF  MORAL  FEELINO.  397 

*  ganisation:  just  as  I  believe  that  this  intuition,  requir- 

*  ing  only  to  be  made  definite  and  complete  by  personal 

*  experiences,  has  practically  become  a  form  of  thought 
'  apparently  quite  independent  of  experience;  so  do  I 

*  believe  that  the  experiences  of  utility,  organised  and 

*  consolidated  through  all  past  generations  of  the  human 

*  race,  have  been  producing  corresponding  nervous  mo- 

*  difications,  which,  by  continued  transmission  and  accu- 

*  mulation,  have  become  in  us  certain  faculties  of  moral 
'  intuition— certain  emotions  responding  to  right  -and 

*  wrong  conduct,  which  have  no  apparent  basis  in  the 

*  individual  experiences  of  utility.' 

I  cannot  entirely  subscribe  to  either  of  these  views. 
The  moral  feelings  are  now,  no  doubt,  intuitive ;  but  if 
the  lower  races  of  savages  have  none,  they  evidently 
cannot  have  been  so  originally,  nor  can  they  be  regarded 
as  natural  to  man.  Neither  can  I  accept  the  opposite 
theory.  While  entirely  agreeing  with  Mr.  Spencer  that 
'  there  have  been,  and  still  are,  developing  in  the  race, 

*  certain  fundamental  moral  intuitions,'  I  feel,  with  Mr. 
Button,  much  difficulty  in  conceiving  that,  in  Mr. 
Spencer's  words,  '  these  moral  intuitions  are  the  results 
'  of  the  accumulated  experiences  of  Utility;'  that  is  to 
aay,  of  Utility  to  the  individual.  When  it  is  once  real- 
ised  that  a  given  line  of  conduct  would  invariably  be 
useful  to  the  individual,  it  is  at  once  regarded  as  *  saga- 
'  cious '  rather  than  *  virtuous.'  Virtue  implies  tempta- 
tion; temptation  indicates  a  feeling  that  a  given  action 
may  benefit  the  individual  at  the  expense  of  others,  or 
in  defiance  of  authority.  It  is  evident,  indeed,  that 
feelings  acting  on  generation  after  generation  might 
produce  a  continually  deepening  conviction,  but  I  feil 


OEiam  OF  MORAL  FEELING.  399 

Or  take  respect  for  Age.  We  find,  even  in  Aus- 
tralia, laws,  if  I  may  so  term  them,  appropriating  the 
best  of  everything  to  the  old  men.  Naturally  the  old  men 
lose  no  opportunity  of  impressing  these  injunctions  on 
the  young;  they  praise  those  who  conform,  and  con- 
denm  those  who  resist.  Hence  the  custom  is  strictly 
adhered  to.  I  do  not  say,  that  to  the  Australian  mind 
this  presents  itself  as  a  sacred  duty;  but  it  would,  I 
think,  in  the  course  of  time  have  come  to  be  so  con- 
sidered. 

For  when  a  race  had  made  some  progress  in  intel- 
lectual development,  a  difference  would  certainly  be 
felt  between  those  acts  which  a  man  was  taught  to  do 
as  conducive  to  his  own  direct  advantage,  and  those 
which  were  not  so,  and  yet  which  were  enjoined  for 
any  other  reason.  Hence  would  arise  the  idea  of  right 
and  dtUj/j  as  distinct  from  mere  utility. 

How  much  more  our  notions  of  right  depend  on  the 
lessons  we  receive  when  young  than  on  hereditary 
ideas,  becomes  evident,  if  we  consider  the  different 
moral  codes  existing  in  our  own  country.  Nay,  even 
in  the  very  same  individual,  two  contradictory  systems 
may  often  be  seen  side  by  side  in  incongruous  associa- 
tion. 

Lastly,  it  may  be  observed  that  in  our  own  case 
religion  and  morality  are  closely  connected  together. 
Yet  the  sacred  character,  which  forms  an  integral  part 
in  our  conception  of  duty,  could  not  arise  until  Religion 
became  moral.  Nor  would  this  take  place  until  the 
deities  were  conceived  to  be  beneficent  beings.  As 
soon,  however,  as  this  was  the  case,  they  would  natu- 
rally be  supposed  to  regard  with  approbation  all  that 


CHAPTER  IX. 


LANGUAGE. 


ALTHOUGH  it  has  been  at  various  times  stated 
that  certain  savage  tribes  are  entirely  without 
language,  none  of  these  accounts  appear  to  be  well 
authenticated,  and  they  are  h  priori  extremely  improb- 
able. 

At  any  rate,  even  the  lowest  races  of  which  we 
have  any  satisfactory  account  possess  a  language,  im- 
perfect though  it  may  be,  and  eked  out  to  a  great 
extent  by  signs.  I  do  not  suppose,  however,  that  this 
custom  has  arisen  from  the  absence  of  words  to  repre- 
sent their  ideas,  but  rather  because  in  all  countries  in- 
habited by  savages  the  number  of  languages  is  very 
great,  and  hence  there  is  a  great  advantage  in  being 
able  to  communicate  by  signs. 

Thus  James,  in  his  expedition  to  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains, speaking  of  the  Eiawa-Easkaia   Indians,  says, 

*  These  nations,  although  constantly  associating   toge- 

*  therand  united  under  the  influence  of  the  Bear- Tooth,- 

*  are  yet  totally  ignorant  of  each  other's  language,  inso- 

*  much  that  it  was  no  uncommon  occurrence  to  see  two 

*  individuals  of  diflerent  nations  sitting  upon  the  ground 

*  and  conversing  freely  by  means  of  the  language  of 

*  signs.     In  the  art  of  thus  conveying  their  ideas  they 

*  were  thorough  adepts;  and  their  manual  display  was^ 

D  D 


402  0E8TUBE  LANGUAGE. 

*  only  interrupted  at  remote  intervals  by  a  smile,  or  by 

*  the  auxiliary  of  an  articulated  word  of  the  language 

*  of  the  Crow  Indians,  which  to  a  very  limited  extent 

*  passes  current  among  them.'  ^  Fisher,*  also,  spealriiig 
of  the  Comanches  and  various  surrounding  tril)e8, 
says  that  they  have  ^a  language  of  signs  by  whidi 

all  Indians  and  traders  can  understand  one  another; 
and  they  always  make  these  signs  when  communicat- 
ing among  themselves.  The  men,  when  conversing 
together,  in  their  lodges,  sit  upon  skins,  cross-legged 
like  a  Turk,  and  speak  and  make  signs  in  corrobora* 
tion  of  what  they  say,  with  their  hands,  so  that  dther 
a  blind  or  a  deaf  man  could  understand  them.  For 
instance,  I  meet  an  Indian,  and  wish  to  ask  him  if  he 
saw  six  waggons  drawn  by  homed  cattle,  n^th  three 
Mexican  and  three  American  teamsters,  and  a  man 
mounted  on  horseback.  I  make  these  signs: — I  point 
"  you,"  then  to  his  eyes,  meaning  "  see ; "  then  hold 
up  all  my  fingers  on  the  right  hand  and  the  forefinger 
on  the  left,  meaning  **  six; "  then  I  make  two  circles  by 
bringing  the  ends  of  my  thumbs  and  fore  fingers  to- 
gether, and,  holding  my  two  hands  out,  move  my 
wrists  in  such  a  way  as  to  indicate  waggon  wheds 
revolving,  meaning  "waggons;"  then,  by  making  an 
upward  motion  with  each  hand  from  both  sides  of  my 
head,  I  indicate  "horns,"  signifying  homed  cattle; 
then  by  first  holding  up  three  fingers,  and  then  by 
placing  my  extended  right  hand  below  my  lower  lip 
and  moving  it  downward  stopping  in  midway  down 
the  chest,  I  indicate  "beard,"  meaning  Mexican;  and 

'  See  Jamefi,  Expedition  to  the  *  Traiui.  Ethn.  Soc.  1869,  toI  I 

Bocky  Mountaiiifs  yol.  iii.  p.  52.  p.  283. 


GESTURE  LANOUAOE.  408 

*  with  three  fingers  again,  and  passing  my  right  hand 

*  fi*om  left  to  right  in  front  of  my  forehead,  I  indicate 

*  "  white  brow  "  or  "  pale  face."     I  then  hold  up  my 

*  fore  finger,  meaning  one  man,  and  by  placing  the  fore 

*  finger  of  my  left  hand  between  the  fore  and  second 
'  finger  of  my  right  hand,  representing  a  man  astride 

*  of  a  horse,  and  by  moving  my  hands  up  and  down, 
^  give  the  motion  of  a  horse  galloping  with  a  man  on 

*  his  back.  I  in  this  way  ask  the  Indian,  **  You  see  six 
* "  waggons,    horned    cattle,    three    Mexicans,    three 

*  **  Americans,  one  man  on  horseback?  "     If  he  holds 

*  up  his  fore  finger  and  lowers  it  quickly,  as  if  he  was 

*  pointing  at  some  object  on  the   ground,  he  means 

*  "  Yes; "  if  he  moves  it  from  side  to  side,  upon  the 

*  principle  that  people  sometimes  move  their  head  from 

*  side  to  side,  he  means  "  No."  The  time  required  to 
'  make  these  signs  would  be  about  the  same  as  if  you 
^  asked  the  question  verbally.'  The  Bushmen  also  are 
said  to  intersperse  their  language  with  so  many  signs 
that  they  are  unintelligible  in  the  dark,  and,  when  they 
want  to  converse  at  night,  are  compelled  to  collect 
Toand  their  camp  fires.  So  also  Burton  tells  us  that 
the  Arapahos  of  North  America,  '  who  possess  a  very 

*  scanty  vocabulary,   can    hardly  converse  with    one 

*  another  in  the  dark;  to  make  a  stranger  understand 

*  them  they  must  always  repair  to  the  camp  fire  for 

*  pow-wow.'  ^ 

Morgan  mentions  a  case  in  which  a  couple  who 
had  been  married  three  years,  conversed  entirely  by 
signs;  the  man  being  a  Blackfoot  Indian,  the  woman  an 

>  City  of  the  Sftinti,  p.  151. 
D  D  S 


THE  ORIGIN  OF  LANGUAGE.  405 

says :  *  Je  persiste  done,  apr^  dix  ans  de   nouvelles 

*  Etudes,  k  envisager  le  langage  comme  fonn4  d'un  seul 
^  coup,  et  comme  sorti  instantanement  du  genie  de 
'  chaque  race,'  a  theory  which  involves  that  of  the 
plurality  of  human  species.  No  doubt  the  complexity 
and  apparent  perfection  of  the  granunar  among  very 
low  races,  is  at  first  sight  very  surprising ;  but  we  must 
remember  that  the  language  of  children  is  more  regular 
than  ours.  A  child  says,  *  I  goed,'  *  I  comed,'  badder, 
baddest,  &c.  Moreover  the  preservation  of  a  compli- 
cated system  of  grammar  among  savage  tribes  shows 
that  such  a  system  is  natural  to  them,  and  not  merely  a 
survival  firom  more  civilised  times.  Indeed,  we  know 
that  the  tendency  of  civilisation  is  towards  the  simplifi- 
cation  of  grammatical  forms. 

Nor  must  it  by  any  means  be  supposed  that  com- 
plexity implies  excellence,  or  even  completeness,  in  a 
language.  On  the  contrary,  it  often  arises  from  a  cum* 
bersome  mode  of  supplying  some  radical  defect.  Adam 
Smith  long  ago  pointed  out  that  the  verb  '  to  be '  is 

*  the  most  abstract  and  metaphysical  of  all  verbs,  and 

*  consequently  could  by  no  means  be  a  word  of  early 

*  invention.'  And  he  suggests  that  the  absence  of  this 
verb   probably   led  to   the   intricacy   of  conjugations. 

*  When,'  he  adds,  '  it  came  to  be  invented,  however,  as 

*  it  had  all  the  tenses  and  modes  of  any  other  verb,  by 

*  being  joined  with  the  passive  participle,  it  was  capable 

*  of  supplying  the  place  of  the  whole  passive  voice,  and 

*  of  rendering  this  part  of  their  conjugations  as  simple 
^  and  uniform,  as  the  use  of  prepositions  had  rendered 

*  their  declensions.'  ^     He  goes  on  to  point  out  that  the 

^  Smith'B  Moral  Seotiments,  vol.  ii.  p.  420. 


TO  A  FEW  BQOT^WOBDS,  407 

mood :  that  of  the  Hottentots  is  said  to  have  contained 
no  auxiliary  verbs.^ 

The  number  of  words  in  the  languages  of  civilised' 
races  is  no  doubt  immense,  Chinese,  for  instance, 
contains  40,000;  Todd's  edition  of  Johnson,  58,000; 
Webster's  Dictionary,  70,000;  and  Fliigers  more  than 
65,000.^  The  great  majority  of  these,  however,  can  be 
derived  from  certain  original  words,  or  roots  which  are 
very  few  in  number.  In  Chinese  there  are  about  450, 
Hebrew  has  been  reduced  to  500,  and  Milller  doubts 
whether  there  are  more  in  Sanskrit.  M.  D'Orsey  even 
assures  us  that  an  ordinary  agricultural  labourer  has 
not  300  words  in  his  vocabulary. 

Professor  Max  Miiller  *  observes,  that  *  this  fact  sim- 

*  plifies  immensely  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  lan- 

*  guage.     It  has  taken  away  all  excuse  for  those  rap- 

*  turous  descriptions    of    language    which    invariably 

*  preceded  the  argument  that  language  must  have  a 

*  divine  origin.  We  shall  hear  no  more  of  that  wonder- 
^  fill  instrument  which  can  express  all  we  see,  and  hear, 
^  and  taste,  and  touch,  and  smell;  which  is  the  breath- 

*  ing  image  of  the  whole  world;  which  gives  form  to 

*  the  airy  feelings  of  our  souls,  and  body  to  the  loftiest 
^  dreams  of  our   imagination;  which  can   arrange  in 

*  accurate  perspective  the  past,  the  present,  and  the 

*  future,  and  throw  over  everything  the  varying  hues  of 

*  certainty,  of  doubt,  of  contingency/ 

This,  indeed,  is  no  new  view,  but  was  that  generally 
adopted  by  the  philologists  of  the  last  century,  and  is 
fully  borne  out  by  more  recent  researches. 

>  LicfatenBteiD,  Travels  in  Soath      1861.     Lectures  <m  LaDgnage,  p. 
Africa,  Tol.  ii.  p.  871.  268. 

•  Saturday  Review,  November  3  •  T/wi  860. 


408  OBIOm  OF  EOOT^WOEDS. 

In  considering  the  origin  of  these  root-words,  we 
must  remember  that  most  of  them  are  very  ancient,  and 
much  worn  by  use.  This  greatly  enhances  the  difficulty 
of  the  problem. 

Nevertheless,  there  are  several  large  classes  of  words 
with  reference  to  the  origin  of  which  there  can  be  no 
doubt.  Many  names  of  animals,  such  as  cuckoo,  crow, 
peewit,  &c.,  are  evidently  derived  from  the  sounds 
made  by  those  birds.  Every  one  admits  that  such 
words  as  bang,  crack,  creak,  crush,  crash,  splash,  dash, 
purr,  whizz,  hum,  &c.,  have  arisen  from  the  attempt  to 
represent  sounds  characteristic  of  the  object  they  are 
intended  to  designate.^ 

Take,  again,  the  inarticulate  human  sounds—sob, 
sigh,  moan,  groan,  laugh,  cough,  weep,  whoop,  shriek, 
yawn. 

Or  of  animals;  as  cackle,  chuckle,  gobble,  quack, 
twitter,  chirp,  coo,  hoot,  caw,  croak,  chatter,  neigh, 
whinny,  mew,  purr,  bark,  yelp,  roar,  bellow. 

The  eollision  of  hard  bodies ;  clap,  rap,  tap,  knap, 
snap,  trap,  flap,  slap,  crack,  smack,  whack,  thwack,  pat, 
bat,  batter,  beat,  butt;  and  again,  clash,  flash,  plash, 
splash,  smash,  dash,  crash,  bang,  clang,  twang,  ring, 
ding,  din,  bump,  thump,  plump,  boom,  hum,  drum,  hiss, 
rustle,  bustle,  whistle,  whisper,  murmur,  babble,  &c 

So  also  sounds  denoting  certain  motions  and  actions; 
whirr,  whizz,  puff^,  fizz,  fly,  flit,  flow,  flutter,  patter, 
clatter,  crackle,  rattle,  bubble,  guggle,  dabble,  grabble, 
draggle,  dripple,  rush,  shoot,  shot,  shut,  &c, 

'  Wedgwood,  Introduction  to  also  Wedgwood's  Origin  of  Laa* 
Die.  of  English  Etymology.  Farrar,  guage,  which  I  regret  I  had  not  read 
Origin  of  Language,  p.  89.      See      when  this  chapter  was  written. 


ONOMATOPCEIA,  409 

Many  words  for  cutting,  and  the  objects  cut,  or 
used  for  cutting,  &c.,  are  obviously  of  similar  origin. 
Thus  we  have  the  sound  sh — r  with  each  of  the  vowels; 
share,  a  part  cut  oflf ;  shear,  an  instrument  for  cutting; 
shire,  a  division  of  a  country;  shore,  the  division  be- 
tween land  and  sea,  or  as  we  use  it  in  Kent,  between 
two  fields ;  a  shower,  a  number  of  separate  particles ; 
again,  scissors,  scythe,  saw,  scrape,  shard,  scale,  shale, 
shell,  shield,  skull,  schist,  shatter,  scatter,  scar,  scoop, 
score,  scrape,  scratch,  scum,  scour,  scurf,  surf,  scuttle, 
sect,  shape,  sharp,  shave,  sheaf,  shed,  shoal,  shred,  split, 
splinter,  splutter,  &c. 

Another  important  class  of  words  is  evidently 
founded  on  the  sounds  by  which  we  naturally  express 
our  feelings.  Thus  from  Oh !  Ah !  the  instinctive  cry 
of  pain,  we  get  woe,  vae  (Latin),  wail,  ache,  a;fo^,  Gr. 

From  the  deep  guttural  sound  ugh,  we  have  ugly, 
huge,  and  hug. 

From  pr,  or  prut,  indicating  contempt,  or  self-con- 
ceit, comes  proud,  pride,  &c. 

From  fie,  we  have  fiend,  foe,  feud,  foul,  Latin  putris, 
Fr.  puer,  filth,  fulsome,  fear. 

From  that  of  smacking  the  lips  we  get  yXvinfe, 
dulcis,  lick,  like,  which  though  originally  no  doubt  ap- 
plied to  things  eaten,  is  now  used  generally.  Turner 
mentions  that  on  presenting  some  hatchets  to  the  natives 
of  Tauna,  they  ^  smacked  their  lips,  and  made  their 
^  usual  click^  click  with  the  mouth  shut,  in  admiration  of 
'  the  fine  new  hatchets.'  ^ 

Under  these  circumstances  I  cannot  bat  think  that 
we  may  look  upon  the  words  above  mentioned  as  the 

^  Nineteen  Tears  in  Fcdjnedi,  p.  K, 


NICKNAMES  AND  SLANO  TEBM8,  411 

often  selected  from  some  similarity  of  sound,  or  connec- 
tion of  ideas,  often  so  quaint,  &nciful,  or  far-fetched, 
that  we  are  unable  to  recall  the  true  origin  even  of 
words  which  have  arisen  in  our  own  time.  How,  then, 
can  we  wonder  that  the  derivations  of  root- words  which 
are  thousands  of  years  old  should  be  in  so  many  cases 
lost,  or  at  least  undeterminable  with  certainty  ? 

Again,  the  words  most  frequently  required,  and 
especially  those  used  by  children,  are  generally  repre- 
sented by  the  simplest  and  easiest  sounds,  merely 
because  they  are  the  simplest.  Thus  in  Europe  we 
have  papa  and  daddy,  mamma,  and  baby  ;  poup^e  for  a 
doll ;  amme  for  a  nurse,  &c.  Some  authorities,  indeed, 
have  derived  Pater  and  Papa  from  a  root  Pa  to  cherish, 
and  Mater,  Mother,  from  Ma  to  make ;  this  derivation 
is  accepted  by  writers  representing  the  most  opposite 
theories,  as  for  instance  by  Pictet,  Renan,  Miiller,  and 
even  apparently  by  Farrar. 

According  to  Professor  Max  Miiller,  the  fact  that 

*  the  name  fether  was  coined  at  that  early  period,  shows 
'  that  the  father  acknowledged  the  offspring  of  his  wife 

*  as  his  own,  for  thus  only  had  he  a  right  to  claim  the 

*  title  of  father.     Father  is   derived  from  a  root   Pa, 

*  which  means,  not  to  beget  but  to  protect,  to  support, 

*  to  nourish.     The   father,   as   genitor,  was  called   in 

*  Sanskrit  ganitdr,  but  as  protector  and  supporter  of  his 

*  offspring  he  was  called  pitar ;  hence,  in  the  Veda, 
'  these  two  names  are  used  together,  in  order  to  express 

*  the  full  idea  of  Father.     Thus  the  poet  says  : — 

Dyads  me  pet&  genit& 
Jovis  mei  pater  genitor 
Ziiff  ifjuni  varifp  yofmip. 


WOBDS  FOB  FATHER  AND  MOTEEB. 


413 


Anguage 

Father 

Mother 

Ba 

De 

ae 

Da 

Noe 

y,  also  Dadye 

99 

Baba 

lya 

a 

99 

1 

99 

99 

i>a 

99 

99 

A 

>9 

99 

99 

99 

in 

>9 

99 

o 

» 

99 

11 

9> 

99 

M 

Yeye 

» 

99 

Ye 

(High  Sudan) 

Ba 

Ma 

la 

>» 

Na 

(Niger 

District) 

Wawa 

Nene 

Dada 

Ayo 

1 

Nda 

Nna 

t 

Dada 

Mo 

ko 

Da 

Na 

1 

Nda 

Meya 

Ba 

Nno 

ida 

Ada 

Onyi 

99 

Onya 

ra 

99 

99 

ima  (Central  Africa) 

Bawa 

Ya 

u 

Aba 

99 

io 

Bawa 

99 

ru 

99 

lya 

sm 

Mba 

99 

share 

Baba 

Nana 

bin 

99 

9» 

99 

Aye 

Ada 

Am 

uku 

Baba 

Bina 

;o(S.  W.Africa) 

Papa 

Mama 

[nan  (S. 

E.  Africa) 

Baba 

Mma 

ogo 

99 

.    Ondsunei 

414 


WORDS  FOB  FATHER  AND  MOTHES 


Language 

FaOer 

Mother 

Wun 

Baba 

Omsion 

Gad  saga 

f9 

Ma 

Gura 

Da 

Nye 

Banyun 

Aba 

Aai 

Nalu 

Baba 

Nya 

Bulanda 

99 

Ni 

Limba 

Papa 

Na 

Landoma 

99 

Mama 

Barba 

Baba 

Inya 

Timbuktu 

5» 

Nya 

Bagrmi 

Babi 

Kunyun 

Kadzina 

Baba 

Ua 

Tirabo 

99 

Nene 

Salum 

5> 

Yuma 

Goburu 

»> 

Inna 

Kano 

>> 

Ina 

Yala 

Ada 

Ene 

Dsarawa 

Tada 

Nga 

Koro 

Oda 

Ma 

Yasgua 

Ada 

Ama 

Kambali 

Dada 

Omo 

Soa  (Arabic 

group) 

Aba 

Aye 

Wadai 

, 

Abba 

Omma 

Malenba 

Tata 

Mamma ' 

Embomma 

Taata 

Mama 

Kaffir 

Ubaba 

Umame  * 

NON-ARYAN  NATIONS  OF  EUROPE 

AND  ARTA.* 

Turkish 

Baba 

Ana 

Georgian 

Mama 

Deda 

Mantshu 

Ama 

Erne 

Javanese 

Bapa 

Ibu 

Malay 

99 

Ma* 

Syami  (Thibet) 

Dhada 

• 

»  Tuckey's 

Narrative. 

Languages  of 

'  Indiay&c 

'  Morgan, 

Systems  of  Consan-           *  Crawfoid's   Malay  Dietioiiii 

ffuinity. 

and  Gramma] 

r. 

'  Hunter,  Die  of    Non-Aryan 


m  VARIOUS  lANGVAOES. 


415 


language 

Fo/Aer 

;an 

Pha 

(Nepal) 

Aba 

• 

1 

Apa 

a 

Babai 

a  (Sikkim) 

Abo 

ni 

Appa 

J  (N.  E.  Bengal) 

Aba 

Bap 

Aba 

m  (Burmah) 

Ahpa 

Pa 

Aba 

(Siam) 

Ma 

tentral  India) 

Appu 

di 

Baba 

jy 

Babe 

i        >> 

Baba 

I 

Abba 

a  (Southern  India) 

Amme 

»            ,, 

Appa 

» 

Amma 

ftlese 

Appa 

le 

Fu 

Pa 

Mother 

Ama 

99 

Amma 

Ama 

Amo 

Ai 

Ama 

Ma 

Ama 

Ami 

Au 

Anu 

Ya 

Enga 

Ayo 

Ayyo 

Dai 

Ayya 

Appe 

Awe 

Awe 

Amma 

Mu 

Mo» 


mill 

Zealand 

,  Islands 

\}  (N.  Australia) 

^  Murray  Island 


ISLANDERS. 

Tama  Mama 

Pa-Matuatana  Matua  wahina 

Tamny  Fae 

Bab  Ama 

Baab  Hammah 


AUSTRALIA. 

rang  (N.  W.  Aastralia)Marmook 
corenwurro     ,>  Marmak 

per  .,  Marmook 


99 


Barbook 

Barpanorook 

Barbook 


'  MorgaOi  Sys.  of  Conianguinity. 


416 


W0BD8  FOB  FATMEB  AND  MOTHBB 


>9 


Language 

Tauugarong 
Boraipar  (S.  Australia) 
Murrumbidgee 
Western  Australia 
Port  Lincoln 


Father 

Warredoo 

Murmme 

Kunny 

Mammun 

Pappi 


MoOer 

Barbanook 
Parppe 

Ngangan 
Maitya 


ESQUIMAUX. 

Esquimaux  (Hudson's  Bay)  Atata 
Tshuktchi  (Asia)  Atta 


Amama 

9 


The  American  languages  seem  at  first  sight  opposed 
to  the  view  here  suggested;  on  close  examination,  how- 
ever, this  is  not  the  case,  since  the  pronunciation  of  the 
labials  is  very  difficult  to  many  American  races.    Thus 
La  Hontan  (who  is  confirmed  by  Gallatin  ^)  informs  us 
that  the  Hurons  do  not  use  the  labials,  and  that  he 
spent  four  days  in  attempting  without  success  to  teach 
a  Huron  to  pronounce  b,  p,  and  m.     The  Iroquois  are 
stated  not  to  use  labials.     Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  teUs 
us  that  the  Peruvian  language  wanted  the  letters  b,  d, 
f,  g,  s,  and  X ;  b,  d,  f,  g,  r,  and  s  in  Aztec  ;  *  and  the 
Indians  of  Port  au  Fran^ais,  according  to  M,  Lamanon, 
made  no  use  of  the  consonants  b,  d,  f,  j,  p,  v,  or  x.' 
Still,  even  in  America  we  find  some  cases  in  which  the 
sounds  for  father  resemble  those  so  general  elsewhere; 
thus — 


Language  Father 

Costanos  (N.  W.  America)  Ah  Pah 
Tahakli  „  Apa 

Tlatskanai  ,y  Mama 

Nasqually  ,,  Baa 


Mother 

Ah  nah 

39 

Naa 
Sogo 


'  Trans.  Am,  Antiq.  Soc.  vol.  i.      vol.  i.  p.  270. 
p.  236.  »  Gallfttin,  lor,  cU.  p,  G3. 

'  Wuttke's    Ges.    der    Mensch. 


t 


IN  VARIOUS  LANGUAGES, 


417 


Language 

^  Father 

Mother 

Nootka  (N.  W.  America) 

Api 

Una 

Athapascans  (Canada) 

Appa 

Unnungcool 

Omahas  (Missouri) 

Dadai 

Eehong 

Minnetarees 

TantAi 

Eeka 

Choctas  (MisRissippi) 

Aunkke 

Iskeh 

Caribs 

Baba 

Bibi 

Quichua 

Yava 

• 

Maipa 

Uainamben  (Amazons) 

Pai 

Ami 

Cobeu                 „ 

Ipaki 

Ipako 

Tucano               „ 

Pagui 

Maou 

Tariana               ,, 

Paica 

Naca 

Baniwa 

Padjo 

Nadjo 

Barre 

Mbaba 

Memi 

Muysea 

Paba 

Guuir^ 

Finding,  then,  that  the  easiest  sounds  which  a  child 
can  produce  denote  father  and  mother  almost  all  over 
the  world;  remembering  that  the  root  ba  or  pa  indi- 
cates baby  as  well  as  father;  that  in  various  parts  of 
the  world  the  roots  *  pa '  and  *  ma '  denote  other  near 
relationships;  and  observing  that  in  some  cases  the 
usual  sounds  are  reversed  ;  as  for  instance  in  Georgian, 
where  mama  stands  for  father,  and  dada  for  mother ; 
or  in  Tuluva,  where  amme  is  father,  and  appe  mother; 
in  Chilian,  where  *papa'  means  mother;  in  Tlatskanai, 
where  *mama'  stands  for  father;  in  Madurese  again, 
'mama'  means  father,  *ambu'  or  *  babu  *  mother;  or 
some  of  the  Australian  tribes,  in  which  combinations  of 
the  sound  mar  stand  for  father,  and  bar  for  mother ;  we 
must  surely  admit  that  the  Sanskrit  verb  Pa,  to  protect, 
comes  from  pa,  father,  and  not  vice  versd. 

There  are  few  more  interesting  studies  than  the 
steps  by  which  our  present  language  has  been  derived 
from  these  original  roots.     This  subject  has  been  ad- 

E  E 


418  THE  GHOIOE  OF  BOOT^WOBDB, 

mirably  dealt  with  by  my  friead  Professor  Max  MuUer 
in  his  *  Lectures  on  Language/  and,  tempting  as  it 
would  be  to  do  so,  I  do  not  propose  to  follow  him  into 
that  part  of  the  science.  As  regards  the  formation  ot 
the  original  roots,  however,  he  declines  to  express  any 
opinion.  Rejecting  what  he  calls  the  pooh-pooh  and 
bow-wow  theories^  (though  they  are  in  reality  but 
one),  he  observes  that  *  the  theory  which  is  suggested 

*  to  us  by  an  aHalysis  of  language  carried  out  according 

*  to  the  principles  of  comparative  philology,  is  the  very 

*  opposite.     We  arrive  in  the  end  at  roots,  and  every 

*  one  of  these  expresses  a  general,  not  an  individual 

*  idea.'  But  the  whole  question  is.  How  were  these  root3 
chosen?  How  did  particular  things  come  to  be  denoted 
by  particular  sounds  ? 

Here,  however.  Professor  Max  MUller  stops.  No- 
thing, he  admits,^  *  would  be  more  interesting  than  to 
know  from  historical  documents  the  exact  process  by 
which  the  first  man  began  to  lisp  his  first  words,  and 
thus  to  be  rid  for  ever  of  all  the  theories  on  the  orimn 
of  speech.  But  this  knowledge  is  denied  us  ;  and,  if 
it  had  been  otherwise,  we  should  probably  be  quite 
unable  to  understand  those  primitive  events  in  the 
history  of  the  human  mind.' 

Yet  in  his  last  chapter  he  says,^  '  And  now  I  am 
afraid  I  have  but  a  few  minutes  left  to  explain  the 
last  question  of  all  in  our  science,  namely.  How  can 
sound  express  thought?  How  did  roots  become  the 
signs  of  general  ideas  ?  How  was  the  abstract  idea  of 
measuring    expressed  by    niA,    the    idea    of   thinking 

»  Science  of  Language,  p.  373.  ^  j^  ^  p  ^^^ 

»  Loc.  cit.  p.  380. 


THE  CHOICE  OF  JiOOT^WORDS.  419 

by  man?  How  did  g&  come  to  mean  going,  sth& 
standing,  sad  sitting,  d&  giving,  mar  dying,  char 
walking,  kar  doing?  I  shall  try  to  answer  as  briefly 
as  possible.  The  400  or  500  roots  which  remain  as 
the  constituent  elements  in  different  ferailies  of  lan- 
guage are  not  interjections,  nor  are  they  imitations. 
They  are  phonetic  tjrpes  produced  by  a  power  inherent 
in  human  nature.  They  exist,  as  Plato  would  say,  by 
nature  ;  though  with  Plato  we  should  add  that,  when 
we  say  by  nature,  we  mean  by  the  hand  of  God. 
There  is  a  law  which  runs  through  nearly  the  whole 
of  nature,  that  everything  which  is  struck  rings.  .  .  . 
Man,  in  his  primitive  and  perfect  state,  was  not  only 
endowed,  like  the  brute,  with  the  power  of  expressing 
his  sensations  by  interjections,  and  his  perceptions  by 
onomatopoeia.  He  possessed  likewise  the  faculty  of 
giving  more  articulate  expression  to  the  natural  con- 
ceptions of  his  mind.  That  faculty  was  not  of  his 
making.  It  was  an  instinct,  an  instinct  of  the  mind 
as  irresistible  as  any  other  iostinct.  So  far  as  lan- 
guage is  the  production  of  that  instinct,  it  belongs  to 
the  realm  of  nature.' 

This  answer,  though  expressed  with  Professor  Max 
MUller's  usual  eloquence,  does  not  carry  to  my  mind 
any  definite  conception.  On  the  other  hand,  it  appears 
to  me  that  at  any  rate,  as  regards  some  roots,  we 
have,  as  already  pointed  out,  a  satisfactory  explanation. 
Professor  Max  Miiller,*  indeed,  admits  that  *  there  are 

*  some  names,  such  as  cuckoo,  which  are  clearly  formed 

*  by  an  imitation  of  sound.     But,'  he  adds,  *  words  of 

*  this  kind  are,  like  artificial  flowers,  without  a  root. 

*  Science  of  Language,  p.  303. 
E  B  2 


420  POVERTY  OF  8AVA0E  LAN0UA0B8. 

'  They  are  sterile,  and  are  unfit  to  express  anything 

*  beyond  the  one  object  which  they  imitate.     If  you 

*  remember  the    variety  of  derivatives  that  could  be 

*  formed  from  the  root  spac,  to  see,  you  will  at  once 

*  perceive  the  difference  between  the  fabrication  of  such 
'  a  word  as  cuckoo,  and  the  true  natural  growth  ol 
'  words/  It  has,  however,  been  already  shown  that 
such  roots,  far  from  being  sterile,  are,  on  the  contrar)^, 
very  fruitful,  and  we  must  remember  that  savage  kn- 
guages  are  extremely  poor  in  abstract  terms. 

Indeed,  the  vocabularies  of  the  various  races  are 
most  interesting  from  the  indications  which  they  afford 
with  reference  to  the  condition  of  those  by  whom  they 
are  used.     Thus  we  get  a  melancholy  idea  of  the  moral 
state  and  family  life  of  tribes  which  are  deficient  in 
terms  of  endearment.    Colonel  Dalton^  tells  us  that  the 
Hos  of  Central   India  have   no   *  endearing  epithets.* 
The  Algonquin  language,  one  of  the  richest  in  North 
America,  contained  no  verb  '  to  love,'  and  when  Elliot 
translated  the  Bible  into  it  in  1661,  he  was  obliged  to 
coin  a  word  for  the  purpose.     The  Tinn6  Indians  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  had  no  equi- 
valent for  '  dear '  or  '  beloved.'     '  I  endeavoured/  says 
General  Lefroy,  *  to  put  this  intelligibly  to  Nanette,  by 
'  supposing  such  an  expression  as  ma  ch^re  femme ;  ma 
'  chere  fille.     When  at  length  she  understood  it,  her 
'  reply  was  (with  great  em})hasis),  "T  disent  jamais  <;a; 
^  "  i'  disent  ma  femme,  ma  fille."  '     The  Kalmucks  and 
some  of  the  South  Sea  Islanders  are  said  to  have  had 
no  word  for  '  thanks.'     Lichtenstein,^  speaking  of  the 

»  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.  N.S.  vol.  vi.  p.  27. 
2  Vol.  i.  p.  110;  vol.  ii.  p.  40. 


DEFICIENOT  IN  TEEMS   OF  AFFECTION.  421 

ishmen,  mentions  it  as  a  remarkable  instance  of  the 

tal  absence  of  civilisation  amon^   them   that  'they 

have  no  names,  and  seem  not  to  feel  the  want  of  such 

a  means  of  distinguishing  one  individual  from  another/ 

^liny  ^  makes  a  similar  statement  concerning  a  race  in 

LVorthern  Africa.     Freycinet*^  also  asserts  that  some  of 

the   Australian  tribes  did  not  name  their  women.     I 

confess  that  I  am  inclined  to  doubt  these  statements, 

and  to   refer   the  supposed  absence  of  names  to  the 

curious  superstitions  already  referred  to  (anii^  p.  236), 

and  which  make  savages  so  reluctant  to  communicate 

their  true  names  to  strangers.     The  Brazilian  tribes, 

according  to  Spix  and  Martins,  had  separate  names  for 

the  different  parts  of  the  body,  and  for  all  the  different 

animals  and  plants  with  which  they  were  acquainted, 

but  were  entirely  deficient  in  such  terms  as  *  colour/ 

'  tone,'  *  sex,'  *  genus,'  '  spirit,'  &c. 

Bailey  *  mentions  that  the  language  of  the  Veddahs 
(Ceylon)  ^is  very  limited.  It  only  contains  such 
^  phrases  as  are  required  to  describe  the  most  striking 

*  objects  of  nature,  and  those  which  enter  into  the  daily 
'  life  of  the  people  theniselves.  So  rude  and  primitive 
'  is  their  dialect  that  the  most  ordinary  objects  and 
'  actions  of  life  are  described  by  quaint  periphrases/ 

'  In  Kocch,  Bodo,  and  Dhimal  there  is  not  a  single 
'  vernacular  word  to  express  matter,  spirit,  space, 
'  instinct,  reason,  consciousness,  quantity,  degree,   or 

*  the  like.'*  Among  the  Bongo  of  Central  Africa  words 
for   *  abstract   ideas,   such   as   spirit,  soul,  hope,  fear, 

•  Nat.  Ilia.,  1.  v.  a.  viii.  *  Eaaay  on  the  Kocch,  Bodo,  and 
»  Vol.  ii.  p.  741).                                Dhimal  Tribea,  by  B.  H.  Hodgsoo, 

•  Trtna.  Ethn.  Soc.  N.S.,  vol.  ii.      Eaq.,  p.  ii.     See  alao  Ilunter'a  An* 
p.  2U8 ;  aee  alao  p.  300.  nala  of  Rural  Bengal,  p.  lia 


422  ABSENCE  OF  AB8TBAGT  TERMS. 

*  appear    to   be    absolutely   wanting,    but    experience 

*  shows  that  in  this  respect  other  negro  tongues  are  not 

*  more  richly  provided.'  ^ 

According  to  missionaries  the  Fuegians  had  *no 
'  abstract  terms.'  In  the  North  American  languages  a 
term  '  suflSciently  general  to  denote  an  oak-tree  is  ex- 
'  ceptional.*  Thus,  the  Choctaw  language  has  names 
for  the  black  oak,  white  oak,  and  red  oak,  but  none  for 
an  oak,  still  less  for  a  tree. 

The  Tasmanians,  again^  had  no  general  term  for  a 
tree,  though  they  had  names  for  each  particular  kind; 
nor  could  they  express  'qualities  such  as  hard,  soft, 

*  warm,  cold,  long,  short,  round,'  &c. 

Speaking  of  the  Coroados  (Brazil),  Martius  observes 
that  '  it  would  be  in  vain  to  seek  among  them  words  for 
'  the  abstract  ideas  of  plant,  animal,  and  the  still  more 

*  abstract  notions  colour,  tone,  sex,  species,  &c.  ;  such  a 

*  generalisation  of  ideas  is  found  among  them  only  In 
'  the  frequently  used  infinitive  of  tlie  verbs  to  walk,  to 
'  eat,  to  drink,  to  dance,  to  see,  to  hear,   &c.     They 

*  have  no  conception  of  the  general  powers  and  laws  of 
'  nature,  and  therefore  cannot  express  tlicm  in  words/ * 
It  is  remarkable  that  barbarous  races  are  often  deficient 
in  terms  denoting  colours. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  more  interesting  part  of  the 
study  of  language  than  that  which  concerns  the  system 
of  numeration,  nor  any  more  striking  pi-oof  of  the  low 
mental  condition  of  many  savage  races  than  the  un- 
doubted fact  that  they  are  unable  to  count  their  own 
fingers,  even  of  one  hand. 

•  Schweinfurth's   Heart   of   Af-  '^  Spix  and  Martius,  Travel*  in 

rica,  vol.  i.  p.  ;U1.  l^razil,  vol.  ii.  p.  i>o.'{. 


DEFICIENCY  IN  NUMERALS.  423 

According  to  Lichtenstein,  the  Bushmen  could  not 
count  beyond  two.  Spix  and  Martius  make  the  same 
statement  about  the  Brazilian  Wood-Indians.  The 
Cape  Yorkers  of  Australia  count  as  follows :— 


One 

Netat. 

Two 

Naes. 

Three 

Naes-netat. 

Four 

Naes-naes. 

Five 

Naes- naes-netat 

Six 

Naes  naes-naes. 

Speaking  of  the  Lower  Murray  nations,  Mr.  Beve- 
ridge  says,  *  Their  numerals  are  confined  to  two  alone, 

*  viz.  "  ryup,"  *'  politi,"  the  first  signifying  "  one  "  and 

*  the  second  "  two."     To  express  five,  they  say  *'  ryup 

*  "  mumangin,"  or  one  hand,  and  to  express  ten,  "  politi 
'  "  mumangin,"  or  two  hands.'  ^  Indeed,  no  Australian 
can  go  beyond  four,  their  term  for  five  simply  implying 
a  large  number.  The  Dammaras,  according  to  Galton, 
used  no  term  beyond  three.  He  gives  so  admirable  and 
at  the  same  time  so  amusing  an  account  of  Dammara 
difficulties  in  language  and  arithmetic  that  I  cannot 
resist  quoting  it  in  full.     *  We  had,'  he  says,^  *  to  trust 

to  our  Dammara  guides,  whose  ideas  of  time  and  dis- 
tance were  most  provokingly  indistinct ;  besides  this 
they  have  no  comparative  in  their  language,  so  that 
you  cannot  say  to  them,  "  Which  is  the  longer  of  the 
*'  two,  the  next  stage  or  the  last  one?  "  but  you  must 
say,  "  The  last  is  little;  the  next  is  it  great?"  The 
reply  is  not.  It  is  a  "  little  longer,"  or  "  very  much 

>  Trans,  of  the  R  8.  of  VictorU,  '  Qalton^s  Tropical  South  Africa, 

▼ol.  vi.  p.  151.    Lang   Queensland,      p.  213. 
p.  43.3. 


SAVAGE  DIFFICULTIES  IN  AEFFEMETIO,        425 

to  come  out  too  "  pat "  to  be  correct,  and  he  would 
refer  back  to  the  first  couple  of  sticks ;  and  then  his 
mind  got  hazy  and  confused,  and  wandered  from  one 
sheep  to  the  other,  and  he  broke  off  the  transaction 
until  two  sticks  were  put  into  his  hand,  and  one  sheep 
driven  away,  and  then  the  other  two  sticks  given  him, 
and  the  second  sheep  driven  away.  When  a  Dam- 
mara's  mind  is  bent  upon  number,  it  is  too  much 
occupied  to  dwell  upon  quantity ;  thus  a  heifer  is 
bought  from  a  man  for  ten  sticks  of  tobacco,  his  large 
hands  being  both  spread  out  upon  the  ground,  and  a 
stick  placed  upon  each  finger.  He  gathers  up  the 
tobacco,  the  size  of  the  mass  pleases  him,  and  the 
bargain  is  struck.  You  then  want  to  buy  a  second 
heifer;  the  same  process  is  gone  through,  but  half 
sticks  instead  of  whole  sticks  are  put  upon  his  fingers; 
the  man  is  equally  satisfied  at  the  time,  but  occasion- 
ally finds  it  out,  and  complains  the  next  day. 

'  Once  while  I  watched  a  Dammara  floundering 
hopelessly  in  a  calculation  on  one  side  of  me,  I  ob- 
served Dinah,  my  spaniel,  equally  embarrassed  on  the 
other.  She  was  overlooking  half-a-dozen  of  her  new- 
bom  puppies,  which  had  been  removed  two  or  three 
times  from  her,  and  her  anxiety  was  excessive,  as  she 
tried  to  find  out  if  they  were  all  present,  or  if  any 
were  still  missing.  She  kept  puzzling  and  running 
her  eyes  over  them,  backwards  and  forwards,  but 
could  not  satisfy  herself.  She  evidently  had  a  vague 
notion  of  counting,  but  the  figure  was  too  large  for 
her  brain.  Taking  the  two  as  they  stood,  dog  and 
Dammarn,  the  comparison  reflected  no  great  honour 
on  the  man.' 


AS  SHOWN   IN  THE  NAMES   OF  NUMERALS,    427 

finger  as  it  is  used  for  enumeration.  They  be^n 
with  the  little  finger.  This  little  finger,  then,  is  one. 
Now  six  is  five  (that  is,  one  whole  hand)  and  one 
more.  We  can  easily  see,  then,  why  their  word  for 
six  comprehends  the  word  for  one.  Again,  seven  is 
five  (one  whole  hand)  and  two  more — thus  their 
word  for  seven  comprehends  the  word  for  two. 
Again,  when  they  have  bent  down  the  eighth  finger, 
the  most  noticeable  feature  of  the  hand  is  that  two 
fingers,  that  is,  a  finger  and  a  thumb,  remain  ex- 
tended. Now  the  Aht  word  for  eight  comprehends 
atlah,  the  word  for  two.  The  reason  for  this  I 
imagine  to  be  as  follows : — Eight  is  ten  (or  the  whole 
hands)  wanting  two.  Again,  when  the  ninth  finger 
is  down,  only  one  finger  is  left  extended.  Their 
word  for  nine  comprehends  tsowwauk,  the  word  for 
one.  Nine  is  ten  (or  two  whole  hands)  wanting 
one.'  ^ 

The  Zamuca  and  Muysca  Indians  *^  have  a  cumbrous, 
but  interesting,  system  of  numeration.  For  five  they 
say,  '  hand  finished.'  For  six,  *  one  of  the  other  hand ; ' 
that  is  to  say,  take  a  finger  of  the  other  hand.  For  ten 
they  say, '  two  hands  finished,'  or  sometimes  more  simply 

*  quicha,'  that  is  '  foot.'  Eleven  is  foot-one ;  twelve, 
foot-two ;  thirteen,  foot-three,  and  so  on :  twenty  is  the 
feet  finished ;  or  in  other  cases  '  Man,'  because  a  man 
has  ten  fingers  and  ten  toes,  thus  making  twenty. 

Among  the  Jaruroes  the  word  for  forty  is  *  noeni- 

*  pume ; '  i.e.  two  men,  from  noeni,  two,  and  canipune, 
men. 

>  ScoDes  and  Studies  of  Savage  '  IIumboldt*8     Penooal      Re- 

Life,  pp.  121,  122.  aearchefl,  vol.  ii.  p.  117. 


428        USE  OF  THE  FIN0EB8  IN  ABITHMBTIC, 

Speaking  of  the  Guiana  natives,  Mr.  Brett  observes  ^ 
that  '  another  point  in  which  the  different  nations  agree 
is  their  method  of  numeration.  The  first  four  num- 
bers are  represented  by  simple  words,  as  in  the  table 
above  given.  Five  is  "my  one  hand/'  abar-dakaho 
in  Araw&k.  Then  comes  a  repetition,  abar  timen^ 
biam  tinieny  &c.,  up  to  nine.  Biam-dakabo^  "  my  two 
'^  hands,"  is  ten.  From  ten  to  twenty  they  use  the 
toes  {kuti  or  okuti)^  as  abar-kuti-bana^  "  eleven"  biam- 
kuti  bana,  ''  twelve,"  &c.  They  call  twenty  abar-loko, 
one  loko  or  man.  They  then  proceed  by  nien  or 
scores;  thus,  forty-five  is  laboriously  expressed  by 
biani'lokoabar-dakabo  tajeago^  "  two  men  and  one 
"  hand  upon  it."  For  higher  numbers  they  have  now 
recourse  to  our  words  hundred  and  thousand.^  So 
also  among  the  Caribs,  the  word  for  '  ten/  Chonnoucabo 
raim,  meant  literally  *  the  fingers  of  both  hands;'  and 
that  for  *  twenty '  was  Chonnougouci  raim,  i.e.  the 
fingers  and  toee.*"^ 

The  Coroados  ^  generally  count  only  by  the  joints  of 
the  fingers,  consequently  only  to  three.  Every  greater 
number  they  express  by  the  word  '  mony.' 

According  to  Dobritzhoffer  'the  Guaranies,  when 
'  questioned  respecting  a  thing  exceeduig  four,  imme- 
'  diatcly  reply  ndipapahabi,  ndipapahai,  innumerable/* 
So  also  *  the  Abipones^  can  only  express  three  numbers 
'  in  proper  words :  Initdra^  one,  Ifioaka^  two,  Inoah 
'  yckaini,  three.     They  make  up  for  the  other  numbers 

>   Bretfs  Indian  Tribes  of  Quiana,  Brazil,  vol  ii.  p.  256. 
P-  417.  *  History  of  the  Abipone*,  voL 

«  Tertre's  History  of  the  Caribby  ii.  p.  1 7 1 . 
Islands.  »  Loc,  cit.  p.  109. 

^  Spix   and  Martius,  Travels  in 


AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  NAMES   OF  NUMERALS.     429 

*  by  various  arts  ;  thus,  geyenk  nath.  the  fingers  of  an 

*  emu,  which,  as  it  has  three  in  front  and  one  turned 

*  back,  are  four,  serves  to  express  that  number:  neen- 

*  halek^  a  beautiful  skin  spotted  with  five  dififerent 
'  colours,  is  used  to  signify  the  number  five.'    '  Handm- 

*  begem^  the  fingers  of  one  hand,  means  five ;  landm 
'  rihegem^  the  fingers  of  both  hands,  ten;  landm  rihegem 

*  cat  gracherhaka  anamichirihegem^  the  fingers  of  both 
'  hands  and  both  feet,  twenty.' 

Among  the  Malays  and  throughout  Polynesia  the 
word  for  five  is  ima,  lima,  or  rima.  In  Bali,  lima  also 
means  a  hand;  this  is  also  the  case  in  the  Bugis,  Hand- 
bar,  and  End6  languages  ;  in  the  Makasar  dialect  it  is 
liman,  in  Sasak  it  is  ima,  in  Bima  it  is  rima,  in  Sem- 
bawa  it  is  limang.^ 

In  the  Mpongwe  language  '  tyani '  or  '  tani '  is  five, 
'  ntyame  '  is  *  hand.'  *  The  Koossa  Kaffirs  make  little 
use  of  numerals.  Lichtenstein  could  never  discover 
that  they  had  any  word  for  eight,  few  could  reckon 
beyond  ten,  and  many  did  not  know  the  names  of  any 
numerals.  Yet  if  a  single  animal  was  missing  out  of  a 
herd  of  several  hundred,  they  observed  it  immediately.* 
This,  however,  as  Mr.  Galton  explains,  is  merely 
because  they  miss  a  face  they  know.    Among  the  Zulu, 

*  tatitisupa '  six,  means  literally  '  take  the  thumb ; '  i.e., 
having  used  the  finger  of  one  hand,  take  the  thumb  of 
the   next.      *  The   numbers,'   says   Lichtenstein,    *  are 

*  commonly  expressed  among  the  Beetjuans  by  fingers 

*  held  up,  so  that  the  word  is  rarely  spoken  ;  many  are 

'  Raffle6*8  Ilifltory  of  Java,  Ap-      guage.     1847. 
pendix  F.  '  Lichtenstein,  vol.  i.  p.  280.  See 

'  Grammar  of  the  Mpongwe  Lan-     also  App. 


430  THE  OFIGIN  OF  THE  DECIMAL  SYSTEM. 

'  even  unacquainted  with  these  numerals,  and  never 
'  employ  anything  but  the  sign.    It  therefore  occasioned 

*  me  no  small  trouble  to  learn  the  numerals,  and  I  could 

*  by  no  means  arrive  at  any  denomination  for  the  num- 
'  bers  five  and  nine.     Beyond  ten  even  the  most  learned 

*  could  not  reckon,  nor  could  I  make  out  by  what  signs 
'  they  ever  designated  these  higher  numbers.'  ^ 

Even  in  our  own  language  the  word  *  five '  has  a 
similar  origin,  since  it  is  derived  firom  the  Greek  tsVti, 
which  again  is  evidently  connected  with  the  Persian 
pendji;  now  in  Persian  *pentcha'  means  a  hand,  as 
Humboldt  has  already  pointed  out.* 

Hence,  no  doubt,  the  prevalence  of  the  decimal  sys- 
tem in  arithmetic ;  it  has  no  particular  advantage ;  in- 
deed, either  eight  or  twelve  would,  in  some  respects, 
have  been  more  convenient ;  eight,  because  you  can 
divide  it  by  two,  and  then  divide  the  result  again  by 
two;  and  twelve  because  it  is  divisible  by  six,  four, 
three,  and  two.  Ten,  however,  has  naturally  been 
selected,  because  we  have  ten  fingers. 

These  examples,  then,  appear  to  me  very  instructive; 
we  seem  as  it  were  to  trace  up  the  formation  of  the 
numerals;  we  perceive  the  true  cause  of  the  decimal 
system  of  notation ;  and  we  obtain  interesting,  if  melan- 
choly, evidence  of  the  extent  to  which  the  faculty  of 
thought  lies  dormant  among  the  lower  races  of  man. 

*  Loc,  cit.  vol.  ii.  App. 

^  Personal  Researches,  London,  1814,  vol  ii.  p.  116. 


431 


CHAPTER  X. 


LAWS. 


THE  customs  and  laws  of  the  lower  races,  so  far  as 
religious  and  family  relations  are  concerned,  have 
already  been  discussed.  There  are,  however,  some 
other  points  of  view  with  reference  to  which  it  seems 
desirable  to  make  some  remarks.  The  progress  and 
development  of  law  is  indeed  one  of  the  most  interesting 
as  well  as  important  sections  of  human  history.  It  is 
fiur  less  essential,  as  Groguet  ^  truly  observes,  *  de  savoir 
^  le  nombre  des  dynasties  et  les  noms  des  souverains 

*  qui  les  composoient;  mais  il  est  essentiel  de  connoitre 
^  les  loix,  les  arts,  les  sciences  et  les  usages  d'une  nation 
'  que  toute  I'antiquit^  a  regard(5e  comme  un  modfele  de 
'  sagesse  et  de  vertu.  Voil^  les  objets  que  je  me  suis 
'  propose,  et  que  je  vais  traiter  avec  le  plus  d'exacti- 

*  tude  qu'il  me  sera  possible.'  It  is,  however,  impos- 
sible thoroughly  to  understand  the  laws  of  the  most 
advanced  nations,  unless  we  take  into  consideration 
those  customs  of  ruder  communities  from  which  they 
took  their  origin,  by  which  they  are  so  profoundly 
influenced. 

It  is,  therefore,  very  much  to  be  regretted  that  we 
are  not  more  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  laws  and 
customs  of  savage  races. 

'  De  rOrigine  des  Loiz,  des  Arts,  et  des  Sciences,  toI.  i.  p.  45. 


SAVAGE  LAW8  NOT  FOUNDED   ON  THE  FAMILY.     433 

'  sur  leurs  enfants:  ils  ^toient  dans  ces  premiers  terns 
*  les  chefs  et  les  legislateurs  de  leur  famille/ 

Whereas,  it  has  been  already  shown  in  the  earlier 
chapters  of  this  work  that  the  family  is  by  no  means  so 
perfectly  organised  among  the  lowest  races. 

Sir  G.  Grey/  speaking  of  the  Australians,  truly  says 
that  the  ^  laws  of  this  people  are  unfitted  for  the  govern- 
ment of  a  single  isolated  family,  some  of  them  being 
only  adapted  for  the  regulation  of  an  assemblage  of 
families;  they  could,  therefore,  not  have  been  a  series 
of  rules  given  by  the  first  father  to  his  children:  again, 
they  could  not  have  been  rules  given  by  an  assembly 
of  the  first  fathers  to  their  children,  for  there  are  these 
remarkable  features  about  them,  that  some  are  of  such 
a  nature  as  to  compel  those  subject  to  them  to  remain 
in  a  state  of  barbarism/ 

Again,  Goguet  *  states  that  '  les  loix  du  mariage  ont 
mis  un  frein  k  une  passion  qui  n'en  voudroit  recon- 
noitre aucun.  EUes  ont  fait  plus:  en  determinant  les 
degres  de  consanguinity  qui  rendent  les  alliances  ill^- 
gitimes,  elles  ont  appris  aux  hommes  a  connoitre  et  a 
respecter  les  droits  de  la  nature,'  which  is  very  far 
from  l>eing  the  case.  I  have  already  observed  that 
even  Sir  Henry  Maine  would  probably  have  modified 
in  some  points  tlie  views  expressed  in  his  excellent 
work,*  if  he  had  paid  more  attention  to  the  manners, 
customs,  and  laws  of  savages.  But,  although  the 
progress  and  development  of  law  belong,  for  the 
most  part,  to  a  more  advanced  stage  of  human  society 
than   that   which  is  the    subject   of  this   work,   still, 

*  Orey's  Australia,  vol.  ii.  p.  222.         '  Ancient  Ijiw. 

*  Loc.  cit.y  p.  20. 

F  F 


TYRANNY  OF  CUSTOM  AMONG  SAVA0E8,        435 

*  which  the  best  food,  the  best  pieces,  the  best  animals, 

*  &c.,  are  prohibited  to  the  women  and  young  men,  and 
'  reserved  for  the  old.  The  women  are  generally  ap- 
'  propriated   to  the  old  and  powerful,  some  of  whom 

*  possess  four  to  seven  wives ;  while  wives  are  altogether 

*  denied  to  young  men,  unless  they  have  sisters  to  give 

*  in  exchange,  and  are  strong  and  courageous  enough 

*  to  prevent  their  sisters   from   being   taken   without 

*  exchange.' 

Among  the  Mbayas  of  South  America  the  married 
women  are  not  allowed  to  eat  beef,  capibara,  or  monkey; 
and  the  girls  are  forbidden  to  partake  of  any  meat,  or 
any  fish  which  is  more  than  a  foot  long.     '  Les  Char- 

*  treux    m^mes   n'e   sont  pas   venus   a  cepoint  d'aus- 

t^rit^.'^ 

*  To  believe,'  says  Sir  G.  Grey,^  '  that  man  in  a 

*  savage  state  is  endowed  with  freedom,  either  of 
'  thought  or  action,  is  erroneous  in  the  highest  degree.' 

In  Tahiti,'  '  the  men  were  allowed  to  eat  the  flesh  of 

*  the  pig,  and  of  fowls,  and  a  variety  of  fish,  cocoa-nuts, 

*  and  plantains,  and  whatever  was  presented  as  an  ofFer- 

*  ing  to  the  gods,  which  the  females,  on  pain  of  death, 

*  were  forbidden  to  touch,  as  it  was  supposed  they  would 

*  pollute  them.     The  fires  on  which  the  men's  food  was 

*  cooked  were  also  sacred,  and  were  forbidden  to  be  used 

*  by  the  females.  The  baskets  in  which  their  provisions 
'  were  kept,  and  the  house  in  which  the  men  ate,  were 

*  also  sacred,  and  prohibited  to  the  females  under  the 

*  same  cruel  penalty;  hence  the  inferior  food,  both  for 

*  Auira*8     Voy.    dans    TAm^r.      217. 
MeridioDale.  '  Polyneaian  Besearchea,  vol.  i. 

'  Grey's    Australia,    ▼ol.    ii.   p.      p.  222. 

f  i2 


436  SUPERSTITIOUS  CUSTOMS, 

*  wives,   daughters,  &c.,  was  cooked  at  separate  fires, 

*  deposited   in   distinct  baskets,    and   eaten  in  lonely 
'  solitude  by  the  females  in  little  huts  erected  for  the 

*  purpose.'     '  Nothing,'  says  the  Bishop  of  Wellington, 

*  can  be  more  mistaken   than    to   represent  the  New 

*  Zealanders  as  a  people  without  law  and  order.    They 

*  are,   and   were,  the  slaves  of  law,  rule,  and    prece- 
'  dent.'  ^ 

The  head  of  a  chief  was  regarded  as  especially 
sacred;  and  Shortland  gives  an  amusing  account  of  a 
case  in  which  an  unfortunate  child  suffered  sadly, 
because  *  no  one  could  for  a  long  time  be  found  of  suffi- 

*  ciently  high  rank  to  cut  his  hair  or  wash  his  head/  * 

If  savages  pass  unnoticed  many  actions  which  we 
should  consider  as  highly  criminal,  on  the  other  hand 
they  strictly  forbid  others  which  we  should  consider 
altogether  immaterial. 

The  natives  of  Russian  America,  near  the  Yukon 
river,   '  have  certain  superstitions  with   regard  to  the 

*  bones  of  animals,  which  they  will  neither  throw  on  the 
^  fire  nor  to  the  dogs,  but  save  them  in  their  houses  or 

*  caches.     When  they  saw  us  careless  in  such  matter^, 

*  they  said  it  would  prevent  them    from   catching  or 

*  shooting  successfully.     Also,  they  \vill  not  throw  away 

*  their  hair  or  nails  just  cut  short,  but  save  them,  hang- 

*  iijg  them  frequently  in  packages  on  the  trees.' ' 

The  Mongols  *  think  it  a  fault  to  touch  the  fire,  or 
take  flesh  out  of  the  pot  with  a  knife,  or  to  cleave  wooil 
with  a  hatchet  near  the  hearth,  imagining  it  takes  away 

»  Trans.  Ethn.  Soc.  1870,  p.  367.  '  Whjmper,  Tran.«.   Kthn.  Sx., 

'  Traditions  of    the   Xew  Zea-      N.S..  vol.'vii.  p.  174. 
landers,  p.  108.  *  Astle^'s  Coll,  vol.  iv.  p.  :>i>. 


BULES  BELATJNO  TO  HUNTING.  437 

the  fire's  power.  It  is  no  less  faulty  to  lean  on  a  whip 
or  touch  arrows  with  it ;  to  kill  young  birds ;  or  pour 
liquor  on  the  ground:  to  strike  a  horse  with  a  bridle  ;  or 
break  one  bone  against  another.  Mr.  Tylor  has  abeady 
pointed  out  ^  that  almost  exactly  the  same  prohibitions 
occur  in  America. 

Some  savage  rules  are  very  sensible.  Thus  Tanner 
states  that  the  Algonkin  Indians,  when  on  a  war-path, 
must  not  sit  upon  the  naked  ground ;  but  must,  at  least, 
have  some  grass  or  bushes  under  them.  They  must,  if 
possible,  avoid  wetting  their  feet ;  but  if  they  are  com- 
pelled to  wade  through  a  swamp,  or  to  cross  a  stream, 
they  must  keep  their  clothes  dry,  and  whip  their  legs 
with  bushes  or  grass  when  they  come  out  of  the  water.  * 
For  others  the  reason  is  not  so  obvious.  Thus,  the 
small  bowls  out  of  which  they  drink  are  marked  across 
the  middle  ;  in  going  out  they  must  place  one  side  to 
their  mouth;  in  returning,  the  other.  The  vessels 
must  also  on  their  return  be  thro^vn  away  or  hung  up 
in  a  tree. 

Hunting  tribes  generally  have  well- understood 
rules  with  reference  to  game.  Among  the  Green- 
landers,  should  a  seal  escape  with  a  hunter's  javelin  in 
it,  and  be  killed  by  another  man  afterwards,  it  belongs 
to  the  former.  But  if  the  seal  be  struck  Avith  the  har- 
poon and  bladder,  and  the  string  break,  the  hunter 
loses  his  right.  If  a  man  find  a  seal  dead  with  a  har- 
poon in  it,  he  keeps  the  seal,  but  returns  the  harpoon. 
In  reindeer  hunting,  if  several  hunters  strike  a  deer 
together,  it  belongs  to  the  one  whose  arrow  is  nearest 

>  Early  History  of  Man,  p.  Ida 
*  Tanner*8  NarratiTe,  p.  123. 


COURT  LANGUAGE.  439 

Below  Tooitonga  and  Veachi  came  the  priests,  while 
civil  society  was  divided  into  five  ranks — the  king,  the 
nobles,  the  Matabooles,  the  Mooas,  and  the  Tooas.  The 
child  took  the  rank  of  the  mother  among  the  nobles, 
but  the  Matabooles  were  succeeded  by  the  eldest  son. 

Among  the  Micronesians  also  distinctions  of  rank 
were  very  strictly  observed.  Thus  in  Banabe,  one  of 
the  Caroline  Islands,  ther.e  were  three  classes,  and  we 
are  assured  that  even  in  battle  *  a  person  of  one  class 
'  never  attacked  one  of  another.'  ^ 

It  is  curious  that  the  use  of  the  third  person  in 
token  of  respect  occurs  in  Tonga,  as  well  as  some  other 
countries.  *Thus  the  King  of  Tonga  addressing  the 
Tooitonga  says,  ''  Ho  egi  Tooitonga;  *'  that  is,  literally, 
thy  Lord  Tooitonga,  in  which  the  possessive  pronoun 
thy,  or  your,  is  used  instead  of  my ;  or,  if  the  word 
egi  be  translated  lordship  or  chiefship,  the  term  of 
address  will  be  more  consistent  and  similar  t6  ours, 
your  lordship,  your  gi'ace,  your  majesty.  The  title, 
ho  egi,  is  never  used  but  in  addressing  a  superior  chie^ 
or  speaking  of  a  god,  or  in  a  public  speech.  Ho  egi ! 
also  means  chiefs,  as  in  the  commencement  of  FinowV 
speech.'^ 

In  Samoa  we  are  assured  that  the  distinction  be- 
tween the  language  of  ceremony  and  that  of  common 
life  is  even  more  marked  than  in  Tonga  .•  Here  also 
the  plural  is  always  used  in  speaking  to  a  superior. 
Mr.  Turner  mentions  that  the  first  time  he  was  so 
addressed  he  felt  somewhat  hurt,  for  as  he  did  not 
know   the   custom,   and   happened    to    be    riding,   he 

>  IIale*8  U.  S.  Expl.  Exped.  p.  '  Mariner,  vol.  iL  p.  142. 

83.  '  Hale'8  U.  S.  Expl.  Exp.  p.  286. 


SALUTATIONS  ANT)  GEBEMONIES.  441 

superior,  the  son  to  the  mother,  the  younger  to  the 
elder  brother,  and  I  have  been  obliged  to  correct  a 
Moslem  boy  of  the  evil  practice  of  assuming  a  position 
in  which  man  should  address  none  but  his  Maker. 
The  performance  usually  takes  place  once  a  day  on 
first  meeting,  but  meetings  are  so  numerous  that  at 
least  one  hour  out  of  the  twenty-four  must  thus  be 
spent  by  a  man  about  town.  Equals  kneel,  or  rather 
squat,  before  one  another,  and  snap  the  fingers  in  the 
peculiarly  West  African  way,  which  seems  to  difier  in 
every  tribe.' 

Livingstone^  '  was  particularly  struck,  in  passing 
through  the  village,  with  the  punctiliousness  of  man- 
ners shown  by  the  Balonda.  The  inferiors,  on  meet- 
ing their  superiors  in  the  streets,  at  once  drop  on 
their  knees  and  rub  dust  on  their  arms  and  chest. 
They  continue  the  salutation  of  clapping  the  hands 
until  the  great  ones  have  passed.' 

In  the  religious  customs  of  Tahiti,^  '  however  large 
or  costly  the  sacrifices  that  had  been  offered,  and 
however  near  its  close  the  most  protracted  ceremony 
might  be,  if  the  priest  omitted  or  misplaced  any  word 
in  the  prayers  with  which  it  was  always  accompanied, 
or  if  his  attention  was  diverted  by  any  means,  so  that 
the  prayer  was  hai,  or  broken,  the  whole  was  rendered 
unavailable  ;  he  must  prepare  other  victims  and  repeat 
his  prayers  over  from  the  commencement.' 

In  Feejee  ^  'public  business  is  conducted  with  tedious 
formality.  Old  forms  are  strictly  observed  and  inno- 
vations opposed.    An  abundance  of  measured  clapping 

'  Travels  in    South   Africa,    p.      vol.  ii.  p.  157. 
290.  *  Williama'  Fiji  and  the  Fijiaos, 

'  Ellis's  Polynesian  ReaearcheS;      vol.  i.  p.  28. 


PROPERTY  m  LAND.  443 

*  II  fallut  alors  distinguer  les  possessions  et  prendre  les 
'  mesures  n&essaires  pour  faire  jouir  chaque  citoyen  du 

*  firuit  de  ses  travaux.     II  ^toit  dans  Tordre  que  celui 

*  qui  avoit  seme  du  grain  fftt  sftr  de  le  recueillir,  et  ne 

*  vit  pas  les  autres  profiler  des  peines  et  des  soins  qu'il 

*  s'^toit  donnas.     De  \k  sont  ^man^s  les  loix  sur  la 

*  propria tc  des  terres,  sur  la  mani^re  de  les  partager  et 

*  d'en  jouir.' 

The  same  view  has  been  taken  by  other  writers.  It 
does  not,  however,  appear  that  property  in  land  implies, 
or  necessarily  arose  from,  agriculture.  On  the  contrary, 
it  exists  even  in  hunting  communities.  Usually,  indeed, 
during  the  hunting  stage,  property  in  land  is  tribal,  not 
individual.  The  North  American  Indians  seem,  as  a 
general  rule,  to  have  had  no  individual  property  in 
land.  It  appears,  therefore,  at  first  sight,  remarkable 
that  among  the  Australians,^  who  are  in  most  respects 
80  much  lower   in    the  scale,  *  every  male  has  some 

*  portion  of  land,  of  which  he  can  always  point  out  the 

*  exact  boundaries.     These  properties  are  subdivided 

*  by  a  father  among  his  sons  during  his  own  lifetime, 

*  and  descend  in  almost  hereditary  succession.     A  man 

*  can  cri8iK)se  of  or  barter  his  lands  to  others,  but  a 

*  female  never  inherits,  nor  has  primogeniture  among 

*  the  sons  any  peculiar  rights  or  advantages.'  Nay, 
more  than  this,  there  are  some  tracts  of  land,  peculiarly 
rich  in  gum,  &c.,  over  which,  at  the  period  when 
the  gum  is  in  season,  numerous  families  have  an  ac- 
knowledged right,  although  they  are  not  allowed  to 
come  there  at  other  times.^     Even  the  water  of  the 

'  Eyre,  Discoveries  in  Australia,      Grey's  Australia,  vol.  it  p.  232. 
voL  ii.  p.  207.    8ee  also  Lang  in  '  Orey*s  Australia,  voL  iL  p.  206. 


COMMUNAL  PROPERTY,  445 

*  spriDg  and  kinsmen.'  ^  Probably  on  these  points  the 
custom  was  not  the  same  in  all  the  tribes. 

In  some  cases,  land  was  private  property  for  a  por- 
tion of  the  year,^  and  belonged  to  the  community  for 
the  remainder.  Thus  our  '  Lammas  Lands '  were  so 
called,  because  they  were  private  property  until  Lam- 
mas-day (August  1),  by  which  time  the  crops  were 
supposed  to  be  gathered  in;  after  which  period  they 
were  subject  to  common  rights  of  pasturage  till  the 
spring.  These  meadows  were  seldom  manured,  and,  as 
the  portions  assigned  were  often  exceedingly  small,  it 
was  difficult  to  retain  the  exact  boundaries  during  the 
joint  occupation  of  the  land ;  it  was  therefore  most  con- 
venient to  make  a  fresh  partition  each  year. 

In  some  parts  of  Russia,  *  after  the  expiration  of  a 

*  given,  but  not  in  all  cases  of  the  same,  period,  separate 

*  ownerships  are  extinguished,  the  land  of  the  village  is 
'  thrown  into  a  mass,  and  then  it  is  re-distributed  among 
'  the  families  composing  the  community,  according  to 

*  their  number.     This  re-partition  having  been  effected, 

*  the  rights  of  families  and  of  individuals  are  again 

*  allowed  to  branch  out  into  various  lines,  which  they 

*  continue  to  follow  till  another  period  of  division  comes 

*  round.'*  Communal  villages,  moreover,  are  by  no 
means  confined  to  Russia,  and  Sir  H.  Maine  has 
recently  pointed  out^  the  many  points  of  similarity 
between  the  village  communities  which  still  exist  in 
India  with  the  old  Teutonic  cultivating  villages  of 
Germany  and  England.     That  a  similar  state  of  things 

»  Shortland's  Traditions,  &c.,  of  Cobden  Club,  1871. 
the  New  Zealandew,  p.  273.  •  Maine's  Ancient  Law,  p.  267. 

«  Nawe,  ()n  the  Agric.  Coram.  *  Village    Communities    in  the 

of  the  Middle  Ages.     Pub.  by  the  East  and  West,  1871. 


LAWS  OF  INHERJTANOW.  U7 

*  said/  he  adds/  *  of  all  landed  tenures  in  India  pre- 

*  vious  to  our  rule,  that  they  were  practically  not  trans  - 

*  ferable  by  sale,  and  that  only  certain  classes  of  the 

*  better  deBned  claims  were  to  some  extent  transferable 

*  by  mortgage.     The  seizure  and  sale  of  land  for  private 

*  debt  was  wholly  and  utterly  unknown — such  an  idea 
'  had  never  entered  into  the  native  imagination.' 

Still  less  does  the  possession  of  land  necessarily 
imply  the  power  of  testamentary  disposition,  and  we 
find  as  a  matter  of  fact  that  the  will  is  a  legal  process 
of  very  late  origin. 

In  some  cases  it  seems  to  be  held  that  the  title  to 
property  ceases  with  the  life  of  the  owner.  Thus,  on 
Vanua  Levu,  one  of  the  Feejee  Islands,  a  chief's  death 
'  is  the  signal  for  plunder,  the  nearest  relations  rushing 
'  to  the  house  to  appropriate  all  they  can  seize  belong- 

*  ing  to  those  who  lived  there  with  the  deceased.' ' 

I  have  already  mentioned  (antk,  p.  388)  the  state  of 
entire  lawlessness  which  exists  in  parts  of  Africa  and 
in  some  of  the  Polynesian  Islands  between  the  death 
of  one  ruler  and  the  election  of  his  successor. 

It  is  stated  that  formerly,  when  a  Greenlander  died, 
if  he  had  no  gro^vn-up  children,  his  property  was 
regarded  as  having  no  longer  an  owner,  and  every  one 
took  what  he  chose,  or  at  least  what  he  could  get, 
without  the  slightest  regard  to  the  wretched  widow  or 
children.* 

There  is,  indeed,  no  more  interesting  chapter  in  Sir 
H.  Maine's  work  than  that  on  the  early  history  of  testa- 

>  SjttemB  of  Land  Tenure,  p.      187. 
171.  '  Crantz*8  Hist  of  Oreenlnnd,  vol. 

'  Fiji  and  tiie  Fljians,  toL  i.  p.      i.  p.  102. 


HISTORY  OF  ROMAN   WILLS.  449 

Again,  in  Tahiti,  the  system  of  willing  was  (I  pre- 
Bume  when  there  were  no  children)  in  full  force,^  *  not 

*  only  with  reference  to  land,  but  to  any  other  kind  of 

*  property.     Unacquainted  with  letters,  they  could  not 

*  leave  a  written  will ;  but,  during  a  season  of  illness, 
'  those  possessing  property  frequently  called  together 

*  the  members   of   the  family   or  confidential  friends, 

*  and  to  them  gave  directions  for  the  disposal  of  their 

*  eflTects  after  their  decease.     This   was  considered  a 

*  kind  of  sacred  charge,  and  was  usually  executed  with 

*  fideUty.' 

For  the  modern  will,  however,  we  are  mainly  in- 
debted to  the  Romans.  At  first,  indeed,  even  Roman 
wills,  if  so  they  may  be  called,  were  neither  secret, 
deferred,  nor  revocable.  On  the  contrary,  they  were 
made  in  public,  before  not  less  than  five  witnesses ; 
they  took  effect  at  once,  and  were  irrevocable.  Hence 
it  is  probable  that  they  were  only  made  just  before  death. 

It  seems  likely  that  the  power  of  willing  was  con- 
fined to  those  who  had  no  natural  heirs;  such  was  cer- 
tainly the  case  in  Athens.  So  also  in  Rome  the  will 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  used  as  a  means  of  dis- 
inheriting, or  of  effecting  an  equal  distribution  of  the 
property. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  appears  at  first  sight 
remarkable  that  the  Romans  should  have  regarded  for- 
feiture  of  testamentary  privileges  as  one  of  the  greatest 
misfortunes^,  and  should  have  regarded  as  a  bitter  curse 
the  wish  that  a  man  might  die  intestate.  The  explana- 
tion of  this  seems  to  lie  in  the  ideas  of  femily  relation- 
ship.    Children  being  slaves,  and  as  such  incapable  of 

'  EIUb'  Polynesian  Researchea,  vol.  ii.  p.  ^2, 

G  G 


BIGHTS   OF  CHILDREN.  451 

is,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  one  of  the  reasons  for 
the  inaccuracy  of  thought  among  the  lower  races  on  the 
subject  of  relationship. 

Among  the  Hindoos,  *  the  instant  a  son  is  born  ^  he 

*  acquires  a  vested  right  in  his  father's  property,  which 

*  cannot  be  sold  without  recognition  of  his  joint-owner- 

*  ship.     On  the  son's  attaining  full  age,  he  can  some- 

*  times  compel  a  partition  of  the  estate,  even  against 

*  the  consent  of  the  parent;    and,  should  the  parent 

*  acquiesce,  one  son  can  always  have  a  partition  even 

*  against  the  will  of  the  others.  On  such  partition 
^  taking  place,  the  father  has  no  advantage  over  his 

*  children,  except  that  he  has  two  of  the  shares  instead 

*  of  one.     The  ancient  law  of  the  German  tribes  was 

*  exceedingly  similar.     The  AUod  or   domain   of  the 

*  £unily  was  the  joint  property  of  the  father  and  his 

*  sons.'  According  to  ancient  German  law,  alsb,  children 
were  co-proprietors  with  their  father,  and  the  family 
endowment  could  not  be  parted  with  except  by  general 
consent. 

This  probably  explains  the  remarkable  custom 
that  in  many  parts  of  Polynesia  the  son  was  con- 
ddered  of  higher  rank  than  the  father;  and  that  even 
in  some  cases — as,  for  instance,  in  the  Marquesas,  and  in 
Tahiti — the  king  abdicated  as  soon  as  a  son  was  born  to 
him  ;  and  landowners  under  similar  circumstances  lost 
the  fee- simple  of  their  laud,  and  became  mere  trustees 
for  the  infant  possessors.' 

The  Basutos  have  a  strict  system  of  primogeniture, 

>  Maine's  Ancient  Uw,  p.  228.        Waitx'  Anthr.  vol.  ri.  pp.  210,  216, 
*  £lli«'   Polynesian   Researches,      210. 
Tol.    ii.    pp.    346,    S47;    Gerland 

o  o  2 


PARENTS  NAMED  AFTER  TEEIB  CHILDREN.    453 

In  America  we  find  the  same  habit.  ^  Thus  *  with 
the  Kutchin  the  father  takes  his  name  from  his  son  or 
daughter,  not  the  son  from  the  father,  as  with  us. 
The  father's  name  is  formed  by  the  addition  of  the 
word  "  tee  "  to  the  end  of  the  son's  name  ;  for  instance, 
Que-ech-et  may  have  a  son  and  call  him  Sah-neu. 
The  father  is  now  called  Sah-neu-tee,  and  the  former 
name  of  Que-ech-et  is  forgotten.' 

In  Sumatra  *  the  father,*  in  many  parts  of  the  coun- 
try, particularly  in  Passum-mah,  is  distinguished  by 
the  name  of  his  first  child,  as  "  Pa-Ladin,"  or  **  Pa- 
**  Rindu"  (Pa  for  bapa,  signifying  "  the  father  of"), 
and  loses,  in  this  acquired,  his  own  proper  name. 
This  is  a  singular  custom,  and  surely  less  conformable 
to  the  order  of  nature  than  that  which  names  the  son 
after  the  father.  Thgre  it  is  not  usual  to  give  them  a 
galar  on  their  marriage,  as  with  the  Rejangs,  among 
whom  the  filio-nymic  is  not  so  common,  though  some- 
times adopted,  and  occasionally  joined  with  the  galar, 
as  Radin-pa-Chirano.  The  women  never  change  the 
name  given  them  at  the  time  of  their  birth ;  yet  fi-e- 
qaently  they  are  called  through  courtesy,  from  their 
eldest  child,  "  Ma  si  ano,"  the  mother  of  such  an  one; 
bat  rather  as  a  polite  description  than  a  name.' 
As  a  general  rule  property  descends  to  the  eldest 
son,  or  is  divided  between  all ;  but  Duhalde  mentions 
that  among  the  Tartars  the  youngest  son  inherits  the 
property,  because  the  elder  ones  as  they  reach  manhood 
leave  the  paternal  tent,  and  take  with  them  the  quantity 

*  Jonesy     SmithflOQiim    Report,  '  Marsden's  History  of  Sumatra, 

isae;  p.  826.  p.  28a 


THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  CRIME,  455 

Hvenge  himself.      The  administration  of  justice,  says 
Du  Tertre/  *  among  the  Caribbians  is  not  exercised  by 

*  the  captain,  nor  by  any  magistrate ;  but,  as  it  is  among 
^  the  Tapinambous,  he  who  thinks  himself  injured  gets 
^  such  satis&ction  of  his  adversary  as  he  thinks  fit, 
^  according  as  his  passion  dictates  to  him  or  his  strength 
^  permits  him.    The  public  does  not  concern  itself  at  all 

*  in  the  punishment  of  criminals  ;  and  if  any  one  among 
^  them  sufiers  an  injury  or  affront,  without  endeavour- 

*  ing  to  revenge  himself,  he  is  slighted  by  all  the  rest 
^  and  accounted  a  coward  and  a  person  of  no  esteem.' 

In  Ancient  Greece  there  were  no  officers  whose  duty 
it  was  to  prosecute  criminals.^  Even  in  the  case  of 
murder,  the  State  did  not  take  the  initiative ;  this  was 
left  to  the  femily  of  the  suflTerer,  nor  was  the  accused 
placed  under  arrest  until  he  was  found  guilty.  Hence 
the  criminal  usually  fled  as  soon  as  he  found  himself 
likely  to  be  condemned. 

Among  the  North  American  Indians,'  if  a  man  was 
murdered,  *the  family  of  the  deceased  only  have  the 

*  right  of  taking  satisfection  ;  they  collect,  consult,  and 

*  decree.     The  rulers  of  a  town  or  of  the  nation  have 

*  nothing  to  do  or  say  in  the  business.'  Indeed,  it 
would  seem  that  the  object  of  legal  regulations  was  at 
first  not  so  much  to  punish  the  offender  as  to  restrain 
and  mitigate  the  vengeance  inflicted  by  the  aggrieved 
party. 

The  amount  of  legal  revenge,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  is 

*  Iluiory  of  the  Caribby  Islanda,  ii.  p.  16. 
p.  316.     Labat  also  makes  a  very  *  Goguet,  vol.  ii.  p.  69. 

similar    statement,      Voyage   aax  *  Trans.  Amer.  Antiq.  Soc  voL 

Isles  de  Am^riqae,  toI.  iL  p.  83.  i.  p.  281. 
Aiara,  Voy.  dans  TAm^r.  Min.  toL 


THE  LAWS  OF  PBOPEBTY.  457 

tribe,  the  natural  effect  would  be  to  develop  the  idea  of 
mere  possession  into  that  of  property. 

Since,  then,  crimes  were  at  first  regarded  merely  as 
personal  matters,  in  which  the  aggressor  and  the  victim 
alone  were  interested,  and  with  which  society  was  not 
concerned,  any  crime,  even  murder,  might  be  atoned  for 
by  the  payment  of  such  a  sum  of  money  as  satisfied  the 
representatives  of  the  murdered  man.     This  payment 
was  proportioned  to  the  injury  done,  and  had  no  rela- 
tion to  the  crime  as  a  crime.     Hence,  as  the  injury  was 
the  same  whether  the  death  was  accidental  or  designed, 
so  also  was  the  penalty.     Hence  our  word  *  pay,'  which 
comes  from  the  Latin  *  pacare,'  to  appease  or  pacify. 
Among  the   Kaffirs,^  *the  law  makes   no   disthjc- 
tion  between  a  murder  from  malice  or  forethought, 
or    from    one    committed   on    the    impulse    of   the 
moment  or  in  revenge  for  the  blood  of  a  relative. 
A  man  is  punished  for  taking  the  law  into  his  own 
hands,  and  in  no  case  is  he  justified  in  doing  so,  even 
in  a  case  of  retaliation.'     On  the  other  hand,  ^  the  law 
does  not  appear  to  demand  compensation  for  what  is 
clearly  proved  to  be   a  purely  accidental   injury  to 
property^  although  it  will  do  so  in  accidental  injuries 
to  the  persons  of  individuals  if  the  injury  is  of  a 
serious  nature,  as  the  latter  would  come  under  the 
head  of  criminal  cases,  and  therefore  could  only  be 
overlooked  or  the  fine  remitted  by  the  chief  himself.'* 
The  Romans,  on  the  contrary,  based  any  claim  for 
compensation  on  the  existence  of  a  '  culpa ; '  and  hence 

»  Kaffir  Laws  aod  Customa,  p.  •  iWrf.p.67.    See  al«o  p.  113. 

110.    8eea]«op.e0. 


458  THE  LAWS  OF  PBOPEBTY. 

laid  down  that  where  there  had  been  no  *  culpa,*  no 
action  for  reparation  could  lie.  This  led  to  very  incon- 
venient consequences.  Thus,  as  Lord  Karnes^  has 
pointed  out,  '  Labeo  scribit,  si  cum  vi  ventorum  navia 
^  impulsa  esset  in  fiines  anchorarum  alterius,  et  nautsB 
'  funes  praecidissent  ;  si,  nuUo  alio  modo,  nisi  praecisis 
^  funibus,  explicare  se  potuit,  nullam  actionem  dandam;' 
b.  29,  §  3,  ad  leg.  Aquil.  *Quod  dicitur  damnum  in- 
^  juria  datum  Aquilia  persequi  sic  erit  accipiendum,  at 

*  videatur  damnum   injuria  datum  quod   cum  danmo 

*  injur iam  attulerit ;  nisi  magna  vi  cogente,  fuerit  fee- 
'  turn.    Ut  Celsus  scribit  circa  eum,  qui  incendii  arcendi 

*  gratia  vicinas  axles  intercidit:  et  sive  pervenit  ignis, 

*  sive  antea  extinctus  est,  extimat  legis  Aquiliae  actionem 

*  cessare.'  b.  49,  §  1,  eod.      In  English  thus  :  In  the 
opinion  of  Labeo,  if  a  ship  is  driven  by  the  violence  of 
a  tempest  among  the  anchor-ropes  of  another  ship  and 
the  sailors  cut  the  ropes,  having  no  other  means  of 
getting  free,  there  is  no  action  competent.     The  Aqui- 
lian  law  must  be  understood  to  apply  only  to  such 
damage  as  carries  the  idea  of  an  injury  along  with  it, 
unless  such  injury  has  not  been  wilfully  done,  but  from 
necessity.    *  Thus  Celsus  puts  the  case  of  a  person  who, 
'  to  stop  the  progress  of  a  fire,  pulls  down  his  neigh- 
'  hour's  house  ;  and  whether  the  fire  had  reached  that 
'  house  which  is   pulled   down,  or  waa   extinguished 
'  before  it  got  to  it,  in  neither  case,  he  thinks,  will  an 
^  action  be  competent  from  the  Aquilian  law.' 

It  would,  however,  appear  that,  even  in  Roman  law, 
the  opposite  and  more  usual  principle  originally  pre- 
vailed.    This  is  indicated,  for  instance,  by  the  great 

'  History  of  Man,  vol.  iv.  p.  34. 


MANIFEST  AND  NONMAKIFE^  THIEVES.       459 

difference  in  the  penalties  imposed  by  ancient  laws  on 
offenders  caught  in  the  act,  and  those  only  detected 
after  considerable  delay.  In  the  old  Roman  law,  as  in 
that  of  some  other  countries,  thieves  were  divided  into 
manifest  and  non-manifest.  The  manifest  thief  who 
was  caught  in  the  act,  or  at  any  rate  with  the  stolen 
goods  still  in  his  possession,  became,  according  to  the 
law  of  the  twelve  tables,  the  slave  of  the  person 
robbed,  or,  if  he  was  already  a  slave,  was  put  to  death. 
The  non-manifest  thief,  on  the  other  hand,  was  only 
liable  to  return  double  the  value  of  the  goods  he  had 
stolen.  Subsequently,  the  very  severe  punishment  in 
the  case  of  the  manifest  thief  was  mitigated,  but  he 
was  still  forced  to  pay  four  times  the  value  of  what  he 
had  stolen,  or  twice  as  much  as  the  non-manifest  thief. 

The  same  principle  was  followed  by  the  North 
American  Indians.^  Again,  in  the  German  and  Anglo- 
Saxon  codes,  a  thief  caught  in  the  act  might  be  killed 
on  the  spot.  Thus  the  law  followed  the  old  principles 
of  private  vengeance,  and  in  settling  the  amount  of 
punishment  took  as  a  guide  the  measure  of  revenge 
likely  to  be  taken  by  an  aggrieved  person  under  the 
circumstances  of  the  case.' 

In  the  South  Sea  Islands,  according  to  Williams,* 
cases  of  thefk  were  seldom  brought  before  the  king  or 
chiefs,  but  the  people  avenged  their  own  injuries.  The 
rights  of  retaliation,  however,  had  almost  a  legal  force, 
for  *  although  the  party  thus  plundered  them,  they 
*  would  not  attempt  to  prevent  the  seizure :  had  they 

'  Tmna  Amer.  Antiq.  Soc.  toL  L  »  Poljnewan  Re«e«rehe«,  toI.  u. 

p.  285.  p.  860,  872. 

'  See  Maine,  loe,  eU.  p.  878. 


THE   WEBQILD.  461 

Among  the  Hill  tribes  of  North  Aracan, '  all  offences 

*  or  injuries  are  remedied  by  fine/  the  amount  of  which 
is  fixed  by  long  custom,  and  always  rigorously  de- 
manded.^ 

Among  the  Kirghiz  the  family  of  a  murdered  man 
are  at  liberty  to  compound  with  the  murderer  for  a  cer- 
tain payment  in  horses,  &c.  A  woman  or  a  child 
count  for  half  as  much  as  a  man.  There  is  also  a 
scale  of  compensation  for  injuries  ;  100  sheep  for  a 
thumb,  20  for  a  little  finger,  and  so  on.' 

So  also  among  the   Kaffirs,*  *  as  banishment,  im- 

*  prisonment,  and  corporal  punishment  are  all  unknown 

*  in   Kaffir  jurisprudence,  the  property  of  the  people 

*  constitutes  the  great  fund  out  of  which  the  debts  of 

*  justice  are  paid.'  The  fines,  however,  thus  levied, 
were  paid  to  the  chief.*  The  principle  is,  that  a 
man's  goods  are  his  own  property,  but  his  person  is  the 
property  of  the  chief.  A  man  who  is  injured  there- 
fore, however  severely,  derives  no  benefit  fi-om  the  fine. 
Their  proverb  is,  *  No  man  can  eat  his  own  blood.' 

The  severity  of  early  codes,  and  the  uniformity  in 
the  amounts  of  punishment  which  characterises  them, 
is  probably  due  to  the  same  cause.  An  individual  who 
felt  himself  aggrieved  would  not  weigh  very  philoso- 
phically the  amount  of  punishment  which  he  was 
entitled  to  inflict ;  and  no  doubt  when  in  any  com- 
munity some  chief,  in  advance  of  his  time,  endeavoured 
to  substitute  public  law  for  private  vengeance,  his 
object  would  be  to  induce  those  who  had  cause  of  com- 

»  8t  John,  Journ.  Anthrop.  In-  *  Kaffir  Laws  and  Customs,  p. 

•titate,  1872,  p.  240.  36. 

•  l>es.  de   toutes  les   Nat     de  *  IM.  p.  .35. 

l*£mp.  de  Ruase,  Ft.  I.  p.  148. 


GENERAL  CONCLUSION.  463 

ment  to  deny  that  there  are  cases  in  which  nations  have 
retrograded,  I  regard  these  as  exceptional  instances. 
The  facts  and  arguments  mentioned  in  this  work  afford, 
I  think,  strong  grounds  for  the  following  conclusions, 
namely : — 

That  existing  savages  are  not  the  descendants  of 
civilised  ancestors. 

That  the  primitive  condition  of  man  was  one  of 
utter  barbarism. 

That  from  this  condition  several  races  have  inde- 
pendently raised  themselves. 

These  views  follow,  I  think,  from  strictly  scientific 
considerations.  We  shall  not  be  the  less  inclined  jto 
adopt  them  on  account  of  the  cheering  prospects  which 
they  hold  out  for  the  future. 

In  the  closing  chapter  of  *  Prehistoric  Times,'  while 
fully  admitting  the  charms  of  savage  life,  I  have  en  • 
deavoured  to  point  out  the  immense  advantages  which 
we  enjoy.  Here  I  will  only  add  that  if  the  past  history 
of  man  has  been  one  of  deterioration,  we  have  but  a 
groundless  expectation  of  future  improvement :  on  the 
other  hand,  if  the  past  has  been  one  of  progress,  we 
may  fairly  hope  that  the  future  will  be  so  too ;  that  the 
blessings  of  civilisation  will  not  only  be  extended  to 
other  countries  and  to  other  nations,  but  that  even  in 
our  own  land  they  will  be  rendered  more  general  and 
more  equable  ;  so  that  we  shall  not  see  before  us 
always,  as  now,  countr3rmen  of  our  own  living,  in  our 
very  midst,  a  life  worse  than  that  of  a  savage  ;  neither 
enjoying  the  rough  advantages  and  real,  though  rude, 
pleasures  of  savage  life,  nor  yet  availing  themselves  of 
the  far  higher  and  more  noble  opportunities  which  lie 
within  the  reach  of  civilised  Man. 


APPENDIX. 


ON  THE  PRIMITIVE  CONDITION  OF  MAN. 

PART  I. 

Being    the    Substance    of    a    Paper    read    before    the    BRirisn 

Association  at  Dundee. 

SIDE  by  Bide  with  the  different  opinions  as  to  the  origin  of 
man,  there  are  two  opposite  views  with  reference  to  the 
primitive  condition  of  the  first  men^  or  first  beings  worthy  to 
be  so  called.  Many  writers  have  considered  that  man  was  at 
first  a  mere  savage^  and  that  the  course  of  history  has  on  the 
whole  been  a  progress  towards  civilisation ;  though  at  times — 
and  at  some  times  for  centuries — some  races  have  been 
stationary^  or  even  have  retrograded.  Other  authors,  of  no 
less  eminence^  have  taken  a  diametrically  opposite  view.  Ac- 
cording to  them,  man  was^  from  the  commencement,  pretty 
much  what  he  is  at  present ;  if  possible,  even  more  ignorant 
of  the  arts  and  sciences  than  now,  but  with  mental  qualities 
not  inferior  to  our  own.  Savages  they  consider  to  be  the  de- 
generate descendants  of  far  superior  ancestors.  Of  the  recent 
supporters  of  this  theory,  the  late  Archbishop  of  Dublin  was 
amongst  the  most  eminent. 

Dr.  .Whately  enunciates  his  opinions  in  the  following 
words : ' — 

'We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  any -community  ever 
*  did  or  ever  can  emerge,  unassisted  by  external  helps,  from  a 
'state  of  utter  barbarism  unto  anything  that  can  be  called 

>  WbAtoly*8  Political  EeoDomj,  p.  68. 
H  H 


OONOLUaWE  EVIDENCE.  467 

Suppofiing,  however,  for  a  moment,  and  for  the  sake  of  axgv- 
ment,  that  the  Mandans,  or  any  other  race,  were  oiiginallj 
aayages,  and  had  civilised  themselves,  it  would  sdll  be  mam- 
festlj — from  the  very  nature  of  the  case — impossiUe  to  king 
forward  the  kind  of  evidence  demanded  by  Dr.  Whatdy,  Ko 
doubt  he  '  may  confidently  aflirm  that  we  find  no  one  recorded 
^  instance  of  a  tribe  of  savages,  properly  so  styled,  rising  into 
'a  civilised  state  without  instruction  and  assistance  firom  a 
'people  already  civilised.'  Starting  with  the  proviso  that 
savages,  properly  so  styled,  are  ignorant  of  letters,  and  laying 
it  down  as  a  condition  that  no  civilised  example  should  be 
placed  before  them,  the  existence  of  any  such  record  is  an  im- 
possibility: its  very  presence  would  destroy  its  value.  In 
another  passage.  Archbishop  Whately  says,  indeed,  '  If  man 
f  generally,  or  some  particular  race,  be  capable  of  self-civilisa- 
'lion,  in  either  case  it  may  be  expected  that  some  record,  or 
'  tradition,  or  monument  of  the  actual  occurrence  of  such  an 
'event  should  be  found.'  So  far  from  this,  the  existence  of 
any  such  record  would,  according  to  the  very  hypothesis  itself, 
be  impossible.  Traditions  are  short*lived  and  untrustworthy. 
A  *  monument '  which  could  prove  the  actual  occurrence  of  a 
race  capable  of  self-civilisation  I  confess  myself  unable  to 
oonceive.  What  kind  of  a  monument  would  the  Archbishop 
aeoept  as  proving  that  the  people  by  whom  it  was  made  had 
been  originally  savage  ?  that  they  had  raised  themselves,  and 
had  never  been  influenced  by  strangers  of  a  superior  race  9 

But,  says  Archbishop  Whately,  *We  have  accounts  of 
^various  savage  tribes,  in  different  parts  of  the  globe,  who 
^  have  been  visited  from  time  to  time  at  considerable  intervals, 
*  but  have  had  no  settled  intercourse  with  civilised  people,  and 
^  who  appear  to  continue,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  in  the 
^  same  uncultivated  condition ; '  and  he  adduces  one  case,  that 
di  the  New  Zealanders,  who  '  seem  to  have  been  in  quite  as 
^advanced  a  state  when  Tasman  discovered  the  country  in 
'  1642  as  they  were  when  Cook  visited  it  one  hundred  and 
^  twenty-seven  years  after.'  We  have  been  accustomed  to  see 
around  us  an  improvement  so  rapid  that  we  forget  how  short  a 
period  a  century  is  in  the  history  of  the  human  race.  Even 
taking  the  oidhiary  chronology,  it  is  evident,  that  if  in  6,000 

H  n  2 


NO  EVWENOE  OF  EARLIER  CIVILISATION.     469 

ticatcd  with  advantage ;  and  in  the  second,  we  find  even  in  the 
Mime  family — among  children  of  the  same  parents — the  most 
opposite  dispositions ;  in  the  same  nation  there  are  families  of 
bigh  character,  and  others  in  which  every  member  is  more  or 
less  criminal.  But  in  this  case,  as  in  the  last,  the  Archbishop's 
argament,  if  good  at  all,  is  good  against  his  own  view.  It  is 
like  an  Australian  boomerang,  which  recoils  upon  its  owner. 
The  Archbishop  believed  in  the  unity  of  the  human  race,  and 
signed  that  man  was  originally  civilised  (in  a  certain  sense). 
'How  comes  it,  then,'  I  might  ask  him,  ^that  the  New 
'  Hollander  is  not  now  in  the  condition  of  the  European  ? '  In 
another  passage.  Archbishop  Whately  quotes,  with  approba- 
tion, a  passage  from  President  Smith,  of  the  College  of  New 
Jersey,  who  says  that  man,  '  cast  out  an  orphan  of  nature, 
'  naked  and  helpless,  into  the  savage  forest,  must  have  perished 
'  before  he  could  have  learned  how  to  supply  his  most  imme- 
^  diate  and  urgent  wants.  Supposing  him  to  have  been  created, 
'  or  to  have  started  into  being  one  knows  not  how,  in  the  full 
'  strength  of  his  bodily  powers,  how  long  must  it  have  been 
'  before  he  could  have  known  the  proper  use  of  his  limbs,  or 
'  how  to  apply  them  to  climb  the  tree  ! '  &c.  &c.  Exactly  the 
same,  however,  might  be  said  of  the  gorilla  or  the  chimpanzee, 
which  certainly  are  not  the  degraded  descendants  of  civilised 
ancestors. 

Having  thus  very  briefly  considered  the  arguments  brought 
Forward  by  Archbishop  Whately,  I  will  proceed  to  state,  also 
very  briefly,  some  facts  which,  I  think,  support  the  view  here 
advocated. 

Firstly,  I  will  endeavour  to  show  that  there  are  indications 
of  progress  even  among  savages. 

Secondly,  that  among  the  most  civilised  nations  there  are 
traces  of  original  barbarism. 

The  Archbishop  supposes  that  men  were,  from  the  beginning, 
herdsmen  and  cultivators.  We  know,  however,  that  the 
Australians,  North  and  South  Americans,  and  several  other 
more  or  less  savage  races,  living  in  countries  eminently  suited 
to  our  domestic  animals  anfi  to  the  cultivation  of  cereals,  were 
yet  entirely  ignorant  both  of  the  one  and  the  other.  It  is,  I 
think,  improbable  that  any  race  of  men  who  had  once  been 


DOMSSTIO  ANIMALS  AND  POTTEET.  471 

'  ^'  luxuriantly^  the  roots  sometimes  two  feet  in  depth,  and  the 
<'<  plants  spreading  over  an  area  from  four  to  five  feet  in 
'  ^  diameter.     The  dock  (Rumex  obttisifolius  or  R.  crispus)  is 

*  *'  to  be  found  in  every  river-bed,  extending  into  the  valleys 
'''of  the  mountain-rivers,  until  these  become  mere  torrents. 

*  ^  The  sow-thistle  is  spread  all  over  the  country,  growing 

*  *'  luxuriantly  nearly  up  to  6,000  feet.  The  watercress  in- 
* ''  creases  in  our  still  rivers  to  such  an  extent  as  to  threaten 
' ''  to  choke  them  altogether." '  The  cardoon  of  the  Argentine 
Republics  is  another  remarkable  instance  of  the  same  fact. 
We  may  therefore  safely  assume  that  if  Australia,  New 
Zealand,  or  South  America  had  ever  been  peopled  by  a  race  of 
herdsmen  and  agriculturists,  the  fauna  and  flora  of  those 
countries  would  almost  inevitably  have  given  evidence  of  the 
&ct,  and  differed  much  from  the  condition  in  which  they  were 
discovered. 

We  may  also  assert,  as  a  general  proposition,  that  no 
weapons  or  implements  of  metal  have  ever  been  found  in 
any  country  inhabited  by  savages  wholly  ignorant  of  metal- 
lurgy. A  still  stronger  case  is  afforded  by  pottery.  Pottery 
is  very  indestructible ;  when  used  at  all,  it  is  always  abundant, 
and  it  possesses  two  qualities — those,  namely,  of  being  easy  to 
break  and  yet  difficult  to  destroy,  which  render  it  very  valuable 
in  an  archaeological  point  of  view.  Moreover  it  is,  in  most 
cases,  associated  with  burials.  It  is  therefore  a  very  signifi- 
cant fact,  that  no  fragment  of  pottery  has  ever  been  found  in 
Australia,  New  Zealand,  or  the  Polynesian  Islands.  It  seems 
to  me  extremely  improbable  that  an  art  so  easy  and  so  useful 
should  ever  have  been  lost  by  any  race  of  men.  Moreover, 
this  argument  applies  to  several  other  arts  and  instruments.  I 
will  mention  only  two,  though  several  others  might  be  brought 
forward.  The  art  of  spinning  and  the  use  of  the  bow  are 
quite  unknown  to  many  races  of  savages,  and  yet  would 
hardly  be  likely  to  have  been  abandoned,  when  once  known. 
The  absence  of  architectural  remains  in  these  countries  is 
another  argument  Archbishop  Whately,  indeed,  claims  this 
as  being  in  his  favour ;  but  the  absence  of  monuments  in  a 
country  is  surely  indicative  of  barbarism,  and  not  of  civilisation. 

The  mental  condition  of  savages  also  seems  to  me  to  speak 


SAVAGES  NOT  INOAFABLE  OF  CIVILISATION.    473 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands  have  recently  intro- 
duced outriggers.  The  Baehapins,  when  visited  by  Burchell, 
had  just  commenced  working  iron.  According  to  Burton^  the 
Wajiji  negroes  have  recently  learned  to  make  brass.  In 
Tahiti,  when  visited  by  Captain  Cook,  the  largest  morai,  or 
burial-place,  was  that  erected  for  the  then  reigning  queen. 
The  Tahitians,  also,  had  then  very  recently  abandoned  the 
habit  of  cannibalism. 

The  natives  of  Celebes,  whose  bamboo  houses  are  very  liable 
to  be  blown  down,  have  discovered  that  if  they  fix  some  crooked 
timbers  in  the  sides  of  the  house  it  is  less  likely  to  fall.  Ac- 
cordingly they  chop  *  the  crookedest  they  can  find,  but  they 
^  do  not  know  the  rationale  of  the  contrivance,  and  have  not 
'  hit  on  the  idea  that  straight  poles  fixed  slanting  would  have 
'  the  same  effect  in  making  the  structure  rigid.'  ^ 

Sha-gwaw-koo-sink,  an  Ottawwaw,  who  lived  at  the  be- 
ginning of  this  century,  first  introduced  the  cultivation  of 
corn  among  the^  Ojibbeways.*  Moreover,  there  are  certain 
facts  which  speak  for  themselves.  Some  of  the  American 
races  cultivated  the  potato.  Now,  the  potato  is  an  American 
plant,  and  we  have  here,  therefore,  clear  evidence  of  a  step 
in  advance  made  by  these  tribes.  Again,  the  Peruvians  had 
domesticated  the  llama.  Those  who  believe  in  the  diversity  of 
species  of  men  may  argue  that  the  Peruvians  had  domestic 
llamas  from  the  beginning.  Archbishop  Whately,  however, 
would  not  take  this  line.  He  would,  I  am  sure,  admit  that  the 
first  settlers  in  Peru  had  no  llamas,  nor,  indeed,  any  other 
domestic  animal,  excepting,  probably,  the  dog.  The  bark-cloth 
of  the  Polynesians  is  another  case  in  point  Another  very 
strong  case  is  the  boomerang  of  the  Australians.  This  weapon 
is  known  to  no  other  race  of  men,'  We  cannot  look  on  it  as 
a  relic  of  primeval  civilisation,  or  it  would  not  now  be  confined 
to  one  race  only.  The  Australians  cannot  have  learnt  it  from 
any  civilised  visitors,  for  the  same  reason.  It  is,  therefore,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  exactly  the  case  we  want,  and  a  clear  proof  of 

'  Wallace's     Malay     Archipelago,  ancient  Egyptians  used  a  curved  stick 

quoted   in  Tylor's  Primitive    Culture,  to  throw  at  birds,  *  but  in  no  instance 

ToL  i.  p.  56.  *  had  it  the  round  shape  and  flight  of  the 

•  Tanner's  Narrative,  p.  180.  'Australian   boomerang.'    Wilkinson's 

•  With  one  doubtful  exception.  The  Ancient  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  p.  235. 


PB0GBES8  A8  DWIOATED  BY  LANOUAQE.      478 

nigin.  Even  if  a  Bystem  of  writing  by  letters  could  ever 
>e  altogether  lost,  which  I  doubt,  it  certainly  would  not 
ye  abandoned  for  that  of  picture-writing,  which  is  inferior 
n  every  point  of  view.  If  the  Mexicans  had  owed  their 
nvilisation,  not  to  their  own  gradual  improvement,  but  to  the 
influence  of  some  European  visitors,  driven  by  stress  of  weather 
3r  the  pursuit  of  adventure  on  to  their  coasts,  we  should  have 
found  in  their  system  of  writing,  and  in  other  respects,  unmis- 
takable proofs  of  such  an  influence.  Although,  therefore,  we 
have  no  historical  proof  that  the  civilisation  of  America  was 
indigenous,  we  have  in  its  very  character  evidence  more  satis- 
foctory  perhaps  than  any  historical  statements  would  be.  The 
B-ne  ar^ment  may  be  derived  from  the  names  used  for  nam- 
bers  by  savages.  I  feel  great  difficulty  in  supposing  that  any 
race  which  had  learned  to  count  up  to  ten  would  ever  unlearn 
a  piece  of  knowledge  so  easy  and  yet  so  useful.  Yet,  as  has 
already  been  pointed  out,  few,  perhaps  none,  of  those  whom 
Archbishop  Whately  would  call  savages  can  count  so  far. 

In  many  cases,  where  the  system  of  numeration  is  at  present 
somewhat  more  advanced,  it  bears  on  it  the  stamp  of  native 
and  recent  origin.  Among  civilised  nations  the  derivations 
of  the  numerals  have  long  since  been  obscured  by  the  gradual 
modification  which  time  effects  in  all  words — especially  those 
in  frequent  use,  and  before  the  invention  of  printing.  And  if 
the  numerals  of  savages  were  relics  of  a  former  civilisation,  the 
wai&  and  strays  saved  out  of  the  general  wreck,  they  would 
certainly  have  suffered  so  much  from  the  wear  and  tear  of 
constant  use,  and  their  derivations  would  be  obscured  or  wholly 
undiscoverable,  instead  of  which  they  are  often  perfectly  clear 
and  obvious,  especially  among  races  whose  arithmetical  attain- 
ments are  lowest.  These  numerals,  then,  are  recent,  because 
they  are  imcorruptfid ;  and  they  are  indigenous,  because  they 
have  an  evident  meaning  in  the  language  of  the  tribes  by  whom 
they  are  used.^ 

Again,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,^  many  savage  languages 
are  entirely  deficient  in  such  words  as  *  colour,'  *  tone,'  *  tree,' 
&C.,  having  names  for  each  kind  of  colour,  every  species  of 

*  See  Chapter  IX.  This  argument  now  words  are  coined  from  time  to  time 
would  be  conclosiTe  were  it  not  that      in  all  languages.  *  Ch.  IX. 


ABBITBABT  CUSTOMS.  477 

priests  ?  evidently  because  they  had  been  at  one  time  in  general 
use,  and  a  feeling  of  respect  made  the  priest  reluctant  to 
introduce  a  new  substance  into  religious  ceremonies. 

There  are,  moreover,  other  considerations  ;  for  instance,  the 
gradual  improvement  in  the  relation  between  the  sexes,  and 
the  development  of  correct  ideas  on  the  subject  of  relationship, 
seem  to  me  strongly  to  point  to  the  same  conclusion. 

In  the  publications  of  the  Nova  Scotian  '  Institute  of  Na- 
« tnral  Science '  is  an  interesting  paper,  by  Mr.  Haliburton,  on 

*  The  Unity  of  the  Human  Race,  proved  by  the  universality 
'of  certain  superstitions  connected  with  sneezing.'  'Once 
'  establish,'  he  says, '  that  a  large  number  of  arbitrary  customs 
* — such  as  could  not  have  naturally  suggested  themselves  to 

*  all  men  at  all  times — are  universally  observed,  and  we  arrive ' 

*  at  the  conclusion  that  they  are  primitive  customs  which  have 
'  been  inherited  from  a  common  source,  and,  if  inherited,  that 
'  they  owe  their  origin  to  an  era  anterior  to  the  dispersion  of 
'  the  human  race.'  To  justify  such  a  conclusion,  the  custom 
must  be  demonstrably  arbitrary.  The  belief  that  two  and 
two  make  four,  the  decimal  system  of  numeration,  and  similar 
coincidences  of  course  prove  nothing ;  but  I  very  much  doubt 
the  existence  of  any  universal,  or  even  general,  custom  of  a 
clearly  arbitrary  character.  The  fact  is,  that  many  things  ap- 
pear to  us  arbitrary  and  strange  because  we  live  in  a  condition 
so  different  from  that  in  which  they  originated.  Many  things 
seem  natural  to  a  savage  which  to  us  appear  absurd  and  un- 
accountable. 

Mr.  Haliburton  brings  forward,  as  his  strongest  case,  the 
habit  of  saying  *  God  bless  you  I '  or  some  equivalent  expres- 
sion, when  a  person  sneezes.  He  shows  that  this  custom, 
which,  I  admit,  appears  to  us  at  first  sight  both  odd  and  arbi- 
trary, is  ancient  and  widely  extended.  It  is  mentioned  by 
Homer,  Aristotle,  Apuleius,  Pliny,  and  the  Jewish  rabbis,  and 
has  been  observed  among  the  Negroes  and  Kaffirs ;  in  Koordis- 
tan,  in  Florida,  in  Otaheite,  in  New  Zealand,  and  the  Tonga 
Islands. 

It  is  not  arbitrary,  however,  and  it  docs  not,  therefore,  come 
under  his  rule.  A  belief  in  invisible  beings  is  very  general 
among  savages ;  and  while  they  think  it  unnecessary  to  account 


MENTAL  DIFFEBEN0E8  IN  DIFFEBENT  EA0E8.    479 

that  their  descendants  were  able  to  keep  it  unchanged  down  to 
tiie  present  time.  This^  however,  we  know  was  not  the  case. 
-Again,  Mr.  Haliburton  says :  *  The  belief  in  Scotland  and 
^  equatorial  Afirica  is  found  to  be  almost  precisely  identical  re- 
'  gpecting  there  being  ghosts,  even  of  the  living,  who  are  ex- 
'  oeedingly  troublesome  and  pugnacious,  and  can  be  sometimes 
^  killed  by  a  silver  bullet.'  Here  we  certainly  have  what  seems 
at  first  sight  to  be  an  arbitrary  belief;  but  if  it  proves  that 
there  was  a  belief  in  ghosts  of  the  living  before  the  dispersion, 
it  also  proves  that  silver  bullets  were  then  in  use.  This  illus- 
tration is,  I  think,  a  very  interesting  one ;  because  it  shows 
that  similar  ideas  in  distant  countries  owe  their  origin,  not  ^  to 
'  an  era  before  the  dispersion  of  the  human  race,'  but  to  the 
fnndamental  similarity  of  the  human  mind.  While  I  do  not 
believe  that  similar  customs  in  different  nations  are  '  inherited 
^  from  a  common  source,'  or  are  necessarily  primitive,  I  certainly 
do  see  in  them  an  argument  for  the  unity  of  the  human  race, 
which,  however  (be  it  remarked),  is  not  necessarily  the  same 
thing  as  the  descent  from  a  single  pair. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  have  attempted  to  show  that  ideas, 
which  might  at  first  sight  appear  arbitrary  and  unaccountable, 
arise  naturally  in  very  distinct  nations  as  they  arrive  at  a 
similar  stage  of  progress ;  and  it  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  be 
extremely  cautious  in  using  such  customs  or  ideas  as  implying 
any  special  connection  between  different  races  of  men. 


PART  II. » 

At  the  Dundee  meeting  of  the  British  Association  I  had  the 
honour  of  reading  a  paper  *  On  the  Origin  of  Civilisation  and 
*  the  Primitive  Condition  of  Man,'  in  answer  to  certain  opinions 
and  arguments  brought  forward  by  the  late  Archbishop  of 
Dublin.  The  views  therein  advocated  met  with  little  opposi- 
tion at  the  time.  The  then  Presidents  of  the  Ethnological 
and  Anthropological  Societies  both  expressed  their  concurrence 

*  The  BubsUnco  of  thii  was  read  before  the  Briti»h  A»wciation  duriDg  their 
BMitiDg  at  Exeter  in  1860. 


THE   WEAPONS  OF  MONKEYS.  481 

*  not,  therefore,'  he  adds  in  a  subsequent  page,*  ^  agree  with 

*  the  late  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  that  we  are  entitled  to  assume 
'  it  as  a  fact  that,  as  regards  the  mechanical  arts,  no  savage 
'race  has  ever  raised  itself.'     And  again :^  *  The  aid  which 

*  man  had  from  his  Creator  may  possibly  have  been  nothing 

*  more  than  the  aid  of  a  body  and  of  a  mind,  so  marvellously 
'endowed    that  thought  was    an  instinct  and  contrivance  a 

*  necessity.' 

I  feel,  however,  less  satisfaction  on  this  account  than  would 
otherwise  have  been  the  case,  because  it  seems  to  me  that, 
though  the  Duke  acknowledges  the  Archbishop's  argument  to 
be  untenable,  he  practically  reproduces  it  with  but  a  slight 
alteration  and  somewhat  protected  by  obscurity. .  What 
Whately  called  ^instruction'  the  Duke  terms  ^Instinct;  ^  and 
he  considers  that  man  had  instincts  which  afforded  all  that  was 
necessary  as  a  starting-ground.  He  admits,  however,  that 
monkeys  use  stones  to  break  nuts ;  he  might  have  added  that 
they  throw  sticks  and  stones  at  intruders.  But  he  says, 
'  Between  these  rudiments  of  intellectual  perception  and  the 
'  next  step  (that  of  adapting  and  fashioning  an  instrument  for 

*  a  particular  purpose)  there  is  a  gulf  in  which  lies  the  whole 
'  immeasurable  distance  between  man  and  brutes.'  I  cannot 
agree  with  the  Duke  in  this  opinion ;  nor  indeed  does  he  agree 
with  himself,  for  he  adds,  in  the  very  same  page,  that — *  The 

*  wielding  of  a  stick  is,  in  all  probability,  an  act  equally  of 
'  primitive  intuition,  and  from  this  to  throwing  of  a  stick  and 
'the  use  of  javelins  is  an  easy  and  natural  transition.' 

He  continues  as  follows : — *  Simple  as  these  acts  are,  they 

*  involve  both  physical  and  mental  powers  which  are  capable  of 
'  all  the  developments  which  we  see  in  the  most  advanced  in- 

*  dustrial  arts.  These  acts  involve  the  instinctive  idea  of  the 
'constancy  of  natural   causes  and  the  capacity  of  thought, 

*  which  gives  men  the  conviction  that  what  has  happened  under 
'  given  conditions  will,  under  the  same  conditions,  always  occur 
'  again.'     On  these,  he  says,  '  as  well  as  on  other  grounds,  I 

*  have  never  attached  much  importance  V)  Whately's  argument.' 
These  are  indeed  important  arlmissions,  and  amount  to  a  virtual 
abandonment  of  Whately's  position. 

»  Goal  Wortlt,  Jfoe,  IWS   p.  ZfiO,  *  K  W2. 

f  f 


SEQUENCE  OF  CUSTOMS.  483 

they  are  by  no  means  In  the  lowest  possible  moral  condition, 
nor  are  they  capable  of  the  higher  virtues. 

In  the  first  part  of  this  paper  I  laid  much  stress  on  the  fact 
that  even  in  the  most  civilised  nations  we  find  traces  of  early 
barbarism.  The  Duke  maintains,  on  the  contrary,  that  these 
traces  afford  no  proof,  or  even  presumption,  that  barbarism  was 
the  primeval  condition  of  man.  He  urges  that  all  such  customs 
may  have  been  not  primeval,  but  mediaeval ;  and  he  continues : 

*  Yet  this  assumption  runs  through  all  Sir  J.  Lubbock's  argu- 

*  ments.  Wherever  a  brutal  or  savage  custom  prevails,  it  is 
'  regarded  as  a  sample  of  the  original  condition  of  mankind. 

*  And  this  in  the  teeth  of  facts  which  prove  that  many  of  such 

*  customs  not  only  may  have  been,  but  must  have  been,  the 

*  result  of  corruption.' 

Fortunately,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  defend  myself 
against  this  criticism,  because  in  the  very  next  sentence  the 
Duke  directly  contradicts  himself,  and  shows  that  I  have  not 
done  that  of  which  he  accuses  me.  He  continues  his  argument 
thus  : — *  Take  cannibalism  as  one  of  these.      Sir  J.  Lubbock 

*  seems  to  admit  that  this  loathsome  practice  was  not  primeval.' 
Thus,  by  way  of  proof  that  I  regard  all  brutal  customs  as 
primeval,  he  states,  and  correctly  states,  that  I  do  not  regard 
cannibalism  as  primeval.  It  would  be  difBcult,  I  think,  to  find 
a  more  curious  case  of  self-contradiction. 

The  Duke  refers  particularly  to  the  practice  of  Bride- 
catching,  which  he  states  ^  cannot  possibly  have  been  primeval.' 
He  omits,  however,  to  explain  why,  from  his  point  of  view,  it 
could  not  have  been  so ;  and  of  course,  assuming  the  word 

*  primeval '  to  cover  a  period  of  some  length,  it  would  have 
been  interesting  to  know  his  reasons  for  this  conclusion ;  in 
fact,  however,  it  is  not  a  case  in  point,  because,  as  I  have 
attempted  to  show,  marriage  by  capture  was  preceded  by  a 
custom  still  more  barbarous.  It  may,  perhaps,  however,  be  as 
well  to  state  emphatically  that  all  brutal  customs  are  not,  in 
my  opinion,  primeval.  Human  sacrifices,  for  instance,  were,  I 
think,  certainly  not  so. 

My  argument,  however,  was  that  there  is  a  definite  sequence 
of  habits  and  ideas ;  that  certain  customs  (some  brutal,  others 
not  so)  which  we  find  lingering  on  in  civilised  communities 

I  I  2 


THE  INFLUENOE  OF  EXTERNAL  CONDITIONS,    485 

opinion,  been  effected  by  force  acting  on  any  given  race  from 
without,  but  by  internal  necessity  and  the  pressure  of  popula- 
tion ;  by  peaceful^  not  by  hostile  force  ;  by  prosperity,  not  by 
misfortune.  I  believe  that  of  old,  as  now,  founders  of  new 
colonies  were  men  of  energy  and  enterprise,  animated  by  hope 
and  courage^  not  by  fear  and  despair ;  that  they  were,  in  short, 
anything  but  mere  outcasts  of  the  human  race. 

The  Duke  relies  a  good  deal  on  the  case  of  America.  ^  Is 
*it  not  true,'  he  asks,  *  that  the  lowest  and  rudest  tribes  in  the 

*  population  of  the  globe  have  been  found  in  the  furthest  ex- 

*  tremities  of  its  great  continents,  and  in  the  distant  islands 

*  which  would  be  the  last  refuge  of  the  victims  of  violence  and 

*  misfortune  ?  "  The  New  World "  is  the  continent  which 
'presents  the  most  uninterrupted  stretch  of  habitable*  land 
*from  the  highest  northern  to  the  lowest  southern  latitude. 

*  On  the  extreme  north  we  have  the  Esquimaux,  or  Inuit  race, 
'  maintaining  human  life  under  conditions  of  extremest  hard- 

*  ship,  even  amid  the  perpetual  ice  of  the  Polar  seas.     And 

*  what  a  life  it  is  !     Watching  at  the  blow-hole  of  a  seal  for 

*  many  hours,  in  a  temperature  of  75°  below  freezing  point,  is 
^  the  constant  work  of  the  Inuit  hunter.  And  when  at  last 
'  his  prey  is  struck,  it  is  his  luxury  to  feast  upon  the  raw  blood 
'  and  blubber.     To  civilised  man  it  is  hardly  possible  to  con- 

*  ceive  a  life  so  wretched,  and  in  many  respects  so  brutal,  as 

*  the  life  led  by  this  race  during  the  long-lasting  night  of  the 

*  Arctic  winter.' 

To  this  question  I  confidently  reply.  No,  it  is  not  true  ;  it  is 
not  true  as  a  general  proposition  that  the  lowest  races  are 
found  furthest  from  the  centres  of  continents ;  it  is  not  true 
in  the  particular  case  of  America.  The  natives  of  Brazil, 
possessing  a  country  of  almost  unrivalled  fertility,  surrounded 
by  the  most  luxuriant  vegetation,  watered  by  magnificent 
rivers,  and  abounding  in  animal  life,  were  yet  unquestionably 
lower  than  the  Esquimaux,*  whom  the  Duke  pities  and 
despises  so  much.^     He  pities  them,  indeed,  more  than  I  think 

»  See  Martius,  p.  77.   Dr.  Eae  ranks  rostigations  finally  led  him  to  the  op- 

1  lie  J'lsquimaux  above  the  Red  Indians.  posito  conclusion.     See  Nature,    187-1, 

Tmns.  Ethn.  Soc.  18G6.     Martius  was  pp.  146,  204. 

himself  at  one  time  of  opinion  that  the  -  When    the     Duke      states    that 

Brazilians  were  degenerate,  but  his  in-  '  neither  an   agricultural    nor  pastoral 


THE  ESQUIMAUX.  487 

^no  people  whom  I  would  more  confidently  trust,  as  respects 

*  either  my  person  or  my  property,  than  the  Esquimaux.'  Dr. 
fiae,^  who  had  ample  means  of  judging,  tells  us  that  the 
Eastern  Esquimaux  ^  are  sober,  steady,  and  faithful.     .     .     . 

*  Provident  to  their  own  property,  and  careful  of  that  of  others 

*  when  under  their  charge.  .  .  .  Socially  they  are  a  lively, 
'cheerful,  and   chatty  people,. fond  of  associating  with  each 

*  other  and  with  strangers,  with  whom  they  soon  become  on 

*  friendly  terms,  if  kindly  treated.     ...     In  their  domestic 

*  relations  they  are  exemplary.     The  man  is  an  obedient  son, 

*  a  good  husband,  and  a  kind  father.     .     .     .     The  children 

*  when  young  are  docile.  ,  .     .     .     The  girls  have  their  dolls, 

*  in  making  dresses  and  shoes  for  which  they  amuse  and  employ 

*  themselves.      The  boys  have  miniature  bows,  arrows,   and 

*  spears.     .     .     .     When  grown  up  they  are  dutiful  to  their 

*  parents.     .     .     .     Orphan  children  are  readily  adopted  and 

*  well  cared  for  until  they  are  able  to  provide  for  themselves.' 
He  concludes  by  saying,  *  the  more  I  saw  of  the  Esquimaux 

*  the  higher  was  the  opinion  I  formed  of  them.' 

Again,  Hooper  ^  thus  describes  a  visit  to  an  Asiatic  Esqui- 
maux belonging  to  the  Tuski  race :  *  Upon  reaching  Mooldoo- 
Ayah's  habitation,  we  found  Captain  Moore  installed  at  his 

*  ease,  with  every  provision  made  for  comfort  and  convenience. 

*  Water  and  venison  were  suspended  over  the  lamps  in  prepa- 
'  ration  for  dinner ;  skins  nicely  arranged  for  couches,  and  the 
'  hangings  raised  to  admit   the  cool  air ;    our  baggage   was 

*  bestowed  around  us  with  care  and  in  quiet,  and  we  were  free 

*  to  take  our  own  way  of  enjoying  such  unobtrusive  hospitality 

*  without  a  crowd  of  eager  gazers  watching  us  like  lions  at 

*  feed ;  nor  were  we  troubled  by  importunate  begging  such  as 
'detractetl  from  the  dignity  of    Metra's  station,  which  was 

*  undoubtedly  high  in  the  tribe.' 

I  know  no  sufficient  reason  for  supposing  that  the  Esqui- 
maux were  ever  more  advanced  than  they  are  now.  The  Duke, 
indeed,  eonsiders  that  before  tliey  were  *  driven  by  wars  and 

*  migrations '  (a  somewhat  curious  expression)  they  *  may  have 

*  been  nomads  living  on  their  flocks  and  herds ; '  and  he  states 
broadly  that  *  the  rigours  of  the  region  they  now  inhabit  have 

»  TraDB.  Eth.  Soc  18CC,  p.  138.  "  The  Tonta  of  the  Tui»ki,  p.  102.. 


SUPPOSED  DiEVTFABILITY  OF  DEOBADATION.    489 

the  Polynesians  carried  the  sweet  potato  and  the  yam,  as  well 
as  the  dog,  with  them  from  island  to  island ;  and  even  if  the 
first  settlers  in  Australia  happened  to  have  been  without  them, 
and  without  the  means  of  acquiring  them,  they  would  certainly 
have  found  some  native  plants  which  would  have  been  worth 
the  trouble  of  cultivation,  if  they  had  already  attained  to  the 
agricultural  stage. 

This  argument  applies  with  even  more  force  to  pottery ;  if 
the  first  settlers  in  Australia  were  acquainted  with  this  art,  I 
can  see  no  reason  why  they  should  suddenly  and  completely 
have  lost  it. 

The  Duke,  indeed,  appears  to  maintain  that  the  natives  of 
Van  Diemen's  Land  (whom  he  evidently  regards  as  belonging 
to  the  same  race  as  the  Australians  and  Polynesians,  from  both 
of  which  they  are  entirely  distinct)  *  must  have  originally  come 

*  from  countries  where  both  corn  and  cattle  were  to  be  had,' 
still  ^  degradation  could  not  possibly  be  avoided.'  This  seems 
to  be  the  natural  inference  from  the  Duke's  language,  and 
suggests  a  very  gloomy  future  for  our  Australian  fellow- 
countrymen.  The  position  is,  however,  so  manifestly  unten- 
able, when  once  put  into  plain  language,  that  I  think  it 
unnecessary  to  dwell  longer  on  this  part  of  the  subject.  Even 
the  Duke  himself  will  hardly  maintain  that  our  colonists  must 
fall  back  because  the  natives  did  not  improve.  Yet  he  extends 
and  generalises  this  argument  in  a  subsequent  paragraph, 
saying,  *  There  is  hardly  a  single  fact  quoted  by  Sir  J.  Lubbock 

*  in  favour  of  his  own  theory  which,  when  viewed  in  connection 

*  with  the  same  indisputable  principles,  does  not  tell  against 

*  that  theory  rather  than  in  its  favour.'  So  far  from  being 
^indisputable,'  the  principle  that  when  savages  remained 
savages,  civilised  settlers  must  descend  to  the  same  level, 
appears  to  me  entirely  erroneous.  On  reading  the  above 
passage,  however,  I  passed  on  with  much  interest  to  see  which 
of  my  facts  I  had  so  strangely  misread. 

The  great  majority  of  facts  connected  with  savage  life  have 
no  perceptible  bearing  on  the  question,  and  I  must  therefore 
have  been  not  only  very  stupid,  but  also  singulariy  unfortu- 
nate, if  of  all  those  quoted  by  me  in  support  of  my  argument 

*  there  was  hardly  a  single  one '  which,  read  aright,  was  not 


THE  SUBVIVAL  OF  CUSTOMS.  491 

is  perhaps  natural  that  the  head  of  a  great  Highland  Clan 
should  regard  with  pity  a  people  who,  having  *  once  known 

*  what  war  and  violence  meant,'  have  no  longer  any  neighbours 
to  pillage  or  to  fight ;  but  a  Lowlander  can  hardly  be  expected 
seriously  to  regard  such  a  change  as  one  calculated  to  excite 
pity,  or  as  any  evidence  of  degradation. 

In  my  first  paper  I  deduced  an  argument  from  the  condition 
of  religion  among  the  different  races  of  man,  a  part  of  the 
subject  which  has  since  been  admirably  dealt  with  by  Mr, 
Tylor  in  a  lecture  at  the  Royal  Institution,  The  use  of  flint 
for  sacrificial  purposes  long  after  the  introduction  of  metal 
seemed  to  me  a  good  case  of  what  Mr,  Tylor  has  aptly  called 

*  Survival.'  So  also  is  the  method  of  obtaining  fire.  The 
Brahman  will  not  use  ordinary  fire  for  sacred  purposes ;  he 
does  not  even  obtain  a  fresh  spark  from  flint  and  steel,  but 
reverts  to,  or  rather  continues,  the  old  way  of  obtaining  it,  by 
friction  with  a  wooden  drill,  one  Brahman  pulling  the  thong 
backwards  and  forwards  while  the  other  watches  to  catch  the 
sacred  spark, 

I  also  referred  to  the  non-existence  of  religion  among 
certain  savage  races,  and,  as  the  Duke  correctly  observes,  I 
argued  that  this  was  probably  their  primitive  condition,  because 
it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  a  people  which  had  once  possessed 
a  religion  would  evg:  entirely  lose  it.^ 

This  argument  filled  the  Duke  with  *  astonishment.'  Surely, 
he  says,  *  if  there  is  one  fact  more  certain  than  another  in 

*  respect  to  the  nature  of  man,  it  is  that  he  is  capable  of  losing 

*  religious  knowledge,  of  ceasing  to  believe  in  religious  truth, 

*  and  of  falling  away  from  religious  duty.     If  by  "  religion  " 

*  is  meant  the  existence  merely  of  some  impressions  of  powers 

*  invisible  and  supernatural,  even  this,  we  know,  can  not  only 

*  be  lost,  but  be  scornfully  disavowed  by  men  who  are  highly 

*  civilised.'  Yet  in  the  very  same  page  the  Duke  goes  on  to 
say,   *  The  most  cruel  and  savage  customs  in  the  world  arc 

*  the  direct  effect  of  its  "  religions."     And  if  men  could  drop 

*  religions  when  they  would,  or  if  they  could  even  form  the  wish 

*  to  get  rid  of  those  which  sit  like  a  nightmare  on  their  life, 

>  It  is  surely  unnecessary  to  explain      possibility  of  a  change  in,  but  a  total 
that  I  did  not  intend  to  question  the      loss  of,  religion. 


FETICHISM,  493 

imiteil ;  one  governs  the  sea,  another  the  land ;  one  reigns 
»ver  the  plains,  another  among  the  mountains.  The  most 
K)werful  are  vindictive,  cruel,  and  unjust.  They  require 
lumiliating  ceremonies  and  bloody  sacrifices.  But  few  races 
laTC  arrived  at  the  conception  of  an  omnipotent  and  benefi- 
jent  Deity. 

One  of  the  lowest  forms  of  religion  is  that  presented  by  the 
Australians,  which  consists  of  a  mere  unreasoning  belief  in  the 
existence  of  mysterious  beings.  The  native  who  has  in  his 
Bleep  a  nightmare  or  a  dream  does  not  doubt  the  reality  of 
that  which  passes ;  and  as  the  beings  by  whom  he  is  visited  in 
his  sleep  are  unseen  by  his  friends  and  relations,  he  regards 
them  as  invisible. 

In  Fetichism  this  feeling  is  more  methodised.  The  negro, 
by  means  of  witchcraft,  endeavours  to  make  a  slave  of  his 
deity.  Thus  Fetichism  is  almost  the  opposite  of  Religion ;  it 
Btands  towards  it  in  the  same  relation  as  Alchemy  to  Chemistry, 
or  Astrology  to  Astronomy ;  and  shows  how  fundamentally 
our  idea  of  a  deity  differs  from  that  which  presents  itself  to 
the  savage.  The  negro  does  not  hesitate  to  punish  a  refrac- 
tory Fetich,  and  hides  it  in  his  waistcloth  if  he  does  not  wish 
it  to  know  what  is  going  on.  Aladdin's  lamp  is,  in  fact,  a  well- 
known  illustration  of  a  Fetich. 

A  further  stage,  and  the  superiority  of  the  higher  deities  is 
more  fully  recognised.  Everything  is  worshipped  indiscrimi- 
uately — animals,  plants,  and  even  inanimate  objects.  In 
endeavouring  to  account  for  the  worship  of  animals,  we  must 
remember  that  names  are  very  frequently  taken  from  them. 
The  children  and  followers  of  a  man  called  the  Bear  or  the 
Lion  would  make  that  a  tribal  name.  Hence  the  animal  itself 
would  be  first  respected^  at  last  worshipped.  This  form  of 
religion  can  be  shown  to  have  existed,  at  one  time  or  another, 
almost  all  over  the  world. 

*  The  Totem,'  says  Schoolcraft,  *  Is  a  symbol  of  the  name  of 

*  the  progenitor — generally  some  quadruped,  or  bird,  or  other 

*  object  in  the  animal  kingdom,  which  stands,  if  we  may  so  ex- 

*  press  it,  as  the  surname  of  the  family.     It  is  always  some 

*  animated  object,  and  seldom  or  never  derived  from  the  inani- 
<  mate  class  of  nature.     Its  significant  importance  is  derived 


WOLATEY.  495 

'  Wisdom  of  Solomon,'  ^  indeed,  long  ago  pointed  out  how  it 
was  connected  with  monarchical  power — 

*  When  men  could  not  honour  in  presence,  because  they  dwelt 
'  far  off,  they  took  the  counterfeit  of  his  visage  from  far,  and 
'  made  an  express  image  <^  a  king,  whom  they  honoured,  to 

*  the  end  that  by  this,  their  forwardness,  they  might  flatter  him 

*  that  was  absent,  as  if  he  were  present. 

'  Also  the  singular  diligence  of  the  artificer  did  help  to  set 

*  forward  the  ignorant  to  more  superstition. 

*  For  he,  peradventure  willing  to  please  one  in  authority, 
'  forced  all  his  skill  to  make  the  resemblance  of  the  best 
'  fashion. 

*  And  so  the  multitude,  allured  by  the  grace  of  the  work, 
'took  him  now  for  a  God  which  a  little  before  was  but 
'  honoured  as  a  man.* 

The  worship  of  principles  may  be  regarded  as  a  still  further 
stage  in  the  natural  deyelopment  of  religion. 

It  is  important  to  observe  that  each  stage  of  religion  is 
superimposed  on  the  prece^ng,  and  that  bygone  beliefs  linger 
on  among  the  children  and  the  ignorant.  Thus  witchcraft  is 
still  believed  in  by  the  ignorant,  and  fairy  tales  flourish  in  the 
nursery. 

It  certainly  appears  to  me  that  the  gradual  development  of 
religious  ideas  among  the  lower  races  of  men  is  a  fair  argu- 
ment in  opposition  to  the  view  that  savages  are  degenerate 
descendants  of  ci\'ilised  ancestors.  Archbkhop  TVhately  would 
admit  the  connection  between  these  different  phases  of  religious 
belief;  but  I  think  he  would  find  it  \Qry  difficult  to  show  any 
process  of  natural  degradation  and  decay  which  could  cjcplain 
the  quaint  errors  and  opinions  of  the  lower  races  of  men,  or  to 
account  for  the  lingering  belief  in  witchcraft,  and  other  absur- 
dities, &c.,  in  civilised  races,  excepting  by  some  such  train  of 
reasoning  as  that  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  sketch. 

There  is  another  case  in  this  memoir  wherein  the  Duke, 
although  generally  a  fair  opponent,  brings  forward  an  unsup- 
portable  accusation.  He  criticises  severely  the  '  Four  Ages, 
generally  admitted  by  archaeologists,  especially  referring  to  the 
terms  '  Paleolithic '  and  '  Xcolithic,'  which  are  used  to  denote 
the  two  earlier. 

»  Wtfd^'W.  xiT.  17. 


HE  TRUE  THEORY  OF  THE  FOUR  AGES.      497 


and  of  a  kind  so 
educible  by  heat,  that 
might  well  be  disco- 
by  the  rudest  tribes, 
ere  in  the  habit  of 
;  fires.  Then  again 
»  be  remembered  that 
ire  some  countries  in 
rid  where  stone  is  as 
nd   difficult  to  get  as 

great  alluvial  plains 
lopotamia  arc  a  case  in 

Accordingly  we  know 
le  remains  of  the  first 
an  monarchy  that  a 
igh  civilisation  in  the 
F  agriculture  and  of 
rce  coexisted  with  the 
stone  implements  of  a 
ude  character.  This 
roves  that  rude  stone 
lents  are  not  necessa- 
ly  proof  whatever  of 
y  barbarous  condition. 
k^en  if  it  were  true  that 
3  of  stone  has  in  all 
preceded  the  use  of 
,  it  is  quite  certain 
e  same  age  which  was 
B  of  Stone  in  one  part 

world  was  an  Age  of 
in  the  other.  As  re- 
the    pjskimo   and  the 

Sea  Islanders,  we  arc 
r  were  very  recently, 
in  a  Stone  Age.' 


*  Fourthly,  the  Iron  Age,  in 
which  that  metal  had  super- 
seded bronze  for  arms,  axes, 
knives,  &c. ;  bronze,  how- 
ever, still  being  in  common 
use  for  ornaments,  and  fre- 
quently also  for  the  handles 
of  swords  and  other  arms,  but 
never  for  the  blades. 

*  Stone  weapons,  however, 
of  many  kinds  were  still  in  use 
during  the  Age  of  Bronze, 
and  even  during  that  of  Iron. 
So  that  the  mere  presence  of  a 
few  stone  implements  is  not  in 
itself  suflicient  evidence  that 
any  given  "  find  "  belongs  to 
the  Stone  Age. 

*  In  order  to  prevent  mis- 
apprehension, it  may  be  as 
well  to  state  at  once  that  I 
only  apply  this  classification 
to  Europe,  though  in  all  pro- 
bability it  might  also  be  ex- 
tended to  the  neighbouring 
parts  of  Asia  and  Africa. 
As  regards  other  civilised 
countries,  China  and  Japan 
for  instance,  we,  as  yet,  know 
nothing  of  their  prehistoric 
archaeology.  It  is  evident, 
nlso,  that  some  nations,  such 
as  the  Fuegians,  Andama- 
ners,  &c.,  are  even  now  only 
in  an  Age  of  Stone.' 


ive  therefore  actually  pointed  out  those  very  limitations: 
ssion  of  which  the  Duke  condemns. 

K  K 


600      SIMILARITY  OF  SAVAGES  AND   CHILDREN. 

*  that  they  would  he  better  in  any  other  place  than  in  the  one 

*  they  occupy  at  the  time.     Like  children,  their  actions  seem 

*  to  be  rp,rely  guided  by  reflection,  and  they  almost  always  act 

*  impulsively.'     The  tears  of  the  South  Sea  Islanders,  *  like 

*  those  of  children,  were  always  ready  to  express  any  passion 

*  that  was  strongly  excited,   and,  like  those  of  children,  they 

*  also  appeared  to  be  forgotten  as  soon  as  shed.'  ^ 

The  Kutchiii  Indians  of  North-West  America,  according 
to  Morgan,  *  give  vent  to  injured  feelings,  as  well  as  physical 
^  pain,  by  crying,  a  practice  shared  equally  by  the  males  and 
^  females,  and  by  the  old  as  well  as  the  young.' 

At  Tahiti,  Captain  Cook  mentions  that  Oberea,  the  Queen, 
and  Tootahah,  one  of  the  principal  chiefs,  amused  themselves 
with  two  large  dolls.  D'Urville  tells  us  that  a  New  Zealand 
chief,  Tauvarya  by  name,  *  cried  like  a  child  because  the  sailors 

*  spoilt  his  favourite  cloak  by  powdering  it  with  flour.'  * 
Williams  ^  mentions  that  in  Feejee  not  only  the  women,  but  even 
the  men  give  vent  to  their  feelings  by  crying.  Burton  even 
says  that  among  East  Africans  the  men  cried  more  frequently 
than  the  women.* 

The  Negro  Kings  of  Western  Africa,  *  from  Gelele  to  Ru- 

*  manika   of  Karaqwah,   are   delighted   with   children's   toys, 

*  gutta-percha  faces,  Noah's  Arks;  in  fact,  what  would  be  most 

*  acceptable  to  a  child  of  eight — which  the  Negro  is.'  * 

Not  only  do  savages  closely  resemble  children  in  their 
general  character,  but  a  curious  similarity  exists  between  them 
in  many  small  points.  For  instance,  the  tendency  to  redupli- 
cation, which  is  so  characteristic  of  children,  prevails  remarkably 
also  amongst  savages.  The  fii*st  1000  words  in  Richardson's 
dictionary  (down  to  allege),  contain  only  three,  namely,  adsci- 
titious,  adventitious,  agitator,  and  even  in  these  it  is  reduccil 
to  a  minimum.  There  is  not  a  single  word  like  a/ii  a/ti\ 
evening;  ake  ake,  eternal;  aki  aid,  a  bird;  aniirahiwa^  the 
rainbow  ;  anga  anga^  agreement ;  angi  angiy  abroail  ;  aro  aro, 
in  front ;  aru  arii,  to  woo  ;  ati  ati,  to  drive  out ;  awa  awn^  a 
valley;  or  awanga  M?a7/yr/,  hope,  words  of  a  class  which  abound 
in  savage  languages. 


•  Cook's  fiist  Vi.yag',  p.  103. 
«  Vol.  ii.  p.  398.      Si'c  also  Y;.tc"s 
Ncv  Zealand,  p.  101. 


*  Fsji  and  iho  FijLiDK,  vol.  ii.  p.  121. 

*  Lake  Kegions,  p.  332. 

*  I«urtor/B  Diihomc,  vol.  i.  p.  326. 


LANGUAGE  OF  SAVAGES. 


501 


The  first  1000  words  in  a  French  dictionary  I  found  to  con- 
tain only  two  reduplications^  namely,  anana  and  assassin,  both 
of  which  are  derived  from  a  lower  race,  and  cannot,  strictly 
speaking,  be  regarded  as  French. 

Again  1000  German  words,  taking  for  variety  the  letters 
C  and  D,  contain  six  cases,  namely,  Cacadu  (cockatoo). 
Cacao,  Cocon  (cocoon),  Cocosbaum,  a  cocoa- tree,  Cocosnuss, 
cocoa-nut,  and  dagegen,  of  which  again  all  but  the  last  are 
foreign. 

Lastly,  the  first  1000  Greek  words  contained  only  two  re- 
duplications, one  of  which  is  a^ap^apos. 

For  comparison  with  the  above  I  have  examined  the  voca- 
bularies of  the  following  eighteen  tribes,  and  the  results  are 
given  in  the  following  table  : — 


Tangnagea 


I 


I 


Eorope — 

Eoglish 

French 

OfTman  « 

Greek 
Africa — 

Be»  tjnan     . 

Bosjetmian  . 

Namaqiui  Hottentot 

Mpongwo    . 

Folnp 

Mbofon 
America — 

Makah 

Darien  Imlians    • 

OjibwA 

Tapy  Bnizil 
Negroid - 

Bmmer  Island 

Rndiicair  \\»y 

liOuisiade    . 

Erroob 

Lewis  Mnn^iy  Island 
Australia — 

Kowrarega  . 
PiilyncBia — 

Tonga 

New  Zealand 


Number 

Nambcnr 

Propor- 

of worda 

of  redu- 

tion  per  1 

examined 

plicati(m8 

mil.      1 

1 

1000 

3 

3 

1000 

2 

2     1 

Both  foreign. 

1000 

6 

6  : 

All  but  one  foreign. 

1000 

2 

2 

One  being  iifiapfiapos. 

188 

7 

37 

Lichtenstein. 

129 

5 

38 

It 

1000 

7o 

75 

II.  TinduH. 

1264 

70 

60 

Snowdon  and  Prall. 

204 

28 

137 

Koello. 

267 

27 

100 

ft 

1011 

80 

79 

Smithsonian   Contribu- 

• 

tions,  1869. 

184 

13 

70 

Trans.  Kth.  Soc.  vol.  vi.  I 

283 

21 

74 

Schwjlcraft. 

1000 

66 

66 

Gonwilvei  Dias. 

214 

87 

170 

Macgillirray. 

125 

10 

80 

If 

138 

22 

160 

tf 

613 

23 

45 

Jukes. 

506 

19 

38 

ff 

720 

26 

36 

MacgilliTray. 

1000 

166 

166 

Mariner. 

1300 

220 

160 

Dieffenbach. 

For  African  languages  I  have  examined  the  Beetjuan  and 
Bosjesman  dialects,  given  by  Lichtenstein  in  his  ^  Travels  in 


ANCIENT  0EBEM0NLE8  AND  MODERN  GAMES.    503 

Dobritzhoffer  tells  us,  the  Abipones  at  a  certain  season  of  the 
year  worshipped  the  Pleiades.  The  ceremony  consisted  in  a 
feast  accompanied  with  dancing  and  music,  alternating  with 
praises  of  the  stars,  during  which  the  principal  priestess  ^  who 

*  conducts  the  festive  ceremonies,  dances  at  intervals,  rattling 
'a  gourd   full   of  hardish  fruit-seeds  to  musical   time,  and 

*  whirling  round  to  the  right  with  one  foot,  and  to  the  left  ^vith 
'another,  without  ever  removing  from  one  spot,  or    in  the 

*  least  varying  her  motions.' '  Spix  and  Martins  ^  thus  describe 
a  Coroado  chief: — In  the  middle  of  the  assembly,  and  nearest 
to  the  pot,  stood  *  the  chief,  who,  by  his  strength,  cunning,  and 

*  courage,  had  obtained  some  command  over  them,  and  had  re- 
'  ceived  from  Marlier  the  title  of  Captain.  In  his  right  hand 
'he  held  the  maraci,  the  above-mentioned  Castanet,  which 
'  thej  call  gringerina,  and  rattled  with  it,  beating  time  with 

*  his  right  foot.'    *  The  Congo  Negroes  had  a  great  wooden 

*  rattle,  upon  which  they  took  their  oaths.'  ^  The  rattle  also  is 
very  important  among  the  Indians  of  North  America.*  When 
any  person  is  sick,  the  sorcerer  or  medicine-man  brings  his 
Bacred  rattle  and  shakes  it  over  him.  This,  says  Prescott,  '  is 
'  the  principal  catholicon  for  all  diseases.'  Catlin  ^  also  describes 
the  *  rattle  *  as  being  of  great  importance.  Some  tribes  have 
a  sacred  drum  closely  resembling  that  of  the  Lapps.^  AVhen 
an  Indian  is  ill,  the  magician,  says  Carver,^  ^  sits   by  the 

*  patient  day  and  night,  rattling  in  his  ears  a  gourd-shell  filled 
'  with  dried  beans,  called  a  chichicon^.' 

Klemm  ®  also  remarks  on  the  great  significance  attached  to 
the  rattle  throughout  America,  and  Staad  even  thought  that  it 
was  worshipped  as  a  divinity.  ® 

Schoolcraft  *®  also  gives  a  figure  of  Oshkabaiwis,  the  Redskin 
medical  chief,  '  holding  in  his  hand  the  magic  rattle,'  which  is 
indeed  the  usual  emblem  of  authority  in  the  American  picto- 

*  Bobritzhofibr,  vol.  ii.  p.  65.    See      40,  163,  &c. 

Also  p.  72.  *  Catlin,  loc.  cit,  p.  40. 

»  Trareli  in  Brazil.    London,  1S24,  *  Travels,  p.  386. 

Tol.  ii.  p.  234.  ■  Culturgeschichte,  vol.  ii.  p.  172. 

»  Airtle/s  Coll.  of  Voyages,  vol.  iii.  *  Mobuw  des  Sauvagos  am^ricainf, 

p.  238.  ^oL  ii.  p.  297. 

*  PreMOtt  in  Schooleraft's    Indian  *•  Indian  Triboe,  Pt.  UL  pp.  490, 
Tribe*.  voL  ii.  pp.  179,  ISO.  492. 

*  Amfyrifain  IndianB,  vol.  i.  pp.  37. 


DEVjELOPMENT  of  tee  individual.  505 

The  close  resemblance  existlDg  in  ideas^  language,  habits, 
and  character  between  savages  and  children,  though  generally 
admitted,  has  usually  been  disposed  of  in  a  passing  sentence, 
and  regarded  rather  as  a  curious  accident  than  as  an  important 
truth.  Yet  from  several  points  of  view  it  possesses  a  high  in- 
terests Better  understood,  it  might  have  saved  us  many 
national  misfortunes,  from  the  loss  of  Captain  Cook  down  to 
the  Abyssinian  war.  It  has  also  a  direct  bearing  on  the  pre- 
sent discussion. 

The  opinion  is  rapidly  gaining  ground  among  naturalists, 
that  the  development  of  the  individual  is  an  epitome  of  that  of 
the  species,  a  conclusion  which,  if  fully  borne  out,  will  evidently 
prove  most  instructive.  Already  many  facts  are  on  record 
which  render  it,  to  say  the  least,  highly  probable.  Birds  of 
the  same  genus,  or  of  closely  allied  genera,  which,  when  ma- 
ture, differ  much  in  colour,  are  often  very  similar  when  young. 
The  young  of  the  Lion  and  the  Puma  are  often  striped,  and 
foetal  whales  have  teeth.  Leidy  has  shown  that  the  milk-teeth 
of  the  genus  Equus  resemble  the  permanent  teeth  of  Anchi- 
therium,  while  the  milk-teeth  of  Anchitherium  again  approxi- 
mate to  the  dental  system  of  Merychippus.^  Riitimeyer, 
while  calling  attention  to  this  interesting  observation,  adds  that 
the  milk-teeth  of  Equus  caballus  in  the  same  way,  and  still 
more  those  of  E.  fossilis,  resemble  the  permanent  teeth  of 
Hipparion,^ 

Agassiz,  according  to  Darwin,  regards  it  as  a  ^  law  of  nature,' 
that  the  young  states  of  each  species  and  group  resemble  older 
forms  of  the  same  group;  and  Darwin  himself  says,^  that  ^  in 
'  two  or  more  groups  of  animals,  however  much  they  may  at 

*  first  differ  from  each  other  in  structure  and  habits,  if  they 
'  pass  through  closely  similar  embryonic  stages,  we  may  feel 

*  almost  assured  that  they  have  descended  from  the  same  parent 

*  form,  and  are  therefore  closely  related.'      So  also  Mr.  Her- 
bert Spencer  says,^  ^  Each  organism  exhibits  within  a  short 

'  Proc.   Acad.  Nat.   Soc.  Philadol-  •  Origin  of  Si>ccics,  4th  editiuo.  p. 

pbia,  1858,  p.  26.  532. 

'  Beitrage      zar     KeDntDistt     der  *  Friociplfs  of  Biology,  vol.  i.  p. 

foMilen  Pferde.    Basle,  1863.  349. 


AND  THAT  OF  THE  SPECIES.  507 

I  confess  therefore  that,  after  giving  the  arguments  of  the 
Duke  of  Argyll  my  most  attentive  and  candid  consideration,  I 
see  no  reason  to  adopt  his  melancholy  conclusion,  but  I  remain 
persuaded  that  the  past  history  of  man  has,  on  the  whole,  been 
one  of  progress,  and  that,  in  looking  forward  to  the  future,  we 
are  justified  in  doing  so  with  confidence  and  with  hope. 


NOTES. 


Page  70. 

Position  of  Women  in  Australia,^ 

F(EMiN^  sese  per  totam  pcne  vitam  prostituunt.  Apud 
plurimas  tribus  juventutcm  utriusque  sexus  sine  discrimine 
concumbere  in  usus  est.  Si  juvenis  forte  indigenorura  coctum 
quendam  in  castris  manentem  adveniat,  ubi  quasvis  sit  puella 
innupta,  mos  est,  nocte  veniente  et  cubantibus  omnibus, 
illam  ex  loco  exsurgere  et  juvenem  accidentem  cum  illo  per 
noctcm  manere,  unde  in  eedcm  propriam  ante  diem  redit.  Cui 
fanniua  sit,  earn  aniicis  libenter  praibet ;  si  in  itinere  sit,  uxori 
in  castris  manenti  aliquis  supplet  illi  vire:?.  Advcnis  ex 
longinquo  accidcntibus  focminas  ad  tempus  dare  hospitis  esse 
boni  judicatur.  Viduis  et  focminis  jam  senesccutibus  sajpc  in 
id  traditis,  quandoque  etiam  invitis  et  insciis  cognatis,  adole- 
scentes  utuntur.  Puella;  teneras  a  decimo  primum  anno,  et 
pueri  a  decimo  tertio  vel  quarto,  inter  se  miscentur.  Seniori- 
bus  mos  est,  si  forte  gentium  plurium  castra  appropinquant, 
viros  noctu  hinc  inde  transeuntes,  uxoribus  alienis  uti  et  in 
sua  castra  ex  utraque  parte  mane  redire. 

*  Temporibus  quinetiam  certls,  machina  qua^dam  ex  ligno 
ad  formam  ovi  facta,  sacra  ct  mystica,  nam  f(rininas  aspiccrc 
baud  licitum,  decem  plus  minus  uncia:)  longa  et  circa  quatuor 
lata,  insculpta  ac  figuris  divcrsis  ornata,  et  ultimam  perforata 
partem  ad  longam  (plerumque  e  criuibus  liunianis  textam) 
inserendam  chordam  cui  nomen  *'  Moo  yumkarr,"  extra  castra 
in  gyrum  versata,  stridore  magno  e  pcrcusso  ajre  facto,  liber- 

*  Eyre's  l>ii{COTcrie»,  iic,  vol.  ii.  p.  820. 


NOTES.  511 

irareaiai,  trriffyavov irtp)  rgcrt  KB^xiK^tn  i^ovrrai  OdfiiyyoSj  iroWal 
ywaix€9'  al  yiv  fy^p  'irpoaify)(pmai^  al  Be  d'rrep)(pvTai'  <r)(pivoTeviss 
Si  Su^Soi  irdvra  rpoTrov  oh&v  i)(pv(n  Sia  r&v  ywaiKa>v,  Bt,^  &v 
oi  fytvoi  Bi€^i6pre9  iKktyoinau  ivOa  hrshv  i^rjTai  yvvij,  ov  Trporepov 
maXKdaaercu  is  rd  oucia,  fj  rls  oi  ^sivtov  apyvpiop  i/jL^d\ja>v  is  rd 
yowaray  M^X^  *f^  '^^^  ipov*  ififiaXovra  Si  Ssi  siTTstv  ToaovSs' 
^EflTixaXeto  tol  rijv  Oiov  MuXtrra.  Mi^Xtrra  Be  Ka\iov<ri  rrjv 
*A<f>poSiTTjv  ^Aaavpioi  •  to  Be  dpyupiov  fjJyaOos  ecri  oaov  Syif '  oi 
yap  fitf  uTrdarp-ai '  ov  yap  oi  Oifiis  itrri '  yiverai  ydp  ipov  tovto  to 
dpTfvpiov '  Ta>  Be  irpwTq)  ififfaXopri  eirerai^  ovBe  anoBoKifia  ovSiva* 
itredp  Si  M'X^.9  dTrociaxrafiii/r)  r^  0e&  diroXKatraeraL  is  rh  oIklUj 
Koi  rarTTO  toutov  ovic  ovtoh  /liya  r/  oi  S(a<rsis  &s  fiiv  Xdfiylrsai. 
oaai  flip  wv  eXSeos  ts  iTrafipJvai  etal  teal  fieyd0eo9y  Ta^i  dTraXKaa- 
aovrai  *  Scat,  Si  apLOp<f>oi  avritDV  slalj  ')(p6vov  'jroXKov  TrpoapJi^ovai 
ov  Swdfievcu  TOP  lOfiov  itcTrXrjaai  *  teal  ydp  Tpiirea  KaX  TSTpaJrea 
fiLsre^iTepai  'xpovov  fiivovtJU  ivia\y  Se  Koi  Trjs  KvTrpov  iaTl 
TTopaTrXijaios  Tothq)  vofios, 

Alela  ^  tells  us  that  among  the  Auziies,  another  Ethiopian 
tribe,  ^  Feminis  solemnc  est,  nocte,  qua  nubunt,  omnium 
^  stupro  patere,  qui  cum  munere  advenerint:  et  turn,  cum 
*  ]>lurimis  concubuisse,  maximum  decus;  in  reliquum  pudicitia 
^  insignis  est/ 

Speaking  of  the  Nasamonians,  Herodotus  observes : 

TTp&Toy  Si  yafiiovTos  ^aaafi&vos  avSpbf,  vofios  iaTi  ttjv  vvfi^y 
w/crl  Tjj  Trpaynj  Sid  TrdvToav  Su^eXOeiv  t&v  SaiTVfioPcov  /juayofiiyrjv  * 
t&v  Si  d}9  BKaaTOS  oi  p.i'X^V^  SiBol  S&povy  to  dv  s'xj)  <f>ep6fi€V09  if 


OllCOV.^ 


Diodorus*  also  gives  a  very  similar  account  of  marriage  in 
the  Balearic  Islands. 

Page  111. 
The  Character  of  Helen. 

The  character  and  position  of  Helen  has  not,  I  think,  been 
as  yet  correctly  appreciated.  Mr.  Gladstone  truly  observes* 
that  ^  No  one  forming  his  estimate  of  Helen  from  Homer  only 

I  Mela,  i.  8.  *  Diodoras,  v.  18. 

'  Melpomene,  it.  172.  *  JaTentns  Mandi,  p.  507. 


512 


NOTES. 


*  could  fall  into  the  gross  error  of  looking  upon  her  as  a  type 

*  of  depraved  character ;'  but  even  he  has,  I  think,  hardly  done 
justice.     He  continues  as  follows  : — 

*  Her  fall  once  incurred,  she  finds  herself  bound  by  the 

*  iron  chain  of  circumstance,  from  which  she  can  obtain  no 

*  extrication.  But  to  the  world,  beneath  whose  standard  of 
^  morality  she  has  sunk,  she  makes  at  least  this  reparation,  that 

*  the  sharp  condemnation  of  herself  is  ever  in  her  mouth,  and 

*  that  she  does  not  seek  to  throw  off  the  burden  of  her  shame 

*  on  her  more  guilty  partner.     Nay,  more  than  this,  her  self- 

*  debasing  and  self-renouncing  humility  come  nearer,  perhaps, 
'  than  any  other  heathen  example  to  the  type  of  Christian 

*  penitence.' 

Other  writers  have  felt  the  same  difficulty.  Maclaurin,  for 
instance,  says:  ^  ^  What  is  most  astonishing  of  all  is,  that  they 

*  (the  Trojans)  did  not  restore  her  upon  the  death  of  Paris, 

*  but  married  her  to  his  brother  Deiphobus.    Here  Chrysostom 

*  argues,  and  with  great  plausibility,  that  this  is  perfectly  in- 
'  credible,  upon  the  supposition  that  Paris  had  possessed  him- 
'  self  of  her  by  a  crime.' 

We  must,  however,  judge  Helen  by  the  customs  of  the 
time,  and  it  has  been  clearly  shown  that  among  the  lower  races 
of  man,  marriage  by  capture  was  a  recognised  custom.  Hers 
seems  to  me  a  case  of  this  kind.  It  will  be  observed  that  she 
is  always  spoken  of  as  Paris'  wife.  Thus,  speaking  of  Paris, 
she  says — 

Would  that  a  better  man  had  called  me  wife  ;  * 


and  again — 


Godlike  Paris  claims  me  as  his  wife.' 


Paris  himself  speaks  of  her  as  his  wife- 


Yot  hath  my  wife,  o*on  now,  with  soothing  words 
Urged  me  to  join  the  battle.* 

So  also  Hector,  though  he  regarded  Paris  with  great  con- 
tempt, and  reproached  him  in  strong  language,  addresses  him 
as  married* 


*  Dissertation  to  prove  that  Troy  was 
not  taken  by  the  Greeks.  By  John 
Maclaurin,  Esq. 


«  VI.  402.     Lord  Derby's  Trans. 
»  L.  c.  xxiv.  892. 
*  VI.  394. 


NOTES.  513 

Thou  wretched  Paris,  though  in  form  so  fair, 
Thoa  sbive  of  woman,  manhood's  counterfeit  1 
WouKl  thoQ  had'st  ne'er  beep  bon^  of  died  at  least 
Unweddod !  * 

and  speaks  to  Helen  with  kindness  and  affection;  as^  for  instance, 
in  the  Vlth  Book  he  says : 

Though  kind  thy  wish,  jet,  Helen,  ask  me  not 
To  sit  or  rest ;  I  cannot  yield  to  thee, 
For  boms  e*en  now  my  soul  to  aid  our  friends, 
Who  feel  my  lo0s,  apd  sorely  need  my  arm. 
But  thou  thy  husband  rouse,  and  let  him  speed. 
That  he  may  find  me  still  within  the  walls.* 

The  aged  Priam,  even  when  grieving  o\  er  the  fatal  war,  is 
careful  to  assure  Helen  that  he  does  not  complain  of  her : 

Not  thee  I  blame, 
But  to  tiie  Qoda  I  owe  this  woful  war.' 

These  were  no  exceptional  cases.      On  the  contrary,  in  her 
touching  lament  over  Hector's  corpse,  Helen  says: 

Hector,  of  all  my  brethren  dearest  thou ! 

True,  Godlike  Paris  claims  me  as  his  wife, 

Who  bore  me  hither — would  I  then  had  died ! 

But  twenty  years  haye  pass'd  since  here  I  came, 

And  left  my  native  land ;  yet  ne'er  firom  theo 

I  heard  one  scornful,  one  degrading  word ; 

And  when  from  others  I  ha?e  borne  reproach,' 

Thy  brothers,  sisters,  or  thy  brothers'  wives, 

Or  mother  (for  thy  sire  was  ever  kind 

E'en  as  a  father),  thou  hast  check*d  them  still 

With  tender  feeling,  and  with  gentle  words. 

For  thee  I  weep,  and  for  myself  no  less ; 

For,  through  the  breadth  of  Troy,  none  luve  me  now. 

None  kindly  look  on  me,  but  all  abhor. 

Weeping  she  spoke,  and  with  her  wept  the  crowd. 

Even  in  that  hour  of  sorrow,  the  people  pitied,  but  did  not 
upbraid  her.  It  is  true  that  she  reproaches  herself;  not,  how- 
ever, apparently  for  her  marriage  with  Paris,  but  on  account  of 
tlie  misfortunes  which  she  had  been  the  means  of  bringing  on 
Troy. 

I  dwell  on  these  considerations,  because  unless  we  realise 
the  fact  that  marriage  by  capture  was  a  recognised  form  of 

•m.  43.  «  VI.  419.  'L.  c.  iii.  195. 


INDEX. 


i«o«- 


ABE 

ABEOEUTA,  tattoos  of  the  people 
of,  67 
Abipones,  their   disbelief   in    naturml 
death,  217 

—  soroeren  among  them,  244,  246 

—  their  Shamanism,  234 

—  their  worship  of  the  Pleiades,  307 

—  no  idea  among  them  of  creation,  370 

—  their  method  of  numeration,  428 
Abstract    terms,    absence    of,    among 

sarages,  422 
Abjisinia,  marriage  ceremony  in,  81 
Aljssinians,  absence  of  the  marriage 

eeremonj  among  the,  78 

—  practice  of  adoption  among  them,  00 

—  their  stone-worship,  301 
Adoption,  preralenoe  among  the  lower 

races  of  men,  88 

—  among  the  Greeks  and  Bomans,  80 

—  and  milk  tie,  89 

JEthiopia,  marriage  customs  in,  117 
Africa,   customs    as    to    fathers-   and 
mothers-in-law,  13 

—  writing  used  as  medicine  in,  24 

—  drawings  not  understood  in,  42 

—  personid  ornamentation  of  various 
tribes,  55,  58 

—  their  tattoos  and  tribal  marks,  58,  61 

—  marriage  and  relationship  in,  68 

—  practice  of  adoption  in,  88 

—  marriage  customs  of  the  Futans,  110 
of  the  North  Africans,  112 

—  reetrictions  on  marriage  in  Eastern 
and  Western  Africa,  127 

—  inheritance  through  females  in,  141 

—  relationship  in,  141 

—  how  dreams  are  regarded  bj  some 
tribes,  208 

—  their  notions  of  a  man's  shadow,  210 

—  and  of  the  Deity,  218 

—  bohariour    of    the    people    during 
«!lip8cs,  222 

—  totemism  in,  254 

—  serpent- worship  in  259 


A3IC 

Africa — continued, 

—  animal-worship  in,  268 

—  tree-worship  in,  280 

—  water-worship  in,  288 

—  stone-worship  in,  300 

—  ceremony  of  eating  the  fetich  in,  325, 
855 

—  worship  of  men  in,  348 

—  human  sacrifices  in,  855 

—  no   notion  of  creation  among    the 
people  of,  372 

—  absence  of  moral  feeling  in,  387*  388 

—  poverty  of  the  language  of,  421 

—  absence  of  abstract  ideas  in,  421 

—  methods  of  numeration  in,  429,  430 

—  salutations  of  the  people  in,  440. 
Age,  respect  paid  to,  309 

Ages,  the  Four,  true  theory  of,  405 
Agoye,  an  idol  of  Whiddah,  261 
Anitas   of  the   Philippines,   marriage 

customs  of  the,  109 
Ahoosh,    Lake,    held    sacred    by    the 

Baskhirs,  288 
Ahts,  inactivity  of  their  intellect,  9 

—  plavery  of  female  captives  among 
the,  136 

—  their  sorcerers,  244 

—  their  worship  of  the  sun  and  moon, 
307 

Ainos,  fire-worship  among  the,  305 
Aleutian  Islanders,  tattooing  of  the,  59 
Algonkins,  their  rules  and  ceremonies, 

437 
Alligator-worship,  268 
Amazon  Valley,   marriage  by  capture 

among  the  tribes  of  the,  1 06 
America,  South,  custom  of  La  Oouvade 

in.  15.  18 
American  Indians,  customs  among  the, 

in  reference  to  mothers-in-law,  1 1 

—  custom  of  La  Coo?ade  among  the,  17 

—  their  ideas  with   reference  to  por- 
traits, 22 

—  their  use  of  writing  as  medicine,  23 


L  L  2 


516 


INDEX. 


▲HE 

American  Indinus—  continued, 

—  their  mode  of  curing  dieeaaes,  29 

—  their  treatment  of  twina*  32 

—  their  picture-writings,  44-47,  49-62 

—  their  grare  poets,  48 

—  their  personal  ornamentation,  66 

—  marriage   and    relationship  among 
them,  67 

—  absence  of  marriage  ceremony,  78 

—  system  of  relationship  among  some 
tnbes,  88 

—  custom  among  the  Hudson's  Bay 
Indians  of  wrestling  for  a  wife,  93 

—  marriage  customs  oif  the  South  Ame- 
ricans, 106 

—  restrictions  on  marriage  among  some 
of  them,  130,  131 

—  importance  of  their  totems,  or  crests, 
130 

—  relationship  through  females  among 
them,  146 

—  systems  of  relationahip  among  them, 
156,  167,  168 

—  absence   of   religion   among   Bomt 
tribes,  206 

—  how  dreams  are  regarded  by  them, 
210 

—  their  notion  of  a  man's  shadow,  211 
^^  of  a  Deity,  213 

—  ftpirits,  how  regarded  by  some,  212 

—  how  they  regard  death,  218 

—  their  belief  in  a  plurality  of  souls, 
228 

in  dirination,  231 

—  their  sorcery,  235,  236 

—  their  fasting  and  supposed  revela- 
tions, 245 

—  their  religious  ideas,  256 

—  their  totemism,  255 

—  their  belief  in  fetiches,  262 

—  their  worship  of  the  serpent,  263 

—  prevalence  of  animal  worship  among 
them,  264 

—  their  tree-worship,  279 

—  their  water- wortdiip,  291 

—  their  stone- worship,  303 

—  their  fire-worship,  307 

—  absence  of   idomtry  among   them, 
335 

—  white    men    regarded    as     deities 
among  them,  349 

—  their  sacrificen,  352 

—  fearless  of  death,  369 

—  their  objection  to  prayer,  374,  376 

—  no  diHtinction  of  right  and  wrong, 
390 

—  their  notion  of  a  future  state,  394 

—  thoir  languages,  406,  416 


▲US 

American  Indians — continued. 

—  customs  of  the,  436 

—  thoir  property  in  land,  443 

—  names  taken  by  parents  from  their 
children,  453 

—  their  punishment  of  crime,  466 
Ancestors,  worship  of,  310,  338,  342 
Andaman  Islands,  relationship  between 

the  sexes  in  the^  82,  97 
Anfflo-Saxons,  their  wergild,  460 
Animal-worship  oonridened  as  a  stage 

of  religious  progress,  262 

—  explanations  of  the  anrients,  262 

—  among  the  ancient  Egyptians,  268 

—  custom  of  apologixing  to  animals  for 
killing  them,  269 

Ant-hills  worshipped,  311 

Apis  regarded  by  the  £gyptians  as  a 

god,  363 
Arabs,  their  ideas  as  to  the  influence  of 

food,  19 

—  tattooing  of  the,  69 

—  singular  marrisge  of  the  Haasaniyeh^ 
73 

—  relations  of  husband  and  wife,  76 

—  their  ancient  stone-worship,  298 

—  their  notions  of  a  broken  oath,  896 
Arawaks,  absence  of  the  marriage  eeve- 

mony  among  the,  78 
Arithmetic,  dOSculties  of  saTages  in, 
422,  426 

—  use  of  the  fingers  in,  426,  429 
Armenia,  marriage  customs  in,  117 
Art,  earliest  traces  of,  87 

—  in  the  Stone  Age,  37 

—  almost  absent  in  the  Bronze  Age, 
37 

—  as  an    ethnological    character,  40, 
41 

Aryan  reli^ons  contrasted  with  Semitic, 

327.  328 
Ashuntee,  king  of,  his  liarem,  139 
Ashantees,   absence    of   the   marriage 

ceremony  among  the.  79 

—  their  water- worship,  289 
Assyrians,  their  human  sdcrifices,  357 
Atheism  defined,  198 

—  the  natural  condition  of  the  earage 
mind,  203 

Australians,   Dampier's  mivtake    with 
the,  8 

—  their  habit  of  non-contmdiction,  8 

—  their  customs  as    to  fathers-  and 
mothers-in-hiw,  13,  14 

—  their  modes  of  curing  diseases,  29, 
30 

—  some  of  them  unable  to  underttand 
a  drawing,  41 


INDEX. 


517 


AUS 

Australians — continued, 

—  their  personal  omampnts,  53 

—  marriage  among  them,  70 

—  condition  of  their  women,  70 

—  their  practice  of  marriage  bj  capture, 
90.  100 

—  restrictioDS  on  marriage  among  them, 
126 

—  bow  dreams  are  regarded  bj  them, 
210 

—  their  belief  in  an  evil  spirit,  217 

—  think  thej  become  white  men  after 
death,  227 

—  their  totemism,  254 

—  their  religious  ideas,  312 

—  had  no  idea  of  creation,  312 

—  Mrs.    Thomsons    residence    among 
them,  313 

—  their  ideas  of  the  dead,  360 

—  their  absence  of  moral  foeiing,  386, 

387 

—  no  notion  of  fhture   rewards   and 
punishments,  391 

—  character  of  their  law«,  434 

—  their  salutations,  438 

—  their  property  in  land,  444 

—  dirision  of  property  into  portions,  448 

—  their  custom  of  taking  Uie  names  of 
their  children,  452 

—  position  of  women  among  them,  509 


BABYLONIA,  marriage  customs  in, 
117 
Badiapins,  their  religious  ideas,  316 
Balearic  Islands,  marriage  customs  in 

the,  117 
Bali,  fiincies  of  the  natives  of,  respecting 
twins,  31 

—  practice  of  marriage  by  capture  in, 
100 

Bamboo,  the,  worshipped,  281,  282 
BasutOH.  their  idea  of  shadows,  211 

—  system  of  primogeniture  of  the,  451 
452 

Battas  of  Sumatra,  relationship  through 

females  among  the,  143 
Boar,  worship  of  the,  264 
B^m,  custom  of  La  Ck)uva«le  in,  15 
Bechuanas,  their  ideas   regarding  evil 

spirits,  212,  220 

—  their  notions  of  the  causes  of  death, 

217 

—  their  totemism,  254 

—  their  worship  of  the  Kun,  309 
Bedouins,  ali«M>ncc  of  religion  among  the 

wilder,  203 


CAR 

Bedouins—  contin  ued. 

—  their  mode  of  divination,  230 
Beerbhoom,  tree  worship  in,  282 
Bells,  use  of,  by  the  Buddhists,  220 

—  and  by  the  Japanese,  220 
Berbers,  their   custom  of    inheritance 

through  females,  141 
Bintang  Islanders,   absence   of   moral 

sense  among  the,  393 
Bird-worship,  264 
Bo  tree,  worship  of  tho,  in  India  and 

Ceylon,  281 
Borneo,  condition  of  the  wild  men  of 

the  interior  of,  10 

—  customs  as  to  mothers-in-law,  13 

—  and  of  La  Couvade,  18 
Bornouose,  tribe  marks  of  tho,  58 
Bouriats,  their  sacred  lakefi,  288 
Bnizilians,  their  custom  of  killing  and 

eating  captives,  120 

—  their  marritigo  regulations,  132 

—  their  notion  of  evil  spirits,  213 

—  sorcerers  among  them,  244 
Bntons,  post  obits  among  tho,  367 
Brumer  Island,   tattooing  among   tho 

women  of,  60 
Buffalo-bell,  worsliip  of  a,  311 
Bunns  of  Africa,  tribal  marks  of  the, 

58 
Burmese  system  of  relationship,  171 
Bushmen,  Lichtenstein's  description  of 

the,  quoted,  1 1 

—  their    customs   as   to  fathers-  and 
mothers-in-law,  14 

—  unable  to  understond  perspective,  42 

—  absence  of  tho   mamage  ceremony 
among  them,  79,  82 

—  their  notions  of  ghosts,  228 
Butias,  absence  of  marriage  ceremonies 

among,  77 

CALIFORNIANS,  absonco  of  religion 
and  government  among  the,  204 

their    belief    in  tho    dcstrut-tion   of 

lx>dy  and  spirit.  229 

—  their  religious  ideas,  314 

—  absence  of  ideas  respecting  creation, 
370 

Callaway  on  Kaffir  religion,  316,  335, 

371 
Camb<)«lianM,  their  low  ideas  regarilmg 

spirits,  220 

—  their  notion  of  eclipses,  224 
Canatlian  Indian^  marring*'  ceremony 

among.  81 
Caribs,  their  ideas  rcspettin;?  the  influ- 
I       encc  of  fowl,  19 


518 


INDEX, 


CAB 

Caribfl — continued, 

—  their  practice  of  marriage  by  capture, 
99 

—  their  behaviour  during  eclipses,  223 

—  their  belief  in  the  plurality  of  souls, 
229 

—  their  fasting  and  supposed  revela- 
tions, 246 

—  their  notion  of  the  Deity,  301 
Ooroline  Islander,  tattooing  of  a,  62 
Carthaginians,  their  human  sacrifices, 

357 
Celts,  their  tree-worship,  279 
Census  roll,  an  American  Indian,  46 
Ceylon,  two  kinds  of  marriage  in,  73 

—  polyandry  in,  135 

—  tree-worship  in,  281 
the  sacred  Bo  tree,  281 

—  religious  ideas  of  the  Veddahs  of, 
814 

Chalikatoe,  disbelief  of  a  future  state, 

365 
Cheek  studs,  56 
Cberokees,     system     of     relationship 

among,  176 

—  divination  practised  by  the,  230 

—  their  practice  of  fasting,  246 

—  their  nre-worship,  805 

—  their  progress  in  civilisation,  474 
Chinese,  their  customs  as  to  daughters- 
in-law,  13 

—  their  custom  of  La  Couvade,  18 

—  their  notions  as  to  the  influence  of 
food,  20 

—  their  mode  of  Biilutation,  35 

—  their  presents  of  coffins,  36 

—  their  deficiency  in  the  art  of  perspec- 
tive, 43 

—  their  knots  for  transacting  business, 
43 

—  their  compression  of  ladies'  feet,  64 

—  their  marriage  customs,  81 

^  restrictions    on    marriage    amongst 
them,  129 

—  notions  of  the  people  of  Kiatka  with 
reference  to  eclipses,  224 

—  their  idea  of  the  man  in  the  moon, 
225 

—  witchcraft  of  the  magicians,  240 

—  their  fetiches,  254 

—  life  attributed  by  them  to  inanimate 
objecta,  277 

—  their  treatment  of  their  gods,  324 

—  their  idolatry,  338 

—  their  language,  407 
Chipewyans,  their  idea  of  creation,  370 
Chippewas,     system     of     relationship 

among,  179 


DIS 

Chiquito  Indians,  their  behaviour  dur- 
ing eclipses,  223 

Chittagong,  marriage  among  the  hill 
tribes  of,  69,  76 

Circassians,  the  milk  tie  among  the, 
89 

—  marriage  by  force  among  them.  111 

—  exogamy  among  them,  120 
Coffins,  presents  of,  36 

Comanches,  their  worship  of  the  sun, 
moon,  and  earth,  307 

—  absence  of  moral  feeling  among  the, 
387 

Communal  marriage,  82,  01,  96 
Coroados,  custom  of  La  Couvade  among 
the,  16 

—  personal  ornaments  of  a  woman,  54 

—  their  worship  of  the  sun  and  moon, 
308 

—  their  method  of  numeration,  339 
Courtesans,  respect  paid  in  Greece  to^ 

120 

—  their  religious  character  in  India, 
122 

Couvade,  La,  custom  of,  in  B^am,  15 

—  its  wide  distribution,  15,  16 

—  origin  of  the  custom,  18 
Creation,  no  idea  of,  among  the  lower 

races,  370 
Crees,  system  of  relationship  among, 

179 
Crocodile-worship,  268 


DACOTAHS,  their  notions  as  to  the 
influence  of  food,  19 

—  their  water-god,  Unktahe,  291 

—  their  stone-worship,  303 
Dahonie,  king  of,  his  messengers  to  his 

docoasod  father,  369 
Dampier,  his  mistake  with  Australians,  8 
Dance,  a,  among  the  redskins  of  Vir- 
ginia, 361 
Dances,  religious,  among  savages,  247, 

504 
Darhoot,  notion  us  to  eclipses  at,  225 
Date-tree,  worship  of  the,  280 
Death,  disbelief  among  savagt«  in  the 

existence  of  natural,  217,  218 
Deoan.  tattooing  of  the  women  of,  61 
Deification,  saviige  tendency  to,  251,  256 
Dekkan,  sacred  btones  in  the,  296 
Delawarcs,      system     of     relationship 

among,  175 
Disease,  supposed  to  be  caused  by  spirits, 
26 

—  how  regardetl  by  savages,  27 

—  various  modes  of  curing,  27 


INDEX. 


519 


DIS 

Disease — continued. 

~  causes  of,  according  to  the  Kaffirs, 

318 
DivlDation  among  savage  races,  229 

—  modes  of,  described,  230,  233 
Doiognaks,  endogamy  of  the,  137 
Breams,  religions  ideas  suggested  by. 

207 

—  inHnence  of,  according  to  the  Kaffirs. 
318 

Dyaks  of  Borneo,  custom  of  La  Convade 
among  the,  18 

—  their  ideas  respecting  the  influence 
of  food,  19 

EAK  ornaments,  56 
Eclipses,    behayiour   of  savages 
during,  222,  224 
Egyptians,  their  animal-worship,  263, 

268 
Kndogamy,  origin  of,  136 
England,  water  worship  in,  286 

—  worship  of  stones  in,  299 
Erromango,  worship  of  the  sun  in,  309 
Esquimaux,  their  attempts  to  render 

barren  women  fertile,  20 

—  their  mode  of  curing  diseases,  29 

—  their  mode  of  salutation,  36 

—  their  skill  in  drawing,  38,  39 

—  their  picture-writings,  44 

—  their  personal  ornamentation,  56 

—  their  habit  of  licking  presents,  90 

—  their  capture  of  brides,  106 

—  their  system  of  relationship,  182 

—  their  Shamanism,  332 

—  their  language,  406 

—  Capt  Parry's  picture  of  a  hut  of  the, 
486 

European  system  of  relationship,  184 

ESyebright,  the,  used  for  ociUar  com- 
plaints, 20 

Exogamy,  or  marriage  out  of  a  tribe, 
122 

Expiation  fur  marriage,  115 

FAMILIA,  the,  of  the  Bomans,   71, 
92 
Fasting  practised  by  savages,  245 
Father  and  mother,  origin  of  the  terms, 
441 

—  words  for,  in  various  languages,  412, 
417 

Feojeeans,  their  custom  of  Vasu,  145 

—  their  tattooing,  61 

—  their  hair-dressing,  66 

—  their  polyandry,  76 
their  marriage  customs,  75 


OHO 


Feejeeans — continued. 

—  their  marriage  by  capture,  107 

—  system  of  relationship  among,  159, 
160,  173 

—  their     religious    ideas      regarding 
dreams,  209 

—  their  mode  of  sorcery,  234,  235,  238 

—  their  serpent-worship,  262 

—  and  worship  of  other  animals,  266 

—  their  worship  of  plants,  284 

—  their  stone- worship,  301 

—  their  Shamanism,  333 

■—  their  offerings  of  food  to  the  ffods. 
352  *      ' 

—  their  notions  of  a  future  state,  364 

—  their  practice  of  putting  old  people 
to  death,  367 

—  namesand  character  of  their  gods,  39 1 
— .  had   no  notion  of    future    rewards 

and  punishments,  392 

—  gradations  of  rank  among,  440 

—  their  ceremonies,  441 

—  their  laws  of  inheritance,  447 
Felatah  hidies,  toilet  of,  55 
Fetichism  defined,  199 

—  considered  as  a  state  of  religious 
progress,  320,  322 

—  believed   in   Europe   and   in   other 
races,  320 

—  belief  of  the  negroes  in,  321 
^  eating  the  fetich,  325 
Fire-worship,  303 

Flatheads  of  Oregon,  their  fasts  and 

supposed  revelations,  246 
Formosa,  tattooing  in,  61 
France,  worship  of  stones  in,  229 
Friendly  Islanders,  their  explanations 

to  Labillardiiro,  7 

—  their  treachery,  370 
Friesland,  marriage  by  force  in,  112 
Futans,  marriage  customs  of  the,  110 
Future   life,  absence   of    belief    in   a, 

among  savages,  220 


GALACTOPHAGI,  communal    mar^ 
riage  of  the,  88 
Gambier  Islands,  tattooing  in  the,  61 
Gangamma,  or  rivers,   worshipped   in 

India,  288 
Ganges,  worship  of  the,  283 
Garoo,  marriage  ceremonies  of  the,  102 
Germans,  ancient,  relationship  among 

the,  142 
Ghosts,  belief  of  savages  in,   161,  226, 

227,228 
—  difference  in  the  belief  in  ghosts  and 

in  the  existence  of  a  soul,  363       -^ 


520 


INBEX, 


GOG 

Gognet  on  property,  442 

—  on  laws,  43.1 

Goose,  the,  worshipped,  268 
Grave-postB  of  American  Indians,  47 
Greeks,  their  marriage  customs,  117 

—  their  notions  respecting  their  deities, 
221 

—  their  water-worship,  287 

—  their  stone-worship,  298 

—  Origin  of  their  myths,  829 
«^  character  of  their  gods,  391 

—  their  power  of  willing  property,  448 

—  their  officers  foi^  prosecuting  crimi- 
nals, 455 

Greenlanders,  their  custom  of  La  Coa- 
vade,  17 

—  their  notions  respecting  dreams,  208 

—  their  behaviour  during  eclipses,  222 

—  fasting  and  sorcery  among  them,  245 

—  seizure  of  property  after  a  man's 
death,  447 

Gruagach-stones  in  Skye,  227 

Guam,  endogamy  in,  138 

Guiana,  custom  of  1a  Gotivade  in,  16 

—  medical  treatment  of  the  sayages  of, 
33 

—  restrictions  on  marriage  among  the, 
131 

—  native  method  of  numeration,  428 
Guinea,    New,    tattooing    among    the 

women  of,  60 
Guinea,  tattooing  in,  61 

—  human  sacrifices  at,  351 

—  notions  of  a  future  state  in,  365 
Guyacurus  of    Paraguay,    matrimony 

among  the,  69 


HAIR-DRESSING  of  the  Feejooans, 
'    65 
—  of  other  races,  64 
Haitians,   heaven   upon   earth  among, 

366 
Hawaii,    system    of    relationship     in, 

83,  87 
Hawaiian  system  of  relationship,  163, 

166 
Head,  compression  of  the,  among  some 

American  tribes,  64 
Heavon,  ideas  of,  among  the  lower  races, 

364,  366 
Helen,  character  of,  511-514 
Holiogabalus,  form  of  the  god,  298 
Hermes,  or  Termos,  worship  of  stones 

under  the  name  of,  293,  294 
Hindoo,  s^'stem  of   nomenclature  and 

relationship  in,  181 


IND 

Hottentots,  marriage  among  the,  67 

—  their  evil  spirits,  212 

—  their  notion  of  prayer,  373 

—  but  no  idea  of  future  rewards  and 
punishments,  394 

Hudson's  Bay  Indians,  relationship 
through  females  among  the,  144 

Human  sacrifices,  351,  359 

Hunting,  custom  of  the  Koussa  Kaffirs 
respecting,  270 

—  laws  of  savages,  437 

Hurons,  S3rstem  of  relationship  among 
the,  148 


IDOLATRY,   or    anthropomorphism, 
199 

—  considered  as  a  stage  of  religio'DB 
development,  335 

—  unknown  to  the  lower  races,  335, 
336 

—  origin  of,  338 

—  writer  of  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon 
on  idols,  342 

—  idols  not  regarded  as  mere  emblems, 
343 

Ikeougoun,  lake  of,  held  sacred,  288 
Immortality  of  the  soul,  225,  868 
India,  La  Couvade  in,  17 

—  tattooing  in,  60 

—  absence  of  the  marriage  oeremooy 
among  some  tribes  in,  77 

—  marriage  customs  among  others,  101, 
102,118 

—  respect  paid  to  courtesans  at  Veeali, 
121,  122 

—  restrictions  on   marriage    in    some 
racea,  127,  128 

—  polyandry  in,  134 

—  endogamy,  135 

—  system  of  Levirate  in,  136 

—  sorcery  of  the  magicians  of,  235 

—  witchcraft  in,  240 

—  religious  dances  in,  250 

—  animal  worship  in,  267 

—  inanimate    objects    worshipped    in, 
274,  277 

—  tree-worship  in,  274.  281 

—  water-worship  in.  288 

—  stone-worship  in,  295 

—  worship  of  the  sun  in,  308 

—  various  other  worships  in,  31 1 

—  fetichism  in,  323 

—  idolatry  in,  338 

—  worship  of  ancestors  in,  340 

—  human  sacrifices  in,  354,  3.")7 

—  notions  of  Alt  u re  rewardis  and  pnni^^h- 
ments  among  varioiw*  races  of,  394 


INDEX. 


521 


en) 

India — ctmtinued, 

—  nlatitions  and  ceremonies  in,  440 

—  rights  of  children  in,  451 

—  primogeniture  in,  554 
Infanticiae,  caoBes  of,  among  sayages, 

124 
Inheritance^  enstom  of,  thzongh  females, 

139 
Irriand,  water-worship  in,  387 

—  stone-worship  in,  300 

Iroqnois,  relationship  through  females 
among,  144 

—  system  of  relationship  among  the, 
148 

—  how  thej  regard  edipees,  223 
Italy,  marriage  enstom  in,  117 

JAKUTS,    restrictions  on    marriage 
among  the,  129 

—  their  worship  of  animals,  267 

—  their  worship  of  trees,  282 
Japan,  mairiage  enstom  in,  73 

—  system  of  relationship  in,  171 
Java,  ooortesans  not  despised  in,  121 
Jews,  relationship  among  the,  145 

—  aacrifioes  among  the,  351,  359 

KACHARIS,  absence  of  moral  feeling 
among  the,  388 
KaiArs,    custom     as    to   fiither-    and 
mother-in-law,  among,  14 

—  their  ideas  on  the  influence  of  food, 
20 

—  unable  to  understand  drawings,  42 

—  ornamentation   of    the   skin   of  the 
Bncbapins,  58 

—  marriage  among  the,  67 

—  marriage  ceremony,  109 

—  system  of  relationship,  l78 

—  remarks  of  the  chief  Seseka  to  Mr. 
Arbrousset,  193 

—  absence    of    religion    among    the 
Koussas,  204 

—  a  Zulu's  notions  of  religion,  206 

—  disease  attributed  by  the  Koussas  to 
three  causes,  216 

—  their  notion  of  the  causes  of  death, 
217 

—  and  of  evil  spirits,  220 

—  curious    hunting    custom     of    the 
Konswis,  270 

—  religious  ideas,  316 

—  their  worship  of  ancestors,  330 

—  priexts  among  the,  362 

—  their  notions  of  creation,  371 

—  absence  of  moral  feeling  among  the, 
388 


LAN 

Kaffirs — continued, 

—  their  method  of  numeration,   429, 
430 

Kalangs     of    Java,    restrictions     on 

mairiage  among  Uie,  138 
Kalmucks,  their  ideas  of  disease,  26 

—  marriage  ceremonies  of  the,  103 

—  restrictions  on  marriage  among  the, 
129 

—  their  character,  380 
Kamchadalea,    marriage    by    capture 

among  the,  104 
Kamskatka,  custom  of  La  Gouvade  in, 
17  ^ 

—  their  low  ideas  of  spirits,  218 
Karens,  their  system  of  relationship, 

182 

—  their  religious  ideas,  334 
Kenaiyers,    restrictions    on    mairiage 

amon^  the,  130 

—  relationship  through  females  among 
the,  143 

Khasias  of    Hindostan,    their  fancies 

respecting  twins,  31 
Khonds,  of  Orissa,  marriage  customs 

among  the,  101 

—  restrictions  on  marriage  among  the, 
128 

—  their  totemism,  256 

—  their  water-worship,  289 

—  and  stone-worship,  296 

—  their   worship    of    the     sun    and 
moon,  309 

—  human  sacrifices  among  them,  354 

—  laws  as  regards  hunting  among,  438 
Kimilaroi  natives,  restriction  of  mar- 
riage among  the,  126,  127 

Kingsmill,  system  of  relationship,  166 
Kirk,  derivation  of  the  word,  286 
Kissing,  not  universally  practised,  35 
Knots  used  as  rocordK,  43 
Kols  of  Central  India,  marriage  cere- 
monies of  the,  102 

—  their  belief  in  an  evil  genius,  216 

—  their  religious  dances,  249 
Kookies  of  Chittagong  have  no  notion 

of  future  rewards  and  punishmentH. 
93 


LABRETS    of   the    Americans   and 
Africans,  55,  56 
Lake  worship,  288 
Lama,  Groat,  of  Thil)et,  worship  of  the, 

349 
Land,  property  in,  among  savages,  442, 

443 
—  communal  property,  444 


INDEX, 


523 


MAB 

Ifairiage — continued. 

—  temporary  wives,  119-122 

—  exogamy  and  its  origin,  122 

—  restrictions  Against  marrying  women 
of  the  same  stock,  126 

—  endogamy,  136 

—  marriage  with  half-sisters,  146 
Mercnry,  his  offices,  294 

Mexicans,  animal-worship  among  the, 
265 

—  their  tree- worship,  284 

—  their  water-worship,  292 

—  their  fire-worship,  306 

—  their  human  sacrifices,  353,  358 
Hicmac  system  of  relationship,  169 
Micronesians,  worship  of  stones  among, 

302 

—  their  worship  of  ancestors,  340,  341 

—  their  notions  of  a  future  state,  365 
Milk-tie,  the,  in  Circassia,  89 

—  strength  of  the  relationship  among 
the  Scotch  Highlanders,  139 

Mirdites,   marriage  by  capture  among 

the,  113 
Mohicans,  nomenclature  in  use  among 

the,  178 
Mongols,  marriage  customs  of  the,  104 

—  their  mode  of  dirination,  230 

—  their  laws,  436 
Moon,  worship  of  the,  306 
Moral  feeling,  origin  of,  396 

—  connection  of  religion  and  morality, 
390 

Morgan,  Mr.,  on  dcTelopment  of  rela- 
tionship, 150 

Mothers-in-law,  customs  in  reference  to, 
11-13 

Mandaris,  marriage  ceremony  among, 
80 

Munsoe,  syntem  of  relationship,  175 

Musicians  looked  on  as  infamous,  121 

Mystery  men,  or  medicine  men,  362 

Myth  3,  326 


N AIRS  of  India,  relationship  among 
the,  82 

—  relationship  through  females  among 
the,  142 

Niiples,  fetichism  in,  30 
Natchez,  their  stone-worship,  303 

—  their  fire-worship,  305 
Nature-worship  defined,  199 
Naudowcssies,    custom   of     polyandry 

among  the,  118 
Negroes,  inactivity  of  their  intellect,  97 

—  their  notion  of  evil  spirits,  213, 214     j 

—  their  belief  in  ghosts,  226  > 


PER 

Negroes — continued, 

—  their  absence  of  belief  in  a  future 
life,  226 

—  become  white  men  after  death,  227 

—  their  mode  of  divination,  233 

—  their  sorcery,  234 

—  their  belief  in  fetichism,  260 

—  their  tree-worship,  280 

—  their  worship  of  the  sea,  289 

—  and  of  white  men,  masts,  and  pumps, 
290 

—  and  worship  of  an  iron  bar,  310 

—  Shamanism  among  them,  334 

—  have  no  notion  of  creation,  372 

—  nor  of  prayer  to  the  Deity,  373 

—  absence  of  moral  feeling  among  the, 
387 

—  their  salutations,  440 

New  Zealand,  worship  of  men  in,  346 
Nicaragua,  rain-worship  in,  292 
Nicknames,  origin  of,  410 
Nicobar  Islands,  ideas  of  the  natives  of, 

of  spirits,  218 
Norway,  stone-worship  in,  300 
Nose-ring,  worship  of  a,  311 
Numerals,  savage  names  of,  426,  428 
Nyambanas,  ornamentation  of  the  skin 

of  the,  68 


OJIBWAS,  their  fire-worship,  306 
Omahaws,  their  customs  respecting 
sons-in-law,  12 
Oneidas,  their  system  of  relationship, 

177 
Ornaments,  personal,  of  savages,  53 
Ostiaks,  their  customs  as  to  daughters- 
in-law,  12 

—  their  ornamentation  of  the  skin,  59 

—  exogamv  among  them,  129 

—  their  religious  dances,  249 

—  their  tree-worship,  282 

—  and  stone-worship,  295 

—  their  statues  in  memory  of  the  dead, 
341 

Otawa  system  of  relationship,  177 
Ox,   the,  held    sacred   in  India    and 
Ceylon,  267 


FCIFIC  Islands,  human  sacrifices  in 
the,  357 
Paraguay,  sea-worship  in,  293 
Parents,  custom  of  naming  them  after 

children,  452 
Pata^onians,  their  tree-worship,  285 
Persia,  Homa  or  Soma  worship  of,  279 


524 


INDEX, 


PER 


REL 


Peruvians,  their  fancies  about  twins,  82 

—  their  mode  of  recording  events,  43 

—  their     religious    ideas    regarding 
dreams,  209 

—  their  notions  of  eclipses,  224 

—  their  animal-worship,  264 

—  their  sea- worship,  293 

—  their  fire-worship,  306 

—  their  worship  of  the  sun,  307 
— •  worship  of  men  among,  346 

—  their  notion  of  religion  and  morals, 
394 

Petition,  an  American  Indian,  52 
Philippine  Islands,  worship  of  trees  in 

the,  283 
Phoenicians,  their  stone-worship,  298 
Picture-writing,  44,  46 
Pleiades,  worship  of  the,  308 
Polyandry,  reasons  for,  74 

—  causes  of,  133 

—  list  of  tribes  regarded  as  polyan- 
drons,  133 

—  considered  as  an  exceptional  pheno- 
menon, 133,  134 

—  widely  distributed  oyer  India,  Thibet, 
and  Ceylon,  135 

Polygamy,  causes  of,  132 

Polynesia,  relationship  through  females 

in,  146 
Polynesians,  their  drawings,  38 

—  polyandry  among  them,  134 

—  their  powers  of  witchcraft,  243 

—  animal-worship  among  them,  266 

—  worship  of  ancestors,  338 

—  their  worship  of  men,  346 

—  their  method  of  numeration,  429 

—  their  property  in  land,  414 

—  their  laws,  469 
Pond-worship,  290 
Prayer,  373 

Priests,  absence   of,  among  the  lower 

races,  361 
Property,  communal,  444,  445 
Prussians,  their  ancient  fires  in  honour 

of  the  god  Potrimpos,  305 


QUEEN   Charlotte  Island,  marringe 
unknown  in,  83 
Queensland,  absence  of  religion  in,  202 
Quippu,  the,  of  the  Peruvians,  43 


"nAIN.  worship  of,  292 

-It     l<uinl>ow,  worship  of  tlie,  310 

Iliittle,  the,  regarded  as  a  deity.  311        ' 


Reddios  of    Southern  India,  marri«i^ 

customs  of  the,  74 
Redknives,  system  of  relationship,  175 
Redskin,  relationship  between  husband 

and  wife,  163 

—  relationship,  summary  of,  180 

—  system  of  relationship,  157-160 
Reindeer,  ancient  drawing  of  a,  38,  39 
Rejangs   of  Sumatra,  their  custom  of 

filing  and  disfiguring  the  teeth,  5C 
Relationship  among  savages,  67 

—  independent  of  marriage,  83 

—  adoption,  88 

—  the  milk-tie,  89 

—  through  males,  148 

—  change  in  the  relationship  from  the 
female  to  the  male  line,  146,  147 

—  through  females,  140 

—  present  system,  149 

—  in  general,  150 

—  development  of,  151 

—  different  systems  of,  162,  153 

—  classification  of  different  systems,  153 

—  Wyandot  system,  155 

—  custom    of   addressing   persons   by 
their,  156-157 

—  similarities  of   system  among   the 
lower  races,  157-159 

—  nomenclature  of,  161 

—  effect  of  female  kinship  on  systems 
of,  163-166 

—  Two-Mountain  Iroquois.system  of,  1 67 

—  importance  of  the  mother's  brother 
in  the  family  system,  168 

—  Miemac  syttem  of,  169 

—  remarkable  terms  in  us»\  174 

—  explanation  of  the  terms,  175.  176 

—  Kaffir  system  of.  178 

—  remark.iblp  systems  of.  182.  183 

—  indications  of  process,  184 

—  incompleteness  of  system  of.  185 
—^existing   system    incompfttiMe   w-th 

the  theory  of  degradation,  187 

—  evidence  of  progress.  188,  189 

—  no  evidence  of  degradation.  190 

—  summary  on  the  subject  of,  190.  191 
Religion  of  savages.  193 

—  their  mentJil  inactivity,  191 

—  character  of  their  religion,  197 

—  classification  of  the  lower  religiors, 
198 

—  sequence   of  religions   acconling  to 
Sanchoniatho,  109 

—  totcmism,  199.  2^2.  326 

—  religions    condition    of    the    lowest 
races.  201 

—  tribes  among  whom  religion  i^aWnt, 
202 


INDEX, 


525 


BEL 

fieligion — cotUiiwsd, 

—  rudimentary  religion,  206 

—  dreams,  207 

—  a  man's  shadow,  210 

—  spirits   at  firbt    regarded    as  evil, 
212 

—  and  causing  disease,  215 

—  low  ideas  of  spirits  entertained  by 
fBiTages,  222 

—  beliet  in  ghosts,  226 

—  absence  of  belief  in  a  future  state, 
226 

—  plurality  of  souls,  229 

—  difination  and  sorcery,  220,  238 

—  witchcraft,  238 

—  reliffious  diinces,  247 

—  gradual    development   of    religious 
ideas,  251,  257 

—  animal  worship,  2d2 

—  deiiicaUon     of    inanimate    objects, 

271 

—  worship  of   the    sun,    moon,     and 
stars,  272 

—  tree-worship,  274 

—  sundry  other  worships,  277 

—  water-worship,  286 

—  worship  of  stones  and  mountains, 
293 

—  fire-worship,  303 

—  fetichism,  319 

—  developmental      and      adaptational 
changes,  328 

—  Shamanism,  331 

—  idolatry,  335 

—  worship  of  ancestors  and  of  men, 
344,  345 

—  worship  of  principles,  350 

—  sacrifices,  351,  352 

—  temples,  359 

—  the  soul,  363^68 

—  the  future  state,  367 

—  creation,  370 

—  prayer,  373 

—  the  nature  of  idols,  376 

—  connection    of    religion    and    mo- 
rality, 399 

—  progress  of   religious  ideas  among 
savages,  491,  492 

Bight,  connection  of,  with  law,  395 
Bishis,  or  penitents,  of  India,  how  re- 
garded, 219 
Biver-worship,  287 
Bock  sculptures,  53 

—  of  Western  Europe,  53 

Bomans,  system  of  relationship  among, 
152,  185 

—  their  notions  respecting  their  deities, 
221 


SAV 

Bomans — continued 

—  sorcery  among  them,  236 

—  origin  of  their  myths,  330 

—  their  human  sacrifices,  358 

—  importance  of  formalities  and  ex- 
pressions among  the,  442 

—  property  in  laud  in,  448        "^ 

—  their  W1II4  449 

—  their  laws  of  property,  457 
Bussia,  human  sacrifices  in,  358 

SAB-EISM,  272 
Sacrifices,  human,  351,  359 

—  confusion  of  the  victim  with  the 
Deity,  353 

—  in  ancient  times,  357 
Salutation,  forms  of,   among  savages, 

35 
Samoans,  totemism  among,  256 

—  religious  ideas  regarding  death,  318 

—  their  idea  of  creation,  371 

—  gradation  of  rank  among,  439 
Samoyedes,  matriage  among  the,  69 

—  absence  of  affection  in  marriage 
amon^,  69 

—  marriage  by  capture  among  the,  104 

—  exogamy  among  the,  129 
Sanchoniatho,  sequence  of  religions  ac« 

cofdiug  to,  190 
Sandwich  Islanders,  tattooing,  63     . 

—  relationship  among  the,  83 

—  endogamy  among  them,  138 

—  their  animal-worship,  265 
Savages,  their  reasons  for  what  they  do 

and  believe,  6 

—  difficulties  of  communicating  with 
them,  and  consequent  mistakes,  7 

—  inactivity  of  their  intellsH,  8 

—  condition  of  the  lowest  races  of  men, 
9-12 

—  resemblance  of  diflferent  races  in 
similar  stages  of  development  to  one 
another,  11 

—  wide  distribution  of  the  custom  of 
La  Couvade,  15-17 

—  ideas  on  the  infiuence  of  food,  19 

—  their  notions  with  reference  to  por- 
traits, 21 

—  and  as  to  the  value  of  writing,  28, 
24 

—  their  ideas  of  disease,  25 

—  their  fancies  respecting  twins,  31, 82 

—  how  life  is  r^anied  bv  them,  32 

—  their  forms  ox  salutation,  35 

—  art  among  them,  37 

—  their  personal  ornaments,  53 

—  marriage  and  relationship  among 
them,  67 


526 


INDEX. 


S3.Ttigoa-~continued. 

—  their  religion,  193 

—  their  figarative  language,  278 

—  their  character  and  morals,  370 

—  difficulty  of  ascertaining  the  charac- 
ter of  savage  races,  382 

—  their  progress  in  morals,  384 

—  their    family  affection    and    moral 
feeling,  386 

—  have  no  notion  of   a  future  state, 
391 

—  origin  of  moral  feeling,  397 

—  language  of  the  lowest  races,  401 

—  their  laws,  431 

—  general  conclusions  respecting  savage 
races,  463 

—  papers  on  the  primitive  condition  of 
man,  465,  479 

—  character  of  the  religious  belief  of, 
472 

—  true  nature  of  barbarism,  482 
Scandinavia,  human  sacrifices  in,  358 
Science,  services  of,  to  the  cause  of  re- 

limon  and  humanity,  307 
ScoUand,  water-worship  in,  287 

—  stone-worship  in  Skye,  300 
Scythians,  their  worship  of  a  scimotar, 

310 
Sea,  worship  of  the,  280,  293 
Semitic  religions  contrasted  with  Aryan, 

327,  328 
Serpent,  worship  of  tlie,  257 

—  races  in  which  the  serpent  was  and 
is  worshipped,  259 

Shadow,  how  regarded  by  savages,  210 
Shamanism  defined,  199 

—  origin  of  the  word  Shaman,  331 

—  account  of,  331 

Shamans  of  Siberia,  their  supernatural 

powers,  244 
Shoshon^s,    custom    of    La    Couvade 

among  the,  17 
Siberia,  ideas  on  the  influence  of  food 

in,  20 

—  stone-worship  in,  295 

—  worship  of  ancestors  in,  341 

—  notions  of  the  people  of,  as  to  crea- 
tion, 371 

Sioux,   system   of  relationship  among 

the,  88 
Skin,  ornamentation  of  the,  57 
Skyo,  worship  of  stones  in,  300 
Slang  terms,  origin  of,  410 
Smoking  in  religious  ceremonies,  249 
Snakes,  departed  relatives  in  the  form 

of,  262 
Sneezing,  custom  at,  477 
Sonthals,  marriage  customs  of  the,  118 


TAH 

Sonthals — etmtin  ued. 

—  their  religious  observances   daring 
intoxication,  250 

—  their  mode  of  praying  for  rain,  298 
Soors,  absence  of  mor^  sense  among 

the,  390 
Sorcery  among  savages,  233,  234 

—  various  modes  of,  234-237 

—  sorcerers  not  necessarily  impostors, 
244 

Soul,  difference  between  the  belief  in 
ghosts  and  in  the  existence  of  a,  363 

—  souls  of  inanimate  objects,  364 

—  belief  that   each  man  has  several 
souls,  366 

South  Sea  Islanders,  system  of  relation- 
ship among,  167 

—  their  religion,  197 

Spartans,  their  marriages  by  capture, 

111 
Spiders  worshipped,  266 
Spirits,  always  regarded  by  savages  as 

evil,  212 

—  the  authors  of  diseases,  215 
Stars,  worship  of  the,  308,  309 
Statues,  worshipped  as  deities,  341,  342 
Stiens  of  Cambodia,  their  belief  in  an 

evil  genius,  215 

—  their  behaviour  during  eclipses,  224 

—  their  animal-worship,  271 

—  absence  of  temples  among  the,  359 
Stones,  worship  of,  293 

Sumatrans,    three    kinds   of   marriage 
among  the,  71-73 

—  their  behaviour  during  an   eclipse, 
224 

—  sorcery  among  them,  236 

—  their  animal-worship,  271 

—  their  tree-worship,  283 

—  their  water- worship,  280 

—  their  notion  of  a  future  state,  393 

—  their  names  taken  from  their  chil- 
dren, 453 

Sun-worship,  306 

—  original  form  of,  287 
Swords,  worship  of,  310 


TACITUS,   his  observations    on    the 
ancient  Germans,  6 
Tahiti,  marriage  customs  in,  70 

—  life  attributed  by  them  to  inanimate 
objects,  275 

—  animal-worship  in,  276 

—  stone- worship  in,  301 

—  worship  of  tne  king  and  queen  of, 
346 

—  human  sacrifices  in,  35 


INDEX, . 


527 


TAH 

Tabiti—cotUinued, 

—  absence  of  ideas  as  to  creation  in, 
372 

_  character  of  the  natiyes,  380,  383 

—  notioDs  of  the  jpeople  as  to  future 
rewards  and  punishments,  391 

—  character  of  the  laws  of,  435 

—  and  of  the  ceremonies  of,  441 

—  property  in  land  in,  444 

—  property  leit  by  will  in,  448 

—  custom  of  abdication  of  the  king  of, 
451 

Tamils,  system  of  relationship  among 

the,  148,  157-160,  173 
Tanna,  ornaments  used  in,  54 

—  tattooing  among  the  women  of,  61 

—  hair-dressing  in,  65 

—  absence  of  idolatry  in,  337 

—  worship  of  ancestors  in,  340 
Tapyrians,  marriage  custom  of  the,  110 
Tartars,  their  notion  of  God,  221 

—  inheritance    in    the   youngest    son 
among  the,  453 

Tasmanians,  their  mode  of  sorcery,  230 
Tattooing  among  the  Africans,  58,  61 

—  among  other  races,  58-64 
Teehurs  of  Oude,  relationship  of  the 

sexes  among  the,  82 
Teeth  filed,  56 

—  pierced  and  ornamented,  56 
Temples,  unknown  mostly  to  the  lower 

races,  359 
Thibet,  polyandry  in,  135 
Thomson,  Mrs^  worshipped  as  a  deity 

in  Australia,  313 
Thracians,  marriage  customs  of  the,  117 
Tierra  del  Fuego,  marriages  in,  106 
^nnn^  Indians,  restrictions  on  marriage 

among  the,  129 
Tipperahs  of  Chittagong,  their  notions 

respecting  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  228 
Todas  of  me  Neilgherry  Hills,  their 

system  of  relationships,  87 

—  their  worship  of  the  ox,  267 

—  never  pray,  374 

Tombstones  of  American  Indians,  47 
Tonga  islands,  tattooing  in  the,  61 

—  practice  of  adoption  in  the,  89 

—  relationship  through  females  in,  145 

—  immortality  of  their  chiefs,  363 

—  but  not  of  the  common  people,  363 

—  their  notion  of  a  future  state,  364 

—  character  of  the  islanders,  379-381 

—  their  absence  of  moral  feeling,  389 

—  and  of  the  idea  of  future  rewards 
and  punishments,  302    • 

—  ceremonies  of  the  people  of,  480 
Tongan  system  of  relationship,  159, 160 

—  absence  oi  idolatry  among,  337 


WEB 

Toiig&n-H>ontinued. 

—  their  idea  of  creation,  371 
Totemism  defined,  199 

^-  considered  as  a  stage  of  religions  pro- 
gress, 253,  326 

Totems,  or  crests,  importance  of,  130 

Tottiyars  of  India,  system  of  relation- 
ship of  the,  88 

Tree-worship,  universality  of,  278 

—  case  of,  recorded  by  Mr.  Feigusson, 
274 

Tribe  marks  of  various  African  races, 

57-60 
Tunguses,  marriage  by  capture  among 

the,  104 

—  their  mode  of  divination,  230 

—  their  water-worship,  288 
Turkomans,  marriage  among  the,  75 
Tuski,  their  skill  in  drawing,  40 

—  their  ornamentation  of  the  skin,  59 
Twins,  fancies  respecting,  31,  32 

—  cause  of  the  general  prejudice  against, 
32 

Two-Moantain  Iroquois,  system  of  rela- 
tionship, 167 

importance  of  the  mother's  brother 

among,  169,  186 

Tylor,  Early  History  of  Man,  15 

Tyre,  worship  of  a  statue  of  Hercules 
at,  344 


TTNKTAHE,  water-god  of  the  Daco- 
U     tabs,  291 


T7EDDAHS  of  Ceylon,  their  religious 
Y      ideas,  314 

Vesali,  religious  character  of  the  cour- 
tesans of,  121 

Virginia,  religious  dance  of  the  natives 
of,  248 

Votyaks,  relation  of  husband  and  wife, 
76 


WALES,  marriage  customs  in,  112 
Warali    tribes,    restrictions   on 
marriage  in  the,  127 
Water-worship,  in  Europe,  286 

—  Siberia,  288 

—  India,  288 

—  Africa,  288,  289 

—  N.  America,  291 

—  8.  America,  293 

Wells,  sacred,  in  Scotland,  287 
Wergild  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  460 


528 


INDEX. 


WHA 


ZUN 


Whntely,  Dr.,  Aiehbisbop  of  Dublin, 
bis  views  as  to  tbe  condition  of 
savages,  465 

—  answers  to  bis  aigmnents,  469 
Wbiddah,  or  Wbydidi,  an  idol  of;  261 

—  water-worsbip  at,  289 
Wills,  modem  origin  of,  447 
Witcberalt,    simikrity  of,    in  rarions 

parts  of  tbe  world,  238-240 

—  among  savages,  239 

—  tbe  belief  in,  sbared  by  Europeans, 
242 

Wives,  custom  of  supplying  guests  witb, 

119 
Women,  position  of^  among  savages, 

68,91 

—  communities  in  which  women  have 
exercised  the  supreme  power,  92 

—  origin  of  exogamy,  122 

—  causes  of  polygamy,  132 

—  endogamy,  136 

—  inheritance  through  females,  140 

—  position  of  women  in  Australia,  411 
Wrestling  for  a  wife,  custom  of,  93 
Writing,  used  as  medicine,  24 

—  surprise  of  savages  at,  aa  a  mode  of 
communication,  43 

—  picture-writing,  44 

—  Indian  bark  letters  48-51 

—  application  of  art  to  purposes  of 
personal  decoration,  53 

Wyandot,  system  of  relationship,  155, 
172 


'TTERKALAS  of  Southern  India,  mar- 
X     riage  customs  of  the,  137 
Yunan,  West,  divination  as  practised 
in,  232 


rTEALANDEBS,  Kew,  custom  of  bar- 
£j    dening  tbe  heart  to  pity,  20 

—  causes  of  their  cannibalism,  20 

—  their  tattooing,  62 

—  their  courtship  and  marriage,  107 

—  endogamv  among  them,  138 

—  evil  spirits,  bow  regarded  by  them, 
215 

—  sorcery  and  witchcraft  among  them, 
238 

—  their  belief  in  the  destruction  of  body 
and  spirit,  226 

—  their  mode  of  divination,  232 

—  their  worship  of  animals,  265 

—  their  absence  of  moral  fiDeling,  298 

—  red  a  sacred  colour  with  them,  297 

—  their  worship  of  the  rainbow,  810 

—  their  belief  in  the    destruction  of 
both  body  and  soul,  363 

—  their  three  tenures  of  land,  444 
Zoolatiy,  252,  264 

Zulus,  divination  as  practised  among 
the,  232 

—  sorcery  among  the,  233 
Znpi,  sacred  well  of;  292 


LOXDOX  :    raiXTEI)    BT 

BPOTTIfcWOOOl    ASD    CO.,    >E>V>bIUKK7    SQCARK 

AXO    rsUUAWaT    IiTUJ&IlT 


39  Paternoster  Row,  E.C. 
London,  November  1 874. 


GENERAL  LIST  OF  WORKS 


PUBLISHED  BY 


Messrs.  Longmans,  Green,  and  Co. 


■•0^- 


PAGE 

AiTs,  Manufactures,  &c.  .    .    .  25 

Astronomy  &*  Meteorology   .    .  17 

Biographical  Works 6 

Chemistry  &  Physiology   ...  23 
Dictionaries    &  other    Books    of 

Reference 14 

Fine  Arts  &  Illustrated  Edi- 
tions    24 

History,     Politics,     Historical 

Memoirs,  &c i 

Index 41  to  44 

K.nowledge  for  the  Young  ...  40 


TACm 

Mental  &  Political  Philosophy  8 

Miscellaneous  &  Critical  Works  la 
Natural     History    &    Physical 

Science 18 

Poetry  &  the  Drama 35 

Religious  &  Moral  Works    .     .  28- 
Rural  Sports,   Horse  &  Cattle 

Management,  &c 3^ 

Travels,  Voyages,  &c 3^: 

Works  of  Fiction 34. 

Works    of   Utility   &    General 

Information 3^ 


io«- 


HISTORY,     POLITICS,      HISTORICAL 

MEMOIRS,    &c. 


yonrnal  of  the  Reigns  of 

King  George  IV.  and  King 
William  IV. 

By  the  late  Charles  C.  F. 
Grevillc,  Esq.  Clerk  of 
the  Council  to  those 
Sovereigns.  Edited  by 
Henry  Reeve,  Registrar 
of  t/ie  Privy  Council. 

3  vols,  %vo.  priee  3d/. 


The  Life  of  Napoleon  I  IF., 

derived  from  State  Records  ^^ 
Unpublished  Family  Cor- 
respondence, and  Personal' 
Testimony. 
By  Blanchard  Jerrold. 

Four  Vols.  %vo.  with  Portraits  from  the 
Originals  in  possession  of  the  Imperial^' 
Family^  and  Facsimiles  of  Letters  of 
Napoleon    I.     Napoleon    ///,     Quern 
Jlortense^  crY.     VoL.  I.  priee  1 8/. 

•»•  Vol,  II.  will  be  publUhtd  in  the 
Autumn^  and  lols.  III,  and  IV,  eom- 
pleting  the  work^  iu  tht  Spring  of  1875,. 

A 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


Lectures  on  the  History 

of  England  from  the  Ear- 
liest  Times  to  the  Death  of 
King  Edward  II. 
By  W,  Longman,  F.AS, 

Maps  and  Illusiraiions,     %vo,  x^s. 

The  History  of  the  Life 

and  Times  of  Edway'd  III. 
By  W,  Longman,  F.AS. 

With  9  Map,  8  Plates,  and  i6  Woodcuts. 
2  vols,  Svo,  2Ss, 

History  of  England 

under  the  Duke  of  Btuking- 
hani  and  Cliarles  the  First, 
1624-1628. 

By  S.  Rawson  Gardiner, 
late  Student  of  Ch.  Cli. 


2  vols,  ^0, 


[In  the  press. 


I  istory  of  Civilization  in 

England  and  France,  Spain 

and  Scotland. 

By  Henry  Thomas  Buckle. 

3  vols,  crown  %vo.  24f. 

A  Student's  Manual  of 

the  History  of  India  from 
tlie  Earliest  Period  to  the 
Present. 

By  Col.  Meadows  Taylor, 
M.R.A.S. 

Second  Thousand,    Cr,  %vo.  Maps,  *js,  6d. 

The  French  Revolution 

and   First    Empire;    an 

Historical  Sketch. 

By  W.  O'Connor  Morris, 

sometime  Scholar  of  Oriel 

College^  Oxford. 

With  2  Maps,    Post  ^0,  Js,  6d, 


The  History    of  India 

from  the  Earliest  Period 
to  the  close  of  Lord  Dal- 
housies  Administration. 
By  John  Clark  Marshman. 

3  vols,  cratun  ^vo.  22s,  6d, 

Indian  Polity;  a  View  of 

the  System  of  Administra- 
tion  in  hidia. 
By  Lieut. 'Colonel  George 
Chesney. 

Second  Edition  t  rci'isedyWith  Map,  Zvo,  21  s, 

Waterloo    Lectures ;     a 

Study  of  the  Campaig7i  of 
1815. 

By     Colonel    Clmrles    C. 
Chesney,  R.E. 

Third  Edition,    %vo,  with  Map^  los,  6d. 

Essays  in  Modern  Mili- 
tary Biography. 
By    Colonel    Charles    C 
Chesney,  R.E. 

%vo,  I2s,  6d. 

The  Imperial  and  Colo- 
nial Constitutions  of  the 
Britannic  Empire,  includ- 
ing Indian  Institutions. 
By  Sir  E.  Creasy,  M.A. 

With  6  Afaps,     ^0,  15J. 

T/ie  Oxford  Reformers — 

John  Colet,  ErastftuSy  and 

Tliomas    More;    being   a 

History  of  their  Fellow- 

Work. 

By  Frederic  Seebohm. 

Second  Edition,    %vo,  14/. 


NEW    WORKS    PuausHED  by    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


The  History  of  Persia 

and  its  present  Political 
Situation ;  with  Abstracts 
of  all  Treaties  and  Con- 
ventions between  Persia  and 
England, 

By  Clements  R.  Mark/mm^ 
CB,  F,R,S, 

Svo,  wUh  Maffj  2is. 

T/ie    Mythology  of  the 

Aryan  Nations, 

By  Geo.  W,  Cox,  M.A,  late 
Scholar  of  Trinity  Col- 
lege, Oxford, 

2  vols,  %V0,  2$^. 

A  History  of  Greece. 

By  the  Rev,  Geo.  W,  Cox, 
M.A,    late    Scholar   of 
Trifiity  College,  Oxford, 

Vols.  I,  and  If.    Svo.  Maps,  36j". 

The  History  of  Greece. 

By  C.  Thirlwall,  D.D. 
late  Bp.  of  St.  David's, 

S  vols,  frp.  %vo,  28x, 

The  Tale  of  the  Great 

Persian     War,   fro7n    the 
Histories  of  Herodotus, 
By  Rev,  G,  W.  Cox,  M,A. 

Ftp.  Zi-o.  y.  6d, 

The  History  of  the  Pelo- 

ponnesian    IVar,  by    Thn- 

cydides. 

Translated  by  Richd.  Crazu- 

ley,  Fellow  of  Worcester 

College,  OxforcL 

8f«k  2 IX. 


Greek  History  from  The-- 

mistocles  to  Alexafider,  in 
a  Series  of  Lives  from 
Plutarch. 

Revised  and  arranged  by 
A.  H.  C lough. 

Fcp.  %i'o.  Woodcuts,  6j. 

History  of  the  Romans 

under  the  Empire, 

By  the  Very  Rev.  Charles 
Merivale,  D,C,L.  Dean 
of  Ely. 

8  vols,  post  %vo.  Afis. 

The  Fall  of  the  Roman 

Republic ;  a  Short  History 
of  the  Last  Century  of  the 
Com7nonwealth. 

By  Dean  Merivale,  D.C.L. 

1 2  mo.  7 J.  6(1. 

The  Sixth  Oriental  Mo- 
narchy ;  or  the  Geography, 
History,  and  Antiquities 
of  Parthia.  Collected  a  fid 
I  I  lust  7'a  ted  fro77i  Aficicnt 
and  Modern  sources. 

By  Geo.  Razulmson,  AT. A. 

JVUh  Maps  art  J  Illustrations.     St  v.  l6f. 

The  Seventh  Great  Ori^ 

ental  Monarchy;  ar^  a 
History  of  the  Sassanians : 
with  Notices  Geographical 
and  Antiquarian. 

By  Geo.  Rawlinson,  Af.A. 

Sm7.  ttf'M  Afiips  tmd  lOmrtrations. 

[/« tkf  press. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


Eficyclopcedia  of  Chro- 
nology, Historical  and 
Biographical ;  comprising 
the  Dates  of  all  the  Great 
Events  of  History y  includ- 
ing  Treaties y  Alliances, 
Wars,  Battles,  &c.  Inci- 
dents in  the  Lives  of  Emi- 
nent Men,  Scientific  and 
Geographical  Discoveries, 
Meclianical  Invefitions,  and 
Social,  Do7nestic,  and  Eco- 
nomical Improvements. 

By  B.  B.  Woodward,  B.A. 
and  W.  L.  R,  Gates. 

2ivo,  42s. 

The  History  of  Rome. 

By  Wilhcbn  Ihne. 

Vols,  I.  and  II.  Stv.  30J.      Vb/s.  III.  and 
IV,  in  preparation. 

History    of    Etiropean 

Morals  from  Augustus  to 

Charlemagfie. 

By  W.  E.  H.  Lccky,  M.A. 

2  vols.  Svo,  2Ss, 

History  of  the  Rise  and 

Influence  of  the  Spirit  of 
Rationalism  in  Europe, 
ByW.E.H.Lecky.M.A. 

CaHnH  Editiofi^  2  vols,  crwwn  ^0.  idr. 

History  of  the   Early 

Church  from  the  First 
Preaching  of  the  Gospel  to 
t/ie  Council  of  Niccea,  a.d. 

325- 

By  Miss  E.  M.  Seweli. 


Introdtiction       to      the 

Science  of  Religion :  Eour 
Lectures  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institutiofi ;  with 
two  Essays  on  False  Ana- 
logies and  the  Philosophy 
of  Mythology. 
By  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A. 

Crown  Svo,  I  or.  6  J, 

The  Stoics,  Epicureans, 

and  Sceptics. 

Tra7tslated  from  the  Ger- 
man  of  Dr.  E.  Zeller, 
by  Oswald  J.  Reichel, 
M.A. 

Crown  Zvo,  14J, 

Socrates  and  the  Socratic 
Schools. 

Translated  from  the  Ger- 
man of  Dr.  E.  Zeller^ 
by  tlie  Rev.  O.  y.  Reiehel^ 
M.A. 

Crown  %V0.  Sj.  6d, 

The  History  of  Philoso- 
phy y  from  T hales  to  Comte. 
By  George  Henry  Lewes. 

Fourth  Edition^  2  vols.  8tv.  yis. 

Sketch  of  the  History  of 

the  Church  of  England  to 
the  Revolution  of  i6SS. 
By  the  Right  Rev.  T.  V. 

Short,  D.D.  Bis/top  of 

St.  Asaph. 

Eighth  Edition,    Crown  8cv.  7/.  6d. 

The  Historical  Geogra^ 

phy  of  Europe. 

By  E.  A.  Freeman^  D.C.L. 

8cv.  Mafi,  {In  thefmu 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


Memoir  of  Thomas  First 

Lord  DenmaUy  formerly 
Lord  Chief  Justice  of 
England. 

By  Sir  Joseph  Arnotddy 
B.A.  K.B. 

Wiih  two  Portraits.  2  vols.  %vo.  32^. 

The  Life  of  Lloyd  First 

Lord  Keftyon. 
By  Ho7t.   G.   T.   Kenyon^ 
M.A. 

IVith  Portraits,     ^vo.  14^. 

Recollections     of    Past 
Life. 

By  Sir  Hefiry  Holland^ 
Bart.  M.D.  F.R.S. 

Third  Edition.     Post^o.  lQs.6d. 

m 

Isaac    Casaubon,    1559- 
1614. 

By  Mark  Pattison,  Rector 
of  Lincoln  Collegey  Oxford. 

8tv.  \In  the  press. 

Life  of  Alexander  von 

Humboldt. 

Edited  by  Karl  Brtthns, 
and  translated  by  Jane 
atid  Caroline  Lassell. 

With  3  Potiraits.     2  vols.  Siv.  3df. 

Biographical  and  Criti- 
cal Essays,  reprinted fro?n 
Reviews y    with    Additiofis 
afid  Correctiojis. 
By  A.  Hay  ward,  Q.C. 

Second  .Series,   2  vols.    Svo.   2Ss.       Third 
Series,  I  vo/.  Sz'o.  1 41. 


The  Life  of  Isambard 

Kingdom  Bnmel,  Civil 
Engijieer. 

By  I.  Brunei,  B.C.L. 

With    Portrait,     Plates,     and    Woodcuts. 
Svo.  2is. 

Lord  George  Bentinck ; 

a  Political  Biography. 

By  the  Right  Hon.  B. 
Disraeli,  M.P. 

Eighth  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  6s. 

Memoir  of  George  Ed- 

ward  Lynch  Cotton,  D.D. 
Bishop  of  Calctdta;  with 
Selectiojis  front  his  yonr- 
nals  and   Correspondence. 

Edited  by  Mrs.  Cottoft. 

second  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  'js.  6d. 

The  Life  and  Letters  of 

the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith. 

Edited  by  his  Daughter, 
Lady  Holland,  and 
Mrs.  A74stin. 

Cro7on  Sz'O.  2s.  6d.  snvid ;  3/.  dd.  cloth. 

Essays  in  Ecclesiastical 

Biography. 

By  the  Right  Ho7t.  Sir  y. 
Stephen,  LLM. 

Cahintt  Edition.     Crown  Sfi'o.  *js.  (>d. 

Leaders  of  Public  Opi- 
nion i?i  Ireland;  Sioift, 
Flood,  G  rat  tan,  OConnell. 

By  W.  E.  //.  Lecky,  M.A. 

Cnnvn  Svo.  Is.  (ui. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


Essays  Critical  &  Nar- 

rattvCy  partly  original  and 
partly  reprinted  from  Re- 
views. 
By  VV.  Forsyth,  Q.C.  M.P. 


$vo,  iGf. 


Essays,  Political,  Social, 

and  Religious. 

By  Rickd.  Congreve,  M.A. 


$vo.  1 8 J. 


Essays  on  Freethinking 

and  P lainspeaking. 
By  Leslie  Stepheit. 

Crcwn  Svo.  lor.  6d. 

Essays,     Critical     and 

Biographical,     contributed 
to  tite  Edinburgh  Review. 
By  Henry  Rogers. 

Krw  Edition,     2  vols,  craiun  %vo,  I2s. 

Essays  on  some  Theolo- 
gical Controversies  of  the 
Time,    contributed  chiefly 
to  the  Edinburgh  Review, 
By  the  same  Author. 

New  Edition,     Croum  %x'0.  6x. 

Democracy  in  America. 

By  Alexis  de   Tocqueville. 
Translated  by  Henry 

Reeve^    C.  B.   D.  C,  L. 

Correspo7tding    Member 

of  the  Institute    of 

France. 

Kao  Edition.  2  vols,  post  %vo.  \In  the  press. 

On    Representative   Go- 
vernment. 

By  John  Stuart  Mill 

Fourth  Edition^  crown  9ffo.  2s, 


On  Liberty. 

By  yohi  Stuart  Mill. 

Post  8zv.  ^s,  6t/.  crown  Svo.  is.  4//. 

Principles    of    Political 

Economy. 

By  John  Stuart  Mill 

2  vols.  %iH).  301'.  or  I  vol.  crown  Svo.  ^s. 

Essays  on  someUnsettled 

Questio7ts  of  Political  Eco- 
nomy. 
By  John  Stuart  Mill. 

Second  Edition,     Svo.  6s.  6d. 

Utilitarianism. 

By  Johi  Stuart  Milk 

Fourth  Edition,     %vo.  ^s, 

A     Systein    of    LogiCy 

Ratiocinative  and  Induc- 
tive. By  John  Stuart  Mill. 

Eighth  Edition.     2  vols.  %vo.  2^5. 

Examination      of     Sir 

Willia^n  Hamilton' s  Phi- 
losophy, and  of  the  princi- 
pal Philosophical  Questions 
discussed  in  his  Writings. 
By  John  Stuart  Mill 

Fotuih  Edition,     ^vo.  l6s. 

TheSiibjection  oflVo7nen. 

By  John  Stuart  Mill 

New  Edition.     Post  Sivo.  5^. 

Dissertations   and  Dis- 
cussions. 

By  John  Stuart  Mill 

Second  Edition.     3  vols.  Svo.  36X. 

B 


10 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


Analysis  of  the  Pheno- 
mena of  the  Hicman  Mi7id. 

By  Ja^fus  Mill.  New 
Edition,  with  Notes, 
Illustrative  and  Critical. 


2  vols,  %V0.  1%S, 


A   Systematic  View  of 

the  Science  of  yurisprti- 

de7ice. 

By  Sheldon  Amos,  M,A. 

A  Primer  of  the  English 

Constitution  a7id  Govern- 
ment. 
By  Sheldon  Amos,  M.A. 

New  Edition,  revised.     Post'%vo» 

[In  the  press. 

Principles  of  Economical 

Philosophy. 

By  H.  /?.  Macleody  M.A. 
Barrister-at-Laio, 

Second  Edition ^  in  2  vols.    Vol.  I.  2>z'o.  15J. 

The  Institutes  of  yus- 

tinian ;  zuith  E?iglis/i  hi- 
troductiony  Translation, 
and  Notes, 

By  T   C.  SandarSy  M,A. 

Sixt/i  Edition.     Sty?.  iSj. 

Lord  Bacons  JVorks, 

Collected  and  Edited  by  R. 
L.  Ellis,  M.A,  7,  Sped^ 
ding,  M,A,  and  D.  D, 
Heath. 

Nnv  and  Cheaper  Edition.     7  zvis.   8r<>. 
^J.  13J.  (xf. 


Letters     and    Life    of 

Francis  Bacon,   ijtcliiding 
all  his  Occasional  Works. 
Collected  and  edited,  with 

a    Comme^itary,    by  y. 

Spedding. 

7  vds.  %vo.  £^  4J. 

The  Nicomachean  Ethics 

of  A  ristotle.   Newly  trans- 
lated  into  Efiglish. 
By  R.  Williamsy  B.A. 

SiVO.    12S. 

The  Politics  of  Aristotle; 

Greek  Text,  with  English 
Notes. 
ByRichardCongrevCy  M.A. 

Nciu  Edition^  revised.     8zv.    l&r. 

The  Ethics  of  Aristotle; 

with  Essays  and  Notes. 
By  Sir  A.  Grant,  Bart. 
M.A.  LL.D. 

Third  Edition^  m'iscd  a ud partly  rc-'i'rittnt. 

[//i  thi' press. 

Bacons     Essays,     unth 

Annotations. 

By  R.  Whately,  D.D. 

Nr<i'  Edition.     8: v.  \os.  Gd. 

Elements  of  Logic. 

By  R.  JVhattly,  D.D. 

A'tTt'  Edition.    Srv.  I  or.  6t/.  cr.  Srv.  4--.  6./. 

Elements  of  Rhetoric. 

By  R.  Whatcly,  D.D. 

y<ru.' Edition.    8:»\  icxr.  (>•/.  cr.  Srw  4/.  C../. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


11 


An  Outline  of  tlie  Neces- 

sary  Laws  of  Thought :  a 
Treatise    on     Pure    and 
Applied  Logic. 
By    tlie    Most    Rev.     W. 

T/iomsony   D.D.   Arch- 

bisliop  of  York. 

Ninth  Thousand,    Crown  Sz/o.  $s.  6d. 

An  Introdtiction  to  Men- 
tal Philosophy,  on  the  In- 
ductive  MetJiod. 

By  7.  D.  Morell,  LL.D. 

Sz'o,  I2s. 

Elements  of  Psychology, 

containing  the  Analysis  of 
the  Intellectnal  Powers. 
By  7.  D.  Morell,  LL.D. 

Post  Svo.  7j.  M. 

The  Secret    of  Hegel : 

being  the  Hegelian  System 
in  Origin,  PrinciplCy  Form, 
and  Matter. 
By  y.  H.  Stirling,  LL.D. 

2  vols.  Sz'o.  28/. 

Sir  IVillia^n  Hainilto^i ; 

being    the    Philosophy    of 
Perception :  an  Analysis. 
By  7.  H.  Stirling,  LL.D. 

%fvo.  5/. 

The  Philosophy  of  Ne- 
cessity;  or.  Natural  Law 
as  applicable  to  Mental, 
Moral,  and  Social  Science. 
By  Charles  Bray. 

Second  Edition,     %vo,  ^x. 


Ueberweg's    System    of 

Logic,     and    History    of 
Logical  Doctrines. 

Translated,  with  Notes  and 
Appendices,  by  T.  M. 
Lhidsay,  M.A.  F.R.S.E. 

Svo,  i6s. 

The   Senses  and  the 

Intellect. 

By  A.  Bai7i,  LL.D.  Prof 
of  Logic,  Univ.  Aberdeen. 

Sz'o,  1 5 J. 

Mental    and    Moral 

Science;  a  Co^npendium  of 
Psychology  and  Ethics. 

By  A.  Bain,  LL.D. 

Third  Edition,  Crown  Svo.  I  or.  6d,  Or 
separately:  Part  I.  Mental  Science,  dr.  6</. 
Part  II,  Moral  Science,  \5,  6d, 

Hume's  Treatise  on  Hu- 

man  Nature. 

Edited,  with  Notes,  &c.  by 
T.  H.  Green,  M.A.  and 
the  Rev.  T.  H.  Grose, 
M.A. 

2  vols,  Siz'o.  2Ss, 

Hume's  Essays  Moral, 

Political,  and  Literary. 
By  the  same  Editors. 

2  vols.  %vo.  28^. 

*^*  The  above  form  a  complete  and  uniform 
Edition  of  HUME's  Philosophical 
IVorks, 


NEW   WORKS   puBusHED  BY    LONGMANS    &   CO. 


IS 


\ 


Families  of  Speech. 

Four  Lectures  delivered  at 
the  Royal  Institution. 

By  F.  W.  Farrar,  M.A. 
F.R.S. 

New  Edition,     Crown  ^vo,    y,  (>d. 


Chapters  on  Language. 

By  F.   W.  Farrar,  M.A. 
\  F.R.S. 

New  Edition,     Croiun  %vo.  51. 

Southeys   Doctor,    com- 
plete in  One  Volume. 

Edited   by    Rev.    J.    W. 
IVarter,  B.D. 

Square cro^vn  81  v.  lis.  6d, 

A  Budget  of  Paradoxes. 

By  Anglistics  De  Morgan, 
FR.A.S. 

RtfrinU'd^  with  Authoi^s  Additions^  from 
the  Alhcna'um.     &'<?.  151. 

Recreations  of  a  Country 

Parson. 

By  A.  K.  H.  B. 

Two  Scries,  y,  6il.  each. 

Landscapes,      Churches, 

and  Moralities. 
By  A.  K.  H.  B. 

Crown  %vo.  y.  dd. 

Seaside  Musings  on  Sun- 
days and  Weekdays. 
By  A.  K.  H.  B. 

Crown  %vo,  3/.  6«/. 


Changed  A  Sped s  of  Un- 

chaiiged  Truths. 
By  A.  K.  H.  B. 


Crown  Svo.  31.  &d. 


Counsel  •  and     Comfort 

from  a  City  Pulpit. 
By  A.  K.  H.  B. 


Craiun  %vo.  y.  td. 

Lessons  of  Middle  Age. 
By  A.  K.  H.  B. 

Crown  Srv.  3^.  6«/. 

Leisure  Hours  in  Town 

By  A.  K.  H.  B. 

Cro7un  8:v.  31.  6d, 

The  Autumn  Holidays 

of  a  Country  Parson. 
By  A,  K.  H.  B. 

Crtncn  Srv.  3V.  6</. 

Sunday    Afternoons   at 

the  Parish    Church   of  a 
Scottish  University  City. 
By  A.  K.  H.  B. 

Crown  %vo.  3^.  6i/. 

The  Commonplace  Phi- 

losophcr    in     Toivn    and 

Countiy. 

By  A.K.H.B. 

Crown  Srv.  y.  (>d, 

Present-Day  Thoughts. 
By  A.  K.  H.  B. 

Crown  %vo,  3/.  6</. 


NEW   WORKS    PUBU8HED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


15 


Neiv  Practical  Diction- 
ary of  the  German  Lan- 
guage ;  German  -  English 
and  English-German. 

By  Rev.  W.  L.  Blackley, 
M.A.  and  Dr.  C.  M. 
Friedldnder. 

Posi  Srw.  is.  td, 

A  Dictionary  of  Roman 

aftd  Greek  Antiquities. 
With  2,000  Woodcuts 
front  Anciefit  Originals, 
illustrative  of  t/ie  Arts 
and  Life  of  the  Greeks  and 
Romans. 
By  Antlwny  Rich,  B.A. 

Third  Edition.     Crown  %vo.  *js.  dd. 

The  Mastery    of  Lan- 

gtiages ;    or,   the    Art   of 

Speaking  Foreign  Tongues 

Idiomatically. 

By  Thomas  Pretidergast. 

Second  Edition.     Sz't^.  dr. 

A  Practical  English  Dic- 
tionary. 

By  John  T.  White,  D.D. 
Oxon.  and  T  C.  Donki^i, 
M.A. 

I  vol.  post  8i'<?.  uniform  with  Contanseau^s 
Practical  French  Dictionary, 

[/n  the  press. 

A    Latin-English  Die- 

tio7iary. 

By  John  T.  White,  D.D. 

0x071.  and  y.  E.  Riddle, 

M.A.  Oxon. 

Third  Edition,  rerised.     2  rv/j.  4/<».  42/. 


IVhite's   College  Latin- 

E  nglish  D  ic  t  io  n  a  ry  ; 
abridged  from  the  Pare^tt 
Work  for  the  use  of  Uni- 
versity Stttdents. 

Allium  Svo.  i8j. 

^   Latin -Englis/t  Die- 

tionary  adapted  for  the  use 
of  Middle-Class  Schools, 

By  John  T.  White,  D.D. 
Oxon. 

Square  fcp.  %vo.  3^. 


IVhite'syunior  Student's 

Complete  Latin  -  English 
a7td  English-Lati7t  Dic- 
tionary. 

Square  12  mo.  I2s. 
c  A      *  /  /English-Latin,  <s.  (xi. 

A  Greek-English  Lexi- 

con. 

By  H.  G.  Liddell,  D.D. 
Dean  of  Christchurch, 
aftd  R.  Scott,  D.D. 
Dca?i  of  Rochester. 

Sixth  Edition.     Crown  ^0.  3df. 


A  Lex  icon  y   Greek  and 

English,  abridged  for 
Schools  from  Liddell  and 
Scotfs  Greek  -  English 
Lexicon. 

Fourteenth  Edition.     Square  tlmo.  7/.  6</. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


17 


ASTRONOMY  and  METEOROLO.GY. 


Tlie    Universe  mid   the 

Coming     Transits ;      Re- 
searches   into    a7id    New 
Views  respecting  the  Con- 
stitution of  the  Heavens. 
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 

WUk  22  Charts  and  22  Diagrams.  Svo.  I  dr. 

T/ie  Transi/s  of  Venus  ; 

A  Popular  Account  of  Past 
and  Coming  Transits,  from 
the  first  observed  by  Hor- 
rocks  A.D.  1639  to  the 
Transit  of  a.d,  2  i  i  2. 
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 
Cantab. 

iViih  20  Plates  and  numerous  Woodcuts. 
Crown  Svo.  \^Nearly  ready. 

Essays  on    Astronomy. 

A    Series    of  Papers    on 

Planets  and  Meteors,   the 

Sun  and  Sun-surrounding 

Space,     Stars    afid    Star 

Cloudlets. 

By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 

lyUh .  I O  Plates  and  24  IVoodcuts.    ^'o,  1 2s, 

The  Moon  ;  her  Motioits, 

Aspect,  Sccfiery,  aftd  Phy- 
sical Cojidition. 
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 

With  Plates^  Charts^  Woodatts^  and  Lunar 
Photographs,      Cro7un  %i'0.  1 5/. 

The  Sun  ;  Ruler,  Light, 

Fire,  and  Life  of  tlie  Pla- 
netary System. 
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 

Second  Edition,    Plates  and  Woodcuts,    Cr. 
%vo,  14/. 


Saturn  and  its  System. 

By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 

Svo.  with  14  Plates,  14/. 

The  Or 6s  Around  Us;  a 

Series  of  Familiar  Essays 

on  the  Moon  and  Planets^ 

Meteors   and  Comets,  the 

Stt?t  and  Coloured  Pairs  of 

Suns. 

By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 

Crown  Sro,  Js.  6d, 

Other  JVorlds  than  Ours; 

The  Plttrality  of  Worlds 
Studied  under  the  Light 
of  Recent    Scientific    Re- 
searches. 
By  R.  A.  Proctor,  B.A. 

Third  Edition^  with  14  Illustrations.     Cr, 

Brinkley's    Astronomy. 

Revised  and  partly  re-zurit- 
ten,  with  Additional  Chap- 
ters, and  an  Appendix  of 
Questions  for Examinatioji. 
By  John  W.  Stubbs,  D.D. 

Trin.  Coll.  Dublin  and 

F.     Bru7uiow,      Ph.D. 

Astrono7ner    Royal    of 

Ireland. 

With  49  Diagrams,    Craivn  &v.  6f. 

Outlines  of  Astronomy. 

By  Sir  7.  F.  W.  Herschel, 
Bart.  M.A. 

Latest  Edition^  with  Plates  and  Diagrams. 
Square  crown  ^v.  12/. 

C 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


19 


Ganofs  Natural  Philo- 

sophy  for  Getter al  Readers 
and  Young  Persons;  a 
Course  of  Physics  divested 
of  Matfunmtical  Formulce 
and  expressed  in  the  lan- 
guage of  daily  life. 
Translated  by  E.  Atkifison, 
PCS. 

Cr,  8rv.  with  404  Woodcuts,  p.  6d. 

Ganofs    Plemenlary 

Treatise  07i  Physics,  Ex- 
perimental and  Applied, 
for  t/ie  use  of  Colleges  and 

Scliools. 

Translated  and  edited  by  E. 
Atkinson,  F.C.S. 

New  Edition,  with  a  Coloured  Plate  and 
726  Woodcuts,    Post  Svo.  1 5 J. 

Principles    of    Animal 

Mechanics. 

By  tfu  Rev.  S.  Haughton, 
F.R.S. 

Second  Edition,     Svo,  2 is, 

fVein/wlcfs  Introduction 

to  Experimental  Physics, 
Theoretical  and  Practical ; 
incltidifig  Directions  for 
Constructing  Physical  Ap- 
paratus and  for  Making 
Experijmnts. 

Tra7islated  by  B.  Loewy, 
P.R.A.S.  With  a  Pre- 
face by  G.  C.  Foster, 
F.R.S. 

With  numerous  Woodcuts.     Svo» 

[Nearly  ready. 


Text-Books  of  Science, 

Mechanical  and  Physical, 
adapted  for  tlie  use  of  Arti- 
sans and  of  Students  in 
Public  and  other  Schools. 
(The  first  Ten  edited  by 
T  M.  Goodeve,  M.A.  Lec- 
turer on  Applied  Science  at 
the  Royal  ScJiool  of  Mines; 
the  remainder  edited  by 
C.  W.  Merrifeld,  KR.S. 
an  Examiner  in  the  De- 
partment of  Public  Educa- 
tion,) 

Small  Sz^o,     Woodcuts, 

Edited  by  T.  M.  Goodeve,  M.  A. 

Anderson's  Stren^h  of  Materials^  y.  6d, 

Bloxam's  Metals,  y.  6d, 

Goodevc's  Mccfianics,  3^.  dd. 

— — —  Mecfianism^  3^.  dd. 

Griffin's  Algebra  *Sr»  Trigonometry^  y.  6d, 

Notes  on  the  same,  with  Solutions^  y.  6d, 
Jenkin's  Electricity  dr*  Magnetism,  3/.  6d, 
Maxwell's  Theory  of  Heat,  y.  (>d, 
Merrifield's  Technical  Arithmetic,  3J.  6d, 

Key^  3/.  6^. 
Miller's  Inorganic  Chemistry^  y,  6d, 
Shelley's  Workshop  Appliances^  y,  6d, 
Watson's  Plane  &*  Solid  Geometry,  ^s,  (>d. 

Edited  by  C.  W.  Memfield,  F.R.S. 

Armstrong's  Organic  Chemistryy  31.  (nl, 
Thorpe's  Quantitative  Analysis^  4/.  6d, 
Thorpe  and  Muir's    Qualitatii'e  Analysis, 
y.  ()d. 

Address  delivered  before 

the    British     Association 
assembled  at  Belfast ;  with 
Additions  and  a  Preface. 
By  yohn  Tyndall,  F,R,S. 
Presidcfit. 

8tv.  price  y. 

Fragments  of  Science. 

By  John  Tyndall,  RRS. 

Third  Edition,     82  v.  14/. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


21 


Kirby  and  Spence's  In-' 

troductio7t  to  Entomology, 
or  Elements  of  the  Natural 
History  of  Insects. 

Crown  8tv.  5^. 

Strange  Dwellings;  a  De- 
scription of  the  Habitations 
of  Anifuals,  abridged  from 
'  Homes  without  Hands! 
By  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A. 

IVitk  Frontispiece  and  60  Woodcuts.   Crown 
%z'o.  is.  dd. 

Homes  without  Hands  ; 

a  Description  of  the  Habi- 
tations of  Animals,  classed 
accordhig  to  their  Principle 
of  Coftstriiction. 

By  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A. 

With  ahout  140  Vignettes  on  Wood.  8:  v.  2IJ. 

Ont  of  Doors  ;   a  Selec- 

tion  of  Original  Articles 
on  Practical  Natural  His- 
tory. 
By  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A. 

With  6  Illustrations  from  Original  Designs 
engraved  on  Wooil.     Crown  ^i*o.  Js.  6d. 

The    Polar    IVorld :    a 

Popular    Description     of 
Man   and  Nature  in  the 
Arctic  and  Antarctic  Re- 
gions of  the  Globe. 

By  Dr.  G.  Hartzuig. 

With  Chromoxylographs^  Maps,  and  Wood- 
cuts.    %vo.  I  or.  6</. 


The  Sea  and  its  Living 

Wonders. 

By  Dr.  G.  Hartwig. 

Fourth  Edition^  enlarged.     Svo.  with  many 
Illustrations f  los.  6d. 

The  Tropical  IVorld ;  a 

Popular  Scientific  Accouftt 
of  the  Natural  History  of 
the  Equatorial  Regions. 
By  Dr.  G.  Hartwig. 

With  about  200  Illustratiotis,    ^0.  lOf.  6</. 

The  Subterranean  World. 

By  Dr.  G.  Hartwig. 

With  Maps  and  many  Woodcuts.     ^0,  2  is. 

The  Aerial  IVorld. 

By  Dr.  George  Hartwig. 

With  8  Chromoxylographs  and  about  60 
other  Illustrations  engraved  on  Wood. 
%i'0.  price  2ls. 

Insects  at  Home;  a  Popu- 
lar Account  of  British 
Insects,  their  Structtire, 
Habits,  and  Transfomta- 
tions. 
By  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A. 

With  ufnvards  of  IQO  Woodcuts.     8zv.  2Ij. 

Insects  Abroad ;  being  a 

Popular  Account  of  Foreign 
Insects,  theirStructure,  Ha- 
bits, and  Transformations. 
By  Rro.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A. 

With  upwards  of  ^QO  Woodcuts.     %vo.  2ls. 

A  Familiar  History  of 

Birds. 

By  E.  Stanley,  D.D.  late 
Ld.  Bishop  of  Norwich. 

Fcp.  8xv.  with  Woodcuts,  y.  6d. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


23 


The  Treasury  of  Botany  y 

or  Popular  Dictionary  of 

the    Vegetable    Kingdom ; 

with  which  is  incorporated 

a    Glossary  of  Botanical 

Terms. 

Edited    by     J.    Lindley, 

F.R.S.   and   T.  Moore y 

F.L.S. 

WUk  274  Woodcuts  and  20  Steel  Plates, 
Two  PattSy  fcp,  %vo.  I2X. 

Handbook     of     Hardy 

Trees,  Shrubs,  and  Her- 
baceous Plants;  containing 
Dcscriptio7is  &c.  of  the 
Best  Species  in  Ctiltivation  ; 
with  Cultuj^at  Details, 
Comparative  Hardiness, 
suitability  for  particular 
positions,  &c.  Based  07i 
the  Fre7ich  Work  of  De- 
caisne  aiid  Naudin,  and 
including  the  7  20  Origiiial 
Woodcut  Illustrations, 
By  W.  B.  Hcmsley. 

Medium  8tv.  2Ij. 


A    General   System    of 

Descriptive  and  A  nalytical 
Botany. 

Translated  from  theFrench 
of  Le  Maout  and  De- 
caisne,  by  Mrs.  Hooker. 
Edited  and  arranged 
according  to  the  English 
Botanical  System,  by  y. 
D.  Hooker,  M.D.  &c. 
Director  of  the  Royal 
Botanic  Gardens,  Kew. 

With  5, 500  Woodcuts,  Imperial  Sz/o.  52J.  6d. 


Forest  Trees  and  Wood- 

land  Scejiery,  as  described 
in  Ancient  and  Modern 
Poets. 

By  William  Menzics,  De- 
puty Suy'veyor  of  Wind- 
sor Forest  and  Parks,  &c. 

In  One  Volume^  imperial  ^o.  unth  Twenty 
Plates^  Coloured  in  facsimile  of  the 
ori^nal  dra^vings^  t*^^^' £S'  S-*"- 

\Preparing  for  publication. 


CHEMISTRY    and    PHYSIOLOGY. 


Millers     Elements     of 

Chemistry,  Theoretical  a7td 
Pj'actical. 

Re-edited,  with  Additions, 
by  H.  Macleod,  F.C.S. 

3  vols,  8w.  ;f  3. 

Part     I.  Chemical  Physics,  1$/. 
Part   II.  Inorganic  Chemistry,  21/. 
Part  III.  Organic  Chemistry,  24/. 


A  Manual  of  Chemical 

Physiology,  including  its 
Points  of  Contact  with 
Pathology. 

By  y.  L.  W.  Thudichum, 
M.D. 

Stv.  with  Woodcuts,  Js.  6d. 


24 


NEW    WORKS    PUBusHEo  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


A   Dictionary  of  Cite- 

mistry    and    tJu     Allied 

Braiiclus  of  other  Sciefues, 

By  Henry   Watts,  F.C.S. 

assisted      by       eminent 

Scientific  and  Prcutical 

C/iemists. 

6  rv/f.  medium  8jv.  £%.  14/.  6s/. 

Second  Supplement  cojn- 

pleting  the  Record  of  Dis- 
covery to  tfie  end  of  1872. 

[/«  ike  pros. 

A    Course  of  Practical 

Chemistry y  for  t/ie  use  of 
Medical  Students, 
By  W.  Odling,  F.R.S. 

Crown  Stv.  IFoodcuts,  js.  6d, 


Select  Met /tods  in  Clienii- 

cal  Analysis^  chiefly  Ifwr- 

ganic. 

By  Wm.  CrookeSy  F.RS. 

With  22  lV<H>dculs.     Crcmm  8rv.  izr.  6</. 

Todd     and     Bowman  s 

Physiological  A  naiomy,  and 
Physiology  of  Man, 

Vol.  II.  Tuith  numavus  Plustratijns,  25/. 

Vol.  I.  Nno  Edition  hy  Dr.  Lionel  S. 
Beale,  F.R.S.  itt  course  of  puhlicatioH^ 
with  numerous  Illustrations.  Parts  I.  and 
II.  in  81V.  price  "js.  6d.  each. 

Outlines  of  Physiology, 

Human  and  Comparative, 
By  y.  Mars/tall,  F.R,C,S. 
Surgeon  to  the  Univer- 
sity College  Hospital. 

2  vols.  cr.  8rv.  with  122  Woodcuts,  yis. 


The    FINE    ARTS    and    ILLUSTRATED 

EDITIONS. 


Albert  Dnrer,  his  Life 

and  Works ;  including  A  u- 
tobiographical  Papers  and 
Complete  Catalogues, 
By  William  B.  Scott. 

lyU/i   6   Etchings  by  the  Author  and  other 
Illustrations.      iSvo.  l6s. 

In  Fairyland ;  Pic  hires 

from  the  Elf  World.  By 
Jiichard  Doyle.  With  a 
Poem  by  W.  Allinghavi. 

/r,M  .6  ../.„.,/  ^,^,,^.^   ,,,uainin,^  ^,6  Dc 
''..  ns.      .s,,ond  JuUtion,  folio,  1 5.. 


A  Dictionary  of  Artists 

of  the  English  School: 
Pai7iterSy  Sculptors,  Archi- 
tects, Engravers,  and  Orna- 
7nentists ;  tcith  Notices  of 
their  Lives  and  Works. 
By  Sam  net  Redgrazc 

Sz'o.  l(ys. 

The  New  Testament,  il- 

lustratcd  zvith  Wood  En- 
gravings after  the  Ear/v 
Masters,  chicly  of  the 
Italia7i  School. 

Croion  4/A  63/. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


25 


The  Life  of  Man  Sym- 
bolised by  the  Months  of 
the   Year. 
Text  selected  by  R.  Pigot. 

2$  niustrations  on  Wood  from  Designs  by 
John  Leighion^  F.S.A,      Quarto^  42J. 

Lyra    Germanica ;    the 

Christian    Year  and  the 
Christian  Life. 
Translated    by    Miss    C. 
Winkworth. 

WUk  about  325  Woodcut  Illustrations  by  J, 
Leighton,  F.S.A.  and  vther  Artists. 
2  vols,  4/9.  price  42/. 

Lord  Macaulay's  Lays 

of  Ancient  Rome.  With 
90  Illustrations  on  Wood 
from  Drawings  by  G. 
Scharf 

Fcp.  ^o.  21  s. 

Miniature  Edition^  with 

Scharf  s  90  Illustrations 
reduced  in  Lithography. 

Imp.  1^0.  10/.  6i/. 


Sacred  and   Legendary 
Art. 

By  Mrs.  yamesoyi. 

6  vols,  square  crown  Svo.  price jT^.  i^s.  6<l, 
asfollmvs : — 

Legends   of  the  Saints 

aftd  Martyrs. 

Nciv  Edition,  tvith   19  Etchings  and  187 
Woodaits.     2  vols.  31J.  dd. 

Legends  of  the  Monastic 

Orders. 

New  Edition,  with    II    Etchings  and  88 
Woodcuts.     I  vol.  2 1  J. 

Legends  of  the  Madonna. 

New  Edition,  with  27  Etchings  and  165 
Woodaits,     I  vol,  2 IX. 

The  History  of  Our  Lord, 

with  that  of  his  Types  and 
Precursors. 

Completed  by  Lady  East^ 
lake. 

Rn^ised  Edition,  unth  13  Etchings  and  281 
Woodcuts.     2  vols.  42J. 


The   USEFUL    ARTS,    MANUFACTURES,    &c. 


A  Manual  of  Architec- 

ture :  being  a  Concise  His- 
tory and  Explanation  of  the 
Pri7tcipal  Styles  of  Euro- 
pean Architecture,  Ancient, 
Mediceval,  and  Reftaissance; 
with  a  Glossary. 
By  Tlumtas  Mitchell,  Ati- 
tlwr  of  *  The  Stepping 
Stone  to  Architecture! 

With  \ya  Woodcuts.     Crown  8w.  lOr.  6</. 


History    of  the   Gothic 

Revival;  an  Attempt  to 
sJiew  how  far  the  tctste  for 
Mcdicvval  Architecture  ivas 
retained  in  England  during 
the  last  two  centuries,  and 
has  been  rc-devc loped  i7t  i/ie 
present* 

By  Charles   L.   EastlahCy 
Architect. 

With  48  Illustrations.     Imp.  %vo.  3 1/.  6</. 

D 


NEW   WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


27 


Encyclopedia    of   Civil 

Engineering,  Historical, 
Theoretical,  and  Practical 
By  E.  Cresy,  C,E. 

With  above  3|000  Woodcuts,    Svo,  42/. 

^  Treatise  on  the  Steam 

Engine,  in  its  various  ap- 
plications to  Mines^  Mills, 
Steam  Navigation^    Rail- 
ways and  Agriculture. 
By  y.  Bourne,  C.E. 

With  Portrait^  37  PlaUs,  and  546  Wood- 
cuts.     4/<?.  42J. 

Catechism  of  the  Steam 

Engine,  in  its  various  Ap- 
plications. 
By  John  Bourne,  C.E. 

New  Edition^  with  89  Woodcuts,  Fcp.%vo.  ds. 

Handbook  of  the  Steam 

Engine. 

By  y.  Bourne,  C.E.  form- 
ing a  Key  to  theAtithors 
Catechism  of  the  Steam 
Engine. 

With  67  Woodcuts.     Fcp.  %vo.  9J. 

Recent  Improve^nents  in 

the  Steam  Engi7ie. 
By  y.  Bourne,  C.E. 

With  124  Woodaits,      Fcp,  Svo.  6s. 

Lowndes  s       Engineer's 

Handbook  ;  explaiyiing  the 
Principles  which  shotdd 
guide  the  Young  E^iginccr 
in  the  Construction  of  Ma- 
chinery. 

Post  Svo.  5/. 


Lire's  DictimtaryofArts^ 

Manufacttires,  and  Mines. 
Sixth  Edition,  re-written 
and  greatly  enlarged  by 
R.  Hunt,  F.R.S.  assisted 
by  numerous  Contributors. 

With  2,000  Woodcuts.    3  vols,  medium  ^0, 
£4.  14s.  6d, 

Handbook  to  the  Miner  a-- 

logy  of  Cornwall  and 
Devon;  with  Instructions 
for  their  Discrimination, 
and  copiotts  Tables  of  Lo- 
cality. 
By  y.  H.  Collins,  F.G.S. 

With  10  Plates,  Svo.  6s. 

Guns  and  Steel ;  Miscel- 
laneous Papers  on  Mechani- 
cal Subjects. 

By  Sir  y.  Whitworth, 
C.E.  F.R.S. 

With  Illustrations.     Royal  Svo.  Js.  6d. 

Practical     Treatise    on 

Metallurgy, 

Adapted  from  tlu  last  Ger- 
ma7i  Edition  of  Professor 
KerVs  Metallurgy  by  W. 
Crookes,  F.R.S.  &c.  and 
E.  Rohrig,  Ph.D. 

3  vols.  Szv.  'cith  625  Woodcuts.  £4.  19J. 

Treatise  on    Mills  and 

Millwork. 

By  Sir  W.  Fairbairn,  Bt. 

With  18  Plates  and  322  Woodcuts.     2  vols. 
8zv.  32/. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


2S» 


Historical  Lectures   on 

the  Life  of  Our  Lord  Jesus 

Christ, 

By  C.  y.  Ellicott,  D.D. 

Fifth  Edition,     %vo,  I2s, 

Sermons;  inclttding  Two 

Sermons  an  the  Interpre- 
tation of  Prophecy,  and  an 
Essay  on  the  Right  Inter- 
pretation and  Understand- 
ing of  the  Scriptures, 
By  t/ie  late  Rev.  Thomas 
Arnold,  D.D. 

3V0is,  ^0.  price  2\s. 

Christian    Life,    its 

Course,  its  Hiftdrances, 
and  its  Helps;  Sermons 
preached  mostly  in  the 
Chapel  of  Rugby  School. 
By  the  late  Rev.  Thofnas 
Ar7told,  D.D. 

Svo.  "js,  6d, 

Ch ris tia n    L  ife,     its 

Hopes,  its  Fears,  and  its 
Close;  Sermons  preac/ied 
mostly  i7t  the  Chapel  of 
Rugby  School. 
By  the  late  Rev.  Thomas 
Arnold,  D.D. 

Svo.  yj.  6d. 

Sermons  Chiefly  on  the 

Interpretation    of   Scrip- 
ture. 

By  the  late  Rev.   Thomas 
Arnold,  D.D. 

%nfO,  price  yj.  6^. 


Sermons  preached  in  the 

Chapel  of  Rugby  School ; 
with  an  Address  before 
Confirmation. 

By  the  late  Rev.  Thomas 
Arnold,  D.D. 

Fcp.  Zz'o.  price  3 J.  td. 

Three  Essays  on  Reli- 
gion :  Nature  ;  the  Utility 
of  Religion;  Theism. 

By  John  Stuart  Mill. 

Zvo.  price  lOs.  (yd. 

Synonyms  of  the  Old  Tes- 

ta?nent,   their  Bearing  on 

Christiaii       Faith       and 

Practice. 

By  Rev.  R.  B.  Girdlestone^ 

8z'(7.  1 5 J. 

Reasons  of  Faith;   or^ 

the  Order  of  the  Christian 

Argument  Developed  and 

Explaiiied. 

By  Rev.  G.  S.  Drew,  M.A^ 

Second  Edition.     Fcp.  8z'^.  6x. 

The  Eclipse  of  Faith : 

or  a   Visit  to  a  Religious: 

Sceptic. 

By  Hcnrv  Rollers. 

Latest  Edition,     Fcp.  %vo.  y. 

Defence  of  the  Eclipse  of 

Faith. 

By  Henry  Rogers. 

Latest  Edition.     Fcp.  $vo.  Jf.  6Ji 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


31 


Thoughts  for  the  Age. 

By  Elizabeth  M.  SewelL 

Niw  Edition.     Fcp.  %vo,  y.  6d. 

Passing     Thoughts    on 

Religion. 

By  Elizabeth  M.  SewelL 

Fcp,  Svo.  y.  6d. 

Self-examination   before 

Confirmation. 

By  Elizabeth  M.  SewelL 

yimo.  IS.  6d. 

Preparation  for  the  Holy 

Communion  ;  the  Devotions 
chiefly  front  the  works  of 
yeremy  Taylor. 
By  Elizabeth  M.  SewelL 

yimo.  y. 

Readings  for  a  Month 

Preparatory  to  Confirma- 
tiony  from  Writers  of  the 
Early  and  English  Church. 
By  Elizabeth  M.  SewelL 

Fcp.  %vo.  4f. 

Readiitgs  for  Every  Day 

in  Lent,  compiled  from  the 
Writings    of    Bishop 
yeremy  Taylor. 
By  Elizabeth  M.  SewelL 

Fcp.  %vo.  5/. 

Bishop  yeremy  Taylor's 

Entire  Works ;  with  Life 
by  Bishop  Heber. 
Revised  and  corrected  by 
the  Rev.  C  P.  Eden. 

10  vols,  £$.  5/. 


Hymns    of  Praise   and 

Prayer. 

Collected  and  edited  by  Rev. 
y.  Martineau,  LL.D. 

Thoughts  for  the  Holy 

Week,  for  Young  Persons. 
By  Elizabeth  M.  SewelL 

New  Edition.     Fcp.  Svo.  2s. 

Spiritual  Songs  for  the 

Stmdays     and     Holidays 
throughout  the  Year. 

Byy.  S.  B.  MonselL  LL,D. 

Fourth  Edition.     Fcp.  %vo.  4J.  dd. 

Lyra  Germanica;  Hymns 

translatedfrom  the  Gerjna^t 
by  Miss  C  Winkworth. 

2  sericsy  fcp.  %vo.  y.  6d,  each. 

Endeavours    after    the 

Christian  Life;  Discourses. 

By  Rev.    y.    MartineaUy 
LL.D. 

Fifth  Edition.     Cro^un  8?v.  ^s.  6d. 

An  Introduction  to  the 

Study  of  the  New  Testa- 
ntenty  Critical,  Exegetical, 
a7id  Theological. 
By  Rev.  S.  Davidson,  D.D. 

2  vols.  %z'o.  30f. 

Supernatural  Religion; 

an  Inquiry  into  the  Reality 
of  Divine  Revelation. 

New  Edition.     2  wit.  8tv.  24/. 


NEW    WORKS  fusumeo  pv    LONGMANS    &   CO. 


88 


The  Alpine  Club  Map 

of   the    Chain    of    Mont 
BlanCy  from  an  actual  Sur- 
vey in  1 863-1 864. 
By      A.      Adams-Reilly^ 
F.R.G.S.  M.A.C. 

In  Ckromolithographyy  on  extra  stout  draW' 
ing  paper  lOf.  or  mounted  on  canvas 
in  a  folding  case^   \ia.  6d, 

The  Alpine   Club  Map 

of  tJu  Valpelline,  the  Val 
Tournanche,  and  the  South- 
ern Valleys  of  the  Chain  of 
Monte  Rosa,  from  actual 
Survey. 

By  A.   Adams-Reilly, 
F.R.G.S.  M.A.C 

Price  df .  on  extra  Stout  Drawing  Paper ^  or 
7/.  dd.  mounted  in  a  Folding  Case, 

Hours  of  Exercise  in  the 

Alps. 

By  John  Tyndall,  KR.S, 

Third   Edition,   with  ^    Woodcuts  by  E, 
IVhymper.     Crown  $vo.  12s.  6d. 

Guide  to  the  Pyrenees,  for 

t/ie  use  of  Mountaineers. 
By  Charles  Packe. 

Seeond  Edition^  with  Maps  ^c.  and  Ap- 
pendix,    Crown  ^'0.  ys.  6d. 

How  to  See  Norway. 

By  y.  R.  Campbell. 

IVith  Map  and  5  Woodcuts,  fcp,  %to.  St. 

Untrodden    Peaks    and 

Unfrequented   Valleys ;    a 
Midsummer  Ramble  ajuong 
tlie  Dolomites. 
By  Amelia  B.  Edwards. 

With  numerous  Illustrations,      %vo,  2lx. 


The  Alpine   Club  Map 

of  Switzerland^  with  parts 
of  the  Neighbouring  Coun- 
trieSy  on  the  scale  of  four 
miles  to  an  Inch. 
Edited  by  R.  C.  Nichols^ 
F.S.A.  F.R.G.S. 

In  Four  Sheets^  in  Portfolio^  42^.  or 
mounted  in  a  Case^  52^.  dd.  Each 
Sheet  may  be  had  separately^  price  I2J. 
or  mounted  in  a  Case,  151. 

The  Alpine  Guide. 

By  John  Ball,  M.R.I. A. 
late  President  of  the 
Alpine  Club. 

Post  ^0.  with  Maps  and  other  Illustrations. 

Eastern  Alps. 

Price  lOJ.  td. 

Central  Alps y  including 

all  t/te  Oberland  District. 

Price  *js.  6d. 

IVestern  Alps,  including 

Mont  Blanc,  Monte  Rosa, 
Zermatt,  &c. 

Price  6s.  6d. 

Introduction  on  Alpine 

Travelling  in  general,  aftd 
on  the  Geology  of  the  Alps. 

Price  I  s.  Either  of  the  Three  Volumes  or  Parts 
of  the  *  Alpine  Guide  ^  may  be  had  xdth 
this  Introtiuction  prefixed^  is.  extra. 

Visits    to     Remarkable 

Places,    and  Scenes  illus- 
trative of  striking  Passages 
771  English    History   and 
Poetry. 
By  William  Howitt. 


2  rols.  Zro.  IVoadcuts^  25/. 


E 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO.         M 


Novels  and  Tales. 

By  the  Right  Hon.  Benja- 
min  Disraeli^  M.P. 

Cabinet  Editions^  compUU  in  Ten  Volumes^ 
crown  &/<?.  6s,  aich^  cufollcws  : — 


Lothair,  6s, 
Coningsby^  6s, 
Sybils  6s, 
Tancred^  6s, 


Vmetia^  6s, 
Alroy^Ixion,  6r»c,  6s, 
Young  Duke^  <Srv.  dr. 
Vivian  Grey^  6s, 


Henrietta  Temple,  6s, 
Contarini  Meming^  6r*c,  6s, 


Cabinet  Edition  y  in  crown 

Svo.  of  Stories  and  Tales 
by  Miss  Sewell : — 


Amy  Herbert,  2s.  6d. 
Gertrude,  2s.  6d, 
Earts      Daughter^ 

2s.  6d. 
Experience  of  Ufe^ 

2s,  6d, 
Cleve  Hall,  2s.  6d, 


Ursula,  ys.  6d, 


Ivors,  %s,  6d, 
Katharine    Ashton, 

2S,  6d, 
Margaret    Percival, 

y.  6d, 
Laneton   Parsonage, 

3J.  6d, 


POETRY    and    THE    DRAMA. 


Ballads  and  Lyrics  of 

Old  France;    with   other 

Poems. 

By  A,  Lang. 

Square  fip.  %vo.  ^s, 

Moore's    Lalla     Rookh, 

TennieVs  Edition,  with  68 
Wood  Engravings. 

Fcp,  ^0.  21S, 

Moore's  Irish  Melodies, 

Maclises  Edition,  with  1 6 1 
Steel  Plates. 

Super-royal  ^0,  3IJ.  6d, 

Miniature    Edition    of 

Moore  s  Irish  Melodies, 
with  Maclises  i6i  Illus- 
t  rat  ions  reduced  in  Litho- 
graphy. 

Imp.  i6mo.  I  Of.  6d, 

Milton's     Lycidas    and 

Epitaphitim  Damonis. 
Edited,    with    Notes   and 

Introduction,    by   C,    S. 

y err  am,  M.A. 

Crown  Svo.  y.  6d. 


Lays  of  Ancient  Rome  ; 

with  Ivry  and  the  Ar- 
mada. 

By  the  Right  Hon.  Lord 
Macaulay. 

i6mo,  y,  6d,^ 

Lord  Macaulay' s  Lays 

of  Ancient  Rome.  With 
90  Illustrations  on  Wood 
from  Drawings  by  G. 
Scliarf 

Fcp.  ^0,  21s, 

Miniature    Edition    oj 

Lord  Macaulay  s  Lays 
of  Ancient  Rome,  with 
Scharfs  90  Illustrations 
reduced  in  Lithography, 

Imp,  \6mo.  I  Of.  6d. 

Sout key's  Poetical  IVorks 

with  the  Authors  last  Cor- 
rections and  Additions. 

Medium  ^o.  with  Portrait,  14J. 

Bowdler's  Family  Shak- 

speare,  cheaper  Genuine 
Edition, 

Complete  in  I  vol,  viedium  ^o.  large  type, 
with  36  IVoodait  Illustratiotts,  i^,  or 
in  6  vols.  fcp.  %vo.  price  2IJ. 


NEW   WORKS   PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &   CO.        87 


Youatfs    IVork  on  the 

Dog^  revised  and  enlarged. 

&v.  Woodcuts^  dr. 

Horses  and  Stables. 

By  Colonel  F.  Fitzwygram^ 
XV.  the  Kings  Hussars. 

IVUh  24  Plates  of  Illmtrations,  ^o.  I  or.  td. 

The  Dog  in  Health  *  and 

Disease. 

By  StoneJunge. 

IVith  73  Wood  Engravings,   Square  crown 
81V0.  Is,  6d, 

The  Greyhound. 

By  Stonehenge. 

Revised  Edition,  with  24  Portraits  of  Grey- 
hounds,    Square  crown  dvo.  los,  6d. 

Stables  and  Stable  Fit- 
tings. 

By  W.  Miles,  Esq. 

Imp.  Svo.  with  13  P/ates,  i$s. 

The  Horse's  Foot,  and 

how  to  keep  it  Sound. 
By  W.  Miles,  Esq. 

Ninth  Edition,  Imp,  Sz'i?.  Woodcuts,  \is.  6d, 


A    Plain    Treatise    on 

Horse-shoeing. 
By  W.  Miles,  Esq. 

Sixth  Edition.    Post  Svo,  Woodcuts,  zs.  6d, 

Rem  a rks    on    Horses' 

Teeth,  addressed  to  Pur- 
cJiasers. 

By  W.  Miles,  Esq. 

Post  %vo,  is,  6d. 

The  Fly-Fisher's  Ento- 
mology. 

By  Alfred  Ronalds. 
With  coloured  Representa- 
tions of  tJie  Natural  and 
Artificial  Insect. 

WUh  20  coloured  Plata,     8w.  I4f. 

The  Dead  Shot,  or  Sports- 

man's  Complete  Guide;  a 
Treatise  on  the  Use  of  the 
Gun,  Dog-breaking,  Pigeon- 
shooting,  &c. 

By  Marksman. 

Fcp,  %ivo.  with  Plates,  Jj. 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


89 


Modern  Cookery  for  Pri- 
vate FantilieSy  reduced  to  a 
System  of  Easy  Practice  in 
a  Series  of  carefully-tested 
Receipts. 

By  Eliza  Acton. 

lVUk%PlaUs^\%oWood€tUs,  Fcp.^o.6s. 

A  Practical  Treatise  on 

Brewing;    with  Formulce 
for  Public  BrcwerSy   and 
Iftstrtictions  for    Private 
Families. 
By  W.  Black. 

Fifth  Edition,     Svo,  lOf.  6d. 

Three  Hundred  Original 

Chess  Problems  and  Studies. 

By  Jas.  Pierce,  M.A.  and 
W.  T.  Pierce. 

With  many  Diagrams.  Sq.  fcp.  ^o,  Js.  6d. 
Supplement^  2s.  6d. 

Chess  Openings. 

By  F.  W.  Longman,  Bal- 
liol  College,  Oxford. 

Second  Ediiiony  rei'ised.    Fcp,  ^o,  2s.  6d. 

The  Theory  of  the  Mo- 

dern   Scientific    Game    of 
Whist. 

By  W.  Pole,  F.R.S. 

Fifth  Edition.     Fcp.  %i'0,  2s.  6d. 


The  Cabinet  Lawyer ;  a 

Popular  Digest  of  the  Laws 
of  England,  Civily  Crimi- 
nal, and  Constitutional. 

Twenty-fonrth  Edition,   corrected  and  «r- 
teftded,     Fcp,  Sfvo.  ^. 

Blackstone  Economised  ; 

being  a  Compendium  of  the 
Laws  of  England  to  the 
Present  Time. 
ByD.  M.  Airdy  Barrister. 

Revised  Edition,     Post  ^o.  Js.  6d. 

Pewtner's  Cofnprehensive 

Specifier ;  a  Guide  to  the 
Practical  Specification   oj 
every  kind   of  Building- 
Artificers  Work. 
Edited  by  W.  Young. 

Cro7Vfi  8tv.  6s. 

Hhits    to    Mothers    07i 

the  Management  of  their 
Health  during  the  Period 
of  Pregnancy  and  in  the 
Lying-in  Room. 
By  Thomas  Bull,  M.D. 

Fcp.  8c  V.  5 J. 

The  Maternal  Manage- 

me^it  of  Children  i7i  Health 

and  Disease. 

By  Thomas  Bull,  M.D. 

Fcp.  %i'0.  5 J. 


40        NEW   WORKS   PUBU8HEO  BY   LONGMANS    &   CO. 


KNOW^LEDGE    for    the    YOUNG. 


The  Stepping'Stone  to  Know- 

letfge;  or  upwards  of  100  Questions 
and  Answers  on  Miscellaneous 
Subjects y  adapted  to  the  capacity  of 
Infant  minds. 

I&IM.   I/. 

Second  Scries  of  tJu  Stepping- 

Stone  to  Kmrwledge :  Containing 
upwards  of  800  Questions  and 
Answers  on  Miscellaneous  Suljeds 
not  contained  in  the  First  Series. 
\%mo.  IX. 

The  Stepping'Stane  to  Geo- 

graphy  :  Containing  seoeral  Hun- 
dred Questions  and  Answers  on 
Geographical  Subjects. 

l^to.  I/. 

TAe  Stepping'Stone  to  Eng- 
lish History ;  Questions  and  An- 
swers  on  the  History  of  England, 
iSmo.  is. 

The  Stepping-Stone  to  Bible 

Knouf ledge;    Questions  and  An- 
swers  on  the  Old  and  Ne7v  Testa- 
ments. 
i%mo.  is. 

The  Stepping-Slo7ie  to   Bio- 
graphy; Questions  and  Answers 
on  the  Lives  of  Eminent  Men  and 
Women. 
iSmo.  is. 

The  Steppi7tg^Stone  to  Irish 

History:  Containin^i^  several  Hun- 
dred Questions  and  Ans^cers  on 
the  History  of  Ireland. 

l^nio.  Is. 

The  Stepping-stone  to  French 

History:  Containing  sn^eral Hun- 
'l^'l^Q'j^tions  and  Answers  on 
the  History  of  France. 

'oW<».    I/. 


Tlu  Stepping'Stone  to  Roman 

History:  Containir^  sei'eral Hun- 
dred Questions  and  Anstvers  on 
tlu  History  of  Rome. 
i8«v.  11. 

Tlu  Stepping'  Stone  to  Grecian 

History:  Containing  several  Hun- 
dred Questions  and  Answers  on 
the  History  of  Greece. 

l%mo.  is. 

The  Stepping'Stofte  to  Eng- 
lish Grammar:  Contaimng  seve- 
ral  Hundred  Questions  and  An- 
swers on  English  Grammar. 
\%mo.  is. 

The  Stepping'Stone  to  Fretich 

Pronunciation  and  Conversa^on: 
Containing      several      Hundred 
Questions  and  Anstvers. 
\%mo.  I  J. 

The  Stepping'Stone  to  Astro- 
nomy: Containing  several  Hun- 
dred   familiar     Questions     and 

Answers  on  the  Earth  and  the 
Solar  and  Stellar  Systems. 
iSmtf.  is. 

The  Stepping'Stone  to  Music: 

Containing  several  Hundred 
Questiofis  on  the  Science;  also  a 
short  History  of  Music. 

iSmo.  I  J. 

The  Stepping'Stone  to  Natu- 
ral History :  Vertebrate  or  Back- 
boned Animals.  Part  I.  Mam- 
malia; Part  II.  Birds,  Ref>tiles. 
Pishes. 

iSmo.  is.  each  Part. 

The  Stepping'Stone  to  A  re  hi  - 

lecture :  Questions  and  Ansioers 
ex/flainini;^  the  Priticiples  and 
Progress  of  Architecture  from  the 
Earliest  Times. 

li^ith  100  lywHicuis.     i^mo.  is. 


INDEX. 


^c(Mi'(  Modem  CoOkerr ... 

j*irfjBlaefc31one  Economised     

AlimeaubMapofSnilicrland  • 

Alpine  Guide  ['ITie) ] 

.<■»»' J  Jorisprudence  j 

Primer  of  IheConsiiiution ; 

^Mj/nen'i  StirogihoS  MMctiiih : 

^rmitreng'i  Organic  Chanhirv ; 

-<™jii-jfDr,)  Christian  Life ; 

Lectures  on  ModernHiilory 

Miscellaneous  Worlu   

School  SennoDS     ; 

(T.)  Manual  of  English  Littialuve 

Arujulits  Lifp  of  Lord  Deanian  

AihcTitons  Pitory...  

Aulnmn  Holidays  o/nCounlry  Parson  ... 
HfVj  Treasury  of  BiUe  Knowledge  

Bactm'i  E^iin,  l,y  U'lmlily 

I  "      -  !  I  ■  !■  r  ,  by  Sftdding   ... 

InleUect   !!. !!!!!!!!! 

Batir^i  It/a  Work5  on  Ceylon 

*fl//-i  Guide  [0  lh(   ■       .     .  -Mps  

/?-■.'.■   ■  '.  '   ■  ,.'hs..^!.!!!!!!!""! 

M:-^'    ir.   -A.-    ..ri  i.u  M,,,;    

fi/j/n/RuBdSpom  .,.!.! 

Bbaami  Metals   

Ihattiava  ^g  Articles..  

Bamrnit  Cakcchism  of  the  Sicnm  Engine  . 
■  Hmdbooii  of  Steam  i;ngiac—  . 
'Treatise on  tlie  Steam  Ei^no 

Improvemenii  in  Ihs  sune 

R-nedUr's  Family  Skaksftan 

BramUyMonris  Sii  Sisters  of  Ihe  Valley  . 
Brandt)  Dictionary  of  Scjence.  Literatuni. 

3nd,Art 

Bray  I  Manual  of  Anlhropology 

Philosophy  of  Necessity 

BrinhUjIi  Astronomy 

Bnrmn^i  Eiposition  of  the  39  Aniclei 

BnmitsWKtiBniHit      

BmdU'i  Hiuory  of  Civilisation 

Ar//(  Hints  lo  Mothers  

— Matental  MamtKCtiKnl  of  Children. 
-     i  Family  (TheJ 


Buriis  Rise  of  Great  Families S 

ViciisitudBS  of  Families 8 

ButKs  Folk-lore  of  Rome 34 

VaUeysof  Tirol    « 33 

Catntiei  T.nwyer 39 

Campbtlts  Norway 33 

Cata'$  Hiogniphical  DIclionaiy.. A 

Changed  Aspects  of  UnchaJiged  ^taths  ...  tji 

Chtmtys  Indian  Polity  3 

Modern  MillUiy  Biography 3 

Waterloo  Campaien  3 

Chu£h's  lives  A^nn  PlutncR... 4 

CeUiue  on  MoabiLe  Stone  Ac.               3a 

's  Pentateuch  and  Book  ot  Jtishua,  31 

Speaker's  Bible  Commentiry   ...  3a 

ColUns's  Mineralogy  of  Cornwall ay 

Perspeciivc 96 

Commonplace  Philosopher  in  Tawn  and 

CQunlry,  by  A.  K.  H.  S 13 

Comtci  Positive  PoUiy    8 

Comyn  1  Elpna                             34 

CoiTfrw'/Essfly* 9 

Politics  of  Aristotle  ro 

Coainglon's  Translation  of  Virgll'i  .£neid  36 

Miscellaneous  Writings 14 

C-tlJf.'cjti'    Two  French  Dictionaries   ...  14 
G-irf-f.ir/mdJinenm'    Life  and  Epistles 

■;.f  St.  !\ml.                                               ...  39 

Cm'i'o«'J  M'-moir:iind  Correspondence      7 

Counsel  :iti'1  (.  uniforl  from  a  City  Pulpit...  J3 

Ce*-i  (G.  W.)  -Arvjn  M)ihology 4 

History  of  Greece 4 

.    I  Tale  o(  the  Grrat  Persian 

War..  4 

-  .1                    Tales  of  Ancient  Greece  34 

and  >"fj'f  Teutonic  Tales  Jj 

Cr,™/<r'»  Thucydidi-s 4 

Cnasy  on  British  Constilutioa  3 

Cmys  Encyclopiedi.i  of  Civil  Engineering  a? 

CrUleal  EHaysof  a  Country  Parson 14 

Aivi<j'j  Chemical  Aoalvtis   34 

Dyang  and  Calico-printing aS 

CnlUyi  Handbook  of  rdegra(*y a6 

Cindik'i  Student's  HistoiT  of  IreUnd 3 

UAftipii'i  RefotRiation  in  Ihe  Tuna  of 

C»hi» fi 


42 


NEW    WORKS    PUBLISHED  BY    LONGMANS    &    CO. 


Davidson* s  Introduction  to  New  Testament  31 

Dead  Shot  (The),  by  Marksman  37 

Di  Caisne  and  Le  MaouCs  Botany   23 

/V  il/<?^<2»'j  Paradoxes  13 

De  TocquevilUs  Democracy  in  America...  9 

Disraebs  Lord  George  Bentinck 7 

Novels  and  Tales  35 

Dobson  on  the  Ox 3^ 

D(jve*5  Law  of  Storms 18 

DayU's  Fairyland 24 

Z>ra9'i  Reasons  of  Faith 29 

Eastlakis  Gothic  Revival 25 

Hints  on  Household  Taste 26 

Edwards's  Rambles  among  the  Dolomites  33 

Elements  of  Botany 22 

Ellicotts  Commentary  on  Ephesians 30 

• ^Galatians  30 

Pastoral  Epist.  30 

— Philippians,&c.  30 

— Thessalonians  .  30 

Lectures  on  Life  of  Christ  29 

Epochs  of  History   6 

iSfaiir'i  Ancient  Stone  Implements  2a 

Ewalds  History  of  Israel  30 


Fairbaim's    Application    of    Cast    and 

Wrought  Iron  to  Building...  28 

Information  for  Engineers 28 

Treatise  on  Mills  and  Millwork  27 

Farrars  Chapters  on  Language  13 

Families  of  Speedi 13 

Fitxwygram  on  Horses  and  Stables 37 

Forsyth's  YsssLys    9 

Fowler's  Collieries  and  Colliers 38 

Francis's  Fishing  Book   36 

Freeman's  Historical  Geography  of  Europe  5 

From  January  to  December  14 

/^r(;«^^' J  English  in  Ireland    a 

History  of  England  2 

Short  Studies 12 

Gairdner's  Houses  of  Lancaster  and  York  6 

Gamgee  on  Horse-Shoeing 36 

Ganot's  Elementary  Physics    19 

Natural  Philosophy  19 

Gardiner's  Buckingham  and  Charles   3 

Life  of  Christ    32 

• Thirty  Years' War   6 

(7/73rr/ and  C////rr^///'j  Dolomites    32 

GirdUstone's  Bible  Synon)TrJS 29 

Goodeve's  Mechanics 20 

Mechanism  20 

Grant's  Ethics  of  Aristotle 10 

('.raver  Thoughts  of  a  Country  Parson 14 

(//V777// J  Journal i 

Griffin  s  Algebra  and  Trigonometry 20 

^V/#//r'j  Sermons  for  the  Times    29 

Grove  on  Corn  laiion  of  Physical  Forc«»s  ...  18 

GwiU's  i:ncycl<ii>;iMlia  of  Arthit.-clnn* -6 


//./r^  on  Election  of  Representatives    14    | 


//tfrr/jo«*i  Political  Problems   8 

Hartwi^s  Aerial  World 21 

Polar  World   ai 

Sea  and  its  Living  Wonders  ...  az 

Subterranean  World 21 

Tropical  World 21 

Haughtons  Animal  Mechanics 19 

Haywards  Biographical  and  Critical  Essays  7 

Heer's  Switzerland    23 

Helmholtz's  Scientific  Lectures  18 

HelmsUy's  Trees,  Shrubs,  and  Herbaceous 

Plants 23 

Hersctuts  Outlines  of  Astronomy 27 

Hollands  Recollections  7 

Howitfs  Rural  Life  of  England    32 

Visits  to  Remarkable  Places 33 

Humboldt  s  Life 7 

/^«iff/'j  Essays  T n 

Treatise  on  Human  Nature 11 

Ihnis  History  of  Rome  5 

Ingelow's  Poems 3^ 


Jamesons  Legends  of  Saints  and  Mntycs .  25 

Legends  of  the  Madonna. 25 

Legends  of  the  Monastic  Orders  35 

Legends  of  the  Saviour 25 

^enkin's  Electricity  and  Magnetism 20 

ferram's  Lycidas  of  Milton   35 

ferrolds  Life  of  Napoleon i 

foknstons  Geographical  Dictionary 17 

Kalisch's  Commentary  on  the  Bible 30 

AV/M'j  Evidence  of  Prophecy    30 

Kenyan's  (Lord)  Life 7 

KerTs  Metallurgy,  by  Crookes  and  Rokrig,  27 

Kirby  and  Spence's  Entomology   21 

Knatchbull-Hugessens     Whisjiers     from 

Fairy-Uand    34 


I^andscapcs,  Churches,  &c.  by  A.  K.  H.  R  13 

Ijing's  Ballads  and  Lyrics 35 

Latham  s  English  Dictionary 14 

iMUghton's  Nautical  Sur\eying 18 

Lawlor's  Centullc 34 

Lawrence  or\  Rocks 22 

I^cky's  Historj'  of  European  Morals 5 

Rationalism  5 

Leaders  of  Public  OjMnion 7 

Leisure  Hours  in  Ton*ti,  by  A.  K,  H.  B. ...  13 

Lessons  of  Middle  Age,  by  A.  K.  H.  B....  13 

L.n^^'css  Bioi^raj^hical  History  of  Philosophy  5 

/  iddcll  and  ScCtfs  Gnx-k-Knglish  I  .rxicx»ns  i  ^ 

Life  of  Man  Symbolised ?5 

Lindley  and  Moore's  Treasury  of  Botany...  23 

Lloyd's  Magnetism  ao 

Wave-Theory  of  Light ao 


NEW   WORKS 


LONGMANS    &    CO. 


iMigmam'   Chess  Dpeniws 39 

Edwsrd  the  TTiird   3 

Ledum  on  History  of  England  3 

Old  and  New  St.  Paul'i a6 

Luudom's  Encydoptedin  of  Agriculture   ...  aB 

Gardening 28 

Plants aa 

Z>nir*i/»'j  EnginHtr's  Handbook  -.  *7 

Lubbafk'i  Origin  of  Civilisation 33 

Lyra  Germanica 33.  31 

UaetKlay'i  (Lord)  Essays a 

Hiiioiy  of  England   ...  a 
Lays  oTADcienl  Rome  35.35 

Miaccltaneous  Writings  la 

World  ...           ".'.'..'^..  a 

.1/.  CaiUth'i  DietionaTY  of  Comnwree  16 

iiacUaSi  Prtndples  of  Economical  J'hilo- 

^wm  10 

' Theory  and  Practice  of  Banking  38 

M^rkhjmi  HisloryofPeraa 4 

M-inhjITi  Physiology 34 

Toda* 3a 

Manhman's  Histoiy  of  India 3 

Life  of  Havelock   8 

Martintati't  Christian  Life                 31 

Uaander't  Biographical  Treasury 38 

tie-^ITaphlcal  Treasury   ..«,....  38 

Hiitorical  Treasury 38 

Scientific  and  Literary  Treasury  38 

Trcararyof  Knowledge  38 

Tteasury  of  NaluiaJ  History  ...  38 

MaiynUs  Theory  of  Heal so 

y^fi  History  of  Democracy a 

Hiilocy  of  England  • 

.tr>Av///j  Digby  Grand  39 

General  Bounce 39 

Gladiators              39 

Uoodfor  Nolhtng 39 

Holmby  House      39 

Interpreter 39 

KnlcCoventry   39 

Queen's  Manes  39 

XtniJibioliM'    Letters        S 

iftmtia     Forest   Trees   and   Woodland 

iitrivaU't  Fall  of  ihe  Koman  Republic  ...  4 

—  Rom.ins  under  the  Empire      ...  4 


A/(>fo'i  (Lord)  Lifcand  Letters 6 

MiUhitis  Manual  of  Architecture 35 

Manual  of  Assaying              38 

Modern  Novetbl'i  Library 34 

Muniell!  ■  Spiritual  Songs'    31 

Afwrr'r  Irish  Melodies,  llhulreted 35 

IjllaRoofch.  Ellustmted  35 

Mirz/rs  Elements  of  Psychology 11 

Mental  PhHosophy H 

Aforriis  French  Revolution   3 

J/*/ir* Chips  from  a  GenoanWortahop.  la 

Science  of  Language  la 

Science  of  Relipon 5 


New  Testament   Illustrated  with  Wood 

Engravings  from  Ihe  Old  Masters : 

NorlhcM  on  Lathes  and  Turning. : 

O'CiiniriCommenlar)'  on  Hebrews , 

St.  John  

Odling's  Course  of  Practical  Chcmislry  ... 
Ouvov  Cotnpamlive  Anatomy  and  Physio- 
logy of  Vertebrate  Animals  

Oit'tn'i  Lectures  on  the  lovertebrata   

/'dc^b'j  Guide  to  the  ^leneet  

PallisQH  I  Caaauhan 

/'.j)v«']  Industrial  Chemistry 

/Vup/Biy'j  Comprehms|vB  Specifier  

Pirni'iCheiA  ProWaw 

Pihi  Game  of  Whisl  

i/'/KBifrmjrf'i  Mastery  of  Languages   

Pr«ent-Day  Thoughts,  by  A.  K.  H.  a  ... 
firiKlars  Asironomica!  usays  

Orbsnround  LTs  

Oilier  Worlds  than  Ours       

Sciemific  Essays  ^^Jcw  Scries]  ... 

Tntnsita  of  Venus    

Two  St-ir  Atlases 

Public  Schools  Atlas   

Modem  Geography 

Ancient  GeoKraphy  

Riniieii  on  Strains  in  Trasses 

MonlG  JioM         

Xmardiom    I)own  the  Kotuj     

Jfieh'i  DMionnry  nf  Aniiqiiiilet    

JCwj-rRow  Amateurs  OulJe ■ 

Kegtril  I'^llpic  of  Failh 

■■  Defence  of  Echpie  of  Faith    

K'«*n- 


.  I
